                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    TRADING VOLUME: IMPLICATIONS OF AN INTERTEMPORAL CAPITAL ASSET
                            PRICING MODEL


                                              Andrew W. Lo
                                               Jiang Wang


                                          Working Paper 8565
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8565


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2001




We thank Joon Chae, Ilan Guedj, Jannette Papastaikoudi, Antti Petajisto, and Jean-Paul Sursock for excellent
research assistance, and Jonathan Lewellen for providing his industry classification scheme. We are grateful
to seminar and conference participants at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Georgetown University, the
Shenzhen Stock Exchange, UCLA, University of Pennsylvania, the 8th World Congress of the Econometric
Society, and the 2001 Lectures in Financial Economics in Beijing and Taipei for helpful comments and
suggestions. Financial support from the MIT Laboratory for Financial Engineering and the National Science
Foundation (Grant No. SBR{9709976) is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.



© 2001 by Andrew W. Lo and Jiang Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Trading Volume: Implications of An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model
Andrew W. Lo and Jiang Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 8565
October 2001
JEL No. G12, G11, G14



                                               ABSTRACT


        We derive an intertemporal capital asset pricing model with multiple assets and heterogeneous
investors, and explore its implications for the behavior of trading volume and asset returns. Assets contain
two types of risks: market risk and the risk of changing market conditions. We show that investors trade
only in two portfolios: the market portfolio, and a hedging portfolio, which allows them to hedge the
dynamic risk. This implies that trading volume of individual assets exhibit a two-factor structure, and
their factor loadings depend on their weights in the hedging portfolio. This allows us to empirically
identify the hedging portfolio using volume data. We then test the two properties of the hedging portfolio:
its return provides the best predictor of future market returns and its return together with the return of the
market portfolio are the two risk factors determining the cross-section of asset returns.




Andrew W. Lo                                                       Jiang Wang
Sloan School of Management                                         MIT
MIT                                                                E52-435
50 Memorial Drive                                                  50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347                                           Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER                                                           and NBER
alo@mit.edu                                                        wangj@mit.edu
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                  1

2 The   Model                                                                                  2
  2.1   The Economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      3
  2.2   Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
  2.3   Equilibrium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    5

3 The   Behavior of Returns and Volume                                                          8
  3.1   The Cross Section of Volume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       8
  3.2   Time Series Implications for the Hedging Portfolio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       10
  3.3   Cross-Sectional Implications for the Hedging Portfolio . . . . . . . . . . . . .       10

4 An Empirical Implementation                                                                  13
  4.1 The Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       13
  4.2 Construction of the Hedging Portfolio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        14

5 The   Forecast Power of the Hedging Portfolio                                                19
  5.1   Hedging-Portfolio Returns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      19
  5.2   Optimal Forecasting Portfolios (OFPs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        21
  5.3   Hedging Portfolio Return as A Predictor of Market Returns . . . . . . . . .            23

6 The Hedging-Portfolio Return as a Risk Factor                                                24

7 Conclusion                                                                                   27

Appendix                                                                                       29
  A.1 Proof of Theorem 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       29
  A.2 Proofs of Propositions 1–4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       30

References                                                                                     32
1         Introduction
Fundamental shocks to the economy drive both the supply and demand of ﬁnancial assets
and their prices. Thus, any asset-pricing model that attempts to establish a structural
link between asset prices and underlying economic factors also establishes links between
prices and quantities such as trading volume. In fact, asset-pricing models link the the
joint behavior of prices and quantities with economic fundamentals such as the preferences
of investors and the future payoﬀs of the assets. Therefore, the construction and empirical
implementation of any asset-pricing model should involve both price and quantities as its key
elements. Even from a purely empirical perspective, the joint behavior of price and quantities
reveals more information about the relation between asset prices and economic factors than
prices alone. Yet the asset-pricing literature has centered more on prices and much less on
quantities. For example, empirical investigations of well-known asset-pricing models such as
the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) and its intertemporal extensions (ICAPM) have
focused exclusively on prices and returns, completely ignoring the information contained in
quantities. In this paper, we hope to show that even if our main interest is in the behavior
of prices, valuable information about price dynamics can be gleaned from trading volume.
        We begin by developing an intertemporal capital asset pricing model of multiple assets
in the spirit of Merton’s ICAPM. We explicitly model investors’ asset demands and derive
equilibrium asset prices and asset holdings. In our model, assets are exposed to two sources
of risks: market risk and the risk of changes in market conditions.1 As a result, investors
wish to hold two distinct portfolios of risky assets: the market portfolio and a hedging
portfolio. The market portfolio allows them to adjust their exposure to market risk, and the
hedging portfolio allows them hedge the risk of changes in market conditions. In equilibrium,
investors trade in only these two portfolios, and expected asset returns are determined by
their exposure to these two risks, i.e., a two-factor linear pricing model holds, where the two
factors are the returns on the market portfolio and the hedging portfolio, respectively.
        We then explore the implications of this model on the joint behavior of volume and
returns. Since investors hold only two portfolios—the market portfolio and the hedging
    1
   One example of changes in market conditions is changes in the investment opportunity set considered
by Merton (1973).



                                                  1
portfolio—they trade in only these portfolios. This implies that trading volume also exhibits
a two-factor structure: the ﬁrst factor arises from their trades in the market portfolio and
the second factor arises from their trades in the hedging portfolio. More importantly, we
show that the factor loading of each asset’s trading volume on the hedging-portfolio factor is
identical to that asset’s portfolio weight in the hedging portfolio. This remarkable property
of the trading volume of individual assets suggests a way to identify the hedging portfolio
from a rather unexpected source: volume data. Moreover, after arriving at such a portfolio,
we have the means to verify that it is indeed the hedging portfolio: its returns should be the
best predictor of future returns on the market portfolio. Collectively, these results provide
concrete economic foundations for determining risk factors beyond the market portfolio for
dynamic equilibrium asset-pricing models.
    Using the weekly returns and volume data on NYSE and AMEX stocks from 1962 to
1996, we implement the model empirically. From the trading volume of individual stocks,
we construct the hedging portfolio and its returns. We ﬁnd that the hedging-portfolio returns
consistently outperforms other factors in predicting future returns to the market portfolio.
We then use the returns to the hedging and market portfolios as two risk factors in a cross-
sectional test along the lines of Fama and MacBeth (1973), and ﬁnd that the hedging portfolio
is comparable to other factors in explaining the cross-sectional variation of expected returns.
    In Section 2, we present our intertemporal equilibrium model of asset-pricing and trading
volume. In Section 3, we explore the model’s implications for volume and returns. Section
4 describes the data used in our empirical implementation of the model, and outlines the
construction of the hedging portfolio. In Section 5, we compare the forecast power of the
hedging portfolio with other factors, and we perform cross-sectional tests of the hedging
portfolio as a risk factor in Section 6. We conclude in Secton 7.


2     The Model
In this section, we develop an intertemporal equilibrium model of stock trading and pricing
with multiple assets and heterogeneous investors. Since our purpose is to draw its qualitative
implications on the joint behavior of return and volume, the model is kept as parsimonious
as possible. Several generalizations of the model are discussed in Section 2.2.


                                              2
2.1        The Economy
We consider an economy deﬁned on a set of discrete dates: t = 0, 1, 2, . . .. There are J risky
assets in the economy, which we call stocks. Each stock pays a stream of dividends over time.
Let Djt denote the dividend of stock j at date t, j = 1, · · · , J, and Dt ≡ (D1t ; · · · ; DJt )
denote the column vector of dividends.2 Without loss of generality, in this section we assume
that the total number of shares outstanding is one for each stock.
       A stock portfolio can be expressed in terms of its shares of each stock, denoted by
S ≡ (S1 ; . . . ; SJ ), where Sj is the number of stock j shares in the portfolio (j = 1, . . . , J). A
portfolio of particular importance is the market portfolio, denoted by SM , which is given by

         SM = ι                                                                                                      (1)

where ι is a vector of 1’s with rank J. DM t ≡ ι Dt gives the dividend of the market portfolio,
which is the aggregate dividend.
       In addition to the stocks, there is also a risk-free bond that yields a constant, positive
interest r per time period.
       There are I investors in the economy. Each investor is endowed with equal shares of the
stocks and no bond. Every period, investor i, i = 1, . . . , I, maximizes his expected utility of
the following form:
               i                 i                i
                                                           
         Et −e−Wt+1 −(λX Xt +λY Yt )DM t+1 −λZ (1+Zt )Xt+1                                                           (2)

where Wt+1
        i
           is investor i’s wealth next period, Xt , Yti , Zti are three one-dimensional state
variables, and λX , λY , λZ are non-negative constants. Apparently, the utility function in (2)
is state-dependent. We further assume

         
         I             
                       I
               Yti =         Zti = 0                                                                                 (3)
         i=1           i=1

where t = 0, 1, . . ..
       For simplicity, we assume that all the exogenous shocks, Dt , Xt , {Yti , Zti , i = 1, . . . , I},
are IID over time with zero means. For tractability, we further assume that Dt and Xt are
   2
   Throughout this paper, we follow the following convention: For a set of elements, e1 , . . . , en , (e1 ; . . . ; en )
denotes the column vector and (e1 , . . . , en ) denotes the row vector from these elements.



                                                           3
jointly normally distributed:
                                                             
             Dt        d                              σDD σDX
      ut ≡             ∼ N (·, σ)    where σ =                      .                      (4)
             Xt                                       σXD σXX

Without loss of generality, σDD is assumed to be positive deﬁnite.

2.2    Discussion
Our model has several features that might seem unusual. Most importantly, investors are
assumed to have a myopic, but state-dependent utility function in (2). The purpose for using
this utility function is to capture the dynamic nature of the investment problem without ex-
plicitly solving a dynamic optimization problem. This utility function should be interpreted
as the equivalent of a value function from an appropriately speciﬁed dynamic optimization
problem (see, for example, Wang, 1994 and Lo and Wang, 2000b). In an earlier draft of the
paper, we did specify a canonical dynamic optimization problem for the investors, in which
they have state-independent utility over their lifetime consumption. It was shown that the
resulting value function, as a function of wealth and the state variables, has the form as the
state-dependent utility function in (2). For simplicity in exposition, we directly start with
(2).
   The state dependence of the utility function has the following properties. The marginal
utility of wealth depends on the dividend of the market portfolio (the aggregate dividend),
as reﬂected in the second term in the exponential of the utility function. When the aggregate
dividend goes up, the marginal utility of wealth goes down. There are many ways to motivate
this type of utility function. For example, the utility can be derived from wealth in reference
to the market, not the level of wealth itself (see, for example, Abel, 1990, and Campbell
and Cochrane, 1999). Alternatively, if in addition to their stock investments, investors are
also exposed to other risks that are correlated to the market (see, for example, Wang, 1994).
The marginal utility of wealth also depends on future state variables, in particular Xt+1 , as
reﬂected in the third term in the exponential of the utility function. The motivation for al-
lowing such a dependence is as follows. Since the state variables determine the stock returns
in equilibrium, the value function (indirect utility function) of an investor who optimizes
dynamically would depend on these state variables. Without modelling the dynamic opti-


                                              4
mization problem explicitly, we explicitly impose such a dependence on the (myopic) utility
function. This dependence introduces dynamic hedging motives in the investors’ portfolio
choices (see Merton, 1971, for a discussion on dynamic hedging).
    Another simpliﬁcation in the model is the IID assumption for the state variables. This
might leave the impression that the model is eﬀectively static. This impression, however, is
false since the state-dependence of investors’ utility function introduces important dynamics
over time. We can allow richer dynamics for the state variables without changing the main
properties of the model.
    The particular form of the utility function and the normality of distribution for the state
variables are assumed for tractability. These assumptions are restrictive. But we hope with
some conﬁdence that the qualitative predictions of the model that we explore in this paper
are not sensitive to these assumptions.
    In the model, we also assumed an exogenous interest rate for the bond without requiring
the bond market to clear. This is a modelling choice we have made in order to simplify
our analysis and to focus on the stock market. As will become clear later, changes in the
interest rate is not important for the issues we examine in this paper. From an empirical
point of view, at the frequency we are interested in (weekly), changes in interest rate are
usually small.

2.3     Equilibrium
Let Pt ≡ (P1t ; . . . ; PJt ) and Sti ≡ (S1t
                                          i
                                             ; . . . ; SJt
                                                        i
                                                           ) be the (column) vectors of (ex-dividend)
stock prices and investor i’s stock holdings respectively. We now derive the equilibrium of
the economy.

Deﬁnition 1 An equilibrium is given by a price process {Pt : t = 0, 1, . . .} and the investors
stock positions {Sti : i = 1, . . . , I; t = 0, 1, . . .} such that:

   1. Sti solves investor i’s optimization problem:
                                              i −(λ X +λ Y i )D              i
                                                                                        
                                             −Wt+1              M t+1 −λZ (1+Zt )Xt+1
              Sti   = arg max         E −e          X t  Y t
                                                                                                 (5)

                            s. t.     Wt+1
                                        i
                                           = Wti + Sti  [Dt+1 + Pt+1 − (1+r)Pt ]


                                                       5
  2. stock market clears:
              
              i
                    Sti = ι.                                                                 (6)
              i=1


The above deﬁnition of equilibrium is standard, except that the bond market does not clear
here. As discussed earlier, the interest rate is given exogenously and there is an elastic supply
of bonds at that rate.
   For t = 0, 1, . . ., let Qt+1 denote the vector of excess dollar returns on the stocks:

        Qt+1 ≡ Dt+1 + Pt+1 − (1+r)Pt .                                                       (7)

Thus, Qjt+1 = Djt+1 + Pjt+1 − (1 + r)Pjt gives the dollar return on one share of stock j
in excess of its ﬁnancing cost for period t + 1. For the remainder of the paper, we simply
refer to Qjt+1 as the dollar return of stock j, omitting the qualiﬁer “excess”. Dollar return
Qjt+1 diﬀers from the conventional (excess) return measure Rjt+1 which is the dollar return
normalized by the share price: Rjt+1 ≡ Qjt+1 /Pjt . We refer to Rjt+1 simply as the return on
stock j in period t + 1.
   We can now state the solution to the equilibrium in the following theorem:

Theorem 1 The economy deﬁned above has a unique linear equilibrium in which

        Pt = −a − bXt                                                                        (8)

and
                            
        Sti = I −1 −λY Yti ι − λY (b ι)Yti + λZ Zti (σQQ )−1 σQX                            (9)

where

        σQQ = σDD − (b σXD + σDX b ) + σX2 b b

        σQX = σDX − σX2 b
               1                  
          a =     ᾱσQQ ι + λZ σQX
               r
                                       −1
           b = λX (1+r)+λZ σXD ι)            σDD ι

and ᾱ = 1/I.

                                                     6
   The nature of the equilibrium is intuitive. In our model, an investor’s utility function
depends not only on his wealth, but also on the stock payoﬀs directly. In other words, even
he holds no stocks, his utility ﬂuctuates with the payoﬀ of the stocks. Such a “market spirit”
aﬀects his demand for the stocks, in addition to the usual factors such as the stocks’ expected
returns. The market spirit of investor i is measured by (λX Xt + λY Yti ). When (λX Xt + λZ Yti )
is positive, investor i extracts positive utility when the aggregate stock payoﬀ is high. Such
a positive “attachment” to the market makes holding stocks less attractive to him. When
(λX Xt + λY Yti ) is negative, he has a negative attachment to the market, which makes holding
stocks more attractive. Such a market spirit at the aggregate level, which is captured by
Xt , aﬀects the aggregate stock demand, which in turn aﬀects their equilibrium prices. Given
the particular form of the utility function, Xt aﬀects the equilibrium stock prices linearly.
The idiosyncratic diﬀerences among investors in their market spirit, which are captured by
Yti , oﬀset each other at the aggregate level, thus do not aﬀect the equilibrium stock prices.
However, they do aﬀect individual investors’ stock holdings. As the ﬁrst term of (9) shows,
investors with positive Yti ’s hold less stocks (they are already happy by just “watching” the
stocks paying oﬀ).
   Since the aggregate utility variable Xt is driving the stock prices, it is also driving the
stock returns. In fact, the expected returns on the stocks are changing with Xt (see the dis-
cussion in the next section). The form of the utility function further states that the investors
utility function directly depends on Xt , which fully characterizes the market conditions in-
vestors face, in particular, the investment opportunities. Such a dependence endogenously
arises when investors optimize dynamically. In our setting, however, we assume that in-
vestors optimize myopically but insert such a dependence directly into the utility function.
This dependence induces investors to care about future market conditions when choose their
portfolios. In particular, they prefer those portfolios whose returns can help them to smooth
ﬂuctuations in their utility due to changes in market conditions. Such a preference gives rise
to the hedging component in their asset demand, which is captured by the second term in
(9).




                                               7
3         The Behavior of Returns and Volume
Given the intertemporal CAPM deﬁned above, we can derive its implications on the behavior
of return and volume. For the stocks, their dollar return vector can be re-expressed as follows:

          Qt+1 = ra + (1+r) bXt + Q̃t+1                                                               (10)

where Q̃t+1 ≡ Dt+1 − bZt+1 denotes the vector of unexpected dollar returns on the stocks,
which are IID over time with zero mean. Equation (10) shows that the expected returns on
the stocks change over time. In particular, they are driven by a single state variable Xt .
        The investors stock holdings can be expressed in the following form:

          Sti = hiM t ι + hiH t SH   ∀ i = 1, 2, . . . , I                                            (11)

where hiM t ≡ I −1 − λY Yti , hiH t ≡ λY (b ι)Yti − λZ Zti , and

          SH ≡ (σQQ )−1 σQX .                                                                         (12)

Equation (11) simply states that two-fund separation holds for the investors’ stock invest-
ments. That is, the stock investments of all investors can be viewed as investments in two
common funds: the market portfolio ι and the hedging portfolio SH .3 In our current model,
these two portfolios, expressed in terms of stock shares, are constant over time.
        The particular structure of the returns and the investors’ portfolios lead to several inter-
esting predictions about the behavior of volume and returns. We present these predictions
through a set of propositions.

3.1        The Cross Section of Volume
Given the heterogeneity in their preferences which change over time, investors trade among
themselves to achieve their optimal stock holdings. The volume of trade can be measure by
the turnover ratio. Since we have normalized the total number of shares outstanding to be
    3
    The investors’ total portfolios satisfy three-fund monetary separation: the risk-free bond and the two
stock funds. For our discussion here, we restrict our attention to their stock investments and always focus
on the two stock funds.




                                                             8
one for all stocks, the turnover of a stock, say, stock j, is given by

              1  i                              
                 I
        τjt ≡       hM t − hiM t−1 + hiH t − hiH t−1 SH j          ∀ j = 1, . . . , J.                   (13)
              2 i=1

    Let τt denote the vector of turnover for all stocks. We have the following proposition on
the cross-section of volume:

Proposition 1 When investors’ trading in the hedging portfolio is small relative to their
trading in the market portfolio, the two-fund separation in their stock holdings leads to an
approximate two-factor structure for stock turnover:

        τt ≈ ιFM t + SH FH t                                                                             (14)

where

                 1 i                                  1  i                              
                   I                                      I
        FM t =         h −hi            and FH t =           hH t −hiH t−1 sgn hiH t −hiH t−1 .
                 2 i=1 M t M t−1                       2 i=1

In the special case when one-fund separation holds for stock holdings (when Xt = 0 ∀ t),
turnover would have an exact one-factor structure, τt = ιFM t . Moreover, the loading of
individual turnover on the common factor is identical. In other words, the turnover is
identical cross all stocks. This is not surprising. In the case of one-fund separation for stock
investments, investors trade in one stock portfolio, which has to be the market portfolio.
Thus, they trade all the stocks in same proportions (in shares). Consequently, the turnover
must be the same for all stocks.4
    In the general case when two-fund separation holds for stock investments, turnover has an
approximate two-factor structure as given in (14). It is important to note that the loading of
stock j’s turnover on the second factor is proportional to its share weight in the hedging port-
folio. Thus, empirically if we can identify the two common factors, FM t and FH t , the stocks’
loadings on the second factor allow us to identify the hedging portfolio. In our empirical
analysis, we explore this information that the cross-section of volume conveys. As we discuss
below, the hedging portfolio has important properties that allow us to better understand the
behavior of returns. Merton (1971) has discussed the properties of hedging portfolios in a
   4
     For a discussion on the implications of mutual fund separation on the cross-sectional behavior of volume,
see Lo and Wang (2000a). See also Tkac (1996).


                                                      9
continuous-time framework as a characterization of equilibrium. Our discussion here follows
Merton in spirit, but is in a discrete-time, equilibrium environment.

3.2    Time Series Implications for the Hedging Portfolio
By the deﬁnition of the hedging portfolio in (12), it is easy to show that its current return
gives the best forecast of future market return.
   Let QM t+1 denote the dollar return on the market portfolio in period t + 1 and QH t+1
denote the dollar return on the hedging portfolio. Then,

      QM t+1 = ι Qt+1   and QH t+1 = SH Qt+1 .                                           (15)

For an arbitrary portfolio S, its dollar return in period t, which is Qt ≡ S  Qt , can serve as
a predictor for the dollar of the market next period:

      QM t+1 = δ0 + δ1 Qt + εM t+1 .

The predictive power of S is measured by the R2 of the above regression. We can solve for
the portfolio that maximizes the R2 . The solution, up to a scaling constant, is the hedging
portfolio. Thus, we have the following result:

Proposition 2 Among the returns of all portfolios, the dollar return of the hedging portfolio,
SH , provides the best forecast for the future dollar return of the market.

In other words, if we regress the market dollar return on the lagged dollar return of any
portfolios, the hedging portfolio gives the highest R2 .

3.3    Cross-Sectional Implications for the Hedging Portfolio
We now turn to examine the predictions of our model on the cross-section of returns. For
expositional simplicity, we introduce some additional notation. Let Qpt+1 be the dollar return
of a stock or a portfolio (of stocks). Q̃pt+1 ≡ Qpt+1 − Et [Qpt+1 ] then denotes its unexpected
dollar return and Q̄p its unconditional mean. Thus, Q̃M t+1 and Q̃H t+1 denote, respectively,
the unexpected dollar returns on the market portfolio and the hedging portfolio, and
                                                                            
       2
      σM ≡ Var Q̃M t+1 ,      σH2 ≡ Var Q̃H t+1 ,   σM H ≡ Cov Q̃M t+1 , Q̃H t+1

                                               10
denote their conditional variances and covariances. It is easy to show that

         2
        σM = ι σQQ ι,   σH2 = σXQ (σQQ )−1 σQX ,   σM H = ι σQX

where σQQ and σQX are given in Theorem 1. From Theorem 1, we have

          Q̄ = ᾱσQQ ι + λZ σQX                                                          (16a)

                 2
        Q̄M = ᾱσM + λZ σM H                                                             (16b)

         Q̄H = ᾱσM H + λZ σH2 .                                                         (16c)

Equation (16) characterizes the cross-sectional variation in the stocks’ expected dollar re-
turns.
   In order to develop more intuition about (16), we ﬁrst consider the special case when
Xt = 0 ∀ t. In this case, returns are IID over time. The risk of a stock is measured by its
co-variability with the market portfolio. We have the following result:

Proposition 3 When Xt = 0 ∀ t, we have
                       
        E Q̃t+1 |Q̃M t+1 = βM Q̃M t+1                                                     (17)

where
                                      
        βM ≡ Cov Q̃t+1 , Q̃M t+1    Var Q̃M t+1 = σDD ι (ι σDD ι)

is the vector of the stocks’ market betas. Moreover,

        Q̄ = βM Q̄M                                                                       (18)

               2
where Q̄M = ᾱσM ≥ 0.

Obviously in this case, the CAPM holds for the dollar returns. It can be shown that it also
holds for the returns.
   In the general case when Xt changes over time, there is an additional risk due to changing
market conditions (dynamic risk). Moreover, this risk is represented by the dollar return of
the hedging portfolio, which is denoted by QH t ≡ SH Qt . In this case, the risk of a stock is
measured by its risk with respect to the market portfolio and its risk with respect to the

                                                    11
hedging portfolio. In other words, there are two risk factors, the (contemporaneous) market
risk and the (dynamic) risk of changing market conditions. The expected returns of the
stocks are then determined by their exposures to these two risks and the associated risk
premia. The result is summarized in the following proposition:

Proposition 4 When Xt changes over time, we have
                                 
        E Q̃t+1 |Q̃M t+1 , Q̃H t+1 = βM Q̃M t+1 + βH Q̃H t+1                                    (19)

where
                                                                                     −1
        (βM , βH ) = Cov Q̃t+1 , Q̃M t+1 , Q̃H t+1         Var       Q̃M t+1 , Q̃H t+1
                                         2
                                                    −1
                                        σM   σM H
                   = (σQM , σQH )
                                        σM H σH2
is the vector of the stocks’ market betas and hedging betas. Moreover, The stocks’ expected
dollar returns satisfy

        Q̄ = βM Q̄M + βH Q̄H                                                                    (20)

               2
where Q̄M = ᾱσM + λZ σM H and Q̄H = ᾱσM H + λZ σH2 .

Thus, a stock’s risk is measured by its beta with respect to the market portfolio and its beta
with respect to the hedging portfolio. The expected dollar return on the market portfolio
gives the premium of the market risk and the expected dollar return on the hedging portfolio
gives the premium of the dynamic risk. (20) simply states that the premium on a stock is
then given by the sum of the product of its exposure to each risk and the associated premium.
   Under constant market conditions (Xt = 0,                ∀ t), the premium for the market risk,
Q̄, is always positive. However, under changing market conditions, the premium for the
market risk need not always be positive. In particular, when σM H is signiﬁcantly negative
(λZ is assumed to be positive), Q̄ can become negative. This is simply because that the
premium is determined by the covariance between the market return and investors’ marginal
utility, which depends on both their wealth and the other state variables. The positive
covariance between the market return and investors’ wealth gives a positive premium to
the market portfolio. But the negative covariance between the market return and the state

                                                    12
variable Xt that drives the utility function gives a negative premium. The total premium on
the market portfolio is the sum of these two components, which can be negative when the
second component dominates.
    The pricing relation we obtain in Proposition 4 is in the spirit of Merton’s Intertemporal
CAPM in a continuous-time framework (Merton, 1971). However, it is important to note
that Merton’s result is a characterization of the pricing relation under a (class of) proposed
price processes and no equilibrium is provided to support these price processes. In contrast,
our pricing relation is derived from a dynamic equilibrium model. In this sense, we model
provides an particular equilibrium model for which Merton’s characterization holds.
    If we can identify the hedging portfolio empirically, its return provides the second risk
factor. Diﬀerences in the stocks’ expected returns can then be fully explained by their
exposures to the two risks (market risk and dynamic risk), as measured by their market
betas and hedging betas.


4     An Empirical Implementation
Our empirical analysis of the implications of the model outlined in Sections 2 and 3 is
comprised of three parts. In the ﬁrst part, we exploit the model’s cross-sectional implications
to construct the hedging portfolio from volume data. In the second part, we examine the
ability of the hedging portfolio to forecast future market-portfolio returns. And in the third
part, we investigate the role of the hedging-portfolio return as a risk factor in explaining the
cross-sectional variation of expected returns. We focus on the ﬁrst part in this section, and
consider the second and third parts in Sections 5 and 6.

4.1    The Data
We use an extract of the CRSP Daily Master File called the “MiniCRSP Returns and
Turnover” database described in Lo and Wang (2000a). This extract consists of weekly
return and turnover series for individual stocks traded on NYSE and AMEX from July
1962 to December 1996 (1800 weeks). We choose weekly holding periods as a compromise
between maximizing the sample size and minimizing the impact of high-frequency return
and turnover ﬂuctuations that are likely to be of less direct economic consequence. We also


                                              13
limit our focus to ordinary common shares (CRSP sharecodes 10 and 11 only).
       As documented in Lo and Wang (2000a) and in many other studies, aggregate turnover
seems to be nonstationary, exhibiting a signiﬁcant time trend and time-varying volatilities.
For example, the average weekly turnover in the period from 1962 to 1966 is 0.57%, but grows
to 1.31% in the period from 1992 to 1996, and the volatilities during these two periods were
0.07% and to 0.23%, respectively. Detrending has been advocated by several other authors
(e.g., Andersen, 1996 and Gallant, Rossi, and Tauchen 1992), and there is no doubt that such
procedures may help to induce more desirable time series properties for turnover. However,
Lo and Wang (2000a) show that the diﬀerent types of detrending methods, e.g., linear,
logarithmic, or quadratic, yield detrended time series with markedly diﬀerent statistical
properties. Since we do not have any speciﬁc priors or theoretical justiﬁcation for the kinds
of nonstationarities in aggregate turnover, we use the raw data in our empirical analysis.
To address the issue of nonstationarities, we conduct our empirical analysis on ﬁve-year
subperiods only.5 For notational convenience, we shall sometimes refer to these subperiods
by the following numbering scheme:
                          Subperiod    1:      July 1962 to December 1966
                          Subperiod    2:      January 1967 to December 1971
                          Subperiod    3:      January 1972 to December 1976
                          Subperiod    4:      January 1977 to December 1981
                          Subperiod    5:      January 1982 to December 1986
                          Subperiod    6:      January 1987 to December 1991
                          Subperiod    7:      January 1992 to December 1996

4.2       Construction of the Hedging Portfolio
Our ﬁrst step in empirically implementing the intertemporal model of Sections 2 and 3 is
to construct the hedging portfolio from turnover data. From (14), we know that in the
two-factor model for turnover in Proposition 1, stock j’s loading on the second factor FH t
yields the number of shares (as a fraction of its total number of shares outstanding) of stock
j in the hedging portfolio. In principle, this identiﬁes the hedging portfolio. However, we
face two challenges in practice. First, the exact two-factor speciﬁcation (14) is, at best, an
   5
     Obviously, from a purely statistical perspective, using shorter subperiods does not render a nonstationary
time series stationary. However, if the sources of nonstationarity are institutional changes and shifts in general
business conditions, conﬁning our attention to shorter timespans does improve the quality of statistical
inference. See Lo and Wang (2000a) for further discussion.


                                                       14
approximation for the true data-generating process of turnover. Second, the two common
factors are generally not observable. We address both of these problems in turn.
   A more realistic starting point for modelling turnover is an approximate two-factor model:

      τjt = FM t + θH j FH t + εjt ,     j = 1, . . . , J                                   (21)

where FM t and FH t are the two factors that generate trading in the market portfolio and
the hedging portfolio, respectively, θH j is the percentage of shares of stock j in the hedging
portfolio (as a percentage of its total number of shares outstanding), and εjt is the error
term, which is assumed to be independent across stocks.
   Cross-sectional independence of the errors is a restrictive assumption. If, for example,
there are other common factors in addition to FM t and FH t , then εjt is likely to be correlated
across stocks. The appropriateness of the independence assumption is an empirical matter,
and in Lo and Wang (2000a), we have found evidence supporting the two- factor structure.
In particular, the covariance matrices of turnover for a collection of turnover-beta-sorted
portfolios generally exhibit two large eigenvalues that dominate the rest. This provides
limited justiﬁcation for assuming that εjt is independent across stocks.
   Since we do not have any suﬃcient theoretical foundation to identify the two common
factors FM t and FH t , we use two turnover indexes as their proxies: the equally-weighted and
share-weighted turnover of the market. Speciﬁcally. let Nj denote the total number of shares
                                
outstanding for stock j and N ≡ j Nj the total number of shares outstanding of all stocks.
The two turnover indexes are

                  1
                     J
      τtEW ≡            τjt = FM t + nEW FH t + εEW                                        (22a)
                  J j=1                          t


                  
                  J
                    Nj
        τt
         SW
              ≡             τjt = FM t + nSW FH t + εSW                                    (22b)
                  j=1
                        N                            t



where

                  1                   
                     J                  J
                                           Nj
      nEW =             θH j and nSW =        θH j
                  J j=1                j=1
                                           N

are the average percentage of shares of each stock in the hedging portfolio and the percentage
of all shares (of all stocks) in the hedging portfolio, respectively, and εEW
                                                                           t  and εSW
                                                                                   t  are the


                                                        15
error terms for the two indexes.6 Since the error terms in (21) are assumed to be independent
across stocks, the error terms of the two indexes, which are weighted averages of the error
terms of individual stocks, become negligible when the number of stocks is large. For the
remainder of our analysis, we shall ignore them.
      Simple algebra then yields the following relation between individual turnover and the
two indexes:

        τjt = βτSW
                 j τt
                    SW
                       + βτEW
                            j τt
                               EW
                                  + εjt                                                          (23)

where
                 nEW − θH j            θH j − nSW
        βτEW
           j =              and β SW
                                     =            .
                 nEW − nSW       τj
                                       nEW − nSW
These expressions imply that the following relations for βτEW
                                                            j and βτ j must hold:
                                                                   SW




           j + βτ j = 1 ∀ j
        βτEW    SW
                                                                                                (24a)
         1  EW
            J
              β    =1.                                                                          (24b)
         J j=1 τ j

These relations should come as no surprise since the two-factor speciﬁcation for turnover,
(21), has only J parameters {θH j }, whereas the transformed two-factor model (23) has
                            j } and {βτ j }. The ﬁrst relation, (24a), exactly reﬂects the
two sets of parameters, {βτEW         SW



dependence between the parameters and the second relation, (24b), comes from the fact
that the coeﬃcients in (23) are independent of the scale of {θH j }.
      Using the MiniCRSP volume database, we can empirically estimate {βτEW
                                                                          j } and {βτ j }
                                                                                    SW



by estimating the following constrained regression:

        τjt = βτSW
                 j τt
                    SW
                       + βτEW
                            j τt
                               EW
                                  + εjt ,           j = 1, . . . , J                            (25a)

             s.t. βτEW
                     j + βτ j = 1
                          SW
                                                                                                (25b)
                 
                 J
                       βτEW
                          j = J .                                                               (25c)
                 j=1


From the estimates {βτEW
                        j }, we can construct estimates of the portfolio weights of the hedging

  6
      To avoid degeneracy, we need Nj = Nk for some j = k, which is surely valid empirically.



                                                     16
portfolio in the following manner

         θH j = (nEW − nSW )βτEW
                                 j +n
                                      SW
                                         .                                                                   (26)

However, there are two remaining parameters, nEW and nSW , that need to be estimated.
It should be emphasized that these two remaining degrees of freedom are inherent in the
model (21). When the two common factors are not observed, the parameters {θH j} are only
identiﬁed up to a scaling constant and a rotation. Clearly, (21) is invariant when FH t is
rescaled as long as {θH j } is also rescaled appropriately. In addition, when the two factors
are replaced by their linear combinations, (21) remains formally the same as long as {θH j }
is also adjusted with an additive constant.7 Since the hedging portfolio {θH j } is deﬁned only
up to a scaling constant, we let

                  nSW = 1                                                                                   (27a)

         nEW − nSW = φ                                                                                      (27b)

where φ is a parameter that we calibrate to the data (see Section 5). This yields the ﬁnal
expression for the J components of the hedging portfolio:

         θH j = φ βτEW
                       j + 1.                                                                                (28)

The normalization nSW = 1 sets the total number of shares in the portfolio to a positive value.
If φ = 0, the portfolio has equal percentage of all the shares of each company, implying that
it is the market portfolio. Nonzero values of φ represent deviations from the market portfolio.
       To estimate {βτEW
                       j } and {βτ j }, we ﬁrst construct the two turnover indexes. Figure 1 plots
                                 SW



their time series over the entire sample period from 1962 to 1996. We estimate (25a)–(25b)
for each of the seven ﬁve-year subperiods, ignoring the global constraint (25c).8 Therefore,
we estimate constrained linear regressions of the weekly turnover for each stock on equal-
   7
       For example, for any a, we have ∀ j:

         τjt = FM t + θH j FH t + εjt = (FM t + aFH t ) + (θH j − a)FH t + εjt = F̃M t + θ̃H j FH t + εjt

where F̃M t = FM t + aFH t and θ̃H j = θH j − a.
   8
     We ignore this constraint for two reasons. First, given the large number of stocks in our sample, imposing
a global constraint like (25c) requires a large amount of computer memory, which was unavailable to us.
Second, because of the large number of individual regressions involved, neglecting the reduction of one
dimension should not signiﬁcantly aﬀect any of the ﬁnal results.


                                                            17
and share-weighted turnover indexes in each of the seven ﬁve-year subperiods of our sample.
   Figure 2 plots the histogram of {βEW } for each of the subperiods. There is clearly a wide
                                            τj

distribution of estimated coeﬃcients, ranging from −2 to 10 in the ﬁrst four subperiods and
−10 to 10 in the last three. Outliers in the raw turnover data are often the source of these
large estimates (see Lo and Wang, 2000a, for a more detailed discussion of outliers).
   Table 1 reports summary statistics for these constrained regressions. To provide a clearer
sense of the dispersion of these regressions, we ﬁrst sort them into deciles based on {βEW },        τj

and then compute the means and standard deviations of the estimated coeﬃcients {βτEW         j }

and {βτSW                                  2
         j }, their t-statistics, and the R̄ s within each decile. The t-statistics indicate that

the estimated coeﬃcients are generally signiﬁcant—even in the ﬁfth and sixth deciles, the
average t-statistic for {βτEW
                             j } is 4.585 and 6.749, respectively (we would, of course, expect

signiﬁcant t-statistics in the extreme deciles even if the true coeﬃcients were zero, purely
from sampling variation). The R̄2 s also look impressive, however, they must be interpreted
with some caution because of the imposition of the constraint (25b), which can yield R̄2
greater than unity and less than zero.9 Table 1 shows that negative R̄2 s appear mainly
in the two extreme deciles, except in the last subperiod when they are negative for all the
deciles, presumably an indication that the constraint is not consistent with the data in this
last subperiod.
       For comparison, we estimate the unconstrained version of (25a) and compute the same
summary statistics, reported in Table 2. Table 2 also reports the mean and standard devi-
ation within each decile of p-values corresponding to the statistic that (25b) holds. Except
for the last subperiod, the constraint seems to be reasonably consistent with the data, with
average p-values well above 5% for all but the extreme deciles in most subperiod. For exam-
ple, in the ﬁrst subperiod, the average p-values range from a minimum of 4.0% in decile 1
to a maximum of 32.4% in decile 6, and with a value of 19.4% in decile 10. However, in the
last subperiod, the average p-value is less than 5% deciles 2–6, and close to signiﬁcance for
most of the other deciles, which explains the negative R̄2 s in Table 1.
       Without the constraint, the R̄2 s in Table 2 are well behaved, and of similar magnitude
to those in Table1 that are between 0% and 100%, ranging from 40% to 60%, even in the
   For example, a negative R̄2 arises when the variance of βτEW
   9
                                                               j τt
                                                                  EW
                                                                     + βτSW
                                                                           j τt
                                                                              SW
                                                                                 exceeds the variance of the
dependent variable τjt , which can happen when the constraint (25b) is imposed.


                                                    18
last subperiod. Clearly the two-factor model of turnover accounts for a signiﬁcant amount
of variation in the weekly turnover of individual stocks.


5       The Forecast Power of the Hedging Portfolio
Having constructed the hedging portfolio up to a parameter φ to be determined, we can
examine its time-series properties as predicted by the model of Sections 2 and 3. In particular,
in this section we focus on the degree to which the the hedging portfolio can predict future
stock returns, especially the return on the market portfolio. We ﬁrst construct the returns
of the hedging portfolio in Section 5.1 by calibrating φ, and then compare its forecast power
with other factors in Sections 5.2 and 5.3.

5.1       Hedging-Portfolio Returns
To construct the return on the hedging portfolio, we begin by calculating its dollar value
and dollar returns. Let k denote subperiod k, k = 2, . . . , 7, Vjt (k) denote the total market
capitalization of stock j at time period t (the end of week t) in subperiod k, Qjt (k) de-
note its dividend-adjusted excess dollar return for the same period, and Rjt (k) denote the
dividend-adjusted excess return, and θj (k) the estimated share (as fraction of its total shares
outstanding) in the hedging portfolio in subperiod k.
      For stock j to be included in the hedging portfolio in subperiod k, which we shall refer to
as the “testing period”, we require it to have volume data for at least one third of the sample
in the previous subperiod (k−1), which we call the “estimation period”. Among the stocks
satisfying this criteria, we eliminate those ranked in the top and bottom 0.5% according to
their volume betas (or their share weights in the hedging portfolio) to limit the potential
impact of outliers.10 We let Jt (k) denote the set of stocks that survive these two ﬁlters and
that have price and return data for week t of subperiod k. The hedging portfolio in week t
of sub-period k is then given by:
                  
                   θH j , j ∈ Jt (k)
      θH jt (k) =                                                                           (29)
                  
                    0,      j∈/ Jt (k)
 10
      See Lo and Wang (2000a) for the importance of outliers in volume data.



                                                    19
The dollar return of the hedging portfolio for week t follows naturally:
                      
         QH t (k) ≡        θH jt (k)Vjt Rjt .                                                         (30)
                       j

and the (rate of) return of the hedging portfolio is given by
                      QH jt (k)
         RH t (k) ≡                                                                                   (31)
                      VH t (k)
where
                      
         VH t (k) ≡        θH jt (k)Vjt−1                                                             (32)
                      j

is the value of the hedging portfolio at the beginning of the week.
       The procedure outlined above yields the return and the dollar return of the hedging
portfolio up to the parameter φ, which must be calibrated. To do so, we exploit a key
property of the hedging portfolio: its return is the best forecaster of future market returns
(see Section 3). Therefore, for a given value of φ, we can estimate the following regression

         RM t+1 = δ0 + δ1 {RH t or QH t } + εM t+1                                                    (33)

where the single regressor is either the return of the hedging portfolio RH t or its dollar return
for a given choice of φ, and then vary φ to maximize the R̄2 .11
       Figures 3 and 4 show how the R̄2 from the regression of RM t on the lagged return and
dollar-return, respectively, of the hedging portfolio varies with the value of φ in each of
the subperiods. In all cases, there is a unique global maximum, from which we obtain
φ. However, for some values of φ, the value of the hedging portfolio changes sign, and
in these cases, deﬁning the return on the portfolio becomes problematic. Therefore, we
eliminate these values from consideration, and for all subperiods except subperiod 4 and 7
(i.e., subperiods 2, 3, 5, 6), the omitted values of φ do not seem to aﬀect the choice of φ for
the maximum R2 .
       For subperiods 2 to 7, the values for φ that give the maximum R2 are 1.25, 4.75, 1.75,
47, 38, and 0.25, respectively, using RH t as the predictor. Using QH t , the values of φ are 1.5,
  11
    This approach ignores the impact of statistical variation on the “optimal” φ, which is beyond the scope
of this paper but is explored further in related contexts by Foster, Smith, and Whaley (1997) and Lo and
MacKinlay (1997).


                                                     20
4.25, 2, 20, 27, and 0.75, respectively. With these values of φ in hand, we have fully speciﬁed
the hedging portfolio, its return and dollar return. Table 3 reports the summary statistics
for the return and dollar return on the hedging portfolio.

5.2        Optimal Forecasting Portfolios (OFPs)
Having constructed the return of the hedging portfolio in Section 5.1, we wish to compare
its forecast power to those of other factors. According to Proposition 2, the returns of the
hedging portfolio should outperform the returns of any other portfolios in predicting future
market returns. Speciﬁcally, if we regress RM t on the lagged return of any arbitrary portfolio
p, the R̄2 should be less than that of (33).
       It is impractical to compare (33) to all possible portfolios, and uninformative to compare
it to random portfolios. Instead, we need only make comparisons to “optimal forecast portfo-
lios”, portfolios that are optimal forecasters of RM t , since by construction, no other portfolios
can have higher levels of predictability than these. The following proposition shows how to
construct optimal forecasting portfolios (OFPs) (see Lo and Wang, 2001 for details):

Proposition 5 Let Γ0 and Γ1 denote the contemporaneous and ﬁrst-order autocovariance
matrix of the vector of all returns. For any arbitrary target portfolio q with weights wq =
(wq1 ; . . . ; wqN ), deﬁne A ≡ Γ0 −1 Γ1 wq wq  Γ1  . The optimal forecast portfolio of wq is given by
the normalized eigenvector of A corresponding to its largest eigenvalue.

       Since Γ0 and Γ1 are unobservable, they must be estimated using historical data. Given
the large number of stocks in our sample (over 2,000 in each subperiod) and the relatively
short time series in each subperiod (261 weekly observations), the standard estimators for
Γ0 and Γ1 are not viable. However, it is possible to construct OFPs from a much smaller
number of “basis portfolios”, and then compare the predictive power of these OFPs to the
hedging portfolio. As long as the basis portfolios are not too specialized, the R̄2 s are likely
to be similar to those obtained from the entire universe of all stocks.
       We form several sets of basis portfolios by sorting all the J stocks into K groups of
equal numbers (K ≤ J) according to: market capitalization, market beta, and SIC codes,
and then construct value-weighted portfolios within each group.12 This procedure yields K
  12
       It is important that we use value-weighted portfolios here so that the market portfolio, whose return


                                                      21
basis portfolios for which the corresponding Γ0 and Γ1 can be estimated using the portfolios’
weekly returns within each subperiod. Based on the estimated autocovariance matrices, the
OFP can be computed easily according to Proposition 5.
    In selecting the number of basis portfolios K, we face the following trade-oﬀ: fewer portfo-
lios yields better sampling properties for the covariance matrix estimators, but less desirable
properties for the OFP since the predictive power of the OFP is obviously maximized when
when K = J. As a compromise, for the OFPs based market capitalization and market betas,
we choose K to be 10, 15, 20, and 25. For the OFP based on SIC codes, we choose 13
industry groupings, described in more detail below.
    Speciﬁcally, for each ﬁve-year subperiod in which we wish to evaluate the forecast power
of the hedging portfolio (the testing period), we use the previous ﬁve-year subperiod (the
estimation period) to estimate the OFPs. For the OFP based on 10 market-capitalization-
sorted portfolios, which we call “CAP10”, we construct 10 value-weighted portfolios each
week, one for each market-capitalization decile. Market-capitalization deciles are recomputed
each week, and the time series of decile returns form the 10 basis portfolio returns of CAP10,
with which we can estimate Γ0 and Γ1 . To compute the OFP, we also require the weights
ωq of the target portfolio, in this case the market portfolio. Since the testing period follows
the estimation period, we use the market capitalization of each group in the last week of the
estimation period to map the weights of the market portfolio into a 10×1-vector of weights
for the 10 basis portfolios. The weights of the OFP for the basis portfolios CAP10 follow
immediately from Proposition 5. The same procedure is used to form OFPs for CAP15,
CAP20, and CAP25 basis portfolios.
    The OFPs of market-beta-sorted basis portfolios are constructed in a similar manner.
We ﬁrst estimate the market betas of individual stocks in the estimation period, sort them
according to their estimated betas and then form small groups of basis portfolios, calculating
value-weighted returns for each group. We consider 10, 15, 20 and 25 groups, denoted by
“Beta10”, “Beta15”, and so on. The same procedure is then followed to construct the OFPs
for each of these sets of basis portfolios.
we wish to predict, is a portfolio of these basic portfolios (recall that the target portfolio ωq that we wish
to forecast is a linear combination of the vector of returns for which Γk is the k-th order autocovariance
matrix).



                                                     22
       Finally, the industry portfolios are based on SIC-code groupings. The ﬁrst two digits
of the SIC code yield sixty to eighty industry categories, depending on the sample period,
and some of categories contain only one or two stocks. On the other, the ﬁrst digit yields
only eight broad industry categories. As a compromise, we use a slightly more disaggregated
grouping of 13 industries, given by the following correspondence:13

        #    SIC Codes            Description
         1   1–14                 Agriculture, forest, ﬁshing, mining
         2   15–19, 30, 32–34     Construction, basic materials (steel, glass, concrete, etc.)
         3   20–21                Food and tobacco
         4   22, 23, 25, 31, 39   Textiles, clothing, consumer products
         5   24, 26–27            Logging, paper, printing, publishing
         6   28                   Chemicals
         7   29                   Petroleum
         8   35–36, 38            Machinery and equipment supply, including computers
         9   37, 40–47            Transportation-related
        10   48–49                Utilities and telecommunications
        11   50–59                Wholesale distributors, retail
        12   60–69                Financial
        13   70–89, 98–99         Recreation, entertainment, services, conglomerates, etc.

Each week, stocks are sorted according to their SIC codes into the 13 categories deﬁned above,
and value-weighted returns are computed for each group, yielding the 13 basis portfolios
which we denote by “SIC13”. The autocovariance matrices are then estimated and the OFP
constructed according to Proposition 5.

5.3       Hedging Portfolio Return as A Predictor of Market Returns
Table 4 reports the results of the regressions of RM t on various lagged OFP returns and on
the hedging portfolios RH t and QH t . For completeness, we have also included four additional
regressions, with lagged value- and equal-weighted CRSP index returns, the logarithm of the
reciprocal of lagged market-capitalization, and the lagged three-month constant-maturity
Treasury bill return as predictors.14 Table 4 shows that the hedging portfolios outperforms
  13
    We are grateful to Jonathan Lewellen for sharing his industry classiﬁcation scheme.
  14
    We also considered nine other interest-rate predictors (six-month and one-year Treasury bill rates,
three-month, six-month, and one-year oﬀ-the-run Treasury bill rates, one-month and three-month CD
and Eurodollar rates, and the Fed Funds rate (all obtained from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,
http://www.stls.frb.org/fred/data/wkly.html). Each of these variables produced results similar to those for
the three-month constant-maturity Treasury bill return, hence we omit those regressions from Table 4.



                                                    23
all of the other competing portfolios in forecasting future market returns in three of the six
subperiods (subperiods 2, 4, and 6). In subperiod 3, only one OFP (Beta20) outperforms
the hedging portfolio, and in subperiod 5, Beta20 and SIC13’s OFPs outperform the hedging
portfolio, but only marginally. And in subperiod 7, the equal-weighted CRSP index return
outperforms the hedging portfolio.
       However, several caveats should be kept in mind with regard to the three subperiods in
which the hedging portfolios were surpassed by one or two competing portfolios. First, in
these three subperiods, the hedging portfolio still outperforms most of the other competing
portfolios. Second, there is no consistent winner in these subperiods. Third, the performance
of the hedging portfolios are often close to the best performer. Moreover, the best performers
in these subperiods performed poorly in the other subperiods, raising the possibility that
their performance might be due to sampling variation. In contrast, the hedging portfolios
forecasted RM t consistently in every subperiod. Indeed, among all of the regressors, the hedg-
ing portfolios were the most consistent across all six subperiods, a remarkable conﬁrmation
of the properties of the model of Sections 2 and 3.15


6        The Hedging-Portfolio Return as a Risk Factor
To evaluate the success of the hedging-portfolio return as a risk factor in the cross section
of expected returns, we implement a slightly modiﬁed version of the well-known regression
tests outlined in Fama and MacBeth (1973). The basic approach is the same: form portfolios
sorted by an estimated parameter such as market beta coeﬃcients in one time period (the
“portfolio-formation period”), estimate betas for those same portfolios in a second non-
overlapping time period (the “estimation period”), and perform a cross-sectional regression
test for the explanatory power of those betas using the returns of a third non-overlapping
time period (the “testing period”). However, in contrast to Fama and MacBeth (1973), we
use weekly instead of monthly returns, and our portfolio-formation, estimation, and testing
  15
    On the other hand, the results in Table 4 must be tempered by the fact that the OFPs are only as good
as the basis portfolios from which they are constructed. Increasing the number of basis portfolios should,
in principle, increase the predictive power of the OFP. However, as the number of basis portfolios increases,
the estimation errors in the autocovariance estimators γ0 and γ
                                                               1 also increase for a ﬁxed set of time series
observations, hence the impact on the predictive power of the OFP is not clear.




                                                     24
periods are ﬁve years each.16
       Speciﬁcally, we run the following bivariate regression for each security in the portfolio-
formation period, using only those securities that exist in all three periods:17

         Rjt = αj + βjM RM t + βjH RH t + εit                                                            (34)

where RM t is the return on the CRSP value-weighted index and RHt is the return on the
hedging portfolio. Using the estimated coeﬃcients {βM } and {βH }, we perform a double sort
                                                              i           i

among the individual securities in the estimation period, creating 100 portfolios correspond-
ing to the deciles of the estimated market and hedging-portfolio betas. We re-estimate the
two betas for each of these 100 portfolios in the estimation period, and use these estimated
betas as regressors in the testing period, for which we estimate the following cross-sectional
regression:

         Rpt = γ0t + γ1t βpM + γ2t βpH + ηpt                                                           (35)

where Rpt is the equal-weighted portfolio return for securities in portfolio p, p = 1, . . . , 100,
constructed from the double-sorted rankings of the portfolio-estimation period, and βM and         pt

βpt
  H
     are the market and hedging-portfolio returns, respectively, of portfolio p obtained from
the estimation period. This cross-sectional regression is estimated for each of the 261 weeks
in the ﬁve-year testing period, yielding a time series of coeﬃcients {
                                                                      γ0t }, {
                                                                              γ1t }, and {
                                                                                          γ2t }.
Summary statistics for these coeﬃcients and their diagnostics are then reported, and this
entire procedure is repeated by incrementing the portfolio-formation, estimation, and testing
periods by ﬁve years. We then perform the same analysis for the hedge-portfolio dollar-return
series {QH t }.
       Because we use weekly instead of monthly data, it may be diﬃcult to compare our
results to other cross-sectional tests in the extant literature, e.g., Fama and French (1992).
Therefore, we apply our procedure to three other benchmark models: the standard CAPM in
  16
     Our ﬁrst portfolio-formation period, from 1962 to 1966, is only four and a half years because the CRSP
Daily Master ﬁle begins in July 1962. Fama and MacBeth’s (1973) original procedure used a seven-year
portfolio-formation period, a ﬁve-year estimation period, and a four-year testing period.
  17
     This induces a certain degree of survivorship bias, but the eﬀects may not be as severe given that we
apply the selection criterion three periods at a time. Moreover, while survivorship bias has a clear impact
on expected returns and on the size eﬀect, its implications for the cross-sectional explanatory power of the
hedging portfolio is less obvious, hence we proceed cautiously with this selection criterion.



                                                    25
which RM t is the only regressor in (34) and 100 market-beta-sorted portfolios constructed, a
two-factor model in which the hedging-portfolio return factor is replaced by a “small-minus-
big capitalization” or “SMB” portfolio return factor as in Fama and French (1993), and a
two-factor model in which the hedging-portfolio return factor is replaced by the OFP return
factor described in Section 5.2.18
       Table 5 reports the the correlations between the diﬀerent portfolio return factors, returns
on CRSP value- and equal-weighted portfolios, return and dollar return on the hedging
portfolio, returns on the SMB portfolio and, OFP, Beta20, and the two turnover indices.
Table 6 reports the summary statistics for the return betas from the ﬁve risk models on
returns: the single-factor market model and the four two-factors models.
       Table 7 summarizes the results of all of these cross-sectional regression tests for each of
the ﬁve testing periods from 1972 to 1996. In the ﬁrst subpanel, corresponding to the ﬁrst
testing period from 1972 to 1976, there is little evidence in support of the CAPM or any
of the two-factor models estimated.19 For example, the ﬁrst three rows show that the time-
series average of the market-beta coeﬃcients, {
                                               γ1t }, is 0.000, with a t-statistic of 0.348 and
an average R̄2 of 10.0%.20 When the hedging-portfolio beta βH is added to the regression,
                                                                           t

the R̄2 does increase to 14.3% but the average of the coeﬃcients {γ̂2t } is −0.002 with a
t-statistic of −0.820. The average market-beta coeﬃcient is still insigniﬁcant, but it has now
switched sign. The results for the two-factor model with the hedging-portfolio dollar-return
factor and the two-factor model with the SMB factor are similar.
       In the second testing period, both speciﬁcations with the hedging-portfolio factor exhibit
statistically signiﬁcant means for the hedging-portfolio betas, with average coeﬃcients and
t-statistics of −0.012 and −3.712 for the hedging-portfolio return factor and −1.564 and
−4.140 for the hedging-portfolio dollar-return factor, respectively. In contrast, the market-
  18
     Speciﬁcally, the SMB portfolio return is constructed by taking the diﬀerence of the value-weighted returns
of securities with market capitalization below and above the median market capitalization at the start of
the ﬁve-year subperiod.
  19
     The two-factor model with OFP as the second factor is not estimated until the second testing period
because we use the 1962–1966 period to estimate the covariances from which the OFP returns in the 1967–
1971 period are constructed. Therefore, the OFP returns are not available in the ﬁrst portfolio-formation
period.
  20
     The t-statistic is computed under the assumption of independently and identically distributed coeﬃcients
{γ1t }, which may not be appropriate. However, since this has become the standard method for reporting
the results of these cross-sectional regression tests, we follow this convention to make our results comparable
to those in the literature.


                                                      26
beta coeﬃcients are not signiﬁcant in either of these speciﬁcations, and are also of the wrong
sign. The only other speciﬁcation with a signiﬁcant mean coeﬃcient is the two-factor model
with SMB as the second factor, with an average coeﬃcient of 0.299 for the SMB factor and
a t-statistic of 4.433.
       For the three remaining test periods, the only speciﬁcations with any statistically sig-
niﬁcant factors are the SMB and MPP two-factor models in the 1992–1996 testing period.
However, the R̄2 s in the last two testing periods are substantially lower than in the earlier
periods, perhaps reﬂecting the greater volatility of equity returns in recent years.
       Overall, the results do not provide overwhelming support for any factor in explaining the
cross-sectional variation of expected returns. There is, of course, the ubiquitous problem of
lack of power in these cross-sectional regression tests, hence we should not be surprised that
no single factor stands out.21 However, the point estimates of the cross-sectional regressions
show that the hedging-portfolio factor is comparable in magnitude and in performance to
other commonly proposed factors.


7        Conclusion
By deriving an explicit link between economic fundamentals and the dynamic properties of
asset returns and volume, we have shown that interactions between prices and quantities in
equilibrium yield a rich set of implications for any asset-pricing model. Indeed, by exploiting
the relation between prices and volume in our dynamic equilibrium model, we are able to
identify and construct the hedging portfolio that all investors use to hedge against changes
in market conditions. Moreover, our empirical analysis shows that this hedging portfolio has
considerable forecast power in predicting future returns of the market portfolio—a property of
the true hedging portfolio—and its abilities to explain cross-sectional variation in expected
returns is comparable to other popular risk factors such as market betas, the Fama and
French (1993) SMB factor, and optimal forecast portfolios.
       Although our model is purposefully parsimonious so as to focus attention on the essential
features of risk-sharing and trading activity, it underscores the general point that quantities,
together with prices, should be an integral part of any analysis of asset markets, both the-
  21
       See, for example, MacKinlay (1987, 1994).



                                                   27
oretically and empirically. Our results provide compelling motivation for determining risk
factors from economic fundamentals rather than through statistical means. Although this
is an old theme that has its origins in Black (1972), Mayers (1973), and Merton (1973),
it has become less fashionable as competing approaches such as the statistical approach of
Roll and Ross (1980) and Chamberlain and Rothschild (1983) and the empirical approach
of Fama and French (1992) have become more popular. We hope to revive interest in the
lofty goal of identifying risk factors through the logic of equilibrium analysis in general, and
by exploiting the information contained in trading volume in particular.




                                              28
                                                    Appendix

A.1       Proof of Theorem 1
We prove Theorem 1 by ﬁrst deriving the investors’ asset demand under the price function
(8) and then solves the coeﬃcient vector a and b to clear the stock market.
     For simplicity in notation, let ut ≡ (Dt ; Xt ), where (·; ·) denotes a column vector and
(·, ·) denotes a row vector. From (8), we have

       Qt+1 = Q̄t + Q̃t+1

where

       Q̄t = ra + (1+r)bXt                and Q̃t+1 = (1, −b)ut+1

where 1 is an (n × n) identity matrix. We also let λ1t ≡ λX Xt + λY Yti and λ2t ≡ λZ (1 + Zti ).
     We now consider investor i’s optimal portfolio choice. Let St be the vector of his stock
holding in period t. His wealth next period is Wt+1 = Wt + St  Q̄t+1 + St  (1, −b)ut+1 , where
we have omitted superscript i for brevity. Then,
                                                                                  
        −Wt+1 −λ1t D                      −Wt −St  Q̄t + St +λ1t ι;−b St +λ2t ut+1
                     M t+1 −λ2t Xt+1
     E e                             = E e
                                                                                                                  
                                                                     1
                                                     −Wt −St  Q̄t +     St +λ1t ι;−b St +λ2t σ St +λ1t ι;−b St +λ2t
                                                = E e                2                                                    .

where σ is the covariance matrix for ut . Thus, the investor’s optimization problem is reduced
to
                                                                                    
         max    St  Q̄t −   1
                             2
                                     St + λ1t ι; −b St + λ2t σ St + λ1t ι; −b St + λ2t .                             (A.1)
          St


The ﬁrst order condition is
                                              
      0 = Q̄t − σDD − bσDX  − σDX b + σXX bb St − λ1t (σDD − bσDZ )ι − λ2t (σDX − bσXX ). (A.2)

The solution gives the investor’s stock demand
                                         −1 
     St = σDD − bσDX  − σDX b + σXX bb       Q̄t − λ1t (σDD − bσDZ )ι − λ2t (σDX − bσXX ) . (A.3)
                                                                                                              
     Summing (A.2) over all investors and imposing the market clearing condition,                                 i   Sti = ι,

                                                             29
we have

      0 = I[ra + (1 + r)bXt ] − σQQ ι − λX IσQD ιXt − λZ IσQX .                    (A.4)

It follows that

               ra = (1/I)σQQ ι + λZ σQX

      (1 + r)b = λX σQD ι

which uniquely determine the equilibrium a and b. Substitute (A.4) into (A.3), we obtain
investor i’s equilibrium stock holding:

      Sti = (I −1 − λY Yti )ι − [λY (b ι)Yti + λZ Zti ](σQQ )−1 σQZ

where is (9). Q.E.D.

A.2       Proofs of Propositions 1–4

Proof of Proposition 1

A proof of a more general version of Proposition 1 with multiple funds is given in Lo and
Wang (2000a). Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 2

Suppose we use the (dollar) return of portfolio S to predict future market return. The
resulting R2 is
                               2                        
      R2 = Cov[(S  Qt )QM t+1 ] / Var[S  Qt ]Var[QM t+1 ] .

To choose the S to maximize R2 , we solve the following problem

          max      S  σQX (b ι)
           S

          s.t.     S  σQQ S = v.

Up to a scaling constant, the solution is SH = (σQQ )−1 σQX . Q.E.D.




                                                    30
Proof of Proposition 3

When Xt = 0 ∀ t, Qt = ra + Q̃t = (1, −b)ut . Then, Cov[Q̃t , Q̃M t ] = Cov[Q̃t , ι Q̃t ] = σDD ι,
Var[Q̃M t ] = ι σDD ι and (17) follows. Since σQX = 0 in this case, σM H = 0 and Q̄M = (1/I)σM
                                                                                              2
                                                                                                .
Thus, Q̄ = βM Q̄M which is (18). Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 4

Equation (19) simply follows from the joint normality of Q̃t+1 , Q̃M t+1 , and Q̃H t+1 . (20) can
be veriﬁed by substituting in the expressions for βM , βM , Q̄M and Q̄H , which gives (16c).
Q.E.D.




                                               31
                                   References
Abel, A., 1990, “Asset Prices under Habit Formation and Catching Up with the Joneses”,
    American Economic Review 80, 38–42.
Andersen, T., 1996, “Return Volatility and Trading Volume: An Information Flow Inter-
   pretation”, Journal of Finance 51, 169–204.

Antoniewicz, R.L., 1993, Relative Volume and Subsequent Stock Price Movements, working
    paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Atkins, A. and E. Dyl, 1997, “Market Structure and Reported Trading Volume: NASDAQ
    versus the NYSE”, Journal of Financial Research 20, 291-304.

Banz, R., 1981, “The Relation between Return and Market Value of Common Stocks”,
    Journal of Financial Economics 9, 3–18.

Black, F., 1972, “Capital Market Equilibrium with Restricted Borrowing”, Journal of Busi-
    ness 45, 444–454.
Black, F., 1976, “Studies of Stock Price Volatility Changes”, in Proceedings of the 1976
    Meetings of the Business and Economic Statistics Section, American Statistical Asso-
    ciation, 177–181.

Black, F., M. Jensen, and M. Scholes, 1972, “The Capital Asset Pricing Model: Some
    Empirical Tests”, Studies in the Theory of Capital Markets (M. Jensen ed.), Praeger
    Publishers.

Brown, K., Van Harlow, W. and S. Tinic, 1993, “The Risk and Required Return of Com-
    mon Stock Following Major Price Innovations”, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
    Analysis 28, 101–116.

Campbell, J. and J. Cochrane, 1999, “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explana-
   tion of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior”, Journal of Political Economy 107, 205–251.
Campbell, J., Grossman S. and J. Wang, 1993, “Trading Volume and Serial Correlation in
   Stock Returns”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 905–939.

Campbell, J., A. Lo and C. MacKinlay, 1996, The Econometrics of Financial Markets,
   Princeton University Press.
Chamberlain, G. and M. Rothschild, 1983, “Arbitrage and Mean-Variance Analysis on
   Large Asset Markets”, Econometrica 51, 1281–1301.

Chan, L. and J. Lakonishok, 1995, “The Behavior of Stock Prices Around Institutional
   Trades”, Journal of Finance 50, 1147–74.
Conrad, J., Hameed, A. and C. Niden, 1994, “Volume and Autocovariances in Short-Horizon
    Individual Security Returns”, Journal of Finance 49, 1305–1329.


                                          32
Epps, T. and M. Epps, 1976, “The Stochastic Dependence of Security Price Changes
    and Transaction Volumes: Implications for the Mixture of Distribution Hypothesis”,
    Econometrica 44, 305–321.
Fama, E. and K. French, 1992, “The Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns”, Journal
   of Finance 47, 427–465.
Fama, E. and J. MacBeth, 1973, “Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests”, Journal
   of Political Economy 81, 607-636.
Foster, D., Smith, T. and R. Whaley, 1997, “Assessing Goodness-of-Fit of Asset Pricing
    Models: The Distribution of the Maximal R-Squared”, Journal of Finance 52, 591–607.
Gallant, R., Rossi, P. and G. Tauchen, 1992, “Stock Prices and Volume”, Review of Finan-
    cial Studies 5, 199–242.
Hiemstra, C. and J. Jones, 1994, “Testing for Linear and Nonlinear Granger Causality in
    the Stock Price-Volume Relation”, Journal of Finance 49, 1639–1664.
He, H., and J. Wang, 1995, “Diﬀerential Information and Dynamic Behavior of Stock
    Trading Volume”, Review of Financial Studies 8, 919–972.
Hu, S., 1997, “Trading Turnover and Expected Stock Returns: Does It Matter and Why?”,
    working paper, National Taiwan University.
Jain, P. and G. Joh, 1988, “The Dependence between Hourly Prices and Trading Volume”,
     Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 23, 269–282.
James, C., and R. Edmister, 1983, “The Relation between Common Stock Returns, Trading
   Activity and Market Value”, Journal of Finance 38, 1075-1086.
Jegadeesh, N. and S. Titman, 1993, “Returns to Buying Winners and Selling Losers: Im-
    plications for Stock Market Eﬃciency”, Journal of Finance 48, 65–91.
Karpoﬀ, J., 1987, “The Relation between Price Changes and Trading Volume: A Survey”,
    Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 22, 109–126.
Lakonishok, J. and S. Smidt, 1986, “Volume for Winners and Losers: Taxation and Other
    Motives for Stock Trading”, Journal of Finance 41, 951–974.
Lakonishok, J. and T. Vermaelen, 1986, “Tax-Induced Trading Around Ex-Dividend Days”,
    Journal of Financial Economics 16, 287–319.
Lamoureux, C. and W. Lastrapes, 1990, “Heteroskedasticity in Stock Return Data: Volume
   vs. GARCH Eﬀects”, Journal of Finance 45, 487–498.
Lamoureux, C. and W. Lastrapes, 1994 “Endogenous Trading Volume and Momentum in
   Stock-Return Volatility”, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 12, 253–160.
Lamoureux, C. and J. Wansley, 1987, “Market Eﬀects of Changes in the Standard & Poor’s
   500 Index”, Financial Review 22, 53–69.

                                          33
LeBaron, B., 1992, “Persistence of the Dow Jones Index on Rising Volume”, working paper,
   University of Wisconsin.

Lim, T., Lo, A., Wang, J. and P. Adamek, 1998, “Trading Volume and the MiniCRSP
    Database: An Introduction and User’s Guide”, MIT Laboratory for Financial Engi-
    neering Working Paper No. LFE–1038–98.

Llorente, G., R. Michaely, G. Saar and J. Wang, 2000, “Dynamic Volume-Return Relations
    for Individual Stocks”, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Lo, A. and C. MacKinlay, 1997, “Maximizing Predictability in the Stock and Bond Mar-
    kets”, Macroeconomic Dynamics 1(1997), 102–134.

Lo, A., H. Mamaysky and J. Wang, 2000, “Asset Prices and Trading Volume under Fixed
    Transaction Costs”, working paper, MIT.

Lo, A. and J. Wang, 2000a, Trading Volume: Deﬁnitions, Data Analysis, and Implications
    of Portfolio Theory, Review of Financial Studies 13, 257–300.

Lo, A. and J. Wang, 2000b, “Trading Volume”, to appear in Advances in Economic Theory:
    Eight World Congress, Econometric Society Monograph.

Lo, A. and J. Wang, 2001, “Optimal Forecast Portfolios”, work in progress, MIT.

MacKinlay, C., 1994, “Multi-Factor Models Do Not Explain Deviations From the CAPM”,
   Journal of Financial Economics 38, 3–28.

MacKinlay, C., 1987, “On Multivariate Tests of the CAPM”, Journal of Financial Eco-
   nomics 18, 341–371.

Mayers, D., 1972, “Nonmarketable Assets and Capital Market Equilibrium Under Uncer-
   tainty”, in M. Jensen, ed., Studies in the Theory of Capital Markets. New York:
   Praeger Publishers.

Merton, R., 1971, “Optimal Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a Continuous-Time Model”,
    Journal of Economic Theory 3, 373–413.
Merton, R., 1973, “An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model”, Econometrica 41, 867–
    887.

Michaely, R., 1991, “Ex-Dividend Day Stock Price Behavior: The Case of the 1986 Tax
    Reform Act”, Journal of Finance 46, 845–860.

Michaely, R. and J. Vila, 1995, “Investors’ Heterogeneity, Prices and Volume Around the
    Ex-Dividend Day”, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 30, 171–198.

Michaely, R. and J. Vila, 1996, “Trading Volume with Private Valuation: Evidence from
    the Ex-Dividend Day”, Review of Financial Studies 9, 471–509.




                                          34
Michaely, R., J.-L. Vila and J. Wang, “A Model of Trading Volume with Tax-Induced
    Heterogeneous Valuation and Transaction Costs” Journal of Financial Intermediation
    5, 340-371, 1996.
Morse, D., 1980, “Asymmetric Information in Securities Markets and Trading Volume”,
   Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 15, 1129–1148.

Smidt, S., 1990, “Long-Run Trends in Equity Turnover”, Journal of Portfolio Management
    , Fall, 66–73.

Shleifer, A., 1986, “Do Demand Curves for Stocks Slope Down?”, Journal of Finance 41,
     579–590.

Stickel, S., 1991, “The Ex-Dividend Day Behavior of Nonconvertible Preferred Stock Re-
     turns and Trading Volume”, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 26, 45–61.

Stickel, S. and R. Verrecchia, 1994, “Evidence that Volume Sustains Price Changes”, Fi-
     nancial Analysts Journal (November-December), 57-67.

Tauchen, G., and M. Pitts, “The Price Variability-Volume Relationship On Speculative
    Markets”, Econometrica 51, 485-506.

Tkac, P., 1996, “A Trading Volume Benchmark: Theory and Evidence”, working paper,
    Department of Finance and Business Economics, University of Notre Dame.
Wang, J., 1994, “A Model of Competitive Stock Trading Volume”, Journal of Political
   Economy 102, 127–168.

Ying, C., 1966, “Stock Market Prices and Volume of Sales”, Econometrica 34, 676–686.




                                          35
                                            Equal-Weighted Turnover
                     4
                     3
Weekly Turnover(%)

                     2
                     1
                     0




                         1962   1967       1972      1977           1982   1986       1992      1996

                                                             Year

                                                            (a)




                                            Share-Weighted Turnover
                     4
                     3
Weekly Turnover(%)

                     2
                     1
                     0




                         1962   1967       1972      1977           1982   1986       1992      1996

                                                             Year

                                                            (b)




               Figure 1: Time series of equally- and share-weighted turnover indices from 1962 to 1997.


                                                            36
                                 Histogram of β τEW , 1962-1966                                                                Histogram of β τEW , 1967-1971
                  1000                                                                                      1000




                    750                                                                                      750
     Frequency




                                                                                                Frequency
                    500                                                                                      500




                    250                                                                                      250




                      0                                                                                          0
                           -10     -6      -2                 2       6         10                                       -10        -6   -2       2       6     10
                                           (a)                                                                                           (b)

                                 Histogram of β τEW , 1972-1976                                                                Histogram of β τEW , 1977-1981
                    1000                                                                                    1000




                    750                                                                                     750
      Frequency




                                                                                                Frequency
                    500                                                                                     500




                    250                                                                                     250




                      0                                                                                          0
                           -10     -6      -2                 2       6         10                                       -10        -6   -2       2       6     10
                                           (c)                                                                                           (d)

                                 Histogram of β τEW , 1982-1986                                                                Histogram of β τEW , 1987-1991
                    1000                                                                                    1000




                     750                                                                                    750
                                                                                                Frequency
        Frequency




                     500                                                                                    500




                     250                                                                                    250




                       0                                                                                         0
                           -10     -6      -2                 2       6         10                                       -10        -6   -2       2       6     10
                                           (e)                                                                                            (f)

                                                                                Histogram of β τEW , 1992-1996
                                                             1000




                                                             750
                                                 Frequency




                                                             500




                                                             250




                                                                  0
                                                                          -10        -6   -2                 2       6         10
                                                                                          (g)




Figure 2: Histogram of turnover betas on the equally-weighted turnover index for each of the 5-year
subperiod from 1962 to 1997.



                                                                                          37
                       -2                                                 -2
                      R (ϕ) with RH, 1967-1971                            R (ϕ) with RH, 1972-1976

       8%                                                  8%




       6%                                                  6%




       4%                                                  4%




       2%                                                  2%




       0%                                                  0%



            -10   0     10       20         30   40   50        -10   0    10        20         30   40   50
                                 ϕ                                                   ϕ
                                 (a)                                                 (b)

                       -2                                                 -2
                      R (ϕ) with RH, 1977-1981                            R (ϕ) with RH, 1982-1986

       8%                                                  8%




       6%                                                  6%




       4%                                                  4%




       2%                                                  2%




       0%                                                  0%



            -10   0     10       20         30   40   50        -10   0    10        20         30   40   50
                                 ϕ                                                   ϕ
                                 (c)                                                 (d)




                       -2                                                 -2
                      R (ϕ) with RH, 1987-1991                            R (ϕ) with RH, 1992-1996

       8%                                                  8%




       6%                                                  6%




       4%                                                  4%




       2%                                                  2%




       0%                                                  0%



            -10   0     10       20         30   40   50        -10   0    10        20         30   40   50
                                 ϕ                                                   ϕ
                                 (e)                                                 (f)




Figure 3: R2 of the return of the candidate hedging portfolio in predicting future market returns as a
function φ for the second to the seventh 5-year subperiods from 1962 to 1996.




                                                      38
                       -2                                                 -2
                      R (ϕ) with QH, 1967-1971                            R (ϕ) with QH, 1972-1976

       8%                                                  8%




       6%                                                  6%




       4%                                                  4%




       2%                                                  2%




       0%                                                  0%



            -10   0     10       20        30    40   50        -10   0    10        20        30    40   50
                                 ϕ                                                   ϕ
                                 (a)                                                 (b)

                       -2                                                 -2
                      R (ϕ) with QH, 1977-1981                            R (ϕ) with QH, 1982-1986

       8%                                                  8%




       6%                                                  6%




       4%                                                  4%




       2%                                                  2%




       0%                                                  0%



            -10   0     10       20        30    40   50        -10   0    10        20        30    40   50
                                 ϕ                                                   ϕ
                                 (c)                                                 (d)




                       -2                                                 -2
                      R (ϕ) with QH, 1987-1991                            R (ϕ) with QH, 1992-1996

       8%                                                  8%




       6%                                                  6%




       4%                                                  4%




       2%                                                  2%




       0%                                                  0%



            -10   0     10       20        30    40   50        -10   0    10        20        30    40   50
                                 ϕ                                                   ϕ
                                 (e)                                                 (f)




Figure 4: R2 of the dollar return of the candidate hedging portfolio in predicting future market returns as
a function φ for the second to the seventh 5-year subperiods from 1962 to 1996.




                                                      39
                                                    Table 1
    Summary statistics for the restricted volume betas using weekly returns and volume data for NYSE
    and AMEX stocks from 1962 to 1996. Turnover over individual stocks is regressed on the equally-
    weighted and share- weighted turnover indices, subject to the restriction that the two regression
    coeﬃcients, βτEW and βτSW , must add up to one. The stocks are then sorted into ten deciles by
    βτEW . The summary statistics are then reported for each decile.

                           τEW
                           β                    τEW )
                                              t(β                    τSW
                                                                     β                    τSW )
                                                                                        t(β
                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                         R (%)
              Sample
     Decile
               Size
                       Mean       S.D.     Mean      S.D.         Mean      S.D.     Mean      S.D.   Mean     S.D.

                                      July 1962 to December 1966 (234 Weeks)
       1        218    −0.906     0.119   −49.394   19.023     1.906        0.119   103.944   38.755−2520.4 27817.4
       2        219    −0.657     0.069   −26.187   12.805     1.657        0.069    65.488   30.083   56.5    19.5
       3        219    −0.432     0.064   −10.917    5.956     1.432        0.064    35.879   17.907   55.0    20.4
       4        218    −0.188     0.082    −3.812    2.732     1.188        0.082    22.907   10.555   57.1    17.8
       5        219     0.107     0.097     1.273    1.243     0.893        0.097    11.365    4.570   51.5    16.0
       6        219     0.494     0.119     4.585    1.943     0.506        0.119     4.847    2.401   50.6    16.5
       7        218     0.927     0.145     6.749    2.258     0.073        0.145     0.639    1.190   50.7    15.5
       8        219     1.520     0.229     8.229    2.893    −0.520        0.229   −2.714     1.348   49.2    15.4
       9        219     2.568     0.434    10.410    3.491    −1.568        0.434   −6.292     2.401   49.4    15.2
      10        218     6.563     4.100    11.682    3.880    −5.563        4.100   −9.500     3.332   47.1    15.3
                                    January 1967 to December 1971 (261 Weeks)
       1        242    −0.783     0.134   −36.725   17.343     1.783        0.134    84.302   38.946 −175.3    976.2
       2        243    −0.529     0.056   −18.772    8.459     1.529        0.056    53.969   22.871   58.2     16.1
       3        242    −0.315     0.068    −7.905    4.099     1.315        0.068    32.431   13.771   56.4     16.3
       4        243    −0.054     0.089    −1.139    1.845     1.054        0.089    18.479    7.855   55.2     14.3
       5        242     0.264     0.087     3.269    1.482     0.736        0.087     9.228    3.260   54.1     13.2
       6        243     0.623     0.126     6.035    2.217     0.377        0.126     3.723    1.871   53.5     13.4
       7        243     1.110     0.154     8.367    2.719    −0.110        0.154    −0.735    1.178   54.4     13.0
       8        242     1.782     0.205    10.314    3.151    −0.782        0.205    −4.477    1.630   53.2     13.2
       9        243     2.661     0.330    12.249    3.120    −1.661        0.330    −7.609    2.149   54.6     11.0
      10        242     5.410     2.540    13.019    4.172    −4.410        2.540   −10.260    3.383   52.6     14.2
                                    January 1972 to December 1977 (261 Weeks)
       1        262    −2.013     0.845   −13.276    4.901     3.013        0.845   20.755     8.319−1147.6 5034.9
       2        263    −1.069     0.129   −10.986    3.890     2.069        0.129   21.239     7.045   25.4   44.6
       3        263    −0.697     0.096    −6.014    2.466     1.697        0.096   14.600     5.619   44.3   27.1
       4        263    −0.359     0.105    −2.825    1.444     1.359        0.105   10.608     4.044   50.3   22.8
       5        263     0.015     0.114     0.062    0.765     0.985        0.114    6.620     2.466   53.0   19.2
       6        263     0.485     0.156     2.577    1.159     0.515        0.156    2.792     1.354   52.8   15.4
       7        263     1.084     0.187     4.684    1.801    −0.084        0.187   −0.322     0.870   51.4   14.5
       8        263     1.888     0.289     6.827    2.426    −0.888        0.289   −3.180     1.421   52.8   14.2
       9        263     3.161     0.501     8.894    3.311    −2.161        0.501   −6.060     2.431   52.5   14.0
      10        262     7.770     4.940    11.202    4.447    −6.770        4.940   −9.480     3.965   52.3   13.8

                                    January 1977 to December 1981 (261 Weeks)
       1        242    −3.096     0.347   −22.164    4.591     4.096        0.347   29.341     5.815 −872.7 6958.8
       2        243    −2.284     0.192   −15.799    4.883     3.284        0.192   22.701     6.846   32.7   23.6
       3        243    −1.654     0.208   −10.524    4.628     2.654        0.208   16.861     7.167   48.9   20.8
       4        243    −1.021     0.156    −5.505    2.335     2.021        0.156   10.884     4.304   54.1   18.4
       5        243    −0.394     0.189    −1.833    1.180     1.394        0.189    6.387     2.655   55.6   17.1
       6        243     0.355     0.250     1.277    1.045     0.645        0.250    2.472     1.438   55.5   16.5
       7        243     1.330     0.308     3.864    1.519    −0.330        0.308   −0.894     0.971   53.6   15.7
       8        243     2.599     0.457     6.198    2.242    −1.599        0.457   −3.782     1.560   54.5   15.7
       9        243     4.913     0.809     8.860    2.983    −3.913        0.809   −7.038     2.487   55.3   14.5
      10        242    10.090     4.231    11.202    3.618    −9.090        4.231   −9.980     3.311   55.2   13.4




Vol2.10.04.01                                            Tables                                           Page 1 of 23
                                          Table 1 (continued)



                           τEW
                           β                    τEW )
                                              t(β                    τSW
                                                                     β                    τSW )
                                                                                        t(β
                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                        R (%)
              Sample
     Decile
               Size
                       Mean       S.D.    Mean       S.D.         Mean      S.D.     Mean      S.D.   Mean     S.D.

                                    January 1982 to December 1986 (261 Weeks)
       1        227    −6.968     3.038   −5.636     2.328     7.968        3.038     6.525   2.577   46.6   15.9
       2        228    −2.257     0.624   −3.249     1.604     3.257        0.624     4.724   2.199   52.7   20.2
       3        228    −0.640     0.380   −1.223     0.967     1.640        0.380     3.180   1.667   45.5 136.9
       4        227     0.501     0.283    1.166     0.841     0.499        0.283     1.177   0.903   55.4   22.4
       5        228     1.357     0.231    3.540     1.655    −0.357        0.231    −0.954   0.786   41.3   90.7
       6        228     2.077     0.201    5.319     2.159    −1.077        0.201    −2.758   1.216 −19.5 686.3
       7        227     2.754     0.196    7.402     2.342    −1.754        0.196    −4.710   1.531   28.3   52.8
       8        228     3.431     0.201    9.244     2.667    −2.431        0.201    −6.548   1.922    3.2 101.8
       9        228     4.168     0.237   11.354     2.905    −3.168        0.237    −8.630   2.248 −163.1 1678.6
      10        227     5.399     1.170   14.045     5.229    −4.399        1.170   −11.392   4.405 −348.1 1027.1
                                    January 1987 to December 1991 (261 Weeks)
       1        216    −8.487     7.040   −7.093     3.763     9.487        7.040     8.082   4.137   50.2   16.8
       2        217    −2.866     0.725   −4.616     2.439     3.866        0.725     6.263   3.224   54.8   18.8
       3        217    −0.843     0.494   −1.832     1.512     1.843        0.494     4.097   2.537   56.8   21.0
       4        217     0.441     0.330    1.196     1.277     0.559        0.330     1.423   1.268   57.0   19.9
       5        217     1.502     0.317    4.887     3.062    −0.502        0.317    −1.693   1.583   57.8   18.8
       6        217     2.510     0.280    8.434     4.070    −1.510        0.280    −5.074   2.582   51.2   18.7
       7        217     3.389     0.234   12.139     4.615    −2.389        0.234    −8.567   3.325   42.2   15.6
       8        217     4.157     0.196   15.329     4.607    −3.157        0.196   −11.637   3.513   23.8   19.8
       9        217     4.836     0.212   18.370     4.580    −3.836        0.212   −14.572   3.673 −27.0    66.1
      10        217     5.743     0.402   21.430     5.101    −4.743        0.402   −17.682   4.229 −921.9 4682.1
                                    January 1992 to December 1996 (261 Weeks)
       1        241    −4.275     2.858   −2.409     1.092     5.275        2.858    3.097    1.342 −423.6   3336.7
       2        241    −1.074     0.384   −1.277     0.741     2.074        0.384    2.538    1.369 −147.7   2631.2
       3        242    −0.245     0.155   −0.371     0.301     1.245        0.155    1.944    0.899 −14.7     508.2
       4        241     0.189     0.100    0.298     0.203     0.811        0.100    1.296    0.534 −135.1    899.3
       5        241     0.520     0.098    0.779     0.313     0.480        0.098    0.729    0.330−1353.9   5755.2
       6        242     0.865     0.106    1.226     0.414     0.135        0.106    0.196    0.177 −197.6    669.1
       7        241     1.303     0.159    1.725     0.641    −0.303        0.159   −0.400    0.260 −130.3    931.7
       8        242     2.022     0.254    2.391     0.824    −1.022        0.254   −1.202    0.480 −58.9     684.5
       9        241     3.271     0.498    3.061     1.027    −2.271        0.498   −2.117    0.769 −24.9     225.8
      10        241     8.234     9.836    3.844     1.360    −7.234        9.836   −3.237    1.190 −219.9   1145.7




Vol2.10.04.01                                            Tables                                         Page 2 of 23
                                                                        Table 2
                Summary statistics for the unrestricted volume betas using weekly returns and volume data for NYSE and
                AMEX stocks from 1962 to 1996. Turnover over individual stocks are regressed on the equally-weighted and
                share- weighted turnover indices, giving two regression coeﬃcients, βτEW and βτSW . The stocks are then sorted
                into ten deciles by the estimates of their βτEW . The summary statistics are reported for each decile. The last two




Vol2.10.04.01
                columns report the test statistic for the condition that βτEW and βτSW add up to one.
                                                                                                                2
                                       β
                                       τEW              t(β
                                                           τEW )            β
                                                                             τSW              t(β
                                                                                                 τSW )        R (%)       p-value (%)
                          Sample
                 Decile
                           Size
                                   Mean       S.D.    Mean      S.D.     Mean       S.D.    Mean      S.D.   Mean   S.D.   Mean   S.D.

                                                        July 1962 to December 1966 (234 Weeks)
                   1       218     −4.749     6.337   −4.121    2.174    11.761 14.451    5.608      2.556   51.4   18.7    0.7    4.0
                   2       219     −1.321     0.249   −3.622    2.152     3.891  1.043    5.351      2.670   57.3   16.7    2.3    8.5
                   3       219     −0.730     0.110   −3.500    2.466     2.398  0.786    5.394      3.054   59.5   17.5   16.7   23.8
                   4       218     −0.406     0.071   −2.756    1.971     1.548  0.664    4.706      2.593   61.0   17.0   23.3   29.2
                   5       219     −0.195     0.055   −2.603    2.262     0.967  0.644    4.810      3.103   63.0   20.2   13.2   24.8
                   6       219      0.034     0.090   −0.012    0.960     0.790  0.806    1.723      1.250   54.6   19.1   19.0   28.6
                   7       218      0.508     0.206    1.554    1.080     0.337  1.058   −0.015      1.111   52.0   16.4   26.0   32.4
                   8       219      1.470     0.336    2.675    1.481   −0.768   1.834   −1.218      1.375   51.7   14.3   26.9   31.5
                   9       219      3.400     0.875    3.685    1.817   −3.639   2.059   −2.392      1.670   46.7   14.2   22.0   30.1
                  10       218     11.334     8.125    5.387    2.376 −15.963 12.976     −4.137      2.147   46.3   14.7    9.6   19.4
                                                       January 1967 to December 1971 (261 Weeks)




Tables
                   1       242     −5.109   17.101    −4.306    2.689    12.966   35.908     6.280   3.303   52.1   16.3    1.0    4.3
                   2       243     −0.770    0.141    −4.458    3.052     2.694    1.188     7.022   3.776   59.3   14.3   10.3   20.3
                   3       242     −0.409    0.078    −4.600    3.229     1.534    0.634     7.725   4.170   64.3   14.8   19.8   27.7
                   4       243     −0.176    0.071    −2.299    2.609     1.128    0.729     5.222   3.639   60.6   15.5   16.3   27.9
                   5       242      0.086    0.087     0.628    1.123     0.851    0.968     2.003   1.537   57.5   15.6   15.5   27.2
                   6       243      0.492    0.152     2.139    1.441     0.447    0.924     0.260   1.289   56.9   13.0   20.5   29.4
                   7       243      1.096    0.201     3.379    1.886    −0.383    0.931    −1.096   1.617   56.0   12.0   20.6   28.1
                   8       242      1.906    0.307     4.567    2.143    −1.583    1.057    −2.328   1.825   56.4   12.2   18.3   28.5
                   9       243      3.275    0.556     5.533    2.246    −3.417    1.223    −3.202   1.760   56.5   12.3   16.8   24.9
                  10       242      7.499    3.595     6.827    2.626    −9.674    5.563    −4.641   2.050   55.6   11.7   10.1   21.8
                                                       January 1972 to December 1976 (261 Weeks)
                   1       262     −1.908     1.364   −4.116    2.584     4.371     2.731    7.313   3.930   57.0   17.7    3.2   11.7
                   2       263     −0.603     0.131   −3.849    3.151     1.874     0.665    8.135   4.806   66.3   17.2   11.0   24.0
                   3       263     −0.237     0.094   −1.949    1.632     1.120     0.481    6.085   3.129   64.7   16.6    8.4   20.6
                   4       263      0.032     0.071    0.316    0.872     0.714     0.570    3.258   1.805   58.0   17.2    5.3   16.8
                   5       263      0.308     0.091    2.249    1.733     0.480     0.659    1.076   1.942   56.1   15.5    6.1   16.7
                   6       263      0.645     0.114    3.586    2.285     0.120     0.807   −0.517   2.197   54.3   14.8    7.1   18.9
                   7       263      1.107     0.141    4.929    2.814    −0.361     0.611   −1.996   2.475   55.5   14.3    7.7   20.9
                   8       263      1.700     0.218    6.180    3.237    −0.910     0.736   −3.229   2.838   56.8   13.7    9.9   23.6
                   9       263      2.846     0.497    7.823    3.678    −2.054     0.894   −4.950   3.194   57.0   13.8    9.6   22.2
                  10       262      6.609     3.411   10.196    4.149    −5.892     3.463   −7.409   3.566   59.3   11.8   13.1   25.6




Page 3 of 23
                                                              Table 2 (continued)

                                                                                                               2
                                      β
                                      τEW              t(β
                                                          τEW )            β
                                                                            τSW              t(β
                                                                                                τSW )        R (%)       p-value (%)
                         Sample
                Decile




Vol2.10.04.01
                          Size
                                  Mean       S.D.    Mean      S.D.    Mean        S.D.    Mean      S.D.   Mean   S.D.   Mean   S.D.

                                                      January 1977 to December 1981 (261 Weeks)
                  1       242     −2.622     1.777   −2.975    1.647    4.749      2.675    4.516   2.251   54.0   20.0    6.4   16.0
                  2       243     −0.805     0.175   −2.356    1.508    1.920      0.662    4.251   2.176   61.6   17.5   13.2   23.9
                  3       243     −0.364     0.101   −1.559    1.160    1.186      0.539    3.553   1.876   62.0   18.7    7.7   19.3
                  4       243     −0.072     0.076   −0.337    0.564    0.733      0.481    2.061   0.999   56.3   19.0    8.8   21.7
                  5       243      0.218     0.093    0.780    0.585    0.504      0.673    0.781   0.823   53.5   15.9    7.0   18.3
                  6       243      0.575     0.119    1.604    0.998    0.238      0.643    0.002   1.053   56.1   14.5   11.0   21.7
                  7       243      1.081     0.184    2.241    1.194   −0.209      0.641   −0.727   1.161   54.5   13.9   12.1   24.8
                  8       243      1.900     0.284    3.108    1.530   −0.917      0.758   −1.610   1.446   54.7   13.1   13.3   24.4
                  9       243      2.993     0.398    3.819    1.593   −1.995      0.784   −2.326   1.482   54.6   14.8   15.9   27.8
                 10       242      7.240     4.979    4.819    1.899   −6.163      5.374   −3.419   1.788   54.5   13.8   20.8   29.3
                                                      January 1982 to December 1986 (261 Weeks)
                  1       227     −3.038     1.819   −2.588    1.102    4.377      2.097    4.014   1.497   49.6   18.2   14.6   26.1
                  2       228     −0.939     0.245   −1.940    1.284    1.821      0.593    3.799   2.206   57.6   19.9    7.7   19.0
                  3       228     −0.342     0.123   −1.021    0.686    1.045      0.477    2.945   1.427   58.7   18.5    4.9   17.0
                  4       227      0.028     0.087    0.116    0.513    0.631      0.459    1.704   0.933   57.6   16.7    5.0   15.9




Tables
                  5       228      0.349     0.101    1.247    0.917    0.340      0.465    0.548   1.118   55.9   19.0    4.0   14.4
                  6       228      0.732     0.117    2.306    1.561    0.073      0.587   −0.507   1.641   57.9   16.4    4.6   16.0
                  7       227      1.204     0.178    3.278    1.885   −0.396      0.486   −1.647   1.842   55.3   13.8    7.7   19.7
                  8       228      1.908     0.249    3.840    1.907   −0.907      0.525   −2.252   1.856   54.8   14.6   11.2   24.1
                  9       228      3.020     0.459    5.012    2.350   −1.754      0.663   −3.369   2.197   57.8   12.7   11.0   23.4
                 10       227      6.772     3.345    6.400    2.616   −4.903      2.873   −4.976   2.415   54.9   13.1    4.9   15.2
                                                      January 1987 to December 1991 (261 Weeks)
                  1       216     −3.153     3.353   −1.997    1.036    4.278      3.325    3.224   1.656   47.5   23.3   20.7   30.0
                  2       217     −0.620     0.236   −1.246    0.866    1.367      0.546    2.872   1.734   57.4   21.7   10.2   22.9
                  3       217     −0.098     0.093   −0.307    0.417    0.673      0.440    1.899   1.156   56.2   21.5    5.0   16.5
                  4       217      0.194     0.077    0.795    0.781    0.332      0.417    0.739   1.123   55.9   20.3    4.6   16.0
                  5       217      0.479     0.086    1.443    0.873    0.150      0.438   −0.013   1.000   55.5   17.8    5.1   18.0
                  6       217      0.764     0.084    2.059    1.074   −0.082      0.433   −0.623   1.185   56.0   17.9    6.7   19.5
                  7       217      1.177     0.146    2.344    1.068   −0.338      0.474   −1.053   1.105   52.9   16.8   07.8   19.8
                  8       217      1.806     0.246    2.756    1.259   −0.719      0.508   −1.436   1.170   53.9   16.3   14.0   26.3
                  9       217      2.972     0.452    3.104    1.371   −1.531      0.610   −1.921   1.231   51.3   15.3   11.5   22.3
                 10       217      6.485     3.351    3.830    1.656   −4.209      2.654   −2.823   1.538   47.5   15.8    4.1   12.6




Page 4 of 23
                                                              Table 2 (continued)

                                                                                                               2
                                      β
                                      τEW              t(β
                                                          τEW )            β
                                                                            τSW              t(β
                                                                                                τSW )        R (%)         p-value
                         Sample
                Decile




Vol2.10.04.01
                          Size
                                  Mean       S.D.    Mean      S.D.    Mean        S.D.    Mean      S.D.   Mean   S.D.   Mean   S.D.

                                                      January 1992 to December 1996 (261 Weeks)
                  1       241     −2.894     2.074   −2.174    1.107    4.563      2.659    3.498   1.595   57.4   19.6    5.5   16.3
                  2       241     −0.681     0.206   −1.335    0.822    1.613      0.622    2.886   1.450   61.3   21.0    4.8   16.3
                  3       242     −0.197     0.093   −0.623    0.612    0.924      0.534    2.192   1.396   59.8   22.6    2.3    9.7
                  4       241      0.072     0.072    0.308    0.485    0.526      0.488    1.057   0.905   56.0   20.7    2.8   13.4
                  5       241      0.344     0.085    1.064    0.731    0.261      0.441    0.281   0.951   55.6   20.0    3.5   12.8
                  6       242      0.624     0.093    1.430    0.778    0.124      0.659   −0.176   0.909   55.1   18.2    2.7   10.3
                  7       241      1.018     0.130    2.028    1.151   −0.224      0.578   −0.836   1.176   53.3   17.0    6.4   18.8
                  8       242      1.618     0.230    2.357    1.122   −0.694      0.647   −1.248   1.110   51.4   17.2    6.1   18.1
                  9       241      2.720     0.454    2.624    1.170   −1.477      0.830   −1.616   1.088   49.4   15.1   10.7   23.7
                 10       241      7.977     9.529    3.706    1.411   −6.205      9.055   −2.823   1.339   45.3   14.5    6.2   17.4




Tables
Page 5 of 23
                                             Table 3
         Summary statistics for the returns and dollar returns of the hedging portfolio con-
         structed from individual stocks’ volume data using weekly returns and volume data
         for NYSE and AMEX stocks from 1962 to 1996.

                                                   Sample Period
          Statistic
                       Entire    67–71     72–76      77–81        82–86    87–91    92–96

                                   Hedging Portfolio Return RHt
          Mean          0.013    0.001      0.005      0.007    0.011        0.052    0.003
          S.D.          0.198    0.029      0.039      0.045    0.046        0.477    0.013
          Skewness     24.092    0.557      0.542     −0.330    0.270       10.200   −0.214
          Kurtosis    747.809    1.479      7.597      0.727    1.347      130.476    0.945
          ρ1            0.017    0.199      0.141      0.196    0.125        0.004   −0.165
          ρ2          −0.058     0.018      0.006      0.071    0.036      −0.070    −0.028
          ρ3            0.104   −0.028     −0.036     −0.010    0.073        0.099   −0.003
          ρ4            0.184    0.070      0.043      0.045   −0.113        0.182   −0.010
          ρ5          −0.086     0.114      0.144     −0.026   −0.103      −0.099    −0.025
          ρ6            0.079   −0.003      0.258     −0.089   −0.093        0.072    0.020
          ρ7            0.217    0.037      0.083     −0.031   −0.173        0.218    0.098
          ρ8          −0.098     0.002     −0.124     −0.008    0.006      −0.111    −0.130
          ρ9            0.048   −0.002     −0.008     −0.060    0.011        0.041    0.006
          ρ10         −0.044    −0.017      0.174     −0.037   −0.117      −0.055     0.035

                                Hedging Portfolio Dollar Return QHt
          Mean         2.113     0.072      1.236      2.258    5.589       3.244     0.281
          S.D.        16.836     3.639     11.059     21.495   25.423      20.906     1.845
          Skewness     0.717     0.210     −0.144     −0.495   −0.080       2.086     0.215
          Kurtosis    14.082    −0.085      0.500      2.286    6.537      13.286     2.048
          ρ1           0.164     0.219      0.251      0.200    0.098       0.157    −0.122
          ρ2           0.082     0.014      0.148      0.052    0.125      −0.015    −0.095
          ρ3           0.039     0.003      0.077      0.010    0.071      −0.041     0.037
          ρ4           0.021     0.061      0.084      0.127   −0.037      −0.066     0.014
          ρ5           0.036     0.116      0.102     −0.002    0.051      −0.016    −0.027
          ρ6          −0.010    −0.044      0.127     −0.094   −0.053       0.057    −0.014
          ρ7          −0.006     0.034      0.013     −0.060   −0.014       0.010     0.107
          ρ8          −0.046     0.005     −0.055     −0.028   −0.127       0.016    −0.075
          ρ9           0.027    −0.016      0.045     −0.006    0.047       0.005    −0.006
          ρ10         −0.001    −0.030      0.042      0.026    0.014      −0.082     0.031




Vol2.10.04.01                                  Tables                                    Page 6 of 23
                                                                                  Table 4
                      Forecast of weekly market-portfolio returns by lagged weekly returns of the beta-sorted optimal forecast portfolios (OFPs),
                      the market-capitalization-sorted OFP’s, the SIC-sorted OFP, the return and dollar return on the hedging portfolio, minus
                      log-market-capitalization, and the lagged returns on the CRSP value- and equal-weighted portfolios from 1962 to 1996, and
                      lagged constant-maturity (three-month) Treasury bill rates from 1982 to 1996. The value of φ is 1.25 for the return RH and




Vol2.10.04.01
                      1.5 for the dollar return QH on the hedging portfolio, respectively.

                Parameter   Beta10   Beta15   Beta20   Beta25    Cap10   Cap15     Cap20    Cap25    SIC13    RH      QH      log(Cap−1 )     VW     EW      TBill

                                                                  January 1967 to December 1971 (261 Weeks)
                Intercept    0.002    0.002    0.001   0.002     0.001    0.002    0.002    0.002    0.001    0.001   0.172      0.746       0.001   0.001    —
                t-Stat       1.330    1.360    1.150   1.430     1.240    1.520    1.400    1.380    0.920    1.270   1.200      2.330       1.240   1.250    —
                Slope        0.103   −0.034   −0.153   0.171    −0.262    0.173   −0.039   −0.176   −0.208    0.138   0.154      0.027       0.191   0.092    —
                t-Stat       1.810   −0.550   −1.890   1.780    −1.900    1.079   −0.240   −1.070   −2.860    3.460   3.900      2.330       3.130   2.080    —
                  2
                R            0.013    0.001    0.014   0.012     0.014    0.005    0.000    0.005    0.031    0.045   0.056      0.021       0.037   0.016    —
                                                                  January 1972 to December 1976 (261 Weeks)
                Intercept    0.001    0.001    0.001   0.001     0.001    0.001    0.001    0.001    0.001  0.001  0.103         0.389       0.001   0.001    —
                t-Stat       0.650    0.640    0.560   0.670     0.830    0.640    0.730    0.630    0.630  0.820  0.760         1.410       0.700   0.640    —
                Slope        0.023    0.204   −0.315   0.079     0.235    0.098   −0.169    0.069    0.040 −0.054 −0.023         0.014      −0.003   0.048    —
                t-Stat       0.120    1.150   −2.630   0.580     1.660    0.660   −1.180    0.430    0.430 −1.430 −1.900         1.410      −0.060   0.910    —
                  2
                R            0.000    0.005    0.026   0.001     0.011    0.002    0.005    0.001    0.001  0.008  0.014         0.008       0.000   0.003    —
                                                                  January 1977 to December 1981 (261 Weeks)




Tables
                Intercept    0.002    0.002    0.002   0.002     0.002    0.002    0.002    0.002    0.002    0.002   0.223      0.151       0.002   0.002    —
                t-Stat       1.750    1.600    1.800   1.640     1.770    1.760    1.800    1.530    1.749    1.500   1.370      0.720       1.570   1.380    —
                Slope        0.007    0.071    0.065   0.033     0.075    0.003   −0.204   −0.186    0.150    0.049   0.013      0.005       0.069   0.080    —
                t-Stat       0.040    0.870    0.460   0.510     0.230    0.010   −0.850   −0.990    1.130    1.810   1.760      0.710       1.110   1.370    —
                  2
                R            0.000    0.003    0.001   0.001     0.000    0.000    0.003    0.004    0.005    0.013   0.012      0.002       0.005   0.007    —




Page 7 of 23
                                                                      Table 4 (continued)



                Parameter   Beta10   Beta15   Beta20   Beta25    Cap10    Cap15    Cap20    Cap25    SIC13   RH     QH      -Cap    VW      EW     TBill




Vol2.10.04.01
                                                                January 1982 to December 1986 (261 Weeks)
                Intercept    0.004    0.004    0.004    0.004    0.004    0.004    0.004    0.004    0.003  0.004  0.672    0.179   0.003   0.003  0.010
                t-Stat       3.150    3.150    3.130    3.180    3.150    3.160    3.110    3.150    2.640  3.500  3.190    1.130   2.690   2.710  1.860
                Slope       −0.006    0.154   −0.309    0.154   −0.105   −0.054    0.142    0.099   −0.203 −0.047 −0.012    0.006   0.068   0.053 −4.053
                t-Stat      −0.030    0.910   −1.990    1.180   −0.470   −0.220    0.740    0.530   −1.890 −1.760 −1.490    1.110   1.100   0.820 −1.212
                  2
                R            0.000    0.003    0.015    0.005    0.001    0.000    0.002    0.001    0.014  0.012  0.009    0.005   0.005   0.003  0.006

                                                                January 1987 to December 1991 (261 Weeks)
                Intercept    0.003    0.002    0.003    0.003    0.003    0.003    0.003    0.003    0.003  0.003  0.392    0.559   0.003   0.003  0.10
                t-Stat       1.700    1.650    1.770    1.770    1.680    1.730    1.700    1.720    1.800  2.280  2.050    1.460   1.820   1.880  1.098
                Slope        0.294   −0.353    0.120    0.130   −0.540   −0.062    0.072   −0.033    0.210 −0.014 −0.023    0.020   0.058   0.032 −5.598
                t-Stat       1.580   −2.000    0.680    0.820   −2.320   −0.320    0.320   −0.190    2.320 −4.500 −2.490    1.460   0.930   0.550 −0.810
                  2
                R            0.010    0.015    0.002    0.003    0.021    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.021  0.073  0.024    0.008   0.003   0.001  0.003

                                                                January 1992 to December 1996 (261 Weeks)
                Intercept    0.003    0.003    0.003    0.003    0.003    0.003    0.003    0.003    0.003  0.003  0.416   −0.107  0.003  0.003 −0.003
                t-Stat       3.170    3.120    3.110    3.060    3.060    3.130    3.120    3.170    3.130  3.700  3.510   −0.780  3.710  4.000 −0.881




Tables
                Slope        0.118   −0.009    0.090   −0.095   −0.191   −0.040    0.033   −0.074   −0.047 −0.194 −0.153   −0.004 −0.163 −0.192  7.280
                t-Stat       1.060   −0.080    0.930   −0.850   −1.090   −0.270    0.240   −0.550   −0.700 −2.910 −2.410   −0.800 −2.710 −3.320  1.661
                  2
                R            0.004    0.000    0.003    0.003    0.005    0.000    0.000    0.001    0.002  0.032  0.022    0.003  0.028  0.041  0.011




Page 8 of 23
                                                       Table 5
    Correlation matrix for weekly returns on the CRSP value-weighted index (RV W t ), the CRSP
    equal-weighted index (REW t ), the hedging-portfolio return (RHt ), the hedging-portfolio dollar-
    return (QHt ), the return of the small-minus-big capitalization stocks portfolio (RSM Bt ), the return
    return ROF P t of the optimal-forecast portfolio (OFP) for the set of 25 market-beta-sorted basis
    portfolios, and the equal-weighted and share-weighted turnover indices (τtEW and τtSW ), using
    CRSP weekly returns and volume data for NYSE and AMEX stocks from 1962 to 1996 and in
    ﬁve-year subperiods.



                            RV W t     REW t    RHt      QHt     RSM Bt   ROF P t   τtEW     τtSW

                                     July 1962 to December 1996 (1,800 Weeks)

                  RV W t    100.0      88.7    −13.2  15.6        14.0    −26.9      10.6     8.1
                  REW t      88.7     100.0    −15.8   4.6        53.5    −25.3      12.6     5.5
                  RHt       −13.2     −15.8    100.0  40.3       −10.7    −11.0      14.9    16.8
                  QHt        15.6       4.6     40.3 100.0       −13.3     −6.7       7.5     9.9
                  RSM Bt     14.0      53.5    −10.7 −13.3       100.0     −4.8       4.6   −5.8
                  ROF P t   −26.9     −25.3    −11.0 −6.7         −4.8    100.0     −4.9    −2.4
                  τtEW       10.6      12.6     14.9   7.5         4.6     −4.9     100.0    86.2
                  τtSW        8.1       5.5     16.8   9.9        −5.8     −2.4      86.2   100.0
                                     January 1967 to December 1971 (261 Weeks)
                  RV W t    100.0      92.6     95.6  91.5        62.7    −76.2      19.1    26.3
                  REW t      92.6     100.0     92.3  88.4        84.5    −71.9      32.8    36.9
                  RHt        95.6      92.3    100.0  97.4        70.7    −65.0      22.0    29.6
                  QHt        91.5      88.4     97.4 100.0        69.8    −60.1      22.9    29.8
                  RSM Bt     62.7      84.5     70.7  69.8       100.0    −46.6      39.7    38.2
                  ROF P t   −76.2     −71.9    −65.0 −60.1       −46.6    100.0     −7.5    −10.4
                  τtEW       19.1      32.8     22.0  22.9        39.7     −7.5     100.0    93.1
                  τtSW       26.3      36.9     29.6  29.8        38.2    −10.4      93.1   100.0
                                     January 1972 to December 1977 (261 Weeks)
                  RV W t    100.0      84.5     13.3  14.2        −6.9    −59.5      19.0    27.6
                  REW t      84.5     100.0    −11.5 −18.2        44.1    −45.4      24.3    35.4
                  RHt        13.3     −11.5    100.0  86.6       −55.2     −8.3     −2.8     −1.9
                  QHt        14.2     −18.2     86.6 100.0       −70.4    −11.6     −4.1     −4.2
                  RSM Bt     −6.9      44.1    −55.2 −70.4       100.0     15.0      11.3    16.3
                  ROF P t   −59.5     −45.4     −8.3 −11.6        15.0    100.0     −6.7    −12.4
                  τtEW       19.0      24.3     −2.8 −4.1         11.3     −6.7     100.0    87.3
                  τtSW       27.6      35.4     −1.9 −4.2         16.3    −12.4      87.3   100.0
                                     January 1977 to December 1981 (261 Weeks)
                  RV W t    100.0       90.2    85.4     82.3     23.8     22.6      12.6    15.7
                  REW t      90.2      100.0    88.5     82.0     59.3     12.7       7.6     8.1
                  RHt        85.4       88.5   100.0     87.1     51.2      9.3       7.6     8.6
                  QHt        82.3       82.0    87.1    100.0     49.0     10.4      11.0    12.3
                  RSM Bt     23.8       59.3    51.2     49.0    100.0    −16.7     −8.3    −12.7
                  ROF P t    22.6       12.7     9.3     10.4    −16.7    100.0      10.7    10.4
                  τtEW       12.6        7.6     7.6     11.0     −8.3     10.7     100.0    94.9
                  τtSW       15.7        8.1     8.6     12.3    −12.7     10.4      94.9   100.0




Vol2.10.04.01                                           Tables                                      Page 9 of 23
                                         Table 5 (continued)

                          RV W t     REW t    RHt     QHt     RSM Bt   ROF P t    τtEW    τtSW

                                   January 1982 to December 1986 (261 Weeks)
                RV W t    100.0      92.1    −17.0   6.1       −2.8    −23.5      27.1    28.6
                REW t      92.1     100.0    −34.1 −10.2       30.6    −30.6      36.0    31.6
                RHt       −17.0     −34.1    100.0  73.3      −54.5     13.5     −12.2    −7.8
                QHt         6.1     −10.2     73.3 100.0      −41.1      8.0       1.3     4.2
                RSM Bt     −2.8      30.6    −54.5 −41.1      100.0    −15.9      19.9     6.5
                ROF P t   −23.5     −30.6     13.5   8.0      −15.9    100.0     −20.7   −17.9
                τtEW       27.1      36.0    −12.2   1.3       19.9    −20.7     100.0    93.2
                τtSW       28.6      31.6     −7.8   4.2        6.5    −17.9      93.2   100.0
                                   January 1987 to December 1991 (261 Weeks)
                RV W t    100.0      91.2    −40.4   −36.0      8.1     18.9     −15.0   −17.0
                REW t      91.2     100.0    −44.3   −46.5     44.6     36.3     −16.7   −20.9
                RHt       −40.4     −44.3    100.0    58.1    −23.8    −26.2      43.2    43.7
                QHt       −36.0     −46.5     58.1   100.0    −37.1    −32.8      25.3    24.0
                RSM Bt      8.1      44.6    −23.8   −37.1    100.0     45.1     −11.4   −16.9
                ROF P t    18.9      36.3    −26.2   −32.8     45.1    100.0     −18.5   −19.7
                τtEW      −15.0     −16.7     43.2    25.3    −11.4    −18.5     100.0    94.7
                τtSW      −17.0     −20.9     43.7    24.0    −16.9    −19.7      94.7   100.0
                                   January 1992 to December 1996 (261 Weeks)
                RV W t    100.0       84.3    95.5  66.5       −1.2    −13.1      15.5    10.4
                REW t      84.3      100.0    73.2  40.5       46.1     −5.2      18.2     5.4
                RHt        95.5       73.2   100.0  84.8      −19.7     −8.7      15.3    11.2
                QHt        66.5       40.5    84.8 100.0      −41.6      0.2      12.0     9.2
                RSM Bt     −1.2       46.1   −19.7 −41.6      100.0     11.3       3.0   −10.1
                ROF P t   −13.1      −5.2     −8.7   0.2       11.3    100.0     −3.0     −3.3
                τtEW       15.5       18.2    15.3  12.0        3.0     −3.0     100.0    92.7
                τtSW       10.4        5.4    11.2   9.2      −10.1     −3.3      92.7   100.0




Vol2.10.04.01                                        Tables                                      Page 10 of 23
                                                  Table 6a
    Summary statistics for market betas estimated with weekly returns data for NYSE and AMEX
    stocks from July 1962 to December 1996 in ﬁve-year subperiods. Returns of individual stocks are
    regressed on the returns of the CRSP value-weighted returns index, yielding the beta coeﬃcient βjM .
    The betas are sorted into deciles and means and standard deviations of the estimated coeﬃcients
    are reported for each decile.

                                              τM
                                              β                  τM )
                                                               t(β
                                                                               2
                                                                              R (%)
                                 Sample
                        Decile
                                  Size
                                          Mean      S.D.    Mean     S.D.   Mean   S.D.

                                  January 1967 to December 1971 (261 Weeks)
                          1       242     0.432     0.136   4.103   1.990    7.2    5.2
                          2       243     0.710     0.058   5.532   1.881   11.9    6.2
                          3       242     0.880     0.041   6.343   2.233   14.9    7.7
                          4       243     1.020     0.044   6.811   2.476   17.3    8.6
                          5       242     1.168     0.040   7.122   2.345   18.1    8.1
                          6       243     1.307     0.038   7.166   2.293   18.4    8.6
                          7       243     1.463     0.050   7.682   2.180   20.7    7.9
                          8       242     1.648     0.061   7.554   2.165   19.9    8.2
                          9       243     1.881     0.077   8.290   2.158   23.4    7.7
                         10       242     2.282     0.239   8.814   2.190   26.7    8.2
                                  January 1972 to December 1977 (261 Weeks)
                          1       262     0.300     0.146   2.774   1.853    3.7    4.3
                          2       263     0.537     0.047   4.493   2.051    8.1    6.4
                          3       263     0.680     0.038   5.161   2.067   10.3    6.7
                          4       263     0.792     0.030   5.671   2.331   12.0    7.9
                          5       263     0.896     0.030   6.334   2.422   14.3    8.5
                          6       263     1.004     0.031   7.011   2.793   16.9    9.7
                          7       263     1.113     0.032   7.365   3.120   18.2   11.2
                          8       263     1.242     0.046   7.550   2.788   18.9   10.1
                          9       263     1.428     0.065   8.337   2.957   21.9   10.6
                         10       262     1.818     0.240   9.085   2.949   25.4   10.4
                                  January 1977 to December 1981 (261 Weeks)
                          1       242     0.262     0.111   2.324   1.549    2.5    3.1
                          2       243     0.490     0.048   4.046   1.885    6.8    5.2
                          3       243     0.643     0.038   4.689   1.806    8.6    5.5
                          4       243     0.761     0.032   5.475   2.047   11.2    6.5
                          5       243     0.870     0.033   6.103   2.485   13.6    8.7
                          6       243     0.977     0.026   6.479   2.609   15.1    9.1
                          7       243     1.091     0.037   7.162   2.709   17.6    9.8
                          8       243     1.223     0.040   7.631   2.793   19.2   10.1
                          9       243     1.397     0.066   8.050   2.609   21.1    9.3
                         10       242     1.756     0.220   9.013   2.762   26.6    9.7
                                  January 1982 to December 1986 (261 Weeks)
                          1       227     0.208     0.157   1.645   1.354    1.3    2.3
                          2       228     0.456     0.046   3.744   1.681    5.8    4.5
                          3       228     0.590     0.040   4.327   1.973    7.9    6.0
                          4       227     0.718     0.032   4.931   1.833    9.8    6.1
                          5       228     0.823     0.033   5.617   2.084   12.1    7.2
                          6       228     0.928     0.027   6.269   2.493   14.4    8.4
                          7       227     1.032     0.034   7.189   2.524   17.6    9.0
                          8       228     1.141     0.035   7.576   2.795   19.5   10.0
                          9       228     1.302     0.060   8.050   2.810   21.7    9.9
                         10       227     1.667     0.231   8.231   3.201   22.7   11.3




Vol2.10.04.01                                       Tables                                   Page 11 of 23
                                  Table 6a (continued)

                                       τM
                                       β                  τM )
                                                        t(β
                                                                        2
                                                                       R (%)
                         Sample
                Decile
                          Size
                                   Mean      S.D.    Mean     S.D.   Mean   S.D.

                          January 1987 to December 1991 (261 Weeks)
                  1       216      0.268     0.219   3.368   2.845    6.2    7.5
                  2       217      0.540     0.061   4.659   2.807    9.6    8.8
                  3       217      0.701     0.036   5.479   2.726   12.3    9.4
                  4       217      0.839     0.040   6.750   3.427   16.7   11.8
                  5       217      0.956     0.032   7.920   3.860   21.5   13.6
                  6       217      1.056     0.025   8.350   4.121   23.1   14.3
                  7       217      1.151     0.031   8.979   4.061   25.0   14.5
                  8       217      1.264     0.033   9.001   4.202   25.6   15.0
                  9       217      1.418     0.054   9.490   4.345   27.7   15.0
                 10       217      1.737     0.217   8.926   4.058   27.7   14.5
                          January 1992 to December 1996 (261 Weeks)
                  1       241     −0.001     0.448   0.394   0.788   −0.2    0.6
                  2       241      0.368     0.050   2.301   1.312    2.3    2.6
                  3       242      0.515     0.033   2.990   1.614    3.9    3.9
                  4       241      0.636     0.037   3.337   1.652    4.8    4.2
                  5       241      0.763     0.040   3.972   1.837    6.7    5.4
                  6       242      0.881     0.030   4.676   2.134    8.9    6.3
                  7       241      1.000     0.035   4.959   2.187    9.9    6.8
                  8       242      1.139     0.045   5.651   2.620   12.5    9.0
                  9       241      1.336     0.076   5.591   2.484   12.3    8.5
                 10       241      1.820     0.340   5.760   2.794   13.8    9.3




Vol2.10.04.01                                Tables                                Page 12 of 23
                                                   Table 6b
    Summary statistics for market and hedging-portfolio return betas estimated with weekly returns
    data for NYSE and AMEX stocks from July 1962 to December 1996 in ﬁve-year subperiods.
    Returns of individual stocks are regressed on the returns of the CRSP value-weighted returns index
    and the hedging-portfolio return index RHt , yielding two beta coeﬃcients βjM and βjHR . The pairs
    are sorted into deciles according to their market betas and means and standard deviations of the
    estimated coeﬃcients are reported for each decile.

                            τM
                            β                   τM )
                                              t(β                    τHR
                                                                     β                   τHR )
                                                                                       t(β
                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                       R (%)
              Sample
     Decile
               Size
                       Mean       S.D.    Mean          S.D.     Mean       S.D.    Mean      S.D.   Mean   S.D.

                                    January 1967 to December 1971 (261 Weeks)
       1        242    −1.250     0.605   −1.451        0.755     2.027     0.640    3.571   1.514   22.4   12.9
       2        243    −0.297     0.155   −0.405        0.248     1.196     0.436    2.347   0.939   17.9   11.0
       3        242     0.147     0.101    0.233        0.207     0.806     0.419    1.611   0.796   15.9    9.6
       4        243     0.420     0.070    0.744        0.350     0.553     0.358    1.224   0.758   16.8    9.5
       5        242     0.648     0.060    1.192        0.578     0.391     0.359    0.777   0.834   16.7    8.7
       6        243     0.852     0.057    1.639        0.711     0.213     0.373    0.339   0.913   17.1    9.1
       7        243     1.053     0.061    2.234        0.908     0.056     0.336   −0.128   1.064   18.8    8.4
       8        242     1.263     0.063    2.493        1.092    −0.049     0.345   −0.450   1.177   18.7    8.3
       9        243     1.527     0.091    3.113        1.368    −0.227     0.331   −0.953   1.273   20.8    8.8
      10        242     2.080     0.341    3.541        1.540    −0.496     0.367   −1.438   1.357   22.1    9.9
                                    January 1972 to December 1977 (261 Weeks)
       1        262     0.316     0.157    3.025        1.924    −0.099     0.134   −0.811   1.230    4.7    4.6
       2        263     0.565     0.048    4.706        2.104    −0.110     0.151   −0.853   1.404    9.4    6.8
       3        263     0.714     0.040    5.427        2.168    −0.129     0.159   −1.055   1.361   11.5    7.4
       4        263     0.839     0.032    6.023        2.371    −0.166     0.154   −1.378   1.271   13.6    8.5
       5        263     0.947     0.029    6.673        2.567    −0.171     0.171   −1.327   1.365   16.0    9.1
       6        263     1.054     0.033    7.197        2.820    −0.187     0.188   −1.454   1.397   18.0   10.1
       7        263     1.180     0.038    7.296        3.077    −0.247     0.212   −1.697   1.444   18.6   11.2
       8        263     1.315     0.046    7.866        2.768    −0.265     0.213   −1.931   1.402   20.5   10.3
       9        263     1.511     0.068    8.120        2.948    −0.312     0.211   −2.135   1.294   21.7   10.4
      10        262     1.930     0.238    9.378        3.010    −0.439     0.297   −2.717   1.329   27.3   10.4
                                    January 1977 to December 1981 (261 Weeks)
       1        242    −0.244     0.295   −0.523        0.519     0.350     0.202    2.335   1.052    5.7    5.7
       2        243     0.137     0.059    0.493        0.341     0.250     0.162    1.997   1.151    8.0    6.9
       3        243     0.308     0.040    1.246        0.600     0.186     0.149    1.634   1.232    9.3    6.2
       4        243     0.428     0.034    1.858        0.850     0.162     0.155    1.459   1.393   11.8    7.8
       5        243     0.528     0.027    2.380        1.019     0.151     0.164    1.324   1.454   14.3    8.1
       6        243     0.629     0.032    2.666        1.139     0.151     0.156    1.325   1.415   16.4    8.5
       7        243     0.742     0.035    3.124        1.163     0.131     0.143    1.233   1.385   18.4    9.1
       8        243     0.867     0.037    3.464        1.357     0.122     0.142    1.122   1.303   20.1   10.4
       9        243     1.035     0.068    4.205        1.742     0.093     0.143    0.795   1.259   23.2   10.7
      10        242     1.414     0.249    4.829        2.215     0.033     0.172    0.226   1.405   25.6   12.9
                                    January 1982 to December 1986 (261 Weeks)
       1        227     0.202     0.164    1.573        1.343    −0.079     0.164   −0.465   1.360    1.7    2.7
       2        228     0.457     0.044    3.672        1.724    −0.049     0.160   −0.023   1.877    6.5    5.2
       3        228     0.590     0.040    4.440        2.107    −0.049     0.182    0.040   2.123    9.4    7.6
       4        227     0.714     0.032    4.864        1.793    −0.086     0.147   −0.671   1.578   10.4    6.3
       5        228     0.818     0.031    5.598        2.078    −0.093     0.150   −0.821   1.510   12.8    7.4
       6        228     0.923     0.028    6.362        2.448    −0.121     0.180   −1.006   1.772   15.9    8.3
       7        227     1.028     0.033    7.141        2.651    −0.107     0.161   −1.017   1.570   18.8    9.5
       8        228     1.136     0.036    7.454        2.830    −0.127     0.161   −1.218   1.470   19.9   10.1
       9        228     1.299     0.059    8.007        2.886    −0.178     0.204   −1.765   1.910   23.3   10.5
      10        227     1.660     0.235    8.147        3.360    −0.229     0.237   −1.913   2.052   24.4   12.5




Vol2.10.04.01                                           Tables                                        Page 13 of 23
                                          Table 6b (continued)

                            τM
                            β                   τM )
                                              t(β                    τHR
                                                                     β                   τHR )
                                                                                       t(β
                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                       R (%)
              Sample
     Decile
               Size
                       Mean       S.D.    Mean          S.D.     Mean       S.D.    Mean      S.D.   Mean   S.D.

                                    January 1987 to December 1991 (261 Weeks)
       1        216     0.205     0.257    2.267        2.359    −0.082     0.174   −0.724   1.657    5.1    6.1
       2        217     0.484     0.048    4.365        2.830    −0.048     0.116   −0.351   2.057   10.7    9.2
       3        217     0.637     0.041    4.923        2.456    −0.063     0.092   −1.080   1.579   13.6    9.3
       4        217     0.775     0.039    5.373        2.931    −0.075     0.098   −1.012   1.644   15.1   11.4
       5        217     0.898     0.035    6.868        3.184    −0.064     0.106   −0.957   1.623   20.8   11.9
       6        217     1.005     0.028    7.740        3.675    −0.063     0.112   −0.756   1.587   23.9   13.6
       7        217     1.098     0.028    8.356        4.074    −0.059     0.086   −0.864   1.389   26.4   15.1
       8        217     1.215     0.038    8.771        4.157    −0.068     0.103   −0.927   1.461   27.8   15.7
       9        217     1.362     0.050    8.651        4.134    −0.064     0.108   −0.849   1.342   27.6   15.8
      10        217     1.699     0.239    8.413        3.661    −0.119     0.207   −0.893   1.280   28.4   14.6
                                    January 1992 to December 1996 (261 Weeks)
       1        241    −1.526     1.776   −1.784        1.521     2.269     1.841    2.727   2.043    9.9   10.1
       2        241    −0.031     0.209   −0.058        0.347     0.660     0.456    0.921   0.764    6.2    8.1
       3        242     0.582     0.153    0.790        0.406     0.027     0.450    0.059   0.554    6.4    8.6
       4        241     1.086     0.138    1.370        0.602    −0.469     0.440   −0.521   0.488    6.4    7.3
       5        241     1.506     0.118    1.833        0.738    −0.799     0.413   −0.881   0.497    8.0    8.0
       6        242     1.965     0.132    2.156        0.935    −1.279     0.507   −1.260   0.603    7.7    7.4
       7        241     2.487     0.177    2.776        1.078    −1.737     0.452   −1.750   0.709   10.0    8.4
       8        242     3.166     0.213    3.067        1.182    −2.344     0.521   −2.064   0.805   10.3    8.6
       9        241     4.062     0.327    3.380        1.432    −3.300     0.673   −2.464   0.997   10.4    8.8
      10        241     6.789     2.540    4.211        2.113    −6.058     2.827   −3.342   1.684   12.4    9.9




Vol2.10.04.01                                           Tables                                        Page 14 of 23
                                                   Table 6c
    Summary statistics for market and hedging-portfolio dollar-return betas estimated with weekly
    returns data for NYSE and AMEX stocks from July 1962 to December 1996 in ﬁve-year subperiods.
    Returns of individual stocks are regressed on the returns of the CRSP value-weighted returns index
    and the hedging-portfolio dollar-return index QHt , yielding two beta coeﬃcients βjM and βjHQ . The
    pairs are sorted into deciles according to their market betas and means and standard deviations
    of the estimated coeﬃcients are reported for each decile.

                            τM
                            β                   τM )
                                              t(β                    τHQ
                                                                     β                   τHQ )
                                                                                       t(β
                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                       R (%)
              Sample
     Decile
               Size
                       Mean       S.D.    Mean          S.D.     Mean       S.D.    Mean      S.D.   Mean   S.D.

                                    January 1967 to December 1971 (261 Weeks)
       1        242    −0.535     0.460   −0.707        0.541     0.011     0.004    2.699   1.171   15.7   11.0
       2        243     0.142     0.101    0.270        0.237     0.006     0.003    1.838   0.984   14.7    9.9
       3        242     0.440     0.073    0.916        0.409     0.005     0.003    1.406   0.982   16.2    9.8
       4        243     0.652     0.054    1.580        0.761     0.003     0.003    0.799   1.106   16.7    8.6
       5        242     0.831     0.049    2.049        0.913     0.002     0.003    0.352   1.105   16.9    8.8
       6        243     1.007     0.051    2.331        0.959     0.001     0.003    0.133   1.091   18.1    8.2
       7        243     1.187     0.053    2.835        1.204     0.000     0.003   −0.236   1.334   19.9    8.1
       8        242     1.393     0.062    3.195        1.510    −0.001     0.003   −0.550   1.333   21.3    8.9
       9        243     1.651     0.085    3.343        1.373    −0.001     0.003   −0.673   1.252   22.0    9.0
      10        242     2.280     0.472    3.555        1.261    −0.003     0.003   −0.982   1.032   23.1    9.6
                                    January 1972 to December 1977 (261 Weeks)
       1        262     0.341     0.155    3.248        1.949    −0.001     0.001   −0.932   1.226    5.4    5.0
       2        263     0.595     0.052    4.836        2.049    −0.001     0.001   −1.111   1.512   10.1    7.1
       3        263     0.754     0.041    5.620        2.246    −0.001     0.001   −1.461   1.461   12.5    8.2
       4        263     0.885     0.032    6.182        2.451    −0.001     0.001   −1.522   1.370   14.4    9.3
       5        263     0.995     0.035    6.844        2.524    −0.001     0.001   −1.786   1.524   16.9    9.4
       6        263     1.108     0.032    7.368        2.953    −0.001     0.001   −1.856   1.686   18.9   11.3
       7        263     1.241     0.041    7.399        2.780    −0.002     0.001   −2.173   1.476   19.1   10.6
       8        263     1.387     0.046    7.777        2.589    −0.002     0.001   −2.507   1.341   20.1    9.6
       9        263     1.591     0.075    8.113        2.846    −0.002     0.001   −2.765   1.308   21.5   10.1
      10        262     2.023     0.241    9.674        3.046    −0.003     0.001   −3.359   1.458   28.1   10.6
                                    January 1977 to December 1981 (261 Weeks)
       1        242    −0.289     0.362   −0.550        0.562     0.001     0.001    2.288   0.986    5.8    5.5
       2        243     0.179     0.075    0.613        0.410     0.001     0.000    1.679   1.150    7.5    6.5
       3        243     0.388     0.047    1.446        0.700     0.000     0.000    1.287   1.305    9.8    8.2
       4        243     0.532     0.033    2.148        0.937     0.000     0.000    1.009   1.416   12.2    7.4
       5        243     0.641     0.034    2.671        1.173     0.000     0.000    0.679   1.558   13.7    8.0
       6        243     0.748     0.033    3.050        1.397     0.000     0.000    0.522   1.634   15.4    9.2
       7        243     0.869     0.034    3.509        1.410     0.000     0.000    0.445   1.648   18.2    9.4
       8        243     1.008     0.045    3.885        1.477     0.000     0.000    0.263   1.380   19.5    9.7
       9        243     1.180     0.060    4.509        1.745     0.000     0.000    0.125   1.507   23.3   10.8
      10        242     1.552     0.261    5.386        2.286     0.000     0.001   −0.747   1.582   25.6   11.9
                                    January 1982 to December 1986 (261 Weeks)
       1        227     0.215     0.159    1.734        1.437     0.000     0.001   −0.094   1.384    2.1    3.4
       2        228     0.460     0.042    3.784        1.757     0.000     0.001    0.362   1.793    7.2    6.5
       3        228     0.600     0.045    4.331        1.756     0.000     0.001    0.010   1.792    9.1    7.7
       4        227     0.738     0.035    4.989        1.786     0.000     0.001   −0.401   1.350   10.5    6.5
       5        228     0.844     0.033    5.618        2.363     0.000     0.001   −0.556   1.542   12.8    8.4
       6        228     0.957     0.030    6.491        2.431     0.000     0.001   −0.801   1.466   15.8    8.9
       7        227     1.063     0.033    6.964        2.727     0.000     0.000   −1.065   1.332   17.4    9.6
       8        228     1.181     0.039    7.554        2.724     0.000     0.000   −1.309   1.255   19.6    9.9
       9        228     1.359     0.067    8.092        2.949     0.000     0.001   −1.613   1.607   22.6   10.3
      10        227     1.743     0.250    8.443        3.476    −0.001     0.001   −2.273   1.878   24.3   12.2




Vol2.10.04.01                                           Tables                                        Page 15 of 23
                                          Table 6c (continued)

                            τM
                            β                   τM )
                                              t(β                    τHQ
                                                                     β                   τHQ )
                                                                                       t(β
                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                       R (%)
              Sample
     Decile
               Size
                       Mean       S.D.    Mean          S.D.     Mean       S.D.    Mean      S.D.   Mean   S.D.

                                    January 1987 to December 1991 (261 Weeks)
       1        216     0.225     0.226    2.499        2.477    −0.001     0.001   −0.378   1.768    5.1    6.3
       2        217     0.501     0.053    4.629        2.998     0.000     0.001   −0.013   2.282   11.0    9.7
       3        217     0.660     0.039    5.205        2.573     0.000     0.001   −0.845   1.507   12.9    8.9
       4        217     0.794     0.039    6.035        3.358     0.000     0.001   −0.718   1.985   16.5   12.2
       5        217     0.918     0.031    7.190        3.599     0.000     0.001   −0.843   1.638   20.5   12.9
       6        217     1.017     0.028    7.886        3.813     0.000     0.001   −0.909   1.458   23.3   13.4
       7        217     1.111     0.028    8.692        3.965     0.000     0.001   −1.058   1.384   26.3   14.3
       8        217     1.222     0.034    9.086        4.338    −0.001     0.001   −1.153   1.438   27.9   15.8
       9        217     1.364     0.050    9.211        4.311    −0.001     0.001   −1.390   1.264   28.7   15.7
      10        217     1.701     0.233    8.494        3.768    −0.001     0.001   −1.302   1.310   28.0   14.5
                                    January 1992 to December 1996 (261 Weeks)
       1        241    −0.990     1.628   −0.866        0.807     0.013     0.016    1.839   1.487    5.7    8.1
       2        241     0.169     0.122    0.378        0.368     0.003     0.003    0.871   0.855    6.2    7.5
       3        242     0.526     0.092    1.026        0.504     0.000     0.003    0.140   0.709    5.7    7.6
       4        241     0.846     0.099    1.609        0.750    −0.001     0.003   −0.212   0.641    7.7    8.2
       5        241     1.177     0.088    2.072        0.883    −0.003     0.003   −0.714   0.586    7.5    7.6
       6        242     1.509     0.100    2.499        1.100    −0.005     0.003   −1.118   0.619    8.5    8.3
       7        241     1.877     0.124    2.985        1.229    −0.008     0.003   −1.559   0.721    9.3    7.3
       8        242     2.365     0.160    3.276        1.458    −0.011     0.004   −1.815   0.828   10.8    9.3
       9        241     3.101     0.250    3.724        1.624    −0.016     0.005   −2.343   1.033   11.4    8.6
      10        241     5.284     2.356    3.925        1.876    −0.036     0.026   −2.855   1.246   11.1    8.8




Vol2.10.04.01                                           Tables                                        Page 16 of 23
                                                   Table 6d
    Summary statistics for market and SMB-portfolio return betas estimated with weekly returns data
    for NYSE and AMEX stocks from July 1962 to December 1996 in ﬁve-year subperiods. Returns of
    individual stocks are regressed on the returns of the CRSP value-weighted returns index and the
    return to a portfolio of small-minus-big capitalization stocks RSM Bt , yielding two beta coeﬃcients
    βjM and βjSM B . The pairs are sorted into deciles according to their market betas and means and
    standard deviations of the estimated coeﬃcients are reported for each decile.

                            τM
                            β                   τM )
                                              t(β                  τSM B
                                                                   β                  τSM B )
                                                                                    t(β
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                     R (%)
              Sample
     Decile
               Size
                       Mean       S.D.    Mean          S.D.     Mean       S.D.   Mean     S.D.   Mean   S.D.

                                    January 1967 to December 1971 (261 Weeks)
       1        242     0.124     0.213    0.699        0.914    1.311   0.874     2.937   1.402    9.1    6.0
       2        243     0.423     0.049    2.398        1.224    0.927   0.802     2.339   1.689   12.4    5.5
       3        242     0.572     0.041    3.017        1.373    0.909   0.832     2.221   1.835   15.0    5.9
       4        243     0.708     0.037    3.715        1.560    0.871   0.862     2.075   1.829   17.7    6.2
       5        242     0.824     0.032    3.951        1.573    0.848   0.769     2.027   1.793   18.8    6.8
       6        243     0.926     0.028    4.498        1.834    0.860   0.768     2.030   1.711   21.3    6.7
       7        243     1.039     0.034    4.865        1.880    0.834   0.782     1.916   1.805   22.5    6.6
       8        242     1.178     0.046    5.444        2.198    0.881   0.785     1.981   1.789   26.1    7.0
       9        243     1.369     0.065    5.697        2.066    0.868   0.752     1.893   1.710   26.9    7.7
      10        242     1.717     0.207    6.248        1.855    0.952   0.704     2.038   1.474   31.4    8.0
                                    January 1972 to December 1977 (261 Weeks)
       1        262     0.317     0.168    3.059        2.073    0.873   0.711     3.374   1.434    8.7    5.9
       2        263     0.564     0.048    4.884        2.163    0.889   0.557     3.563   1.426   13.2    6.6
       3        263     0.713     0.040    5.686        2.201    0.913   0.576     3.457   1.693   15.5    7.0
       4        263     0.830     0.030    6.254        2.429    0.970   0.630     3.439   1.933   17.6    7.8
       5        263     0.933     0.031    6.687        2.548    1.016   0.689     3.476   2.133   19.3    8.4
       6        263     1.040     0.034    7.548        2.847    0.929   0.741     3.056   2.209   21.9    9.2
       7        263     1.157     0.036    7.600        3.020    1.120   0.766     3.427   2.396   22.5   10.3
       8        263     1.287     0.043    8.095        2.965    1.138   0.836     3.316   2.536   24.3   10.0
       9        263     1.471     0.065    8.326        2.893    1.235   0.800     3.451   2.180   25.2    9.6
      10        262     1.857     0.221    9.475        2.904    1.364   0.947     3.533   1.946   29.5    9.3
                                    January 1977 to December 1981 (261 Weeks)
       1        242     0.183     0.123    1.503        1.310    0.676   0.665     2.053   1.335    4.0    3.2
       2        243     0.411     0.046    3.313        1.603    0.636   0.549     2.159   1.533    8.2    4.6
       3        243     0.548     0.038    4.052        1.717    0.703   0.549     2.393   1.582   11.0    5.3
       4        243     0.661     0.032    4.529        1.767    0.779   0.534     2.588   1.422   12.9    5.8
       5        243     0.765     0.028    4.834        1.906    0.865   0.583     2.611   1.480   14.2    6.3
       6        243     0.871     0.031    5.958        2.352    0.792   0.652     2.456   1.822   18.1    7.6
       7        243     0.982     0.035    6.551        2.577    0.773   0.620     2.331   1.782   20.1    8.3
       8        243     1.108     0.039    7.148        2.594    0.844   0.622     2.548   1.910   22.9    8.7
       9        243     1.288     0.060    8.094        2.751    0.718   0.668     2.049   2.221   25.8    8.9
      10        242     1.638     0.219    8.809        2.915    0.785   0.641     2.089   1.790   30.2    9.6
                                    January 1982 to December 1986 (261 Weeks)
       1        227     0.215     0.157    1.690        1.373    0.672   0.797     1.519   1.326    2.7    3.0
       2        228     0.463     0.045    3.872        1.687    0.510   0.557     1.389   1.612    7.4    4.5
       3        228     0.599     0.041    4.429        1.988    0.568   0.628     1.370   1.884    9.6    6.5
       4        227     0.727     0.032    4.952        1.881    0.765   0.677     1.905   1.508   11.5    6.3
       5        228     0.831     0.034    5.857        2.103    0.705   0.675     1.870   1.827   14.5    7.4
       6        228     0.938     0.027    6.513        2.604    0.796   0.726     1.964   1.881   16.9    8.6
       7        227     1.040     0.033    7.154        2.593    0.722   0.764     1.781   1.876   19.1    8.9
       8        228     1.150     0.035    7.769        2.697    0.662   0.700     1.747   1.822   21.3    9.7
       9        228     1.317     0.060    8.188        2.903    0.842   0.794     2.014   1.878   23.8   10.0
      10        227     1.681     0.226    8.286        3.262    1.117   0.872     2.302   1.690   24.4   11.5




Vol2.10.04.01                                           Tables                                      Page 17 of 23
                                          Table 6d (continued)

                            τM
                            β                   τM )
                                              t(β                  τSM B
                                                                   β                  τSM B )
                                                                                    t(β
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                     R (%)
              Sample
     Decile
               Size
                       Mean       S.D.    Mean          S.D.     Mean       S.D.   Mean     S.D.   Mean   S.D.

                                    January 1987 to December 1991 (261 Weeks)
       1        216     0.254     0.234    3.138        2.773    0.614   0.845     1.176   2.242    7.7    7.8
       2        217     0.522     0.056    4.668        2.949    0.658   0.711     1.474   2.816   12.8   10.2
       3        217     0.672     0.037    5.535        2.743    0.789   0.594     2.735   2.159   16.5   10.6
       4        217     0.808     0.037    6.285        3.354    0.910   0.672     2.632   2.306   19.0   12.0
       5        217     0.928     0.032    7.766        3.749    0.806   0.663     2.461   2.556   24.7   13.3
       6        217     1.025     0.027    8.062        3.971    0.841   0.733     2.353   2.326   25.1   13.6
       7        217     1.119     0.027    9.163        4.334    0.812   0.728     2.345   2.327   28.6   14.7
       8        217     1.228     0.036    9.188        4.240    0.855   0.666     2.490   2.026   29.6   15.0
       9        217     1.378     0.052    9.637        4.477    0.985   0.762     2.710   1.779   31.3   14.9
      10        217     1.726     0.258    9.021        4.098    1.102   0.765     2.504   1.678   30.3   15.0
                                    January 1992 to December 1996 (261 Weeks)
       1        241    −0.002     0.442    0.400        0.794    0.790   1.087     1.307   1.222    0.8    1.7
       2        241     0.368     0.049    2.310        1.338    0.445   0.657     0.934   1.902    3.7    3.7
       3        242     0.514     0.032    2.983        1.688    0.480   0.743     0.757   2.492    5.9    5.7
       4        241     0.634     0.036    3.432        1.692    0.547   0.674     1.273   2.213    7.0    5.7
       5        241     0.763     0.040    3.937        1.858    0.618   0.673     1.495   1.824    8.1    5.9
       6        242     0.881     0.030    4.761        2.149    0.597   0.615     1.560   1.975   11.0    6.6
       7        241     1.000     0.035    5.035        2.168    0.670   0.666     1.696   1.872   11.9    6.9
       8        242     1.139     0.046    5.704        2.653    0.634   0.685     1.522   2.029   14.3    9.0
       9        241     1.336     0.074    5.651        2.501    0.946   0.787     2.365   1.519   14.6    8.5
      10        241     1.820     0.343    5.955        2.850    1.462   1.490     2.671   1.667   17.1    9.9




Vol2.10.04.01                                           Tables                                      Page 18 of 23
                                                   Table 6e
    Summary statistics for market and optimal-forecast-portfolio return betas estimated with weekly
    returns data for NYSE and AMEX stocks from July 1962 to December 1996 in ﬁve-year subperiods.
    Returns of individual stocks are regressed on the returns of the CRSP value-weighted returns index
    and the return ROF P t of the optimal-forecast portfolio (OFP) for the set of 25 market-beta-sorted
    basis portfolios, yielding two beta coeﬃcients βjM and βjOF P . The pairs are sorted into deciles
    according to their market betas and means and standard deviations of the estimated coeﬃcients
    are reported for each decile.

                            τM
                            β                   τM )
                                              t(β                    τOF P
                                                                     β                   τOF P )
                                                                                       t(β
                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                        R (%)
              Sample
     Decile
               Size
                       Mean       S.D.    Mean          S.D.     Mean         S.D.   Mean      S.D.   Mean   S.D.

                                    January 1967 to December 1971 (261 Weeks)
       1        242     0.161     0.146    0.932        0.904    −0.592   0.368      −2.771   1.784   12.0    8.3
       2        243     0.551     0.081    2.543        0.975    −0.361   0.378      −1.126   0.941   11.6    7.3
       3        242     0.777     0.051    3.464        1.350    −0.272   0.371      −0.748   0.930   14.9    8.4
       4        243     0.945     0.050    3.968        1.409    −0.176   0.344      −0.434   0.923   16.3    8.0
       5        242     1.107     0.044    4.333        1.512    −0.130   0.391      −0.227   1.030   17.6    8.0
       6        243     1.261     0.046    4.668        1.711    −0.065   0.464      −0.041   1.141   18.9    8.8
       7        243     1.450     0.056    5.035        1.709     0.032   0.429       0.197   1.082   20.1    8.4
       8        242     1.649     0.071    5.241        1.841     0.029   0.422       0.219   1.139   21.4    8.4
       9        243     1.952     0.104    5.636        1.612     0.220   0.452       0.533   0.989   22.6    8.4
      10        242     2.629     0.414    6.970        1.899     0.777   0.625       1.570   1.258   28.0    8.4
                                    January 1972 to December 1977 (261 Weeks)
       1        262     0.310     0.163    2.392        1.681    −0.102   0.596      −0.083   1.153    4.5    5.6
       2        263     0.572     0.044    3.795        1.657     0.014   0.512       0.156   1.054    8.5    6.1
       3        263     0.712     0.038    4.402        1.743     0.075   0.497       0.218   1.122   11.0    7.4
       4        263     0.840     0.036    4.968        1.900     0.107   0.517       0.273   1.130   13.1    8.6
       5        263     0.955     0.029    5.573        2.078     0.213   0.551       0.533   1.136   15.2    9.3
       6        263     1.067     0.038    6.260        2.496     0.182   0.582       0.446   1.275   18.6   11.4
       7        263     1.187     0.032    6.049        2.153     0.279   0.566       0.583   1.174   17.3    9.8
       8        263     1.317     0.045    6.317        2.415     0.374   0.651       0.673   1.131   18.7   11.0
       9        263     1.502     0.068    6.882        2.338     0.357   0.653       0.629   1.225   21.3   11.0
      10        262     1.910     0.301    7.252        2.322     0.595   0.923       0.844   1.262   23.4   10.7
                                    January 1977 to December 1981 (261 Weeks)
       1        242     0.267     0.122    2.338        1.633     0.004   0.567      −0.264   1.267    2.8    3.6
       2        243     0.504     0.045    4.172        1.865    −0.125   0.471      −0.531   1.344    7.4    5.3
       3        243     0.654     0.037    4.711        1.906    −0.119   0.458      −0.288   1.097    9.0    6.1
       4        243     0.771     0.032    5.299        2.060    −0.095   0.533      −0.233   1.224   11.3    6.9
       5        243     0.883     0.035    6.066        2.495    −0.141   0.427      −0.314   1.193   13.8    9.4
       6        243     0.994     0.029    6.702        2.464    −0.180   0.480      −0.425   1.172   16.2    9.1
       7        243     1.110     0.038    6.825        2.666    −0.219   0.503      −0.404   1.074   17.0    9.9
       8        243     1.249     0.043    7.680        2.723    −0.262   0.491      −0.582   1.214   19.9   10.5
       9        243     1.436     0.067    7.727        2.431    −0.456   0.595      −0.974   1.153   20.3    8.9
      10        242     1.805     0.223    9.143        2.722    −0.540   0.596      −1.194   1.184   27.3    9.7
                                    January 1982 to December 1986 (261 Weeks)
       1        227     0.179     0.160    1.301        1.135    −0.392   0.716      −0.748   1.140    1.4    2.3
       2        228     0.436     0.050    3.347        1.602    −0.287   0.524      −0.488   1.135    5.4    4.1
       3        228     0.574     0.035    4.237        1.976    −0.175   0.623      −0.103   1.435    8.3    6.0
       4        227     0.695     0.033    4.886        1.780    −0.267   0.504      −0.546   1.188   10.7    6.3
       5        228     0.801     0.031    5.254        1.993    −0.306   0.580      −0.668   1.157   11.9    7.2
       6        228     0.905     0.030    6.063        2.337    −0.228   0.657      −0.450   1.228   14.9    8.2
       7        227     1.013     0.032    6.586        2.595    −0.215   0.605      −0.381   1.197   16.7    9.1
       8        228     1.119     0.032    7.549        2.587    −0.199   0.513      −0.384   1.128   20.5    9.5
       9        228     1.280     0.059    7.641        2.850    −0.243   0.669      −0.395   1.146   21.4   10.2
      10        227     1.645     0.240    8.210        3.135    −0.173   0.751      −0.223   1.137   23.9   11.2




Vol2.10.04.01                                           Tables                                         Page 19 of 23
                                        Table 6e (continued)

                          τM
                          β                   τM )
                                            t(β                   τOF P
                                                                  β                   τOF P )
                                                                                    t(β
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                     R (%)
             Sample
    Decile
              Size
                      Mean      S.D.    Mean          S.D.     Mean        S.D.   Mean      S.D.   Mean    S.D.

                                   January 1987 to December 1991 (261 Weeks)
      1       216     0.231     0.247     2.664       2.457    0.663   1.210       1.187   1.077    5.6     6.6
      2       217     0.500     0.060     4.482       2.731    0.588   0.746       1.261   1.194   10.9     8.7
      3       217     0.657     0.035     5.034       2.403    0.663   0.727       1.511   1.267   13.0     8.9
      4       217     0.793     0.041     6.255       3.263    0.627   0.707       1.299   1.478   17.2    11.5
      5       217     0.919     0.033     7.248       3.555    0.536   0.688       1.162   1.498   21.2    12.8
      6       217     1.018     0.028     7.919       3.734    0.591   0.679       1.189   1.511   23.4    13.0
      7       217     1.114     0.028     8.658       4.462    0.512   0.736       0.954   1.603   25.8    15.6
      8       217     1.218     0.034     9.028       4.089    0.539   0.643       1.169   1.353   27.9    14.7
      9       217     1.366     0.055     9.412       4.311    0.719   0.683       1.506   1.404   29.7    15.3
     10       217     1.694     0.220     8.709       4.024    0.541   0.838       0.987   1.228   28.5    15.0
                                   January 1992 to December 1996 (261 Weeks)
      1       241     0.006     0.439     0.424       0.810    0.066   0.971       0.146   1.134   − 0.1     1.1
      2       241     0.384     0.052     2.278       1.372    0.135   0.517       0.708   1.769     2.9     4.5
      3       242     0.530     0.032     3.100       1.858    0.132   0.611       1.001   2.203     5.4     6.6
      4       241     0.648     0.037     3.542       1.780    0.165   0.483       0.800   1.874     6.0     6.0
      5       241     0.769     0.037     4.105       1.971    0.080   0.468       0.335   1.668     7.6     6.7
      6       242     0.883     0.031     4.629       2.057    0.052   0.446       0.090   1.323     9.0     6.4
      7       241     1.002     0.034     5.077       2.225   −0.002   0.516      −0.068   1.414    10.6     7.5
      8       242     1.141     0.045     5.363       2.594   −0.005   0.671      −0.017   1.437    12.2     9.0
      9       241     1.337     0.077     5.627       2.418    0.037   0.549       0.069   1.260    12.7     8.5
     10       241     1.823     0.341     5.754       2.820    0.079   0.795       0.228   1.058    13.8     9.5




Vol2.10.04.01                                         Tables                                        Page 20 of 23
                                                     Table 7
      Cross-sectional regression tests of various linear factor models along the lines of Fama and
      MacBeth (1973) using weekly returns for NYSE and AMEX stocks from 1962 to 1996,
      ﬁve-year subperiods for the portfolio-formation, estimation, and testing periods, and 100
      portfolios in the cross-sectional regressions each week. The ﬁve linear-factor models are:
      the standard CAPM (βpM ), and four two-factor models in which the ﬁrst factor is the
      market beta and the second factors are, respectively, the hedging portfolio return beta
      (βpHR ), the hedging portfolio dollar-return beta (βpHQ ), the beta of a small-minus-big cap
      portfolio return (βpSM B ), and the beta of the optimal forecast portfolio based on a set of 25
      market-beta-sorted basis portfolios (βpOF P ).

                                                                                              2
                         Model                       Statistic    γ̂0t    γ̂1t     γ̂2t     R (%)

                                     January 1972 to December 1976 (261 Weeks)
        Rpt = γ0t +   γ1t βpM   +   pt              Mean:       0.002    0.000               10.0
                                                     S.D.:       0.015    0.021               10.9
                                                     t-Stat:     1.639    0.348
        Rpt = γ0t + γ1t βpM + γ2t βpHR +     pt    Mean:       0.004   −0.002   −0.002      14.3
        (φ = 1.25)                                   S.D.:       0.035    0.035    0.037      10.9
                                                     t-Stat:     2.040   −1.047   −0.820
        Rpt = γ0t + γ1t βpM + γ2t βpHQ +     pt    Mean:       0.004   −0.002   −0.104      15.5
        (φ = 1.50)                                   S.D.:       0.032    0.034    3.797      10.9
                                                     t-Stat:     2.162   −1.081   −0.442
        Rpt = γ0t + γ1t βpM + γ2t βpSM B +    pt   Mean:       0.001    0.000    0.063      12.1
                                                     S.D.:       0.014    0.024    1.142      10.8
                                                     t-Stat:     1.424    0.217    0.898

                                     January 1977 to December 1981 (261 Weeks)
        Rpt   = γ0t + γ1t βpM +     pt              Mean:       0.001    0.003               11.7
                                                     S.D.:       0.011    0.022               12.8
                                                     t-Stat:     1.166    2.566
        Rpt = γ0t + γ1t βpM + γ2t βpHR +     pt    Mean:       0.003   −0.001   −0.012      13.1
        (φ = 4.75)                                   S.D.:       0.014    0.020    0.051      12.4
                                                     t-Stat:     3.748   −0.902   −3.712
        Rpt = γ0t + γ1t βpM + γ2t βpHQ +     pt    Mean:       0.003   −0.001   −1.564      12.5
        (φ = 4.25)                                   S.D.:       0.013    0.020    6.104      12.2
                                                     t-Stat:     3.910   −0.754   −4.140
        Rpt = γ0t + γ1t βpM + γ2t βpSM B +    pt   Mean:       0.001    0.000    0.299      14.9
                                                     S.D.:       0.011    0.017    1.088      13.4
                                                     t-Stat:     2.251   −0.164    4.433
        Rpt = γ0t + γ1t βpM + γ2t βpOF P +    pt   Mean:       0.003    0.001    0.001      14.1
                                                     S.D.:       0.018    0.023    0.036      11.6
                                                     t-Stat:     2.735    0.843    0.632




Vol2.10.04.01                                        Tables                                  Page 21 of 23
                                             Table 7 (continued)



                                                                                            2
                         Model                       Statistic    γ̂0t    γ̂1t     γ̂2t    R (%)

                                     January 1982 to December 1986 (261 Weeks)
        Rpt = γ0t +   γ1t βpM   +   pt              Mean:       0.006   −0.001              9.4
                                                     S.D.:       0.011    0.019             11.1
                                                     t-Stat:     8.169   −1.044
        Rpt = γ0t + γ1t βpM + γ2t βpHR +     pt    Mean:       0.006   −0.001   −0.006        9.6
        (φ = 1.75)                                   S.D.:       0.011    0.020    0.055        9.4
                                                     t-Stat:     8.390   −0.780   −1.732
        Rpt = γ0t + γ1t βpM + γ2t βpHQ +     pt    Mean:       0.006   −0.002   −0.740    10.4
        (φ = 2.00)                                   S.D.:       0.011    0.019   19.874     9.5
                                                     t-Stat:     8.360   −1.297   −0.602
        Rpt = γ0t + γ1t βpM + γ2t βpSM B +    pt   Mean:       0.005   −0.002    0.038    10.0
                                                     S.D.:       0.012    0.019    1.154     8.4
                                                     t-Stat:     7.451   −1.264    0.531
        Rpt = γ0t + γ1t βpM + γ2t βpOF P +    pt   Mean:       0.005   −0.001    0.000    11.7
                                                     S.D.:       0.011    0.020    0.021    10.8
                                                     t-Stat:     7.545   −0.818    0.199

                                     January 1987 to December 1991 (261 Weeks)
        Rpt = γ0t +   γ1t βpM   +   pt              Mean:       0.002    0.000                 5.9
                                                     S.D.:       0.013    0.023                 8.7
                                                     t-Stat:     2.649    0.204
        Rpt = γ0t + γ1t βpM + γ2t βpHR +     pt    Mean:       0.002    0.000    0.000        5.4
        (φ = 47)                                     S.D.:       0.016    0.019    0.060        6.1
                                                     t-Stat:     2.254    0.105    0.132
        Rpt = γ0t + γ1t βpM + γ2t βpHQ +     pt    Mean:       0.002    0.000    0.189        6.0
        (φ = 20)                                     S.D.:       0.016    0.019   18.194        6.7
                                                     t-Stat:     2.434   −0.147    0.168
        Rpt = γ0t + γ1t βpM + γ2t βpSM B +    pt   Mean:       0.003    0.000   −0.075        7.8
                                                     S.D.:       0.014    0.020    1.235        8.2
                                                     t-Stat:     3.101    0.158   −0.979
        Rpt = γ0t + γ1t βpM + γ2t βpOF P +    pt   Mean:       0.003   −0.001    0.000        6.4
                                                     S.D.:       0.015    0.021    0.021        7.3
                                                     t-Stat:     2.731   −0.385   −0.234




Vol2.10.04.01                                        Tables                                Page 22 of 23
                                             Table 7 (continued)



                                                                                            2
                         Model                       Statistic    γ̂0t    γ̂1t     γ̂2t    R (%)

                                     January 1992 to December 1996 (261 Weeks)
        Rpt = γ0t +   γ1t βpM   +   pt              Mean:       0.002    0.001                 5.7
                                                     S.D.:       0.013    0.020                 7.7
                                                     t-Stat:     2.679    1.178
        Rpt = γ0t + γ1t βpM + γ2t βpHR +     pt    Mean:       0.002    0.001   −0.004        6.9
        (φ = 38)                                     S.D.:       0.013    0.020    0.091        6.8
                                                     t-Stat:     2.785    1.164   −0.650
        Rpt = γ0t + γ1t βpM + γ2t βpHQ +     pt    Mean:       0.003    0.000   −1.584        6.2
        (φ = 27)                                     S.D.:       0.015    0.022   12.992        6.6
                                                     t-Stat:     3.279   −0.178   −1.970
        Rpt = γ0t + γ1t βpM + γ2t βpSM B +    pt   Mean:       0.002    0.001    0.154        6.7
                                                     S.D.:       0.015    0.019    1.157        7.0
                                                     t-Stat:     1.653    0.861    2.147
        Rpt = γ0t + γ1t βpM + γ2t βpOF P +    pt   Mean:       0.001    0.002    0.002        7.9
                                                     S.D.:       0.016    0.020    0.015        7.4
                                                     t-Stat:     0.895    1.236    2.407




Vol2.10.04.01                                        Tables                                Page 23 of 23
