                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             A MULTIVARIATE MODEL OF STRATEGIC ASSET ALLOCATION


                                          John Y. Campbell
                                          Yeung Lewis Chan
                                           Luis M. Viceira


                                          Working Paper 8566
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8566


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2001




Campbell acknowledges the financial support of the National Science Foundation, and Viceira the financial
support of the Division of Research of the Harvard Business School. We are grateful for helpful comments
and suggestions by Ludger Hentschel, Anthony Lynch, an anonymous referee, and seminar participants at
Harvard, the 1999 Intertemporal Asset Pricing Conference hosted by the Centre Interuniversitaire de
Recherche en Analyse des Organizations (CIRANO) of Montreal and the 2000 WFA Meetings. Josh White
provided invaluable research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.



© 2001 by John Y. Campbell, Yeung Lewis Chan and Luis M. Viceira. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
A Multivariate Model of Strategic Asset Allocation
John Y. Campbell, Yeung Lewis Chan and Luis M. Viceira
NBER Working Paper No. 8566
October 2001
JEL No. G12



                                                   ABSTRACT


          Much recent work has documented evidence for predictability of asset returns. We show how such
predictability can affect the portfolio choices of long-lived investors who value wealth not for its own sake but for
the consumption their wealth can support. We develop an approximate solution method for the optimal
consumption and portfolio choice problem of an infinitely-lived investor with Epstein-Zin utility who faces a set
of asset returns described by a vector autoregression in returns and state variables. Empirical estimates in long-run
annual and postwar quarterly US data suggest that the predictability of stock returns greatly increases the optimal
demand for stocks. The role of nominal bonds in long-term portfolios depends on the importance of real interest
rate risk relative to other sources of risk. We extend the analysis to consider long-term inflation-indexed bonds and
find that these bonds greatly increase the utility of conservative investors, who should hold large positions when
they are available.


John Y. Campbell
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 213
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
Email: john_campbell@harvard.edu
Website: http://post.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/jcampbell/campbell.html

Yeung Lewis Chan
Department of Finance
School of Business and Management
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Clear Water Bay
Kowloon, Hong Kong
Email: ylchan@ust.hk

Luis M. Viceira
Graduate School of Business Administration
Morgan Hall 367
Harvard University
Boston, MA 02163,
CEPR and NBER
Email: lviceira@hbs.edu
Website: http://www.people.hbs.edu/lviceira
1    Introduction

Academic finance has had a remarkable impact on many participants in the financial
services industry, from mutual fund managers to corporate risk managers. Curiously,
however, financial planners oﬀering portfolio advice to long-term investors have re-
ceived little guidance from academic financial economists.

     The mean-variance analysis of Markowitz (1952) has provided a basic paradigm,
and has usefully emphasized the ability of diversification to reduce risk, but this
model ignores several critically important factors. Most notably, the analysis is
static; it assumes that investors care only about risks to wealth one period ahead. In
reality, however, many investors–both individuals and institutions such as charitable
foundations or universities–seek to finance a stream of consumption over a long
lifetime.

    Financial economists have understood at least since the work of Samuelson (1969)
and Merton (1969, 1971, 1973) that the solution to a multi-period portfolio choice
problem can be very diﬀerent from the solution to a static portfolio choice problem. In
particular, if investment opportunities are varying over time, then long-term investors
care about shocks to investment opportunities–the productivity of wealth–as well
as shocks to wealth itself. They may seek to hedge their exposures to wealth pro-
ductivity shocks, and this gives rise to intertemporal hedging demands for financial
assets. Brennan, Schwartz, and Lagnado (1997) have coined the phrase “strate-
gic asset allocation” to describe this far-sighted response to time-varying investment
opportunities.

    Unfortunately Merton’s intertemporal model is hard to solve in closed form. For
many years solutions to the model were only available in those trivial cases where
it reduces to the static model. Therefore the Merton model has not become a us-
able empirical paradigm, has not displaced the Markowitz model, and has had little
influence on financial planners and their clients.

   Recently this situation has begun to change as a result of several related develop-
ments. First, computing power and numerical methods have advanced to the point
at which realistic multi-period portfolio choice problems can be solved numerically
using discrete-state approximations. Balduzzi and Lynch (1999), Barberis (1999),
Brennan, Schwartz, and Lagnado (1997, 1999), Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout (1998),
and Lynch (2001) are important examples of this style of work. Second, financial the-


                                          1
orists have discovered some new closed-form solutions to the Merton model. In a
continuous-time model with a constant riskless interest rate and a single risky asset
whose expected return follows a mean-reverting (Ornstein-Uhlenbeck) process, for
example, the model can be solved if long-lived investors have power utility defined
over terminal wealth (Kim and Omberg 1996), or if investors have power utility de-
fined over consumption and the innovation to the expected asset return is perfectly
correlated with the innovation to the unexpected return, making the asset market
eﬀectively complete (Wachter 2002), or if the investor has Epstein-Zin utility with
intertemporal elasticity of substitution equal to one (Campbell and Viceira 1999,
Schroder and Skiadas 1999). Similar results are available in aﬃne models of the term
structure (Brennan and Xia 2001, Campbell and Viceira 2001, Liu 1998, Wachter
2000). Third, approximate analytical solutions to the Merton model have been devel-
oped (Campbell and Viceira 1999, 2001). These solutions are based on perturbations
of the known exact solutions for intertemporal elasticity of substitution equal to one,
so they are accurate provided that the intertemporal elasticity is not too far from
one. They oﬀer analytical insights into investor behavior in models that fall outside
the still limited class that can be solved exactly.

   Despite this encouraging progress, it remains extremely hard to solve realistically
complex cases of the Merton model. Discrete-state numerical algorithms become slow
and unreliable in the presence of many assets and state variables, and approximate
analytical methods seem to require a daunting quantity of algebra. Neither approach
has been developed to the point at which one can specify a general vector autore-
gression (VAR) for asset returns and hope to solve the associated portfolio choice
problem.

    The purpose of this paper is to remedy this situation by extending the approximate
analytical approach of Campbell and Viceira (1999, 2001). Specifically, we show that
if asset returns are described by a VAR, if the investor is infinitely lived with Epstein-
Zin utility, and if there are no borrowing or short-sales constraints on asset allocations,
then the Campbell-Viceira approach implies a system of linear-quadratic equations
for portfolio weights and consumption as functions of state variables. These equations
are generally too cumbersome to solve analytically, but can be solved very rapidly by
simple numerical methods. As the time interval of the model shrinks, the solutions
become exact if the elasticity of intertemporal substitution equals one. They are
accurate approximations for short time intervals and elasticities close to one.

   We apply our method to a VAR for short-term real interest rates, excess stock


                                            2
returns, and excess bond returns. We also include variables that have been identified
as return predictors by past empirical research: the short-term interest rate (Fama and
Schwert 1977, Campbell 1987, Glosten, Jagannathan, and Runkle 1993); the dividend-
price ratio (Campbell and Shiller 1988, Fama and French 1988a); and the yield spread
between long-term and short-term bonds (Shiller, Campbell, and Schoenholtz 1983,
Fama 1984, Fama and French 1989, Campbell and Shiller 1991). In a variant of
the basic approach we construct data on hypothetical inflation-indexed bond returns,
following the approach of Campbell and Shiller (1996), and study the allocation to
stocks, inflation-indexed bonds, nominal bonds, and bills.

    Two closely related papers are by Brennan, Schwartz, and Lagnado (1999) and
Lynch (2001). Brennan, Schwartz, and Lagnado consider asset allocation among
stocks, nominal bonds, bills, and interest-rate futures, using short- and long-term
nominal interest rates and the dividend-price ratio as state variables. The investor is
assumed to have power utility defined over wealth at a given horizon, and the stochas-
tic optimization problem is solved using numerical dynamic programming imposing
borrowing and short-sales constraints. Lynch considers asset allocation among port-
folios of stocks sorted by size and book-to-market ratios, using the long-short yield
spread and the dividend-price ratio as state variables, and assuming power utility
defined over consumption. He solves the optimization problem with and without
short-sales constraints, again using numerical dynamic programming. Our paper,
by contrast, assumes recursive Epstein-Zin utility defined over an infinite stream of
consumption and does not impose any portfolio constraints. The simplicity of our
solution method allows us to consider an unrestricted VAR in which lagged returns
are state variables along with the short-term nominal interest rate, dividend-price
ratio, and yield spread. Our method also allows us to break intertemporal hedging
demands into components associated with individual state variables.

   The organization of the paper is as follows. Section 2 explains our basic setup, and
Section 3 describes our approximate solution method. Section 4 presents empirical
results for the case where stocks, nominal bonds, and bills are available. Section 5
considers portfolio allocation in the presence of inflation-indexed bonds. Section 6
concludes.




                                          3
2     The Model

Our model is set in discrete time. We assume an infinitely-lived investor with Epstein-
Zin (1989, 1991) recursive preferences defined over a stream of consumption. This
contrasts with papers such as Brennan, Schwartz and Lagnado (1997, 1999), Kim and
Omberg (1996), and Barberis (2000) that consider finite-horizon models with power
utility defined over terminal wealth. We allow an arbitrary set of traded assets and
state variables. Thus we do not make the assumption of Wachter (2000, 2002) that
markets are complete, and we substantially extend the work of Campbell and Viceira
(1999) in which there is a single risky asset with a single state variable.


2.1    Securities

There are n assets available for investment. The investor allocates her after-consumption
wealth among these assets. The real return on her portfolio Rp,t+1 is given by
                                 n
                                 X
                      Rp,t+1 =         αi,t (Ri,t+1 − R1,t+1 ) + R1,t+1 ,            (1)
                                 i=2

where αi,t is the portfolio weight on asset i. The first asset is a short-term instrument
whose real return is R1,t+1 . Although we use the short-term return as a benchmark
and measure other returns relative to it, we do not assume that this return is riskless.
In practice we use a nominal bill as the short-term asset; the nominal return on a
nominal bill is riskless, but the real return is not because it is subject to short-term
inflation risk. In most of our empirical analysis we consider two other assets: stocks
and long-term nominal bonds. In Section 5 we also consider long-term inflation-
indexed bonds.


2.2    Dynamics of state variables

We postulate that the dynamics of the relevant state variables are well captured
by a first-order vector autoregressive process or VAR(1). This type of dynamic
specification has been used by Kandel and Stambaugh (1987), Campbell (1991, 1996),
Hodrick (1992), and Barberis (2000), among others. In principle the use of a VAR(1)
is not restrictive since any vector autoregression can be rewritten as a VAR(1) through

                                               4
an expansion of the vector of state variables. For parsimony, however, in our empirical
work we avoid additional lags that would require an expanded state vector with
additional parameters to estimate. Specifically, we define
                                                        
                                         r2,t+1 − r1,t+1
                                       r3,t+1 − r1,t+1 
                                                        
                              xt+1 ≡           ..       ,                         (2)
                                                .       
                                         rn,t+1 − r1,t+1
where ri,t+1 ≡ log (Ri,t+1 ) for all i, and xt+1 is the vector of log excess returns. In
our empirical application, r1,t+1 is the real short rate, r2,t+1 refers to the real stock
return and r3,t+1 to the real return on nominal bonds.

    We allow the system to include other state variables st+1 , such as the dividend-
price ratio. Stacking r1,t+1 , xt+1 , st+1 into an m × 1 vector zt+1 , we have
                                                      
                                                r1,t+1
                                     zt+1 ≡  xt+1  .                            (3)
                                                 st+1
We will call zt+1 the state vector and we assume a first order vector autoregression
for zt+1 :
                              zt+1 = Φ0 + Φ1 zt + vt+1 ,                         (4)
where Φ0 is the m×1 vector of intercepts, Φ1 is the m×m matrix of slope coeﬃcients,
and vt+1 are the shocks to the state variables satisfying the following distributional
assumptions:
                                   i.i.d.
                            vt+1 ∼ N (0, Σv ) ,
                                            2               
                                             σ 1 σ 01x σ 01s
                     Σv   ≡ Vart (vt+1 ) =  σ 1x Σxx Σ0xs  .                       (5)
                                             σ 1s Σxs Σss
Thus, we allow the shocks to be cross-sectionally correlated, but assume that they
are homoskedastic and independently distributed over time. The VAR framework
conveniently captures the dependence of expected returns of various assets on their
past histories as well as on other predictive variables. The stochastic evolution of
these other state variables st+1 is also determined by the system.

   The assumption of homoskedasticity is of course restrictive. It rules out the
possibility that the state variables predict changes in risk; they can aﬀect portfolio

                                            5
choice only by predicting changes in expected returns. Authors such as Campbell
(1987), Harvey (1989, 1991), and Glosten, Jagannathan, and Runkle (1993) have
explored the ability of the state variables used here to predict risk and have found
only modest eﬀects that seem to be dominated by the eﬀects of the state variables
on expected returns. Chacko and Viceira (1999) show how to include changing risk
in a long-term portfolio choice problem, using a continuous-time extension of the
methodology of Campbell and Viceira (1999); they find that changes in equity risk
are not persistent enough to have large eﬀects on the intertemporal hedging demand
for equities. Aït-Sahalia and Brandt (2001) adopt a semiparametric methodology
that accommodates both changing expected returns and changing risk.

    Given our homoskedastic VAR formulation, the unconditional distribution of zt
is easily derived. The state vector zt inherits the normality of the shocks vt+1 .
Appendix A gives expressions for the unconditional mean and variance-covariance
matrix of zt .


2.3    Preferences and optimality conditions

We assume that the investor has Epstein-Zin (1989, 1991) recursive preferences. This
preference specification has the desirable property that the notion of risk aversion is
separated from that of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution. Following Epstein-
Zin, we let
                                    h          1−γ ¡ ¡ 1−γ ¢¢ 1θ i 1−γ
                                                                    θ

               U (Ct , Et (Ut+1 )) = (1 − δ) Ct + δ Et Ut+1
                                                θ
                                                                       ,              (6)

where Ct is consumption at time t, γ > 0 is the relative risk aversion coeﬃcient, ψ > 0
is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, 0 < δ < 1 is the time discount factor,
θ ≡ (1 − γ)/(1 − ψ −1 ), and Et (·) is the conditional expectation operator.

    Epstein-Zin recursive utility nests as a special case the standard, time-separable
power utility specification. Figure 1 shows graphically the relation between Epstein-
Zin utility and power utility. The horizontal axis in the figure shows the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution ψ, while the vertical axis shows the coeﬃcient of relative risk
aversion γ. The set of points with unit elasticity of intertemporal substitution is drawn
as a vertical line, while the set of points with unit relative risk aversion is drawn as
a horizontal line. For time-separable power utility, γ = ψ −1 and hence θ = 1. This
corresponds to the hyperbola γ = ψ −1 plotted in the figure. Log utility obtains when

                                            6
we impose the additional restriction γ = ψ −1 = 1. This is the point in the figure
where all three lines cross.

   At time t, the investor uses all relevant information to make optimal consumption
and portfolio decisions. She faces the intertemporal budget constraint

                               Wt+1 = (Wt − Ct ) Rp,t+1 ,                            (7)

where Ct is consumption and Wt is wealth at time t.

   Epstein and Zin (1989, 1991) have shown that with this budget constraint, the
Euler equation for consumption is
                        (                                
                            µ      ¶− ψ1 )θ
                              Ct+1
                     Et  δ                 Rp,t+1 Ri,t+1  = 1,
                                             −(1−θ)
                                                                             (8)
                               Ct

for any asset i, including the portfolio p itself. This first-order condition reduces to
the standard one in the power utility case where γ = ψ −1 and θ = 1.

    The investor’s optimal consumption and portfolio policies must satisfy the Euler
equation (8). When investment opportunities are constant, the optimal policies imply
a constant consumption-wealth ratio and a myopic portfolio rule–that is, the investor
chooses her portfolio as if her investment horizon was only one period. However, when
investment opportunities are time-varying, there are no known exact analytical so-
lutions to this equation except for some specific values of γ and ψ. Giovannini and
Weil (1989) have shown that with γ = 1, it is optimal for the investor to follow a
myopic portfolio rule. This case corresponds to the horizontal line plotted in Fig-
ure 1. They also show that with ψ = 1, the investor optimally chooses a constant
consumption-wealth ratio equal to (1 − δ). This corresponds to the vertical line in
Figure 1. However, with γ = 1, the optimal consumption-wealth ratio is not constant
unless ψ = 1 and, conversely, with ψ = 1 the optimal portfolio rule is not myopic
unless γ = 1. This corresponds to the point where the vertical and horizontal lines
in Figure 1 cross–i.e., the log utility case. To solve for the optimal rules in all other
cases, we extend the approximate analytical solution method in Campbell and Viceira
(1999, 2001) to a multivariate framework.

   Epstein and Zin (1989, 1991) have derived one other useful result. They show
that the value function–the maximized utility function (6)–per unit of wealth can


                                           7
be written as a power function of the optimal consumption-wealth ratio:
                                                  µ ¶ 1−ψ
                                                       1
                              Ut               ψ
                                            − 1−ψ  Ct
                        Vt ≡      = (1 − δ)               .                        (9)
                              Wt                   Wt
We have already noted that the ratio Ct /Wt approaches (1 − δ) as ψ approaches one.
This allows the value function (9) to have a finite limit as ψ approaches one.



3     Solution Methodology

3.1    An approximate framework

The return on the portfolio in (1) is expressed in terms of the simple returns on the
assets. Since it is more convenient to work with log returns in our framework, we
first derive an expression for the log return on the portfolio. Following Campbell
and Viceira (1999, 2001), we approximate the log return on the portfolio as
                                                1 ¡               ¢
                    rp,t+1 = r1,t+1 + α0t xt+1 + α0t σ 2x − Σxx αt ,             (10)
                                                2
where σ 2x ≡ diag(Σxx ) is the vector consisting of the diagonal elements of Σxx , the
variances of excess returns. This approximation holds exactly in continuous time and
is highly accurate for short time intervals. Just as in a continuous-time model, (10)
prevents bankruptcy even when asset positions are leveraged; Campbell and Viceira
(2001) discuss the relation of this approach with continuous-time modelling. When
there is only one risky asset, (10) collapses to the approximation derived in Campbell
and Viceira (1999). Detailed derivations for this and other results in this section are
provided in Appendix A.

    The budget constraint in (7) is nonlinear. Following Campbell (1993, 1996), we
log-linearize around the unconditional mean of the log consumption-wealth ratio to
obtain                                   µ       ¶
                                               1
                        ∆wt+1 ≈ rp,t+1 + 1 −       (ct − wt ) + k,               (11)
                                               ρ
where ∆ is the diﬀerence operator, ρ ≡ 1 − exp (E[ct − wt ]) and k ≡ log (ρ) +
(1 − ρ) log (1 − ρ) /ρ. When consumption is chosen optimally by the investor, ρ de-
pends on the optimal level of ct relative to wt and in this sense is endogenous. This

                                          8
form of the budget constraint is exact if the elasticity of intertemporal substitution
ψ = 1, in which case ct − wt is constant and ρ = δ.

   Next, we apply a second-order Taylor expansion to the Euler equation (8) around
the conditional means of ∆ct+1 , rp,t+1 , ri,t+1 to obtain

                                   θ
                   0 = θ log δ −     Et ∆ct+1 − (1 − θ) Et rp,t+1 + Et ri,t+1                         (12)
                                   ψ
                                  ·                                  ¸
                             1       θ
                            + Vart − ∆ct+1 − (1 − θ) rp,t+1 + ri,t+1 .
                             2       ψ

    This loglinearized Euler equation is exact if consumption and asset returns are
jointly lognormally distributed, which is the case when the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution ψ = 1. It can be usefully transformed as follows. Setting i = 1 in (12),
subtracting from the general form of (12), and noting that ∆ct+1 = ∆(ct+1 − wt+1 ) +
∆wt+1 , we obtain, for asset i = 2, ..., n,
                            1                           θ
  Et (ri,t+1 − r1,t+1 ) +     Vart (ri,t+1 − r1,t+1 ) =   (σ i,c−w,t − σ 1,c−w,t )                 (13)
                            2                           ψ
                                                        +γ (σ i,p,t − σ 1,p,t ) − (σ i,1,t − σ 1,1,t ) ,

where σ i,c−w,t = Covt (ri,t+1 , ct+1 − wt+1 ), σ 1,c−w,t = Covt (r1,t+1 , ct+1 − wt+1 ), σ i,p,t =
Covt (ri,t+1 , rp,t+1 ), σ 1,p,t = Covt (r1,t+1 , rp,t+1 ), σ i,1,t = Covt (ri,t+1 , r1,t+1 ), and σ 1,1,t =
Vart (r1,t+1 ). The left hand side of this equation is the risk premium on asset i over asset
1, adjusted for Jensen’s Inequality by adding one-half the variance of the excess return.
The equation relates asset i’s risk premium to its excess covariance with consumption
growth, its excess covariance with the portfolio return, and the covariance of its excess
return with the return on asset 1. (The last term drops out when asset 1 is riskless.)
Of course, consumption growth and the portfolio return are endogenous so this is a
first-order condition describing the optimal solution rather than a statement of the
solution itself.




                                                     9
3.2      Solving the approximate model

To solve the model, we now guess that the optimal portfolio and consumption rules
take the form
                                       αt = A0 + A1 zt ,                                            (14)

                                 ct − wt = b0 + B01 zt + z0t B2 zt                                  (15)
That is, the optimal portfolio rule is linear in the VAR state vector but the optimal
consumption rule is quadratic. A0 , A1 , b0 , B1 , and B2 are constant coeﬃcient ma-
trices to be determined, with dimensions (n − 1) × 1, (n − 1) × m, 1 × 1, m × 1, and
m × m, respectively. This is a multivariate generalization of the solution obtained by
Campbell and Viceira (1999).2

   To verify this guess and solve for the parameters of the solution, we write the
conditional moments that appear in (13) as functions of the VAR parameters and the
unknown parameters of (14) and (15). We then solve for the parameters that satisfy
(13). Recalling that the vector of excess returns is written as xt , the conditional
expectation on the left hand side of (13) is
                           1                                    1
                             Vart (xt+1 ) = Hx Φ0 + HxΦ1 zt + σ 2x ,
                    Et (xt+1 ) +                                                 (16)
                           2                                    2
where Hx is a selection matrix that selects the vector of excess returns from the full
state vector.

   Appendix A shows that the three conditional covariances on the right hand side of
(13) can all be written as linear functions of the state variables. In matrix notation,
              σ c−w,t − σ 1,c−w,t ι ≡ [σ i,c−w,t − σ 1,c−w,t ]i=2,...n = Λ0 + Λ1 zt ,               (17)

                    σ p,t − σ 1,p,t ι ≡ [σ i,p,t − σ 1,p,t ]i=2,...n = Σxx αt + σ 1x ,              (18)

                     σ 1,t − σ 1,1,t ι ≡ [σ i,1,t − σ 1,1,t ]i=2,...n = σ 1x ,                      (19)
   2
    It is important to note that only m + (m2 − m)/2 elements of B2 are determined. The diagonal
elements of B2 are unique, but the consumption-wealth ratio is determined by the sums of oﬀ-
diagonal elements b2,ij +b2,ji because zi,t zj,t = zj,t zi,t . Thus we can impose arbitrary normalizations
on B2 provided that we leave each sum b2,ij + b2,ji unrestricted. For example, we could restrict B2
to be symmetric, upper triangular, or lower triangular.

                                                    10
where ι is a vector of ones.


3.3    Optimal portfolio choice

Solving the Euler equation (13) for the portfolio rule we have
                             ·                                         ¸
                      1 −1                1
              αt =      Σ     Et (xt+1 ) + Vart (xt+1 ) + (1 − γ) σ 1x
                      γ xx                2
                                                                                      (20)
                              ·                        ¸
                         1 −1   θ
                        + Σxx − (σ c−w,t − σ 1,c−w,t ι) ,
                         γ      ψ

where Et (xt+1 ) + Vart (xt+1 ) /2 and σ c−w,t − σ 1,c−w,t ι are the linear functions of zt
given in (16) and (17), respectively. This equation is a multiple-asset generalization
of Restoy (1992) and Campbell and Viceira (1999). It expresses the optimal portfolio
choice as the sum of two components.

    The first term on the right hand side of (20) is the myopic component of asset
demand. When the benchmark asset 1 is riskless (σ 1x = 0), then the myopic al-
location is the vector of Sharpe ratios on risky assets, scaled by the inverse of the
variance-covariance matrix of risky asset returns and the reciprocal of the coeﬃcient
of relative risk aversion. Investors with γ 6= 1 adjust this allocation slightly by a
term (1 − γ) σ 1x when asset 1 is risky. Because of its myopic nature, this component
does not depend on ψ, the elasticity of intertemporal substitution.

   The second term on the right hand side of (20) is the intertemporal hedging
demand. In our model, the investment opportunity set is time varying since expected
returns on various assets are state-dependent. Merton (1969, 1971) shows that
a rational investor who is more risk averse than a logarithmic investor will hedge
against adverse changes in investment opportunities. For a logarithmic investor, the
optimal portfolio rule is purely myopic and hence the hedging demand is identically
equal to zero. This can be easily seen from (20) since when γ = 1, θ = 0 and the
hedging component vanishes. Also, when investment opportunities are constant over
time, hedging demand is zero for any level of risk aversion. This case corresponds
to having only the intercept term in our VAR specification. It is straightforward
to verify that the coeﬃcient matrices Λ0 and Λ1 in the hedging component are zero
matrices in this case and thus there is no hedging component of asset demand.

                                            11
   Substituting (16) and (17) in (20) and rearranging the terms yields

                                      αt ≡ A0 + A1 zt ,                           (21)

where
              µ ¶     µ                        ¶ µ      ¶     µ     ¶
               1   −1          1 2                    1    −1   −Λ0
      A0    =     Σxx Hx Φ0 + σ x + (1 − γ)σ 1x + 1 −     Σxx         , (22)
               γ               2                      γ         1−ψ
              µ ¶            µ      ¶     µ     ¶
               1   −1             1    −1   −Λ1
      A1    =     Σxx Hx Φ1 + 1 −     Σxx         .                     (23)
               γ                  γ         1−ψ

Equation (21) verifies our initial guess for the form of the optimal portfolio rule and
expresses the coeﬃcient matrices A0 , A1 as functions of the underlying parameters
describing preferences and the dynamics of the state variables. A0 and A1 also depend
on the parameters in the consumption-wealth ratio equation, B1 and B2 , through the
coeﬃcient matrices Λ0 and Λ1 . It is important to note that the terms in (1 − 1/γ)
in equations (22) and (23) reflect the eﬀect of intertemporal hedging on optimal
portfolio choice. Thus intertemporal hedging considerations aﬀect both the mean
optimal portfolio allocation to risky assets–through A0 and A1 –and the sensitivity
of the optimal portfolio allocation to changes in the state variables–through A1 .

    Appendix A shows that, given the loglinearization parameter ρ, the coeﬃcient
matrices −Λ0 /(1 − ψ) and −Λ1 /(1 − ψ) are independent of the intertemporal elas-
ticity of substitution ψ. This implies that the optimal portfolio rule is independent
of ψ given ρ. ψ only aﬀects portfolio choice to the extent that it enters into the de-
termination of ρ. This property is a generalization to a model with multiple assets
and state variables of a similar result shown by Campbell and Viceira (1999) in the
context of a univariate model.


3.4        Optimal consumption

Next, we solve for the optimal consumption-wealth ratio. Setting i = p in (12) and
rearranging,
                      Et (∆ct+1 ) = ψ log δ + χp,t + ψ Et (rp,t+1 ),           (24)
where                                µ ¶
                                 1    θ
                        χp,t   =         Vart (∆ct+1 − ψrp,t+1 ) .                (25)
                                 2    ψ

                                              12
This equation relates expected consumption growth to preferences and investment
opportunities. A patient investor with high δ plans more rapid consumption growth.
Similarly, when the return on the portfolio is expected to be higher, the investor
increases planned consumption growth to take advantage of good investment oppor-
tunities. The sensitivity of planned consumption growth to both patience and returns
is measured by the elasticity of intertemporal substitution ψ.

   The term χp,t arises from the precautionary savings motive. Randomness in future
consumption growth, relative to portfolio returns, increases precautionary savings and
lowers current consumption if θ > 0 (a condition satisfied by power utility for which
θ = 1), but reduces precautionary savings and increases current consumption if θ < 0.

   We show in Appendix A that combining equation (24) and the log-linearized
budget constraint (11), we obtain a diﬀerence equation in ct − wt :

   ct − wt = −ρψ log δ − ρχp,t + ρ(1 − ψ) Et (rp,t+1 ) + ρk + ρ Et (ct+1 − wt+1 ),   (26)

where both Et (rp,t+1 ) and χp,t are quadratic functions of the VAR state variables.
Given our conjectured quadratic form for the optimal consumption-wealth ratio, both
sides of this equation are quadratic in the VAR state variables. This confirms our
initial conjecture on the form of the consumption-wealth ratio and gives us a set of
equations that solve for the coeﬃcients of the optimal consumption policy, b0 , B1 and
B2 .

     In a model with a single state variable, as in Campbell and Viceira (1999, 2001),
it is feasible to solve these equations to obtain approximate closed-form solutions for
consumption and portfolio choice given the parameter of loglinearization ρ. A simple
numerical recursion then obtains the value of ρ that is consistent with the derived
consumption rule. In the current model, with multiple state variables, we use a
numerical procedure to solve for consumption and portfolio choice given ρ. This
procedure, which is described in detail in Appendix B, converges much more rapidly
than the usual numerical procedures which approximate the model on a discrete grid.
In our empirical results we emphasize the case ψ = 1, for which the value of ρ is
known to equal the time discount factor δ; however it is straightforward to add a
numerical recursion for ρ when this is needed.




                                           13
3.5    Value function

Substitution of the optimal log consumption-wealth ratio into the expression for the
value function (9) gives
                               µ ¶ 1−ψ 1
                            ψ
                         − 1−ψ  Ct
         Vt = (1 − δ)                                                           (27)
                                Wt
                     ½                                                   ¾
                            ψ                    b0   B01       0 B2
             = exp −            log (1 − δ) +       +     zt + zt     zt
                          1−ψ                   1−ψ 1−ψ           1−ψ
             = exp {B0 + B10 zt + z0t B2 zt } ,
where the definitions of B0 , B1 and B2 are obvious from the second equality.

    Appendix A shows that B1 , and B2 are independent of ψ given ρ. However, B0
does depend on ψ. Appendix A also derives an expression for B0 when ψ = 1. This
derivation uses the fact that Ct /Wt = 1 − δ when ψ = 1, which implies that ρ = δ.
Therefore, the value function (27) has a well defined finite limit in the case ψ = 1,
that obtains by setting ρ = δ in the expressions for B0 , B1 and B2 . Finally, Appendix
A derives an expression for the unconditional mean of the value function, E[Vt ]. We
can use these results to calculate the utility of long-term investors who are oﬀered
alternative menus of assets.



4     An Empirical Application: Stocks, Bonds, and
      Bills

Section 3 provides a general theoretical framework for strategic asset allocation. In
this section, we use the framework to investigate how investors who diﬀer in their
consumption preferences and risk aversion allocate their portfolios among three assets:
stocks, nominal bonds, and nominal Treasury bills. Investment opportunities are
described by a VAR system that includes short-term ex-post real interest rates, excess
stock returns, excess bond returns and variables that have been identified as return
predictors by empirical research: the short-term nominal interest rate, the dividend-
price ratio, and the yield spread between long-term bonds and Treasury bills.

   The short-term nominal interest rate has been used to predict stock and bond
returns by authors such as Fama and Schwert (1977), Campbell (1987), and Glosten,

                                          14
Jagannathan, and Runkle (1993). An alternative approach, suggested by Campbell
(1991) and Hodrick (1992), is to stochastically detrend the short-term rate by sub-
tracting a backwards moving average (usually measured over one year). For two
reasons we do not adopt this alternative here. First, one of our data sets is annual
and does not allow us to measure a one-year moving average of short rates. Second,
we want our model to capture inflation dynamics. If we include both the ex-post real
interest rate and the nominal interest rate in the VAR system, we can easily calculate
inflation by subtracting one from the other. This allows us to separate nominal from
real variables, so that we can extend our model to include a hypothetical inflation-
indexed bond in the menu of assets. We consider this extension in section 5.

   We compute optimal portfolio rules for diﬀerent values of γ, assuming ψ = 1 and
δ = 0.92 in annual terms. This case gives the exact solution of Giovannini and Weil
(1989), where the consumption-wealth ratio is constant and equal to 1 − δ. This
implies that the loglinearization parameter ρ ≡ 1 − exp(E[ct − wt ]) is equal to δ.3

    Section 4.1 describes the quarterly and annual data used in this exercise, and
section 4.2 reports the estimates of the VAR system. The numerical procedure used
to calculate optimal asset allocations is described in detail in Appendix B. Section
4.3 discusses our findings on asset allocation.


4.1     Data description

Our calibration exercise is based on postwar quarterly and long-term annual data
for the US stock market. The quarterly data begin in 1952:2, shortly after the Fed-
Treasury Accord that fundamentally changed the stochastic process for nominal in-
terest rates, and end in 1999:4. We obtain our quarterly data from the Center for
Research in Security Prices (CRSP). We construct the ex post real Treasury bill rate
as the diﬀerence of the log return (or yield) on a 90-day bill and log inflation, and
the excess log stock return as the diﬀerence between the log return on a stock index
and the log return on the 90-day bill. We use the value-weighted return, including
dividends, on the NYSE, NASDAQ and AMEX markets. We construct the excess log
bond return in a similar way, using the 5-year bond return from the US Treasury and
   3
    The choice of ψ = 1 is convenient but not necessary for our results. We have also calculated
optimal portfolios for the case ψ = 0.5 and δ = 0.92, and find very similar results to those reported
in the paper.



                                                 15
Inflation Series (CTI) file in CRSP. The source of the 90-day bill rate is the CRSP
Fama Risk-Free Rate file.

    The nominal yield on Treasury bills is the log yield on a 90-day bill. To calculate
the dividend-price ratio, we first construct the dividend payout series using the value-
weighted return including dividends, and the price index series associated with the
value-weighted return excluding dividends. Following the standard convention in the
literature, we take the dividend series to be the sum of dividend payments over the
past year. The dividend-price ratio is then the log dividend less the log price index.
The yield spread is the diﬀerence between the 5-year zero-coupon bond yield from the
CRSP Fama-Bliss data file (the longest yield available in the file) and the bill rate.

   The annual dataset covers over a century from 1890 to 1998. Its source is the
data used in Grossman and Shiller (1981), updated for the recent period by Campbell
(1999).4 This dataset contains data on prices and dividends on S&P 500 stocks as well
as data on inflation and short-term interest rates. The equity price index is the end-
of-December S&P 500 Index, and the price index is the Producer Price Index. The
short rate is the return on 6-month commercial paper bought in January and rolled
over July. We use this dataset to construct time series of short-term, nominal and
ex-post real interest rates, excess returns on equities, and dividend-yields. Finally, we
obtain data on long-term nominal bonds from the long yield series in Shiller (1989),
which we have updated using the Moody’s AAA corporate bond yield average. We
construct the long bond return from this series using the loglinear approximation
technique described in Chapter 10 of Campbell, Lo and MacKinlay (1997):

                             rn,t+1 ≈ Dn,t yn,t − (Dn,t − 1) yn−1,t+1 ,

where n is bond maturity, the bond yield is written Ynt , the log bond yield yn,t =
log (1 + Yn,t ), and Dn,t is bond duration. We calculate duration at time t as

                                             1 − (1 + Yn,t )−n
                                    Dn,t   ≈                   ,
                                             1 − (1 + Yn,t )−1

and we set n to 20 years. We also approximate yn−1,t+1 by yn,t+1 .
  4
      See the Data Appendix to Campbell (1999), available on the author’s website.




                                                 16
4.2       VAR estimation

Table 1 gives the first and second sample moments of the data. Except for the
dividend-price ratio, the sample statistics are in annualized, percentage units. Mean
excess log returns are adjusted by one-half their variance to account for Jensen’s In-
equality. For the postwar quarterly dataset, Treasury bills oﬀer a low average real
return (a mere 1.53% per year) along with low variability. Stocks have an excess re-
turn of 7.72% per year compared to 1.08% for the 5-year bond. Although volatility is
much higher for stocks than for bonds (16.23% vs. 5.63%), the Sharpe ratio is almost
three and a half times as high for stocks as for bonds. The average Treasury bill rate
and yield spread are 5.50% and 0.95%, respectively. Figure 2 plots the history of the
variables included in the quarterly VAR.

    Covering a century of data, the annual dataset gives a diﬀerent description of the
relative performance of each asset. The real return on short-term nominal debt is quite
volatile, due to greater volatility in both real interest rates and inflation before World
War II. Stocks oﬀer a slightly lower excess return, and yet a higher standard deviation,
than the postwar quarterly data. The Depression period is largely responsible for this
result. The long-term bond also performs rather poorly, giving a Sharpe ratio of only
0.10 versus a Sharpe ratio of 0.37 for stocks. The bill rate has a lower mean in the
annual dataset, but the yield spread has a higher mean. Both bill rates and yield
spreads have higher standard deviations in the annual dataset.

    Table 2 reports the estimation results for the VAR system in the quarterly dataset
(Panel A) and the annual dataset (Panel B). The top section of each panel reports
coeﬃcient estimates (with t-statistics in parentheses) and the R2 statistic (with the
p-value of the F test of joint significance in parentheses) for each equation in the
system.5 The bottom section of each panel shows the covariance structure of the
innovations in VAR system. The entries above the main diagonal are correlation
statistics, and the entries on the main diagonal are standard deviations multiplied by
100. All variables in the VAR are measured in natural units, so standard deviations
are per quarter in panel A and per year in panel B.

       The first row of each panel corresponds to the real bill rate equation. The lagged
   5
    We estimate the VAR imposing the restriction that the unconditional means of the variables
implied by the VAR coeﬃcient estimates equal their full-sample arithmetic counterparts. Standard,
unconstrained least-squares fits exactly the mean of the variables in the VAR excluding the first
observation. We use constrained least-squares to ensure that we fit the full-sample means.


                                               17
real bill rate and the lagged nominal bill rate have positive coeﬃcients and t-statistics
above 2 in both sample periods. The yield spread also has a positive coeﬃcient and a
t-statistic above 2 in the quarterly data. The rest of the variables are not significant
in predicting real bill rates one period ahead.

   The second row corresponds to the equation for the excess stock return. Predicting
excess stock returns is diﬃcult: This equation has the lowest R2 in both the quarterly
and the annual sample–8.6% and 5.0%, respectively. The dividend-price ratio, with
a positive coeﬃcient, is the only variable with a t-statistic above 2 in both samples.
The coeﬃcient on the lagged nominal short-term interest rate is also significant in
the quarterly sample, and it has a negative sign in both samples. The yield spread
has positive coeﬃcients in both samples, but they are not statistically significant.

   The third row is the equation for the excess bond return. In the quarterly postwar
data, excess stock returns and yield spreads help predict future excess bond returns.
In the long annual dataset, real Treasury bill rates also help predict future excess
bond returns. The fit of the equation in the annual sample, with an R2 of 39%, is
four times as large as the fit in the quarterly sample, where the R2 is only 9.6%. In
part, this diﬀerence in results may reflect approximation error in our procedure for
constructing annual bond returns; the possibility of such error should be kept in mind
when interpreting our annual results.

    The last three rows report the estimation results for the remaining state variables,
each of which are fairly well described by a univariate AR(1) process. The nominal
bill rate in the fourth row is predicted by the lagged nominal yield, whose coeﬃcient is
above 0.9 in both samples, implying extremely persistent dynamics. The log dividend-
price ratio in the fifth row also has persistent dynamics; the lagged dividend-price ratio
has a coeﬃcient of 0.96 in the quarterly data and 0.84 in the annual data. The yield
spread in the sixth row also seems to follow an AR(1) process, but is considerably
less persistent than the other variables, especially in the quarterly sample.

    The bottom section of each panel describes the covariance structure of the innova-
tions in the VAR system. Unexpected log excess stock returns are highly negatively
correlated with shocks to the log dividend-price ratio in both samples. This result is
consistent with previous empirical results in Campbell (1991), Campbell and Viceira
(1999), Stambaugh (1999) and others. Unexpected log excess bond returns are neg-
atively correlated with shocks to the nominal bill rate, but positively correlated with
the yield spread. This positive correlation is about 20% in the quarterly sample, and
26% in the annual sample.

                                           18
    The signs of these correlations help to explain the contrasting results of recent
studies that apply Monte Carlo analysis to judge the statistical evidence for pre-
dictability in excess stock and bond returns. Stock-market studies typically find
that asymptotic tests overstate the evidence for predictability of excess stock returns
(Hodrick 1992, Goetzmann and Jorion 1993, Nelson and Kim 1993). Bond-market
studies, on the other hand, find that asymptotic procedures are actually conservative
and understate the evidence for predictability of excess bond returns (Bekaert, Ho-
drick, and Marshall 1997). The reason for the discrepancy is that the evidence for
stock market predictability comes from positive regression coeﬃcients of stock returns
on the dividend-price ratio, while the evidence for bond market predictability comes
from positive regression coeﬃcients of bond returns on the yield spread. Stambaugh
(1999) shows that the small-sample bias in such regressions has the opposite sign
to the sign of the correlation between innovations in returns and innovations in the
predictive variable. In the stock market the log dividend-price ratio is negatively
correlated with returns, leading to a positive small-sample bias which helps to ex-
plain some apparent predictability; in the bond market, on the other hand, the yield
spread is positively correlated with returns, leading to a negative small-sample bias
which cannot explain the positive regression coeﬃcient found in the data.

    Although finite-sample bias may well have some eﬀect on the coeﬃcients reported
in Table 2, bias corrections are complex in multivariate systems and we do not attempt
any corrections here. Instead we take the estimated VAR coeﬃcients as given, and
known by investors, and explore their implications for optimal long-term portfolios.


4.3    Strategic allocations to stocks, bonds, and bills

We have shown in section 3.3 that the optimal portfolio rule is linear in the vector
of state variables. Thus the optimal portfolio allocation to stocks, bonds and bills
changes over time. One way to characterize this rule is to examine its mean and
volatility. To analyze level eﬀects we compute the mean allocation to each asset as
well as the mean hedging portfolio demand for diﬀerent specifications of the vector of
state variables. Specifically, we estimate a series of restricted VAR systems, in which
the number of explanatory variables increases sequentially, and use them to calculate
mean optimal portfolios for ψ = 1, δ = 0.92 at an annual frequency, and γ = 1, 2, 5
or 20.

   The first VAR system only has a constant term in each regression, corresponding to

                                          19
the case in which risk premia are constant and realized returns on all assets, including
the short-term real interest rate, are i.i.d. The second system includes an intercept
term, the ex-post real bill rate and log excess returns on stocks and bonds. We then
add sequentially the nominal bill rate, the dividend yield and the yield spread. Thus
we estimate five VAR systems in total.

    Table 3 reports the results of this experiment for values of the coeﬃcient of relative
risk aversion γ equal to 1, 2, 5 and 20, with the intertemporal elasticity of substitution
ψ = 1. Panel A considers the quarterly dataset, while Panel B considers the annual
dataset. The entries in each column are mean portfolio demands in percentage points
when the explanatory variables in the VAR system include the state variable in the
column heading and those to the left of it. For instance, the “constant” column reports
mean portfolio allocations when the explanatory variables include only a constant
term, that is, when investment opportunities are constant. The right-hand “spread”
column gives the case where all state variables are included in the VAR.

    Table 3 reports results only for selected values of risk aversion, but we have also
computed portfolio allocations for a continuum of values of risk aversion; Figure 3
plots these allocations and their myopic component using the quarterly VAR with all
state variables included. In this figure the horizontal axis shows risk tolerance 1/γ
rather than risk aversion γ, both in order to display the behavior of highly conservative
investors more compactly, and because myopic portfolio demands are linear in risk
tolerance. Infinitely conservative investors with 1/γ = 0 are plotted at the right edge
of the figure, so that as the eye moves from left to right we see the eﬀects of increasing
risk aversion on asset allocation.

    Table 3 enables us to analyze two eﬀects on the level of portfolio demands. By
comparing numbers within any column, we can study how total asset allocation and
intertemporal hedging demand vary with risk aversion. By comparing numbers within
any row, we can examine the incremental eﬀects of the state variables on asset al-
location. Here we explore the first topic and leave the second for the next section.
To simplify the discussion we focus only on the allocations implied by the full VAR,
shown in the right-hand column of the table.

    The first set of numbers in Table 3 reports the mean portfolio allocation to stocks,
bonds and bills of a logarithmic investor. For this investor, the optimal portfolio rule
is purely myopic. Equation (20) evaluated at γ = 1 shows that asset allocation
depends only on the inverse of the variance-covariance matrix of unexpected excess
returns and the mean excess return on stocks and bonds. This myopic allocation

                                           20
is long in stocks and bonds in both the quarterly dataset and the annual dataset.
However, the ratio of stocks to bonds is about 1.8 in the quarterly dataset, and close
to one in the annual dataset. The preference for stocks in the quarterly dataset is
primarily due to the estimated large positive correlation between unexpected excess
returns on stocks and bonds in the quarterly dataset. This shifts the optimal myopic
allocation towards stocks–the asset with the largest Sharpe ratio. In the annual
dataset the correlation between excess bond and stock returns is very low, implying
that the optimal portfolio allocation to one asset is essentially independent of the
optimal allocation to the other.

    Conservative investors, with risk aversion γ > 1, have an intertemporal hedging
demand for stocks. This demand is most easily understood by looking at Figure 3,
which is based on the quarterly dataset. In Figure 3, the total demand for stocks
is a concave function of risk tolerance 1/γ, while the myopic portfolio demand is a
linear function of 1/γ.6 Moreover, total stock demand is always larger than myopic
portfolio demand for all 1/γ < 1. This implies that intertemporal hedging demand
is a positive, hump-shaped function of 1/γ. We can verify this by looking at the
hedging demands reported in Table 3. In both datasets, the hedging demand for
stocks is always positive and exhibits a hump-shaped pattern as a function of 1/γ.

    These patterns reflect the time-variation in expected stock returns, which is cap-
tured in our VAR model by the predictability of stock returns from the dividend-price
ratio. Because stocks have a large positive Sharpe ratio, investors are normally long
in the stock market. Hence an increase in expected stock returns represents an
improvement in the investment opportunity set. Our VAR model implies that ex-
pected stock returns increase when the dividend-price ratio increases; since stocks
are strongly negatively correlated with the dividend-price ratio, this means that poor
stock returns are correlated with an improvement in future investment opportunities.
Thus stocks can be used to hedge the variation in their own future returns, and this
increases the demand for stocks by conservative investors. The eﬀect is strongest
at intermediate levels of risk aversion, because investors with γ = 1 do not wish to
hedge intertemporally, and extremely conservative investors have little interest in the
risky investment opportunities available in the stock market.
    6
      We can see this formally by looking at equation (20). This equation implies that myopic demand
is a linear function of 1/γ with intercept given by −Σ−1xx σ 1x . The intercept is zero only when shocks
to the real interest rate on nominal Treasury bills are uncorrelated with excess returns on all other
assets, that is, when σ1x is zero.




                                                  21
    These results are comparable to those reported by Campbell and Viceira (2000)
for a model with a single risky asset (stocks) and a single state variable (the dividend-
price ratio) over a slightly shorter postwar sample period.7 Although there is slightly
weaker predictability of stock returns in our longer postwar sample, which tends to
reduce intertemporal hedging demand, there is also more persistence in the dividend-
price ratio, which tends to increase intertemporal hedging demand. These two eﬀects
roughly cancel.

   Intertemporal hedging demands are just as striking for nominal bonds. Figure
3 and Table 3 show that the intertemporal hedging demand for nominal bonds is U-
shaped in risk aversion in the quarterly dataset. It is strongly negative at intermediate
coeﬃcients of risk aversion, but turns positive for extremely conservative investors.
This eﬀect is large enough to make the total demand for nominal bonds negative for
investors with intermediate risk aversion.

    This pattern results from several features of bond returns in our quarterly VAR
model. First, there is a positive correlation between unexpected excess stock returns
and nominal bond returns in the quarterly dataset. Thus investors can oﬀset the
short-term risk implied by their large positive intertemporal hedging demand for
stocks by taking short positions in long-term nominal bonds. This negative eﬀect
on bond demand is largest at intermediate levels of risk aversion because the positive
intertemporal hedging demand for stocks is largest at these levels of risk aversion.

    Second, the short-term nominal interest rate forecasts real interest rates positively,
but excess stock returns negatively in the quarterly dataset. A high real interest rate
is a good investment opportunity, but a low excess stock return is a poor invest-
ment opportunity. Thus there are opposing eﬀects of short-term interest rates on the
investment opportunity set. An investor with intermediate risk aversion is most inter-
ested in the opportunities available in the stock market, and will consider an increase
in the short rate to be a deterioration in investment opportunities, but an extremely
conservative investor is most interested in real interest rates and will consider an in-
crease in the short nominal rate to be an improvement in investment opportunities.
Since nominal bond returns are highly negatively correlated with movements in the
short nominal interest rate, this generates negative intertemporal hedging demand by
investors with intermediate risk aversion but positive intertemporal hedging demand
  7
    Campbell and Viceira (2000) correct an estimation error in Campbell and Viceira (1999) that
understated the predictability of postwar quarterly stock returns and the absolute value of the
correlation between innovations to stock returns and dividend yields.



                                              22
by extremely conservative investors.

    Third, the yield spread forecasts real interest rates and excess bond returns pos-
itively in the quarterly dataset; thus an increase in the yield spread represents an
improvement in investment opportunities. Since innovations in the yield spread are
positively correlated with unexpected bond returns, this reduces the intertemporal
hedging demand for long-term bonds. We can see the importance of this eﬀect in
Table 3 by noting the negative shift in average bond demand that occurs when the
yield spread is included in the VAR system.

    Panel B of Table 3 shows that the intertemporal hedging demand for long-term
nominal bonds is always positive in the annual dataset. There are several reasons
for this diﬀerence in results. Bond and stock returns are uncorrelated rather than
positively correlated in the annual data, so the positive intertemporal hedging demand
for stocks does not reduce the demand for bonds. The nominal interest rate still
predicts the real interest rate positively but does not predict excess stock returns
negatively in the annual data, so an increase in the interest rate unambiguously
represents an improvement in investment opportunities that can be hedged by holding
bonds. Finally, the yield spread forecasts low rather than high real interest rates in
the annual data.8

    The contrast in results between the postwar quarterly and long-term annual data
can also be understood by noting that real interest rate variation is more important
in the annual dataset. Row 2 of Table 1 shows that the standard deviation of ex post
real interest rates is almost six times higher in the annual dataset, while Table 2 shows
that the predictability of real interest rates is only modestly lower, implying that ex
ante real interest rates are much more variable in the long-term annual data. This
implies that a strategy of rolling over Treasury bills is highly risky at long horizons
because bills must be reinvested at unknown future real interest rates. This risk can
be hedged using long-term bonds, as emphasized by Campbell and Viceira (2001). In
the postwar data real interest rate variation is less important relative to other sources
of risk.
   8
    The yield spread still predicts excess bond returns positively in the annual data. By itself this
would generate negative intertemporal hedging demand for bonds. A univariate model, not shown
here to save space, where short-term real interest rates are constant and yield spreads forecast only
excess bond returns, shows a negative intertemporal hedging demand for bonds. This negative
demand is a direct result of the positive regression coeﬃcient of future bond excess returns on yield
spreads, and the positive correlation between shocks to yield spreads and unexpected bond excess
returns.


                                                 23
   We turn now to the analysis of the variability of asset demands. From equation
(20), we can express the optimal portfolio rule as

                                        αi,t = αm      h
                                                i,t + αi,t ,                                  (28)

where i denotes stocks or bonds, m denotes myopic and h denotes hedging. Thus,
                                ¡ ¢        ¡ h¢         ¡ m h¢
               Var (αi,t ) = Var αm
                                  i,t + Var αi,t + 2 Cov αi,t , αi,t .     (29)


    Table 4 reports this variance decomposition for the case γ = 5 and ψ = 1.
Panel A refers to the quarterly sample, and panel¡ B to¢ the ¡annual
                                                                  ¢ sample.¡ The   top¢
rows in each panel report the contribution of Var αi,t , Var αi,t and Cov αi,t , αhi,t
                                                    m           h               m

to the total variance of the demand for each asset. The variance of the hedging
component explains at most 22% of the total variation in stock and bond demand
in the quarterly dataset, and 14% in the annual dataset. Thus hedging portfolio
demand is much more stable than total portfolio demand. Kim and Omberg (1996)
and Campbell and Viceira (1999) give an intuitive explanation for this result, showing
that hedging demand can change sign only in extreme circumstances where investors
have replaced their normal long positions with short positions in risky assets. To a
first approximation, intertemporal hedging shifts the intercept of risky asset demand
rather than the slope with respect to state variables; put another way, long-term
investors should “time the market” just as aggressively as short-term investors.

    Figure 4 illustrates the result graphically. The figure plots time series of total port-
folio allocations based on the quarterly dataset for γ = 5, along with the myopic and
hedging components of total portfolio demand. For all three assets, hedging demands
are considerably less volatile than myopic demands. The allocation to long-term
nominal bonds has the greatest short-term volatility, despite the low predictability in
bond excess returns. This can be understood by noting that the variability of myopic
allocations depends positively on the predictability of returns, but negatively on their
unpredictable volatility, which is relatively low for bonds.9
   9
    In the case with only a single risky asset, the variability of the optimal myopic allocation is
proportional to R2 /(σ2 (1 − R2 )), where R2 is the R-squared of the predictive regression for the
excess return on the asset and σ2 is the variance of the unexpected excess return. Thus we should
expect variable asset demand when this variance is low, even if there is only a modest degree of
predictability.




                                                24
4.4    Which state variables matter?

The analysis so far has focused on the shape of asset demands and their hedging com-
ponents. It is equally important to understand the eﬀects of various state variables
on the level and variability of asset demands. To analyze the level eﬀects of state
variables, we can compare average portfolio demands across rows in Table 3.

    Panel A shows that there are important changes in the magnitude of hedging
demands as we consider new state variables in the investor information set. In the
case of stocks, hedging demand is very small when only lagged Treasury bill rates
(either real or nominal) and excess returns on bonds and stocks are included in the
VAR. It increases dramatically when the dividend-price ratio is introduced into the
VAR as a regressor. The inclusion of the yield spread has a negligible eﬀect on the
hedging demand for stocks.

    The correlation structure shown in Table 2 helps explain these results. In the full
annual VAR system, there is a strong negative correlation between unexpected excess
returns on stocks and shocks to the dividend-price ratio, while the magnitude of all
other correlations in the table is much smaller. These correlations are not sensitive
to the inclusion or exclusion of state variables in the VAR. The presence of the
dividend-price ratio in the investor information set increases the hedging demand for
stocks because negative shocks to the dividend-price ratio, which drive down expected
returns on stocks, tend to coincide with positive realized excess returns on stocks.
This negative correlation is even stronger in the quarterly dataset, which makes the
pattern for hedging demands more pronounced in this dataset.

     The case of bonds is more complex, particularly in the quarterly dataset. As we
have noted in section 4.3, several diﬀerent factors influence the demand for nominal
bonds. The positive correlation of bond and stock returns in the quarterly dataset
means that positive hedging demand for stocks tends to produce negative hedging
demand for bonds in that dataset. In the annual dataset, by contrast, the correlation
of bond and stock returns is very small, so that positive hedging demand for stocks has
little eﬀect on the hedging demand for bonds. The VAR system also includes the ex-
post real bill rate, the nominal bill rate and the yield spread; these variables capture
the complex dynamics of real interest rates, inflation and excess bond returns. In
the quarterly dataset, these variables tend to create a negative intertemporal hedging
demand for bonds, while in the annual dataset they create a positive hedging demand
for bonds.


                                          25
    We can analyze the importance of each state variable for the variability of asset
demands by looking at Table 4. The lower section of Table 4 report the contribution
of each state variable to total asset demand variation Var (αi,t ). For each block,
the diagonal elements are the own variance components and the lower oﬀ-diagonal
elements are the covariance components, normalized to sum to 100%. The numbers
on the main diagonals indicate that in both samples the variance of the dividend-price
ratio is the dominant source of movements in stock demand, explaining about 84%
of the variance of stock demand. The dividend-price ratio explains almost 28% of
the variability of bond demand in the annual dataset, but less than 2% in the annual
dataset. The nominal bill rate and the yield spread are the most important variables
driving the variability of bond demand in the quarterly dataset, while the yield spread
alone is of dominant importance for bond demand in the annual dataset.

    The numbers oﬀ the main diagonals in Table 4 indicate that shifts in asset demands
caused by innovations of some state variables are not independent of each other. The
covariance terms are particularly important in the quarterly dataset, where shifts in
stock and bond demands caused by innovations to the nominal bill rate are partially
oﬀset by shifts of opposite sign caused by contemporaneous shocks to the dividend-
price ratio and the yield spread. These oﬀsets reduce the overall variability of asset
demands. In the annual dataset, covariances are much less important.

   In summary, our results indicate that the most important state variable deter-
mining the mean and volatility of stock demand is the dividend yield, while variables
that forecast real interest rates, inflation and excess bond returns determine the mean
and volatility of bond demand. Aït-Sahalia and Brandt (2001) also find that these
variables are important determinants of optimal portfolio choice.




                                          26
5      Strategic Asset Allocation with Inflation-Indexed
       Bonds

We have found that the intertemporal hedging demand for long-term bonds is neg-
ative for investors with intermediate levels of risk aversion in the quarterly postwar
sample. This finding contrasts with conventional investment advice that conservative
long-term investors should hold bonds to obtain a stable stream of income, disregard-
ing short-run fluctuations in capital value. There are two possible reasons for the
discrepancy between our results and conventional wisdom. First, the conventional
wisdom disregards the distinction between nominal and inflation-indexed bonds. In
the presence of significant inflation risk, long-term nominal bonds are not suitable
assets for conservative long-term investors. Campbell and Viceira (2001) use a term
structure model with time-varying real interest rates and inflation rates, but constant
risk premia, and find that inflation uncertainty drastically reduces the intertempo-
ral hedging demand for long-term nominal bonds in the postwar period.10 Second,
our model has a general dynamic structure in which either stocks or bonds might
be good hedges for predictable variation in stock and bond returns. Conventional
investment advice may be based on the presumption that bonds are the best hedges
for predictable variation in returns on all risky assets; the model of Campbell and
Viceira (2001) explicitly assumes this.

    To determine which of these explanations is correct, we now extend our model to
include an inflation-indexed perpetuity in the menu of available assets. This requires
us to construct hypothetical real bond returns, because inflation-indexed bonds were
first issued by the US Treasury in 1997 and thus very little direct evidence is available
about their returns. The VAR framework is well suited for this purpose, provided that
we make the assumption that expected real returns on real bonds of all maturities and
the expected real return on short-term nominal bills diﬀer only by a constant. This
amounts to assuming that the inflation risk premium on nominal bills is constant.
We now briefly describe the construction procedure, which is adapted from the work
of Campbell and Shiller (1996). Appendix C provides full details.

   We first use the estimates of the coeﬃcient matrices in the VAR to construct
returns on hypothetical real perpetuities according to the procedure outlined in Ap-
  10
     Campbell and Viceira also look at recent data since 1983, and find much smaller inflation
uncertainty. We do not examine this period here as our VAR system is not suﬃciently parsimonious
for such a short sample period.


                                              27
pendix C. The procedure assumes a zero inflation risk premium. As noted in Campbell
and Shiller (1996), if the inflation risk premium is not zero but constant, the procedure
will miss the average level of the yield curve, but will still capture the dynamics of the
curve. This is important, because intertemporal hedging demand depends sensitively
on the dynamics of asset returns. With the correct dynamics in hand, we set the
mean excess return of the real perpetuity to zero. We deliberately choose this value
to be conservative about the appeal of this bond to a myopic investor.11 Finally, we
include the imputed excess return on real perpetuities in two new VAR systems. In
the first VAR we replace the excess return on nominal bonds with the excess return
on real perpetuities, while in the second system we include both variables. Appendix
D shows the estimation results.

    Table 5 reports the resulting mean asset demands for values of γ equal to 1, 2,
5, 20 and 2000 and ψ = 1 in the quarterly dataset. We include the case γ = 2000
because we want to study asset demand for infinitely risk averse investors, which
we proxy using this large value of γ. We also report mean asset allocations under
constant investment opportunities. Appendix D shows results for the annual dataset.
Figures 5 and 6 plot the allocations implied by the full quarterly VAR for a continuum
of values of γ.

    We start by looking at the optimal portfolio of a myopic logarithmic investor in
Table 5. This investor should hold long positions in both stocks and the inflation-
indexed perpetuity, and a short position in long-term nominal bonds when these assets
are available. The positive holdings of stocks result from the positive expected excess
return on stocks. The positive holdings of the real perpetuity result from a large
negative correlation (shown in Appendix D) between excess returns on stocks and on
the real perpetuity, which makes this asset good to hedge long positions in stocks.
The myopic demand for long-term nominal bonds is negative because there is a large
positive correlation between nominal bond returns and stock returns, and between
nominal bond returns and real consol returns. The first correlation makes it optimal
to use a short position in nominal bonds to oﬀset a long position in stocks.. The
second correlation has the eﬀect of strengthening the long and short positions on the
  11
    In our model with multiple risky assets the assumption of a zero risk premium on the real
perpetuity does not necessarily imply a zero mean myopic allocation to this bond. The myopic mean
allocation can diﬀer from zero if unexpected excess returns on the real perpetuity are correlated with
unexpected excess returns on other assets. We have also considered a positive mean excess return
on the perpetuity. In particular, we have considered a mean excess return such that the Sharpe
ratio of the real perpetuity is equal to the Sharpe ratio of nominal bonds. This choice increases the
myopic demand for the perpetuity but has only modest eﬀects on intertemporal hedging demands.


                                                 28
real perpetuity and nominal bonds determined by the correlations of these assets with
stock returns. By contrast, the correlation structure of excess returns in the annual
sample (shown in Appendix D) is markedly diﬀerent: The excess return on stocks
is negatively correlated with the excess return on the real perpetuity, and almost
uncorrelated with the excess return on nominal bonds, while the excess returns on
the real perpetuity and nominal bonds are still positively correlated. This correlation
structure results in long positions in stocks and the nominal bond, and a short position
in the real perpetuity.

    We can learn about the myopic allocations of non-logarithmic investors by looking
at the allocations under constant investment opportunities shown in the “constant”
column in Table 5. Investors with γ > 1 have a myopic demand for real perpetuities
that is larger than 1/γ times the optimal allocation of the logarithmic investor. This
is driven by the fact that the short-term bill is risky in real terms, so the portfolio
with the smallest short-term risk is a combination of the short-term bill and the real
perpetuity, with a short position in nominal bonds when they are available. The
myopic portfolio approaches this “minimum short-term variance” portfolio as risk
aversion γ increases.12

    The “full VAR” column in Table 5 shows total portfolio demands with time-
varying investment opportunities. The total portfolio demand for the real perpetuity
is increasing in risk aversion, approaching 100% of the portfolio as the investor be-
comes infinitely conservative. By contrast, the total portfolio demand for stocks, the
nominal bill and the nominal bond are decreasing in γ, approaching 0% as the in-
vestor becomes infinitely conservative. Thus inflation-indexed bonds drive out cash
from the portfolios of conservative investors. In their model with time-varying in-
terest rates but constant risk premia, Campbell and Viceira (2001) show that an
infinitely risk-averse long-horizon investor with zero elasticity of intertemporal sub-
stitution would choose to be fully invested in a real perpetuity.13 Table 5 shows that
this result extends to a world in which both interest rates and expected excess returns
  12
     Equation (20) shows that the myopic demand of non-logarithmic investors is not proportional
to 1/γ; instead it is a linear function of 1/γ whose intercept depends on the covariance between
shocks to the real interest rate on nominal bills and unexpected excess returns on all other assets
(σ1x ). Appendix D shows that the correlation between shocks to the real interest rate on nominal
bills and unexpected excess returns on the real consol bond is negative and large (about −46% in
the quarterly dataset, and −85% in the annual dataset), which in turn translates into a substantial,
positive intercept for the real perpetuity.
  13
     Wachter (2000) has extended this result to more general models with complete markets. See
also Brennan and Xia (2001).


                                                29
are time-varying.14

    In this model the intertemporal hedging demand for long-term nominal bonds
is negative for all levels of risk aversion; it does not turn positive for extremely
conservative investors as in the model where only nominal bonds are available. We
have noted that the dynamic properties of bond returns imply a multiplicity of hedging
roles for these assets. The presence of inflation-indexed bonds in the menu of assets
allows investors to use long positions in inflation-indexed bonds to hedge real interest
rate risk, and short positions in nominal bonds to hedge their long positions in stocks
and the risk of time-variation in expected excess bond returns.


5.1     The utility benefits of inflation-indexation

Another way to judge the importance of an asset class is to compare the utility of an
investor who has access to that asset class, with the utility of an investor who does
not. In Table 6 we carry out this comparison. The table shows the mean value
function for values of γ equal to 1, 2, 5, 20 and 2000 and ψ = 1 in the quarterly
dataset. The value function is normalized so that a doubling from one asset menu
to another implies that an investor would require twice as much wealth to obtain
the same utility with the worse asset menu than with the better one. We report
results for a base case in which only nominal bills and stocks are available, and for
the three asset menus we have discussed earlier in the paper: nominal bills, long-term
nominal bonds, and stocks; nominal bills, real perpetuities, and stocks; and nominal
bills, long-term nominal bonds, real perpetuities, and stocks. To make these asset
menus fully comparable, we compute value functions for all of them based on the
same VAR, which includes the real perpetuity as an additional state variable. Thus
the value function numbers for bills, nominal bonds, and stocks do not correspond
exactly to the mean asset allocations reported in Table 3–although the numbers are
extremely close. Appendix D shows results for the annual dataset.

   A comparison of the top panel of Table 6, in which no long-term bonds are avail-
able, with the lower panels shows that long-term bonds generate large welfare gains
  14
    Note that the allocation to the real consol bond for an investor with an extremely large coeﬃcient
of relative risk aversion does not equal 100% exactly. This is due primarily to the fact that the
investor we consider in Table 5 has unit, not zero, elasticity of intertemporal substitution. There is
also a small eﬀect caused by the fact that the VAR system in Table 5 does not exactly capture the
information set we used to construct the long-term real bond yield.


                                                 30
for all investors. Aggressive investors gain by having access to risky nominal bonds
with positive expected excess returns, and by the ability to use bonds to hedge long
positions in stocks. Conservative investors gain by having access to long-term in-
struments that hedge the risk of variation in real interest rates. A comparison of
the second panel of Table 6 with the bottom panel shows that the addition of real
perpetuities to an asset menu that already includes nominal bonds also creates large
gains for all investors by improving static and intertemporal hedging opportunities.
A comparison of the second panel of Table 6 with the third panel shows that ex-
tremely conservative investors would prefer to have real perpetuities available instead
of nominal bonds; however aggressive and moderately conservative investors prefer to
be able to invest in nominal bonds because of the risk premium they oﬀer and their
ability to hedge stock positions. In interpreting this result, it is important to recall
that we have assumed that real perpetuities oﬀer no risk premium. Also, results
are somewhat more favorable for real perpetuities in the annual dataset, where real
interest rate risk is more important. In that dataset even moderately conservative
investors prefer to have real perpetuities instead of nominal bonds in the asset menu.



6     Conclusion

This paper has explored the implications for long-term investors of the empirical ev-
idence on the predictability of asset returns. Dividend yields, interest rates, yield
spreads, inflation, and other variables that predict asset returns in previous empir-
ical research have substantial eﬀects on optimal portfolio allocations among bills,
stocks, and nominal and inflation-indexed bonds. These eﬀects are strategic, work-
ing through intertemporal hedging demands, rather than merely tactical eﬀects on
myopic optimal portfolios.

    Strategic eﬀects on asset demands arise because shocks to the forecasting variables
are correlated with the unexpected returns on stocks and bonds. The correlation
is strongest for the dividend-price ratio, and thus we find that this variable is the
most important determinant of both the level and the variability of optimal portfolio
demands. Predictability of stock returns from the dividend-price ratio tilts the
optimal portfolio holdings of moderately conservative investors towards stocks and
away from bonds and cash.

    We find that the intertemporal hedging demand for long-term nominal bonds is

                                          31
negative for intermediate levels of risk aversion in postwar quarterly data, and positive
in long-term annual data covering the whole 20th Century. These contrasting results
reflect the importance of real interest rate risk in each period. In the annual dataset
real interest rates are much more variable than in the quarterly postwar dataset,
thus increasing the desire of conservative investors to use bonds to hedge real interest
rate risk. Also, nominal bonds have been positively correlated with stocks in the
postwar period, encouraging investors to use short bond positions to hedge long stock
positions; this correlation is much weaker in the long-term annual dataset. When we
add inflation-indexed bonds to the asset menu, we find that conservative investors use
these assets to hedge real interest rate risk; extremely conservative investors should
hold most of their wealth in inflation-indexed bonds when these assets are available.

    Our research has several limitations that should be kept in mind when interpreting
the results. First, we consider a long-term investor who has financial wealth but no
labor income. We hope to remedy this serious omission in future work by extending
the approach of Viceira (2001). Second, we do not impose borrowing or short-sales
constraints; to do so would take us outside the tractable linear-quadratic approximate
framework and would require a fully numerical solution method of the sort used by
Brennan, Schwartz, and Lagnado (1997, 1999) and Lynch (2001). Third, our solu-
tions are approximate for investors with elasticity of intertemporal substitution not
equal to one. Campbell, Cocco, Gomes, Maenhout, and Viceira (1998) have checked
the accuracy of the approximation in the simpler model of Campbell and Viceira
(1999) with only one risky asset and one state variable, and have explored the eﬀects
of portfolio constraints in that context, but further work is needed within the richer
dynamic framework used here. Fourth, we ignore the diﬀerential tax treatment of in-
terest or dividend income and capital gains. Dammon, Spatt, and Zhang (2001) have
recently argued that tax eﬀects can be particularly important for long-term investors.
Fifth, we assume that a VAR system, estimated without corrections for small-sample
biases and without the use of Bayesian priors, is a reasonable description of the dy-
namic behavior of stock and bond returns. Finally, we assume that investors know
all the parameters of the model. We have found that these parameters, including not
only the means and covariances of asset returns but also the parameters governing
the dynamics of asset returns and state variables, can have enormous eﬀects on opti-
mal portfolio demands. Given this, it is not surprising that parameter uncertainty
and learning can have a large eﬀect on optimal long-term investment strategies as
shown by Barberis (2000), Brennan (1998), Xia (2001), and others. A challenging
task for future research will be to integrate all these eﬀects into a single empirically
implementable framework.

                                           32
7   References
Aït-Sahalia, Yacine and Michael Brandt, 2001, “Variable Selection for Portfolio
    Choice”, Journal of Finance 56, 1297—1351.

Balduzzi, Perluigi and Anthony Lynch, 1999, “Transaction Costs and Predictability:
    Some Utility Cost Calculations”, Journal of Financial Economics 52, 47—78.

Barberis, Nicholas C., 2000, “Investing for the Long Run When Returns Are Pre-
    dictable”, Journal of Finance 55, 225—264.

Bekaert, Geert, Robert J. Hodrick, and David A. Marshall, 1997, “On Biases in
    Tests of the Expectations Hypothesis of the Term Structure of Interest Rates”,
    Journal of Financial Economics 44, 309—348.

Brandt, Michael, 1999, “Estimating Portfolio and Consumption Choice: A Condi-
    tional Euler Equations Approach”, Journal of Finance 54, 1609—1645.

Brennan, Michael J., 1998, “The Role of Learning in Dynamic Portfolio Decisions”,
    European Finance Review 1, 295—306.

Brennan, Michael J., Eduardo S. Schwartz, and Ronald Lagnado, 1997, “Strategic
    Asset Allocation”, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 21, 1377—1403.

Brennan, Michael J., Eduardo S. Schwartz, and Ronald Lagnado, 1999, “The Use of
    Treasury Bill Futures in Strategic Asset Allocation Programs”, in William T.
    Ziemba and John M. Mulvey eds. World Wide Asset and Liability Modeling,
    Cambridge University Press, 205—228.

Brennan, Michael J. and Y. Xia, 2001, “Dynamic Asset Allocation Under Inflation”,
    forthcoming Journal of Finance.

Campbell, John Y., 1987, “Stock Returns and the Term Structure”, Journal of
   Financial Economics 18, 373—399.

Campbell, John Y., 1991, “A Variance Decomposition for Stock Returns”, Economic
   Journal 101, 157—179.

Campbell, John Y., 1993, “Intertemporal Asset Pricing without Consumption Data”,
   American Economic Review 83, 487—512.


                                       33
Campbell, John Y., 1996, “Understanding Risk and Return”, Journal of Political
   Economy 104, 298—345.
Campbell, John Y., 1999, “Asset Prices, Consumption, and the Business Cycle”, in
   John Taylor and Michael Woodford eds. Handbook of Macroeconomics, North-
   Holland, Amsterdam.
Campbell, John Y., Joao Cocco, Francisco Gomes, Pascal Maenhout, and Luis Vi-
   ceira, 2001, “Stock Market Mean Reversion and the Optimal Equity Allocation
   of a Long-Lived Investor”, forthcoming European Finance Review.
Campbell, John Y., Andrew W. Lo and A. Craig MacKinlay, 1997, The Econometrics
   of Financial Markets, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Campbell, John Y. and Hyeng Keun Koo, 1997, “A Comparison of Numerical and
   Analytical Approximate Solutions to an Intertemporal Consumption Choice
   Problem”, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 21, 273—295.
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, 1988, “The Dividend-Price Ratio and
   Expectations of Future Dividends and Discount Factors”, Review of Financial
   Studies 1, 195—228.
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, 1991, “Yield Spreads and Interest Rates:
   A Bird’s Eye View”, Review of Economic Studies 58, 495—514.
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, 1996, “A Scorecard for Indexed Govern-
   ment Debt”, in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg eds. National Bureau of
   Economic Research Macroeconomics Annual 11:155—197.
Campbell, John Y. and Luis M. Viceira, 1999, “Consumption and Portfolio Decisions
   when Expected Returns are Time Varying”, Quarterly Journal of Economics
   114, 433—495.
Campbell, John Y. and Luis M. Viceira, 2000, “Consumption and Portfolio Deci-
   sions when Expected Returns are Time Varying: Erratum”, unpublished paper,
   Harvard University, available on the authors’ websites.
Campbell, John Y. and Luis M. Viceira, 2001, “Who Should Buy Long-Term Bonds?”,
   American Economic Review 91, 99—127.
Canner, Niko, N. Gregory Mankiw, and David N. Weil, 1997, “An Asset Allocation
   Puzzle”, American Economic Review 87, 181—191.

                                      34
Chacko, George and Luis Viceira, 1999, “Dynamic Consumption and Portfolio Choice
    with Stochastic Volatility in Incomplete Markets”, NBER Working Paper 7377,
    National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Cocco, Joao, Francisco Gomes, and Pascal Maenhout, 1998, “Consumption and
    Portfolio Choice over the Life Cycle”, unpublished paper, Harvard University.

Cox, John C. and Chi-fu Huang, “Optimal Consumption and Portfolio Policies when
    Asset Prices Follow a Diﬀusion Process”, Journal of Economic Theory 39, 33—
    83.

Dammon, Robert M., Chester S. Spatt, and Harold H. Zhang, 2001, “Optimal Con-
   sumption and Investment with Capital Gains Taxes”, Review of Financial Stud-
   ies 14, 583—616.

Epstein, Lawrence and Stanley Zin, 1989, “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the
    Temporal Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Frame-
    work”, Econometrica 57, 937—69.

Epstein, Lawrence and Stanley Zin, 1991, “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the
    Temporal Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: An Empirical Investi-
    gation”, Journal of Political Economy 99, 263—286.

Fama, Eugene, “The Information in the Term Structure”, Journal of Financial Eco-
   nomics 13, 509—528.

Fama, Eugene and Kenneth French, 1988a, “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock
   Returns”, Journal of Financial Economics 22, 3–27.

Fama, Eugene and Kenneth French, 1988b, “Permanent and Temporary Components
   of Stock Prices”, Journal of Political Economy 96, 246—273.

Fama, Eugene and Kenneth French, 1989, “Business Conditions and Expected Re-
   turns on Stocks and Bonds”, Journal of Financial Economics 25, 23—49.

Fama, Eugene and G. William Schwert, 1977, “Asset Returns and Inflation”, Journal
   of Financial Economics 5, 115—146.

Giovannini, Alberto and Philippe Weil, 1989, “Risk Aversion and Intertemporal
    Substitution in the Capital Asset Pricing Model”, NBER Working Paper 2824,
    National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

                                      35
Glosten, Lawrence R., Ravi Jagannathan, and David Runkle, 1993, “On the Relation
    Between the Expected Value and the Volatility of the Nominal Excess Return
    on Stocks”, Journal of Finance 48, 1779—1801.

Goetzmann, William N. and Philippe Jorion, 1993, “Testing the Predictive Power
    of Dividend Yields”, Journal of Finance 48, 663—679.

Hansen, Lars P. and Ravi Jagannathan, 1991, “Restrictions on Intertemporal Mar-
    ginal Rates of Substitution Implied by Asset Returns”, Journal of Political
    Economy 99, 225-262.

Harvey, Campbell, 1989, “Time-Varying Conditional Covariances in Tests of Asset
    Pricing Models”, Journal of Financial Economics 22, 305—334.

Harvey, Campbell, 1991, “The World Price of Covariance Risk”, Journal of Finance
    46, 111—157.

Hodrick, Robert J., 1992, “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns: Alternative
   Procedures for Inference and Measurement”, Review of Financial Studies 5,
   357—386.

Kandel, Shmuel, and Robert Stamburgh, 1987, “Long Horizon Returns and Short
   Horizon Models”, CRSP Working Paper No.222, University of Chicago.

Kim, Tong Suk and Edward Omberg, 1996, “Dynamic Nonmyopic Portfolio Behav-
   ior”, Review of Financial Studies 9, 141—161.

Liu, Jun, 1998, “Portfolio Choice in Stochastic Environments”, unpublished paper,
     Stanford University.

Lynch, Anthony W., 2001, “Portfolio Choice and Equity Characteristics: Charac-
    terizing the Hedging Demands Induced by Return Predictability”, Journal of
    Financial Economics 62, 67—130..

Markowitz, Harry, 1952, “Portfolio Selection”, Journal of Finance 7, 77—91.

Merton, Robert C., 1969, “Lifetime Portfolio Selection Under Uncertainty: The
    Continuous Time Case”, Review of Economics and Statistics 51, 247—257.

Merton, Robert C., 1971, “Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a Continuous-
    Time Model”, Journal of Economic Theory 3, 373—413.


                                       36
Merton, Robert C., 1973, “An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model”, Econo-
    metrica 41, 867—87.

Merton, Robert C., 1990, Continuous Time Finance, Basil Blackwell, Cambridge,
    MA.

Muirhead, Robb J., 1982, Aspects of Multivariate Statistical Theory, John Wiley &
    Sons, Inc., New York.

Nelson, Charles R. and Myung J. Kim, 1993, “Predictable Stock Returns: The Role
    of Small Sample Bias”, Journal of Finance 48, 641—661.

Poterba, James M. and Lawrence H. Summers, 1988, “Mean Reversion in Stock
    Returns: Evidence and Implications”, Journal of Financial Economics 22, 27—
    60.

Restoy, Fernando, 1992, “Optimal Portfolio Policies Under Time-Dependent Re-
    turns”, Bank of Spain Working Paper 9207, Bank of Spain, Madrid, Spain.

Samuelson, Paul A., 1969, “Lifetime Portfolio Selection by Dynamic Stochastic Pro-
   gramming”, Review of Economics and Statistics 51, 239—246.

Schroder, Mark and Costis Skiadas, 1999, “Optimal Consumption and Portfolio
    Selection with Stochastic Diﬀerential Utility”, Journal of Economic Theory 89,
    68—126.

Shiller, Robert J., John Y. Campbell, and Kermit L. Schoenholtz, 1983, “Forward
     Rates and Future Policy: Interpreting the Term Structure of Interest Rates”,
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 173—217.

Siegel, Jeremy, 1998, Stocks for the Long Run, 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill.

Stambaugh, Robert F., 1999, “Predictive Regressions”, Journal of Financial Eco-
    nomics 54, 375—421.

Viceira, Luis M., 2001, “Optimal Portfolio Choice for Long-Horizon Investors with
    Nontradable Labor Income”, Journal of Finance 56, 433—470.

Wachter, Jessica, 2000, “Risk Aversion and Allocation to Long-Term Bonds”, Chap-
   ter 2 in Essays in Financial Economics, PhD dissertation, Harvard University..



                                       37
Wachter, Jessica, 2002, “Portfolio and Consumption Decisions Under Mean-Reverting
   Returns: An Exact Solution for Complete Markets”, forthcoming Journal of Fi-
   nancial and Quantitative Analysis.

Xia, Yihong, 2001, “Learning About Predictability: The Eﬀects of Parameter Un-
    certainty on Dynamic Asset Allocation”, Journal of Finance 56, 205—246.




                                      38
                                              TABLE 1
                                           Sample Statistics

                   Sample Moment                              1952.Q2 - 1999.Q4             1890 - 1998

                   $                  $
   (1)          E[r1,t − πt ] + σ 2 (r1,t − πt )/2                    1.528                     2.101
                   $
   (2)          σ(r1,t − πt )                                         1.354                     8.806
                   $      $            $      $
   (3)          E[re,t − r1,t ] + σ2 (re,t − r1,t )/2                 7.719                     6.797
                   $      $
   (4)          σ(re,t − r1,t )                                      16.231                    18.192
   (5)          SR = (3)/(4)                                          0.476                     0.374
                   $      $            $      $
   (6)          E[rn,t − r1,t ] + σ2 (rn,t − r1,t )/2                 1.079                     0.674
                   $      $
   (7)          σ(rn,t − r1,t )                                       5.631                     6.543
   (8)          SR = (6)/(7)                                          0.192                     0.103
   (9)          E[yt$ ]                                               5.501                     4.361
   (10)         σ(yt$ )                                               1.413                     2.597
   (11)         E[dt − pt ]                                          -3.420                    -3.101
   (12)         σ(dt − pt )                                           0.305                     0.304
                   $      $
   (13)         E[yn,t − y1,t ]                                       0.951                     0.902
                   $      $
   (14)         σ(yn,t − y1,t )                                       0.507                     1.450


             $                                                      $                                $
    Note: r1,t   = log return on T-bills, πt = log inflation rate, re,t = log return on equities, rn,t   = log
                                                                                        $
return on nominal bond, (d − p)t = log dividend-price ratio, rbt = relative bill rate, yn,t = log yield on the
                     $
nominal bond, and y1,t  is the short yield. The bond is a 5-year nominal bond in the quarterly dataset and
a 20-year for the annual dataset.
                                           TABLE 2
                                VAR Estimation Results
                     A: Quarterly Sample (1952.Q2 - 1999.Q4)
  Dependent          rtbt        xrt        xbt        yt       (d − p)t       sprt       R2
   Variable           (t)        (t)        (t)        (t)         (t)          (t)       (p)
  VAR Estimation Results
    rtbt+1           0.444      0.005 -0.012          0.255      -0.001       0.455      0.340
                    (6.557)    (0.837) (-0.630)      (3.374)    (-0.975)     (2.414)    (0.000)
    xrt+1            0.639      0.021      0.428 -2.108           0.047       0.408      0.086
                    (0.644)    (0.257)    (1.729) (-2.357)       (2.213)     (0.160)    (0.006)
    xbt+1            0.047 -0.055 -0.088              0.355       0.002       3.068      0.096
                    (0.143) (-2.728) (-0.779)        (0.816)     (0.320)     (2.768)    (0.003)
    yt+1            -0.008      0.004      0.004    0.952        -0.000       0.115      0.868
                   (-0.200)    (1.808)    (0.341) (19.467)      (-0.116)     (1.075)    (0.000)
    (d − p)t+1      -0.848 -0.020 -0.402              1.412    0.963         -1.114      0.932
                   (-0.820) (-0.222) (-1.513)        (1.508) (44.001)       (-0.425)    (0.000)
    sprt+1          -0.000 -0.001          0.002      0.026      -0.000    0.747         0.539
                   (-0.004) (-0.329)      (0.270)    (0.857)    (-0.254) (10.897)       (0.000)


  Cross-Correlation of Residuals
                      rtb        xr         xb          y        (d − p)       spr
    rtb              0.550      0.239      0.393     -0.389       -0.238       0.186
    xr               -          7.752      0.229     -0.171       -0.981       0.026
    xb               -          -          2.674     -0.765       -0.246       0.198
    y                -          -          -          0.255        0.202      -0.777
    (d − p)          -          -          -          -            7.932      -0.058
    spr              -          -          -          -            -           0.172


    Note: rtbt = ex post real T-Bill rate, xrt = excess stock return, xbt = excess bond return, (d − p)t =
log dividend-price ratio, yt = nominal T-bill yield, sprt = yield spread. The bond is a 5-year nominal bond
in the quarterly dataset and a 20-year for the annual dataset.
                                        TABLE 2 (ctd.)
                                VAR Estimation Results
                             B: Annual Sample (1890 - 1998)
  Dependent          rtbt        xrt        xbt        yt       (d − p)t       sprt       R2
   Variable           (t)        (t)        (t)        (t)         (t)          (t)       (p)
  VAR Estimation Results
    rtbt+1           0.303 -0.052          0.122      0.701      -0.004      -0.776      0.240
                    (2.434) (-1.314)      (0.902)    (2.365)    (-0.146)    (-1.242)    (0.000)
    xrt+1            0.116      0.075 -0.091 -0.074               0.131       1.291      0.050
                    (0.438)    (0.607) (-0.305) (-0.105)         (2.320)     (0.957)    (0.399)
    xbt+1            0.200      0.106 -0.197 -0.112               0.012       2.628      0.392
                    (3.072)    (2.990) (-1.502) (-0.319)         (0.614)     (5.289)    (0.000)
    yt+1            -0.042 -0.012          0.037    0.921        -0.005      -0.017      0.776
                   (-1.922) (-1.784)      (1.318) (12.307)      (-1.119)    (-0.136)    (0.000)
    (d − p)t+1      -0.567 -0.124          0.357 -0.597      0.842           -1.662      0.721
                   (-2.272) (-1.146)      (1.115) (-0.941) (13.362)         (-1.194)    (0.000)
    sprt+1           0.020      0.002 -0.013          0.085       0.004       0.820      0.540
                    (1.118)    (0.409) (-0.667)      (1.625)     (1.153)     (8.900)    (0.000)


  Cross-Correlation of Residuals
                      rtb        xr         xb          y        (d − p)       spr
    rtb              7.592     -0.167     -0.020      0.114        0.100      -0.155
    xr               -         17.498     -0.020     -0.135       -0.725       0.186
    xb               -          -          5.102     -0.650       -0.055       0.264
    y                -          -          -          1.228        0.179      -0.894
    (d − p)          -          -          -          -          16.067       -0.170
    spr              -          -          -          -            -           0.978


    Note: rtbt = ex post real T-Bill rate, xrt = excess stock return, xbt = excess bond return, (d − p)t =
log dividend-price ratio, yt = nominal T-bill yield, sprt = yield spread. The bond is a 5-year nominal bond
in the quarterly dataset and a 20-year for the annual dataset.
                                   TABLE 3
                        Mean Asset Demands (ψ = 1 Case)
                   A: Quarterly Sample (1952.Q2 - 1999.Q4)
                State Variables:        Constant       ARt         yt      (d − p)t      sprt
    γ = 1, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.921/4
    Stock      Total Demand              272.77      292.42 296.33         303.41     302.79
               Hedging Demand              0.00        0.00   0.00           0.00       0.00
    Bond       Total Demand              172.93      162.73 160.07         160.67     171.01
               Hedging Demand              0.00        0.00   0.00           0.00       0.00
    Cash       Total Demand             -345.70     -355.15 -356.40       -364.08     -373.80
               Hedging Demand              0.00        0.00    0.00          0.00        0.00

    γ = 2, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.921/4
    Stock      Total Demand              135.52      146.02 149.62         246.07     246.61
               Hedging Demand              0.00        0.20   1.95          94.91      95.77
    Bond       Total Demand               82.13       33.53 -7.22            6.25      -8.17
               Hedging Demand              0.00      -43.86 -83.35         -70.18     -90.00
    Cash       Total Demand             -117.65       -79.55 -42.39       -152.32     -138.44
               Hedging Demand              0.00        43.66 81.41         -24.73       -5.77

    γ = 5, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.921/4
    Stock      Total Demand               53.17       56.52     57.40      157.64     160.51
               Hedging Demand              0.00       -1.34     -1.08       97.83     100.84
    Bond       Total Demand               27.65        -3.94 -15.70        -43.70      -94.24
               Hedging Demand              0.00       -30.13 -41.47        -69.59     -122.57
    Cash       Total Demand               19.18       47.42     58.30      -13.94       33.73
               Hedging Demand              0.00       31.47     42.55      -28.24       21.72

    γ = 20, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.921/4
    Stock      Total Demand               12.00       12.01     11.47       59.37       59.54
               Hedging Demand              0.00       -1.88     -2.41       45.23       45.46
    Bond       Total Demand                0.41       -11.28      3.61     -19.55      -39.95
               Hedging Demand              0.00       -11.86      3.03     -20.17      -41.53
    Cash       Total Demand               87.59       99.27     84.92       60.18       80.41
               Hedging Demand              0.00       13.74     -0.62      -25.06       -3.94

    Note: ARt = real returns on T-Bills, excess return on stocks, and excess return on bonds; yt = nominal
yield on T-Bills; (d − p)t = log dividend-price ratio; sprt = yield spread. The bond is a 5-year nominal bond
in the quarterly dataset and a 20-year in the annual dataset.
                               TABLE 3 (Ctd.)
                        Mean Asset Demands (ψ = 1 Case)
                          B: Annual Sample (1890 - 1998)
                State Variables:        Constant       ARt         yt      (d − p)t      sprt
    γ = 1, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.92
    Stock      Total Demand              192.33      207.77 209.27         215.20     219.34
               Hedging Demand              0.00        0.00   0.00           0.00       0.00
    Bond       Total Demand              120.29      152.23 161.31         162.08     241.55
               Hedging Demand              0.00        0.00   0.00           0.00       0.00
    Cash       Total Demand             -212.62     -260.00 -270.57       -277.28     -360.89
               Hedging Demand              0.00        0.00    0.00          0.00        0.00

    γ = 2, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.92
    Stock      Total Demand               98.94      108.84 108.84         132.21     133.41
               Hedging Demand              0.00        0.96   0.55          20.83      20.10
    Bond       Total Demand               65.44       89.60 96.87           83.16     142.25
               Hedging Demand              0.00        6.99 11.53           -2.58      19.78
    Cash       Total Demand              -64.38       -98.43 -105.71      -115.36     -175.67
               Hedging Demand              0.00        -7.96 -12.08        -18.25      -39.88

    γ = 5, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.92
    Stock      Total Demand               42.91       53.87     52.77       67.38       66.70
               Hedging Demand              0.00        5.94      5.06       18.29       17.01
    Bond       Total Demand               32.53       52.31     63.87       53.76       90.99
               Hedging Demand              0.00       11.48     24.12       13.84       39.95
    Cash       Total Demand               24.56        -6.19 -16.64        -21.14      -57.69
               Hedging Demand              0.00       -17.42 -29.17        -32.13      -56.96

    γ = 20, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.92
    Stock      Total Demand               14.89       27.61     25.82       29.25       29.32
               Hedging Demand              0.00        9.64      8.40       11.31       11.44
    Bond       Total Demand               16.07       34.03     48.01       44.10       76.42
               Hedging Demand              0.00       14.08     31.05       27.08       61.10
    Cash       Total Demand               69.03        38.36 26.17          26.65       -5.73
               Hedging Demand              0.00       -23.73 -39.45        -38.39      -72.54

    Note: ARt = real returns on T-Bills, excess return on stocks, and excess return on bonds; yt = nominal
yield on T-Bills; (d − p)t = log dividend-price ratio; sprt = yield spread. The bond is a 5-year nominal bond
in the quarterly dataset and a 20-year in the annual dataset.
                                                      TABLE 4
                                            Variability of Asset Demands
                                      A: Quarterly Sample (1952Q2 - 1999Q4)
                                                  γ = 5, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.921/4

                       Var(αm )/Var(α) (%)            Var(αh )/Var(α) (%)            Cov(αm , αh )/Var(α) (%)
    Stock                        52.00                           14.31                            16.84
    Bond                         60.49                           21.44                              9.03

                                      Percentage of Total Variation Explained By:
  Stocks
                              rtbt        xrt         xbt      yt      (d − p)t     sprt
            rtbt               1.22        0.00       0.00     0.00       0.00       0.00
            xrt                0.58        1.56       0.00     0.00       0.00       0.00
            xbt                2.94        1.93      13.88     0.00       0.00       0.00
              yt              -1.27        3.00      13.59 56.82          0.00       0.00
      (d − p)t                -0.32       -2.09       1.15 -64.93        83.73       0.00
            sprt              -1.09       -0.52      -4.07 -11.02         1.20       3.69


  Bonds
            rtbt               0.01        0.00       0.00     0.00       0.00       0.00
            xrt                0.19      14.11        0.00     0.00       0.00       0.00
            xbt                0.24        4.25       7.44     0.00       0.00       0.00
              yt              -0.15        9.82      10.82 67.20          0.00       0.00
      (d − p)t                -0.02       -3.58       0.48 -40.26        27.23       0.00
            sprt              -0.53       -6.94     -13.27 -53.47         3.06      73.38


    Note: rtbt = ex post real T-Bill rate, xrt = excess stock return, xbt = excess bond return, (d − p)t =
log dividend-price ratio, rbt = relative bill rate, sprt = yield spread. The bond is a 5-year nominal bond in
the monthly dataset and a 20-year in the annual dataset.
                                                  TABLE 4 (Ctd.)
                                            Variability of Asset Demands
                                           B: Annual Sample (1890-1998)
                                                  γ = 5, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.921/4

                       Var(αm )/Var(α) (%)            Var(αh )/Var(α) (%)            Cov(αm , αh )/Var(α) (%)
    Stock                       103.17                           13.95                             -8.56
    Bond                         96.54                              0.40                            1.53

                                      Percentage of Total Variation Explained By:
  Stocks
                              rtbt        xrt         xbt      yt      (d − p)t     sprt
            rtbt               0.51        0.00       0.00     0.00         0.00     0.00
            xrt               -0.91       13.01       0.00     0.00         0.00     0.00
            xbt                0.22       -0.60       2.48     0.00         0.00     0.00
              yt              -0.68        1.77      -1.78     2.13         0.00     0.00
      (d − p)t                -1.01       -8.14       3.35     7.42        83.58     0.00
            sprt              -0.17        0.83      -1.11     0.62        -1.97     0.45


  Bonds
            rtbt              17.59        0.00       0.00     0.00         0.00     0.00
            xrt               -6.76       20.69       0.00     0.00         0.00     0.00
            xbt                2.50       -1.46       9.21     0.00         0.00     0.00
              yt              -0.28        0.16      -0.24     0.01         0.00     0.00
      (d − p)t                -0.76       -1.31       0.82     0.07         1.35     0.00
            sprt             -13.90      14.86      -30.49     0.62        -3.57    90.88


    Note: rtbt = ex post real T-Bill rate, xrt = excess stock return, xbt = excess bond return, (d − p)t =
log dividend-price ratio, rbt = relative bill rate, sprt = yield spread. The bond is a 5-year nominal bond in
the monthly dataset and a 20-year in the annual dataset.
                     TABLE 5
  Mean Asset Demands with Hypothetical Real Bonds
       (Quarterly Sample: 1952.Q2 - 1999.Q4)
      A: Nominal Bills, Stocks, and Real Consol Bond
      State Variables:                   Constant           Full VAR
    γ = 1, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.92
      Stocks                              322.40            361.03
      Real Consol Bond                    741.86            813.66
      Cash                               -964.26          -1074.70

    γ = 2, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.92
      Stocks                              160.46             265.55
      Real Consol Bond                    379.69             262.14
      Cash                               -440.16            -427.69

    γ = 5, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.92
      Stocks                               63.31             155.59
      Real Consol Bond                    162.39              61.03
      Cash                               -125.70            -116.66

    γ = 20, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.92
      Stocks                               14.73              55.97
      Real Consol Bond                     53.74              58.12
      Cash                                 31.53             -14.09

    γ = 2000, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.92
      Stocks                               -1.30               2.53
      Real Consol Bond                     17.88              97.10
      Cash                                 83.42               0.37

    Note: “Constant” column reports mean asset demands when the VAR system only has a constant in
each regression, corresponding to the case in which risk premia are constant and realized returns on all
assets, including the short-term real interest rate, are i.i.d. “Full VAR” column reports mean asset demands
when the VAR system includes all state variables. The nominal bond is a 5-year nominal bond in the
quarterly dataset and a 20-year in the annual dataset.
                          TABLE 5 (ctd.)
          Mean Asset Demands with Hypothetical Real Bonds
               (Quarterly Sample: 1952.Q2 - 1999.Q4)
  B: Nominal Bills, Stocks, Real Consol Bond and Nominal Bond
      State Variables:                   Constant                  Full VAR
    γ = 1, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.92
      Stocks                              328.29                    387.82
      Real Consol Bond                    802.07                   1055.20
      Nominal Bond                        -40.24                   -149.07
      Cash                               -990.13                  -1193.96

    γ = 2, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.92
      Stocks                              165.04                    307.05
      Real Consol Bond                    426.36                    599.77
      Nominal Bond                        -31.18                   -255.51
      Cash                               -460.21                   -551.31

    γ = 5, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.92
      Stocks                               67.08                    192.14
      Real Consol Bond                    200.93                    310.10
      Nominal Bond                        -25.75                   -233.06
      Cash                               -142.26                   -169.18

    γ = 20, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.92
      Stocks                               18.10                     76.46
      Real Consol Bond                     88.21                    156.03
      Nominal Bond                        -23.04                   -123.31
      Cash                                 16.72                     -9.18

    γ = 2000, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.92
      Stocks                                1.94                      2.68
      Real Consol Bond                     51.01                    102.23
      Nominal Bond                        -22.13                     -2.76
      Cash                                 69.18                     -2.16

    Note: “Constant” column reports mean asset demands when the VAR system only has a constant in
each regression, corresponding to the case in which risk premia are constant and realized returns on all
assets, including the short-term real interest rate, are i.i.d. “Full VAR” column reports mean asset demands
when the VAR system includes all state variables. The nominal bond is a 5-year nominal bond in the
quarterly dataset and a 20-year in the annual dataset.
                     TABLE 6
         Mean Value Function (ψ = 1 Case)
       (Quarterly Sample: 1952.Q2 - 1999.Q4)
      γ              E[Vt ]
Nominal Bills and Stocks
      1               0.803
      2               0.158
      5               0.043
     20               0.015
   2000               0.000
Nominal Bills, Stocks, and Nominal Bond
      1              13.392
      2               0.692
      5               0.087
     20               0.020
   2000               0.001
Nominal Bills, Stocks, and Real Consol Bond
      1               1.920
      2               0.192
      5               0.044
     20               0.016
   2000               0.009
Nominal Bills, Stocks, Nominal Bond, and Real Consol Bond
      1           3456.715
      2              4.762
      5              0.174
     20              0.023
   2000              0.009
                                                Figure 1. Epstein-Zin Utility


Coefficient of Relative Risk Aversion (γ)               Myopic Consumption Choice




                                                                                        Myopic Portfolio Choice
                                                     Log Utility

                                            1


                                                                                                  Power Utility
                                                                                                   ψ =    1
                                                                                                          γ


                                                1
                                                Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution (ψ)
           6}hi 2G Ot|Lh) Lu 5|@|i V@h@M*it EbD2"2  bbb"e

  0.3

  0.2

  0.1

    0

 -0.1

 -0.2
                                                            real rate
 -0.3                                                       excess stock ret.
                                                            excess bond ret.
 -0.4
        1955   1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990       1995           2000



 0.04
                                                                 nominal yield
                                                                 yield spread
 0.03


 0.02


 0.01


    0


-0.01
        1955   1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990       1995           2000



 -2.8
                                                                div.-price ratio
   -3

 -3.2

 -3.4

 -3.6

 -3.8

   -4

 -4.2

 -4.4
        1955   1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990       1995           2000
6}hi G T|4@* tti| **LU@|L?t |L 5|LU!t @?_ L4?@* L?_ E"@h|ih*) 5@4T*i

                                      Allocation to Stocks
      350
                                                                      Total Demand
      300                                                             Myopic Demand
      250

      200
  %




      150

      100

       50

        0

      -50
            1   0.9   0.8   0.7     0.6       0.5        0.4    0.3   0.2     0.1     0
                                     Risk Tolerance -- 1/ γ

                                  Allocation to Nominal Bonds
      200
                                                                      Total Demand
                                                                      Myopic Demand
      150

      100
 %




       50

        0

      -50

     -100
            1   0.9   0.8   0.7     0.6       0.5        0.4    0.3   0.2     0.1     0
                                     Risk Tolerance -- 1/ γ
         6}hi eG Ot|Lh) Lu tti| **LU@|L?t EbD2"2  bbb"e

 1000
                                                                    cash
                                                                    total stock
                                                                    total bond
  500



    0



 -500



-1000
        1955   1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990      1995           2000



 1000
                                                                 myopic stock
                                                                 myopic bond


  500




    0




 -500
        1955   1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990      1995           2000



  400

  200

    0

 -200

 -400
                                                                hedging stock
                                                                hedging bond
 -600

 -800
        1955   1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990      1995           2000
6}hi DG T|4@* **LU@|L?t |L 5|LU!t @?_ +i@* L?tL* L?_ E"@h|ih*) 5@4T*i

                                    Allocation to Stocks
      400

      350                                                          Total Demand
                                                                   Myopic Demand
      300

      250
  %




      200

      150

      100

       50

        0
            1   0.9   0.8   0.7   0.6       0.5        0.4   0.3   0.2     0.1     0
                                   Risk Tolerance -- 1/ γ

                                  Allocation to Real Bonds
     1000
                                                                   Total Demand
                                                                   Myopic Demand
      800


      600
 %




      400


      200


        0
            1   0.9   0.8   0.7   0.6       0.5        0.4   0.3   0.2     0.1     0
                                   Risk Tolerance -- 1/ γ
6}hi SG T|4@* **LU@|L?t |L 5|LU!tc L4?@* L?_ @?_ +i@* L?tL* L?_ E"@h
|ih*) 5@4T*i

                                               Allocation to Stocks
           400

           350

           300

           250
      %




           200

           150

           100       Total Demand
                     Myopic Demand
            50

             0
                 1   0.9     0.8     0.7     0.6       0.5        0.4    0.3   0.2   0.1   0
                                              Risk Tolerance -- 1/ γ

                                           Allocation to Nominal Bonds
             0

           -50

          -100
      %




          -150

          -200
                     Total Demand
          -250       Myopic Demand

          -300
                 1   0.9     0.8     0.7     0.6       0.5        0.4    0.3   0.2   0.1   0
                                              Risk Tolerance -- 1/ γ

                                            Allocation to Real Bonds
          1200

          1000

           800
      %




           600

           400
                     Total Demand
                     Myopic Demand
           200

             0
                 1   0.9     0.8     0.7     0.6       0.5        0.4    0.3   0.2   0.1   0
                                              Risk Tolerance -- 1/ γ
               Appendix to
  A Multivariate Model of Strategic Asset
                Allocation


        John Y. Campbell, Yeung Lewis Chan, and Luis M. Viceira1




                                First draft: September 1999
                                This version: October 2001




   1
    Campbell: Department of Economics, Littauer Center 213, Harvard University, Cambridge MA
02138, USA, and NBER. Email john_campbell@harvard.edu. Chan: Department of Finance, School
of Business and Management, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay,
Kowloon, Hong Kong. Email ylchan@ust.hk. Viceira: Graduate School of Business Administration,
Morgan Hall 367, Harvard University, Boston MA 02163, USA, and NBER. Email lviceira@hbs.edu.
Campbell acknowledges the financial support of the National Science Foundation. We are grateful
to participants at the 1999 Intertemporal Asset Pricing Conference hosted by the Centre Interuni-
versitaire de Recherche en Analyse des Organizations (CIRANO) of Montreal for helpful comments
and suggestions.
A       Appendix A: Derivation of Main Equations in
        Text
We first summarize three results on matrix algebra that will be convenient in deriving the expressions
given in the text.

Result 1.
                   ¡          ¢                                                         ¡        ¢
    zt+1 z0t+1 − Et zt+1 z0t+1 = (Φ0 + Φ1 zt + vt+1 ) (Φ0 + Φ1 zt + vt+1 )0 − Et zt+1 z0t+1
                                = Φ0 Φ00 + Φ1 zt Φ00 + vt+1 Φ00 + Φ0 z0t Φ01 + Φ1 zt z0t Φ01
                                                                                              ¡          ¢
                                  +vt+1 z0t Φ01 + Φ0 vt+1
                                                       0            0
                                                           + Φ1 zt vt+1           0
                                                                         + vt+1 vt+1     − Et zt+1 z0t+1
                                = vt+1 Φ00 + vt+1 z0t Φ01 + Φ0 vt+1
                                                                0             0
                                                                    + Φ1 zt vt+1  + vt+1 vt+10
                                                                                                − Σv .

¥

Result 2.
                                                               ³              ´
                                              (i−1)              (i−1)
                     ri,t+1 − Et (ri,t+1 ) = xt+1 + r1,t+1 − Et xt+1 + r1,t+1
                                                 (i)       (1)
                                           = vt+1 + vt+1
         (i−1)
where xt+1 denotes the (i − 1)th element of the excess return vector xt+1 and likewise with vt+1 .¥

Result 3. Any quadratic form z0t+1 Mzt+1 admits the following vector form representation:
                                                     ¡          ¢
                           z0t+1 Mzt+1 = vec (M)0 vec zt+1 z0t+1 ,

where vec(·) is the vectorization operator.¥

Result 4. (Muirhead, 1982, pp.518)
                                                                
                                                   m
                                                   X
                        ¡   ¡          ¢¢            ¡          ¢
                                   0
                    Vart vec vt+1 vt+1    = Im2 +    Qij ⊗ Q0ij  (Σv ⊗ Σv ) ,
                                                           i,j


where Qij is a m × m zero matrix except for the (i, j)th element which is equal to 1, and ⊗ is the
kronecker product operator.¥

Unconditional distribution of the state vector zt .

    The linearity of the VAR system (4) implies that the state vector zt inherits the normality of
the shocks vt+1 . It has unconditional mean µz and variance-covariance matrix Σzz given by

                                     µz    = (Im − Φ1 )−1 Φ0 ,                                           (30)
                                                                  −1
                              vec(Σzz ) = (Im2 − Φ1 ⊗ Φ1 )             vec (Σv ) .


                                                       1
¥

Derivation of Equation (10)

    The log return on the portfolio rp,t+1 is a discrete-time approximation to its continuous-time
counterpart. We begin by specifying the return processes for the short-term instrument Bt and
other risky assets Pt in continuous time:
                                          dBt
                                                 = µb,t dt + σb dWt ,                                 (31)
                                           Bt
                                          dPt
                                                 = µt dt + σdWt ,                                     (32)
                                          Pt
where µb,t and µt are the drifts, σb and σ are the diﬀusion, and Wt is a m-dimensional standard
Brownian motion.15 We allow the drifts to depend on other state variables, but for notational
simplicity, we suppress this dependency and simply use the time subscript. Moreover, note that the
same Wt appears in the two equations.

         We can obtain the log return on each asset using Ito’s Lemma:
                                                 µ       ¶
                                                   dBt       1
                                    d log Bt =             − (σb σ0b ) dt,                            (33)
                                                    Bt       2
                                                 µ        ¶
                                                   dPi,t      1
                                   d log Pi,t =             − (σi σ0i ) dt,                           (34)
                                                    Pi,t      2
where σi is the ith row of the diﬀusion matrix σ, and i = 1, .., n − 1.

     Let Vt be the value of the portfolio at time t. We will use d log Vt to approximate rp,t+1 . By
Ito’s Lemma,
                                                 µ      ¶    µ       ¶2
                                                    dVt     1 dVt
                                   d log Vt =             −             .                        (35)
                                                    Vt      2 Vt
We will now derive these two terms in order:
                          µ     ¶
             dVt            dPt                    dBt
                   = α0t           + (1 − α0t ι)
             Vt              Pt                     Bt
                          µ                           ¶               µ               ¶
                                         1                                  1
                   = α0t d log Pt + [σi σ0i ] dt + (1 − α0t ι) d log Bt + (σb σ0b ) dt
                                         2                                  2
                   = α0t (d log Pt − d log Bt · ι) + d log Bt
                         1                                1
                       + α0t ([σi σ0i ] − σb σ0b · ι) dt + σb σ0b dt,
                         2                                2
where ι is a n × 1 vector of ones and the bracket [ · ] denotes a vector with σi σ0i the ith entry. Next,
          µ      ¶2
             dVt
                      = α0t (d log Pt − d log Bt · ι) (d log Pt − d log Bt · ι)0 αt + (d log Bt )2
              Vt
                          +2α0t (d log Pt − d log Bt · ι) (d log Bt ) + o (dt) ,
    15
         The dimensions of µb , µ, σb , σ are 1 × 1, (n − 1) × 1, 1 × m, (n − 1) × m, respectively.

                                                        2
where the o(dt) terms vanish because they involve either (dt)2 or (dt) (dWt ) .

    Now, from equation (31)—(33) and ignoring dt terms,
                                d log Pt − d log Bt · ι = (σ − ι · σb ) dWt .
Thus,
                                                              0                             0
           (d log Pt − d log Bt · ι) (d log Pt − d log Bt · ι) = (σ − ι · σb ) (σ − ι · σb ) ,
                          (d log Pt − d log Bt · ι) (d log Bt ) = (σ − ι · σ1 ) · σ0b .
Collecting these results and using our notation for excess returns: xt+1 = d log Pt − d log Bt · ι,
r1,t+1 = d log (Bt ) and dt = 1,
                rp,t+1   = d log Vt
                                              1
                         = α0t xt+1 + r1,t+1 + α0t ([σi σ0i ] − σb σ0b · ι)
                                              2
                             1£ 0                             0                         ¤
                           − αt (σ − ι · σb ) (σ − ι · σb ) αt + 2α0t (σ − ι · σb ) σ0b
                             2

     Using the notation in the VAR system with the Cholesky decomposition for Σv = GG0 , σi − σb
is equal to the ith row of G, Gi . Hence,
                    (σ − ι · σb ) (σ − ι · σb )0    =   G2:n G02:n = Σxx ,
                                         σb σ0b     =   G1 G01 = σ21 ,
                                          σi σ0i    =   Gi G0i + σb G0i + Gi σ0b + σb σ0b ,
                                        [σi σ0i ]   =   σ2x + 2σ1x + σ 21 ι,
                              (σ − ι · σb ) σ0b     =   G2:n G01 = σ1x ,
where G2:n denotes the submatrix formed by taking the 2nd to nth rows of G.

    With these terms, the return on the portfolio is
                                            1 ¡         ¢ 1
             rp,t+1 = α0t xt+1 + r1,t+1 + α0t σ2x + 2σ1x − α0t Σxx αt − α0t σ1x ,
                                            2              2
                           0                1 0¡ 2       ¢
                     = αt xt+1 + r1,t+1 + αt σx − Σxx αt .
                                            2
¥

Solving for the Optimal Portfolio Rule.

    Subtracting the log Euler equation (12) with i = 1 from (12), we obtain
                                                       µ                                   ¶
                       1                                 θ
Et (ri,t+1 − r1,t+1 ) + Vart (ri,t+1 − r1,t+1 ) = Covt     ∆ct+1 + (1 − θ) rp,t+1 , ri,t+1                 (36)
                       2                                 ψ
                                                         µ                                   ¶
                                                           θ
                                                  −Covt      ∆ct+1 + (1 − θ) rp,t+1 , r1,t+1
                                                           ψ
                                                   1
                                                  − (Vart (ri,t+1 ) − Vart (r1,t+1 ) − Vart (ri,t+1 − r1,t+1 )) .
                                                   2

                                                        3
Using the budget constraint (11) and the trivial identity ∆ct+1 = (ct+1 − wt+1 )− (ct − wt ) +∆wt+1 ,
        θ                         θ
          ∆ct+1 + (1 − θ) rp,t+1 = (ct+1 − wt+1 ) + γrp,t+1 + time t terms and constants.
        ψ                         ψ
Thus, equation (36) can be written as
                       1                                θ
Et (ri,t+1 − r1,t+1 ) + Vart (ri,t+1 − r1,t+1 ) =         [σ i,c−w,t − σ1,c−w,t ] + γ [σi,p,t − σ 1,p,t ]
                       2                                ψ
                                                          1
                                                        − (Vart (ri,t+1 ) − Vart (r1,t+1 ) − Vart (ri,t+1 − r1,t+1 )) .
                                                          2
We will derive these terms now.

    Using the equation for log return on the portfolio and ignoring time t terms and constants,
                               σi,p,t     = Covt (α0t xt+1 + r1,t+1 , ri,t+1 )
                                               ³              ´
                                                                      (i−1)
                                          = α0t Σ(i−1)
                                                  xx    + σ1x + σ1x + σ 21 ,

                                 σ1,p,t    = Covt (α0t xt+1 + r1,t+1 , r1,t+1 )
                                           = α0t σ1x + σ 21 .
To evaluate the conditional covariances σ i,c−w,t and σ 1,c−w,t , we use the conjectured policy rule for
the consumption-wealth ratio.
            σ i,c−w,t
      =     Covt (ct+1 − wt+1 − Et (ct+1 − wt+1 ) , ri,t+1 − Et (ri,t+1 ))
                   ³                                                                            ´
                                                                                   (i)      (1)
      =     Covt B01 vt+1 + (Φ0 + Φ1 zt + vt+1 )0 B2 (Φ0 + Φ1 zt + vt+1 ) , vt+1 + vt+1
                   ³                                                                                      ´
                                                                                               (i)    (1)
      =     Covt B01 vt+1 + Φ00 B2 vt+1 + z0t Φ01 B2 vt+1 + vt+10               0
                                                                     B2 Φ0 + vt+1  B2 Φ1 zt , vt+1 + vt+1
                 ³           ´          ³             ´ ³                 ´0
      =     B01 Σ(i)v + Σ(1)
                         v     + Φ 0
                                   0 B2  Σ(i)
                                          v   + Σ (1)
                                                  v     +   Σ (i)
                                                              v   +  Σ(1)
                                                                      v      B2 Φ0
                       ³             ´ ³               ´0
            +z0t Φ01 B2 Σ(i)
                          v + Σv
                                 (1)
                                      + Σ(i)
                                           v + Σv
                                                   (1)
                                                          B2 Φ1 zt ,
                                                                                  (i)
where the second equality follows from using Result 1 and 2, and Σv denotes the ith column of
Σv . Note that B2 is not necessarily symmetric, so that we cannot combine any of the terms in the
expression above. Similarly, for the return on the short-term bond we have
                                             ³     ´0                         ³     ´0
         σ1,c−w,t = B01 Σ(1)
                         v   + Φ 0
                                 0 B2 Σ(1)
                                       v   +  Σ(1)
                                               v      B2 Φ0 + z 0 0
                                                                 Φ
                                                                t 1 B2 Σ(1)
                                                                        v   +  Σ(1)
                                                                                v      B2 Φ1 zt .

Therefore
                                                                   ³     ´0
       σi,c−w,t − σ1,c−w,t     = B01 Σ(i)   0       0 0        (i)
                                      v + (Φ0 B2 + zt Φ1 B2 ) Σv + Σv
                                                                     (i)
                                                                            (B2 Φ0 + B2 Φ1 zt )
                               = B01 Σ(i)      0     0 0           0
                                       v + (Φ0 + zt Φ1 ) (B2 + B2 ) Σv
                                                                       (i)
                                 ³      ´0       ³    ´0
                               =  Σ(i)
                                     v     B1 + Σ(i)
                                                   v     (B2 + B02 ) (Φ0 + Φ1 zt )


                                                        4
    Stacked, this equations give

           σc−w,t − σ 1,c−w,t ι
                                                                          
                 (2)0                (2)0                          (2)0
               Σv                 Σv                             Σv
            .                 .                     .                     
         =                                    0                 
            ..  B1 + 2  ..  (B2 + B2 ) Φ0  +  ..  (B2 + B2 ) Φ1  zt
                                                                                 0 
                 (n)0                (n)0                          (n)0
               Σv                 Σv                             Σv
           h                                      i h                        i
                    0                                         0
         = (Σv H0x ) B1 + (Σv H0x ) (B2 + B02 ) Φ0 + (Σv H0x ) (B2 + B02 ) Φ1 zt
         = Λ0 + Λ1 zt ,                                                                          (37)

as claimed in equation (17).¥

Solving for the Optimal Consumption Rule.

    We derive first equation (26). To derive this equation, note that log consumption growth verifies
the following trivial identity: ∆ct+1 = (ct+1 − wt+1 ) − (ct − wt ) + ∆wt+1 . Substituting the log-
linearized budget constraint (11) into this equation and taking expectations we obtain

        Et (∆ct+1 ) = Et (ct+1 − wt+1 ) − (ct − wt ) + Et (∆wt+1 )                               (38)
                                                                      µ      ¶
                                                                           1
                     = Et (ct+1 − wt+1 ) − (ct − wt ) + Et (rp,t+1 ) + 1 −     (ct − wt ) + k.
                                                                           ρ

Combining the two equations (24) and (38), we obtain a diﬀerence equation in ct − wt , given in (26).

     Next we show that both the expected log return on the wealth portfolio Et rp,t+1 and the variance
term χp,t in equation (24) for expected log consumption growth are quadratic functions of the vector
of state variables.

   Taking conditional expectations of equation (10) and substituting the portfolio policy rule αt =
A0 + A1 zt ,
                                                             1 ¡              ¢
              Et (rp,t+1 ) = α0t Et (xt+1 ) + Et (r1,t+1 ) + α0t σ2x − Σxx αt
                                                             2
                           = (A00 + z0t A01 ) Hx (Φ0 + Φ1 zt ) + H1 (Φ0 + Φ1 zt )
                               1                       1
                             + (A00 + z0t A01 ) σ 2x − (A00 + z0t A01 ) Σxx (A0 + A1 zt )
                               2                       2
                           = Γ0 + Γ1 zt + Γ2 vec (zt z0t ) ,

where
                                                1         1
                   Γ0   ≡ A00 Hx Φ0 + H1 Φ0 + A00 σ 2x − A00 Σxx A0 ,
                                                2         2
                                                            1
                   Γ1   ≡ Φ00 H0x A1 + A00 Hx Φ1 + H1 Φ1 + σ 2x A1 − A00 Σxx A1 ,
                                                            2
                                          0   1               0
                   Γ2   ≡ vec (A01 Hx Φ1 ) − vec (A01 Σxx A1 ) ,
                                              2

                                                  5
and H1 and Hx are selection matrices that select the short-term real interest rate and the vector of
excess returns from the full state vector.

    We now evaluate the variance term
                                     µ ¶
                                    1 θ
                             χp,t =      Vart (∆ct+1 − ψrp,t+1 ) .
                                    2 ψ

Using the trivial identity for ∆ct+1 and the budget constraint (11), substituting the conjecture for
the consumption rule

                             ct − wt       = b0 + B01 zt + z0t B2 zt
                                           = b0 + B01 zt + vec (B2 )0 vec (zt z0t )

and αt = A0 + A1 zt , and ignoring time t terms and constants, we can write the argument of the
variance as:

                        ∆ct+1 − ψrp,t+1
                      = [B01 + Φ00 (B2 + B02 ) + (1 − ψ) A00 Hx + (1 − ψ) H1 ] vt+1
                        +z0t [Φ01 (B2 + B02 ) + (1 − ψ) A01 Hx ] vt+1
                                    0     ¡      0
                                                    ¢
                        + vec (B2 ) vec vt+1 vt+1
                                                       0    ¡         ¢
                      = [Π1 + z0t Π2 ] vt+1 + vec (B2 ) vec vt+1 vt+1
                                                                    0
                                                                        ,

where

                      Π1   ≡ B01 + Φ00 (B2 + B02 ) + (1 − ψ) A00 Hx + (1 − ψ) H1 ,
                      Π2   ≡ Φ01 (B2 + B02 ) + (1 − ψ) A01 Hx .


    Since vt+1 is conditionally normally distributed, all third moments are zero. Thus,

                             Vart (∆ct+1 − ψrp,t+1 )
                                                                              0
                      = Π1 Σv Π01 + [2Π1 Σv Π02 ] zt + vec (Π2 Σv Π02 ) vec (zt z0t )
                                            ¡    ¡          ¢¢
                           + vec (B2 )0 Vart vec vt+1 vt+1
                                                         0
                                                               vec (B2 ) ,
        ¡   ¡      0
                       ¢¢
and Vart vec vt+1 vt+1    is given by the expression in Result 4 above. Putting these pieces together,
we have
                                  χp,t = V0 + V1 zt + V2 vec (zt z0t ) ,
where
                             θ   £                           ¡   ¡          ¢¢          ¤
                 V0    ≡          Π1 Σv Π01 + vec (B2 )0 Vart vec vt+1 vt+1
                                                                        0
                                                                               vec (B2 ) ,
                            2ψ
                             θ
                V1     ≡         [2Π1 Σv Π02 ] ,
                            2ψ
                             θ   h                     i
                                                     0
                V2     ≡             vec (Π2 Σv Π02 ) .
                            2ψ

                                                           6
    We can now solve for the coeﬃcients of the optimal consumption rule. Simple substitution of the
expressions for Et rp,t+1 and χp,t , and the expression for the conditional expectation of (ct+1 − wt+1 )
into the RHS of (26) yields
                                  ct − wt = Ξ0 + Ξ1 zt + Ξ2 vec (zt z0t ) ,                         (39)
where

                    Ξ0   ≡ ρ[−ψ log δ + k − V0 + (1 − ψ) Γ0 + b0 + B01 Φ0
                           + vec (B2 )0 vec(Φ0 Φ00 ) + vec (B2 )0 vec(Σv )],
                    Ξ1   ≡ ρ [−V1 + (1 − ψ) Γ1 + B01 Φ1 + 2Φ00 (B02 + B2 ) Φ1 ] ,
                             h                                         i
                                                                     0
                    Ξ2   ≡ ρ −V2 + (1 − ψ) Γ2 + vec (Φ01 B2 Φ1 ) .

Equation (39) confirms our initial conjecture on the form of the consumption-wealth ratio. Notice
that Ξ0 , Ξ1 , Ξ2 depend on b0 , B1 and B2 . Therefore, for the solution to be consistent, {b0 , B1 , B2 }
must solve the following set of equations:

                                                 b0 = Ξ0 ,                                           (40)
                                                B1 = Ξ01 ,
                                           vec (B2 ) = Ξ02 .

The resulting set of values for b0 , B1 and vec (B2 ) determines the optimal consumption rule.¥

Verification that the optimal portfolio rule is independent of ψ given ρ.

   >From equations (22) and (23) in text, and equation (37) in the Appendix, we can write A0
and A1 as:
        µ ¶        µ                          ¶ µ         ¶
           1    −1           1 2                        1        −Λ0
A0 =          Σxx Hx Φ0 + σx + (1 − γ)σ1x + 1 −              Σ−1
                                                              xx
           γ                 2                          γ        1−ψ
        µ ¶        µ                             ¶ µ        ¶     ·                       µ          ¶ ¸
           1    −1           1 2                          1    −1      0 0 B1         0     B2 + B02
    =         Σxx Hx Φ0 + σx + (1 − γ)Σσ1x − 1 −              Σxx (Σv Hx )     + (Σv Hx )             Φ0
           γ                 2                            γ                1−ψ               1−ψ
        µ ¶                µ       ¶
           1                     1        −Λ1
A1 =          Σ−1
                xx Hx Φ1 + 1 −       Σ−1
                                       xx
           γ                     γ        1−ψ
                         µ       ¶      ·        µ          ¶ ¸
        1 −1                   1             0 0   B2 + B02
    =      Σxx (Hx Φ1 ) − 1 −      Σ−1
                                     xx  (Σ H
                                           v x )             Φ1 .
        γ                      γ                    1−ψ

Thus, showing that the optimal portfolio rule is independent of ψ given ρ is equivalent to showing
that B1 ≡B1 /(1 − ψ) and B2 ≡ B2 /(1 − ψ) are independent of ψ given ρ.

    First, consider B2 . From (40), we have

                  (1 − ψ) vec (B2 ) = ρ [−V20 + (1 − ψ)Γ02 + (1 − ψ) vec (Φ01 B2 Φ1 )] .             (41)




                                                    7
   Using the definition of V2 , we have
              1−γ         h                                                                            i
                                                                                                     0
  −V20 =              vec (Φ01 (B2 + B02 ) + (1 − ψ) A01 Hx ) Σv (Φ01 (B2 + B02 ) + (1 − ψ) A01 Hx )
            2(1 − ψ)
              1−γ         h                                                                    i
                                                                                             0
        =             vec (1 − ψ)2 (Φ01 (B2 + B20 ) + A01 Hx ) Σv (Φ01 (B2 + B20 ) + A01 Hx )
            2(1 − ψ)
            1−γ               h                                                           i
                                                                                        0
        =         (1 − ψ) vec (Φ01 (B2 + B20 ) + A01 Hx ) Σv (Φ01 (B2 + B20 ) + A01 Hx )
              2
                      0
        ≡ (1 − ψ)V2 ,
which is independent of ψ, since A1 does not depend on ψ, given B2 .

    Similarly, using the definition of Γ2 , we have:
                                            ·                              ¸
                              0                    0      1      0
                     (1 − ψ)Γ2 = (1 − ψ) vec (A1 Hx Φ1 ) − vec (A1 Σxx A1 ) ,
                                                          2
which is also independent of ψ, since A1 does not depend on ψ, given B2 .

    Thus, (41) reduces to
                                             h 0                         i
                                vec (B2 ) = ρ V2 + Γ02 + vec (Φ01 B2 Φ1 ) .

This is a quadratic equation in B2 , whose coeﬃcients do not depend on ψ, except for ρ. The loglin-
earization coeﬃcient ρ ≡ 1 − exp(Et [ct − wt ]) does depend onψ indirectly, through the dependence
of Et [ct − wt ] on b0 , B1 and B2 , which are functions of ψ. Consequently, the solution for B2 will
also be independent of ψ given ρ.

    Using the same logic, we can show that B1 is independent of ψ. From (40) we have
            (1 − ψ)B1 = ρ [−V10 + (1 − ψ) Γ01 + (1 − ψ)Φ01 B1 + (1 − ψ)Φ01 (B2 + B20 ) Φ0 ] .         (42)


    Now,
                               1 − γ £¡           ¢                                ¤0
                   −V10     =            (1 − ψ)Π1 Σ0v (Φ01 (B2 + B20 ) + A01 Hx )
                              (1 − ψ)
                                              £                                 ¤0
                            = (1 − γ) (1 − ψ) Π1 Σ0v (Φ01 (B2 + B20 ) + A01 Hx )
                                          0
                            ≡ (1 − ψ)V 1
where
                                Π1 ≡ B10 + Φ00 (B2 + B20 ) + A00 Hx + H1 .
Both V 1 and Π1 are also independent of ψ, since A0 and A1 do not depend on ψ, given B1 and B2 .

    Also, Γ1 is only a function of B1 and B2 via its dependence on A0 and A1 , not of ψ. Therefore,
(42) becomes                       h 0                                   i
                            B1 = ρ V1 + Γ01 + Φ01 B1 + Φ01 (B2 + B20 ) Φ0 ,


                                                    8
which again implies that the solution for B1 does not depend on ψ given ρ This completes our
proof.¥

Value function when ψ = 1.

    First, note that we have just proved that B1 and B2 do not depend on ψ given ρ. We now derive
an expression for the value function when ψ = 1. The value function is given by
                                     µ        ¶ 1−ψ
                                                 1
                                ψ
                             − 1−ψ       Ct
            Vt   = (1 − δ)
                                         Wt
                       ½                                                                     ¾
                            ψ                   b0         B01      vec (B2 )0
                 = exp −        log (1 − δ) +         +        zt +            vec (zt z0t )
                           1−ψ                 1−ψ 1−ψ                1−ψ
                       ©      0              0         0
                                                          ª
                 = exp B0 + B1 zt + vec (B2 ) vec (zt zt ) ,

where B10 , and vec B2 are independent of ψ given ρ, but B0 does depend on ψ.

     We now find the limiting expression for B0 when ψ = 1:
           ψ                  b0
B0   = −     log (1 − δ) +
         1−ψ                1−ψ
           ψ
     = −     log (1 − δ)
         1−ψ
             ·                                                                                                    ¸
           ρ       ψ              k       V0              B01        vec (B2 )0                vec (B2 )0
       +      −        log δ +        −        + Γ0 +         Φ0 +              vec(Φ0 Φ00 ) +            vec(Σv )
         1−ρ    1−ψ             1−ψ 1−ψ                  1−ψ           1−ψ                       1−ψ
                  ·                                    ¸
         1   ρ       1−ρ
     =             −       ψ log (1 − δ) − ψ log δ + k
       1−ψ1−ρ          ρ
             ·                                                                          ¸
           ρ      V0              B01       vec (B2 )0         0     vec (B2 )0
       +      −        + Γ0 +         Φ0 +             vec(Φ0 Φ0 ) +            vec(Σv ) .
         1−ρ    1−ψ              1−ψ          1−ψ                      1−ψ


    Substituting k = log ρ + ((1 − ρ)/ρ) log(1 − ρ) into the first term of the last equality, and noting
that ρ = δ when ψ = 1, we have
                               ·                                    ¸
                    1     ρ       1−ρ
                                −       ψ log (1 − δ) − ψ log δ + k
                  1−ψ1−ρ            ρ
                               ·                                                           ¸
                    1     ρ       1−ρ                                      1−ρ
              =                 −       ψ log (1 − δ) − ψ log δ + log ρ +       log (1 − ρ)
                  1−ψ1−ρ            ρ                                        ρ
                               ·                                           ¸
                    1     ρ      1−ρ
              =                        (1 − ψ) log (1 − δ) + (1 − ψ) log δ
                  1−ψ1−ρ          ρ
                                  δ
              = log (1 − δ) +         log δ,
                                1−δ
which is independent of ψ.



                                                      9
    >From previous results, we know that all the terms in the second term of the last equality are
independent of ψ given ρ, except for V0 /(1 − ψ). We now verify that this term is also independent
of ψ given ρ:


                                  V0
                    V0     ≡
                                 1−ψ
                                          "                                         #
                               1−γ    Π1 Σv Π01   vec (B2 )0           vec (B2 )0
                           = −                  +            Var t (.)
                                2     (1 − ψ)2      1−ψ                  1−ψ
                                    "                                         #
                               1 − γ Π1 Σv Π01             0
                           = −                  + vec (B2 ) Vart (.) vec (B2 ) ,
                                 2    (1 − ψ)2
where the second term is independent of ψ given ρ, and the first one is also verifiably independent
of ψ:
              µ                                      ¶    µ                                          ¶
Π1 Σv Π01         B01       0             0 B2 + B2
                                                   0
                                                              B1          0         0   B2 + B2 0
           =            + A0 Hx + H1 + Φ0              Σv           + Hx A0 + H1 +                Φ0
(1 − ψ)2        (1 − ψ)                      1−ψ            (1 − ψ)                      (1 − ψ)
              ¡ 0                     ¡       ¢¢   ¡                        ¡      ¢   ¢
           = B1 + A00 Hx + H1 + Φ00 B2 +B02 Σv B1 + H0x A0 + H01 + B2 +B02 Φ0 ,
which does not depend on ψ given ρ.

    Thus when ψ = 1 we have:
                                     δ
          B0   = log (1 − δ) +          log δ
                                    1−δ
                        δ £                                                                 ¤
                   +       −V0 + Γ0 + B10 Φ0 + vec (B2 )0 vec(Φ0 Φ00 ) + vec (B2 )0 vec(Σv ) .
                       1−δ

     Now, since ρ is independent of ψ in the special case ψ = 1–because ρ = δ–, we conclude that
B0 , B1 and B2 are independent of ψ when ψ = 1.

Derivation of E[Vt ].

   >From the previous section, we learn how to obtain the coeﬃcient matrices B0 , B1 and B2 . Now
we want to evaluate explicitly

                                  E (Vt ) = E [exp (B0 + B10 zt + z0t B2 zt )]
where zt has a multivariate normal distribution
                                               zt ∼ N (µz , Σzz ) ,
with
                                     µz       = (Im − Φ1 )−1 Φ0 ,
                               vec (Σzz ) = (Im2 − Φ1 ⊗ Φ1 )−1 vec (Σv ) .

                                                       10
    First, consider a change of variable. Define

                                                  ht = zt − µz .

Then,
                                 B0 + B10 zt + z0t B2 zt = C0 + C1 ht + h0t C2 ht ,
where

                                       C0    ≡ B0 + B10 µz + µ0z B2 µz ,                           (43)
                                       C1    ≡ B10 + 2µ0z B2 ,                                     (44)
                                       C2    ≡ B2 .                                                (45)


    To calculate E (Vt ),

        E (Vt )
        Z ∞       Z ∞
    =         ···       exp (B0 + B10 zt + z0t B2 zt )
         −∞         −∞
          µ                      µ                               ¶¶
               1         − 12         1            0 −1
        × √ |Σzz | exp − (zt − µz ) Σzz (zt − µz )                    dz1t ...dzmt
                2π                    2
        Z ∞       Z ∞                                   µ                    µ           ¶¶
                                               0           1      − 12           1 0 −1
    =         ···       exp (C0 + C1 ht + ht C2 ht ) · √ |Σzz | exp − ht Σzz ht             dh1t ...dhmt
         −∞         −∞                                     2π                    2
                          Z ∞      Z ∞          µ                                   ¶
          1           1                                       1 ¡               ¢
    =   √ |Σzz |− 2 ·          ···         exp C0 + C1 ht − h0t Σ−1 zz − 2C2 ht dh1t ...dhmt
          2π                −∞      −∞                        2
                   ¯¡           ¢    ¯− 12
                 1 ¯  −1         −1 ¯         Z ∞      Z ∞     µ                                 ¶
        |Σzz |− 2 ¯ Σzz − 2C2        ¯                                          1 0 ¡ −1    ¢
    =     √        ¯                        ·     ···      exp C0 + C1 ht − ht Σzz − 2C2 ht dh1t ...dhmt
            2π ¯¡ −1            ¢−1 ¯¯− 12     −∞       −∞                      2
                   ¯ Σzz − 2C2       ¯
                    1
            |Σzz |− 2
    =   ¯¡ −1      ¢¯ 1
        ¯ Σzz − 2C2 ¯ 2
                                      Z         Z ∞     µ                               ¶
           1 ¯¯¡            ¢−1 ¯¯− 12 ∞                             1 0 ¡ −1       ¢
        × √ ¯ Σ−1zz −   2C2      ¯        · · ·     exp  C0 + C h
                                                               1 t −  h   Σ   − 2C2   ht dh1t ...dhmt
           2π                          −∞        −∞                  2 t zz
                    1
            |Σzz |− 2     e (exp (C0 + C1 ht )) ,
    =   ¯¡ −1      ¢¯ 1 · E
        ¯ Σzz − 2C2 ¯ 2

where the expectation Ee is taken as if ht is normally distributed with mean zero and covariance
       ¡ −1       ¢−1
matrix Σzz − 2C2      . Thus, we immediately have
                                            1            µ                          ¶
                                    |Σzz |− 2                  1 ¡ −1         ¢−1 0
                        E (Vt ) = ¯¡          ¢¯ 12 · exp C0 + 2 C1 Σzz − 2C2    C1 .              (46)
                                  ¯ Σ−1
                                     zz − 2C2
                                               ¯

¥

                                                        11
B      Appendix B: Numerical Procedure
Equations (21) and (40) show that the coeﬃcients {A0 , A1 } , {b0 , B1 , vec(B2 )} in the optimal policy
rules are functions of the underlying parameters. When there is one state variable as in Campbell
and Viceira (1999), solving explicitly for these coeﬃcients is manageable. However, with multiple
state variables, such an exercise is practically impossible. Therefore, we employ a simple numerical
procedure to find these coeﬃcients instead.

    To find the coeﬃcients of the optimal portfolio rule for each value of γ, we use the fact that they
are independent of ψ given ρ. Thus, for each γ, we fix a value for ρ, choose an arbitrary value for ψ,
                                                                            (1)          (1)
and start with some initial values for {B1 , vec (B2 )}–denote these by {B1 , vec (B2 ) }. Through
                                                                                (1)  (1)
equation (21), this implies a set of values for {A0 , A1 }–denote these by {A0 , A1 }.
                (1)   (1)    (1)         (1)
    With ρ, {A0 , A1 }, {B1 ,vec(B2 ) }, we can compute the coeﬃcients {Ξ1 , Ξ2 } in the c − w
diﬀerence equation (39). By equating these coeﬃcients with the {B1 , vec(B2 )} in the conjectured
                                                                                   (2)
policy function, we have a new set of values for {B1 , vec (B2 )}–call them {B1 ,vec(B2 )(2) }. Since
                                    (2)        (2)                           (1)       (1)
the initial values are arbitrary, {B1 ,vec(B2 ) } will be diﬀerent from {B1 ,vec(B2 ) } in general.
                                                (2)        (2)           (2)     (2)
Thus, we recompute {A0 , A1 } using ρ,and {B1 ,vec(B2 ) } to get {A0 , A1 }. We obtain then a
new set of values for {Ξ1 , Ξ2 }. We continue until values of {B1 , vec(B2 )}, and hence {A0 , A1 },
converge.

     The convergence criterion for {B1 , vec (B2 )} is rather stringent. We first calculate the maximum
of the squared deviations of all elements from 2 consecutive iterations. We then require for parameter
convergence that the sum of 20 such consecutive maxima be less than 0.00001.

    Note once again that coeﬃcients {A0 , A1 } are the same for all values of ψ given the loglin-
earization parameter ρ. In the special case ψ = 1, we also have that ρ = δ, so that the solution is
exact, and choosing a value for ρ is equivalent to choosing a value for δ. When ψ is not equal to one,
we implement a recursive procedure similar to the one described in Campbell and Viceira (1999,
2001). Given an initial value of ρ, we compute coeﬃcients {A0 , A1 } , {b0 , B1 , vec(B2 )} using the
procedure described above. From {b0 , B1 , vec(B2 )}, we can compute Et [ct − wt ], and a new value
of ρ. We iterate until convergence.




                                                  12
C       Appendix C: Construction of Hypothetical Real
        Bonds
Recall that the first element of our VAR system is the ex post real bill return. Therefore, the ex
ante log real bill return at time t + 1 is the first element of Et (zt+1 ) = Φ0 + Φ1 zt . In other words,
the log real yield at time t is given by

                                       yb1t = H1 · Et (zt+1 ) ≡ H1 · b
                                                                     zt,t+1 ,

where H1 ≡ (1, 0, ..., 0) and b
                              zt,t+1 ≡Et (zt+1 ) .

    The next step is to assume that the log expectations hypothesis holds for the real term structure;
that is,
                                                n−1
                                              1X
                                      yn,t =        Et (y1,t+i ) ,
                                              n i=0
where yn,t is the log yield on a real bond with maturity n. Note that we have implicitly assume
that inflation risk premium is zero. An estimate of yn,t can be easily constructed as follows:
                                                n−1             n−1
                                              1X              1X
                                ybn,t =             yb1,t+i =       H1 · b
                                                                         zt,t+i+1 .
                                              n i=0           n i=0


     To compute b
                zt,t+i+1 , we can iterate the VAR(1) system forward to get
                                                    
                                              k−1
                                              X j
                                   zt,t+k = 
                                   b              Φ1  Φ0 + Φk1 zt .
                                                          j=0



    Using this result, log yield can be expressed as a function of current state variables:
                                                         n
                                                         X
                                                1
                              ybn,t       =         H1         b
                                                               zt,t+i
                                                n        i=1
                                                                                     
                                                         n
                                                         X       Xi−1
                                                1              
                                          =       H1                  Φj1  Φ0 + Φi1 zt 
                                                n    i=1           j=0

                                                1
                                          ≡       H1 (Qc + Qn zt )
                                                n
where
                                              n
                                              X
                            Qn        ≡             Φi1 = Φ1 (Im − Φ1 )−1 (Im − Φn1 ) ,
                                              i=1

                             Qc       ≡ (Im − Φ1 )−1 (Im − Qn ) Φ0 ,

                                                                13
and Im is the identity matrix, m = dim(zt ).

    Finally, the 1-period return on a hypothetical real n-period bond is calculated as

                                 rn,t+1          yn,t − (n − 1) ybn−1,t+1
                                              = nb
                                                 yn,t − (n − 1) ybn,t+1
                                              ≈ nb

And the excess return on the hypothetical real n-period bond is

                   rn,t+1 − r1,t+1
                    yn,t − (n − 1) ybn,t+1 ) − yb1t
                = (nb
                  ½                                                ¾
                                         n−1
                =   H1 (Qc + Qn zt ) −           H1 (Qc + Qn zt+1 ) − H1 (Φ0 + Φ1 zt ) .
                                            n

    The next step is to construct a real perpetuity from these zero-coupon bonds. Campbell, Lo and
MacKinlay (1997) show how to use a loglinearization framework to construct real perpetuity returns.
Specifically,their equations (10.1.16) and (10.1.17) show that the log yield on a real perpetuity or
“consol” yc,∞,t is given by
                                                      ∞
                                                      X
                                   yc,∞,t = (1 − ρc )   ρic rc,∞,t+1+i ,
                                                           i=0

where rc,∞,t+i is the one-period log return on a perpetuity at time t + i and ρc = 1 − exp (E[−pc,t ]) ,
where pc,t is the log “cum-dividend” price of the perpetuity including its current coupon payout.

    Taking conditional expectations at time t and imposing the expectations hypothesis,
                                   ∞
                                   X
            yc,∞,t   = (1 − ρc )         ρic H1b
                                               zt,t+i+1
                                   i=0
                                                                Ã∞        !
                                     X∞    i
                                           X                       X
                     = H1 (1 − ρc )     i
                                        ρc    j
                                             Φ1 Φ0 + H1 (1 − ρc )     i i+1
                                                                     ρc Φ1    zt .
                                           i=0     j=0                            i=0

It is straightforward to show that
                              ∞
                              X          i
                                         X                 1                 −1
                                   ρic       Φj1   =            (Im − ρc Φ1 ) ,
                              i=0   j=0
                                                         1 − ρc
                                X∞
                                    ρic Φi+1
                                         1         = (Im − ρc Φ1 )−1 Φ1 .
                                i=0

Thus, the log yield can be expressed as function of the VAR parameters, current state variables and
the loglinearization constant ρc :

                  yc,∞,t = H1 (Im − ρc Φ1 )−1 Φ0 + H1 (1 − ρc ) (Im − ρc Φ1 )−1 Φ1 zt .




                                                         14
D   Appendix D: Tables




                         15
                                           TABLE A
                           VAR Estimation Results
                   Nominal Bills, Stocks and Real Consol Bond
                     A: Quarterly Sample (1952.Q2 - 1999.Q4)
   Dependent          rtbt       xrt        xrcbt       yt        (d − p)t      sprt        R2
    Variable           (t)       (t)         (t)        (t)          (t)         (t)        (p)
  VAR Estimation Results
    rtbt+1           0.435       0.005      0.015      0.270       -0.001       0.428      0.338
                    (6.154)     (0.775)    (0.359)    (3.478)     (-1.173)     (2.261)    (0.000)
                    (6.154)     (0.775)    (0.359)    (3.478)     (-1.173)     (2.261)    (0.000)
    xrt+1            1.866       0.079      0.919 -2.341           0.050        0.201      0.084
                    (1.559)     (0.953)    (1.580) (-2.627)       (2.404)      (0.077)    (0.008)
    xrcbt+1          0.000       0.000      0.000      0.000       0.000        0.000      0.000
                    (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)    (1.000)
    yt+1            -0.001       0.004 -0.000      0.948           0.000        0.120      0.868
                   (-0.024)     (1.505) (-0.009) (18.671)         (0.002)      (1.151)    (0.000)
    (d − p)t+1      -1.972 -0.072 -0.819               1.640    0.959          -0.955      0.932
                   (-1.615) (-0.803) (-1.333)         (1.765) (44.168)        (-0.355)    (0.000)
    sprt+1           0.009 -0.000           0.009      0.026       -0.000    0.743         0.540
                    (0.304) (-0.045)       (0.586)    (0.815)     (-0.232) (10.996)       (0.000)


  Cross-Correlation of Residuals
                      rtb         xr        xrcb         y        (d − p)       spr
    rtb              0.551       0.228     -0.465     -0.390       -0.228       0.183
    xr               -           7.764     -0.351     -0.164       -0.981       0.023
    xrcb             -           -          1.236     -0.408        0.333       0.111
    y                -           -          -          0.256        0.196      -0.776
    (d − p)          -           -          -          -            7.946      -0.056
    spr              -           -          -          -            -           0.172


    Note: rtbt = ex post real T-Bill rate, xrt = excess stock return, xrcbt = excess real consol bond return,
(d − p)t = log dividend-price ratio, yt = nominal T-bill yield, sprt = yield spread. The bond is a 5-year
nominal bond in the quarterly dataset and a 20-year for the annual dataset.
                                       TABLE A (Ctd.)
                           VAR Estimation Results
                   Nominal Bills, Stocks and Real Consol Bond
                             B: Annual Sample (1890 - 1998)
   Dependent          rtbt       xrt        xrcbt       yt        (d − p)t      sprt        R2
    Variable           (t)       (t)         (t)        (t)          (t)         (t)        (p)
  VAR Estimation Results
    rtbt+1           0.309 -0.056           0.000      0.604       -0.009      -0.548      0.235
                    (2.299) (-1.467)       (0.004)    (2.546)     (-0.320)    (-1.081)    (0.000)
    xrt+1           -0.096       0.078 -0.211          0.052       0.136        1.682      0.058
                   (-0.270)     (0.650) (-1.100)      (0.080)     (2.385)      (1.217)    (0.314)
    xrcbt+1          0.000       0.000      0.000      0.000       0.000        0.000      0.000
                    (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)    (1.000)
    yt+1            -0.058 -0.013 -0.017        0.897              -0.006       0.098      0.774
                   (-2.142) (-1.928) (-1.035) (11.157)            (-1.343)     (0.956)    (0.000)
    (d − p)t+1      -0.362 -0.136           0.192 -0.928      0.826            -1.505      0.719
                   (-1.202) (-1.310)       (1.047) (-1.498) (12.505)          (-1.113)    (0.000)
    sprt+1           0.030       0.003      0.011      0.093       0.004        0.767      0.541
                    (1.565)     (0.500)    (0.962)    (1.672)     (1.245)      (9.785)    (0.000)


  Cross-Correlation of Residuals
                      rtb        xr         xrcb         y        (d − p)       spr
    rtb              7.619     -0.169      -0.839      0.126        0.109      -0.160
    xr               -         17.429       0.166     -0.149       -0.721       0.196
    xrcb             -          -          12.416     -0.579       -0.026       0.617
    y                -          -           -          1.235        0.205      -0.892
    (d − p)          -          -           -          -          16.104       -0.185
    spr              -          -           -          -            -           0.977


    Note: rtbt = ex post real T-Bill rate, xrt = excess stock return, xrcbt = excess real consol bond return,
(d − p)t = log dividend-price ratio, yt = nominal T-bill yield, sprt = yield spread. The bond is a 5-year
nominal bond in the quarterly dataset and a 20-year for the annual dataset.
                                                 TABLE B
                                VAR Estimation Results
              Nominal Bills, Stocks, Real Consol Bond, and Nominal Bond
                             A: Quarterly Sample (1952.Q2 - 1999.Q4)
   Dependent          rtbt       xrt        xnbt       xrcbt        yt       (d − p)t      sprt        R2
    Variable           (t)       (t)         (t)        (t)         (t)         (t)         (t)        (p)
  VAR Estimation Results
    rtbt+1           0.593       0.012 -0.058          0.128      0.236       -0.001       0.409      0.352
                    (5.344)     (1.984) (-1.929)      (1.967)    (3.129)     (-0.721)     (2.178)    (0.000)
    xrt+1            0.962       0.038      0.329      0.276 -2.148            0.047       0.310      0.087
                    (0.558)     (0.394)    (0.729)    (0.261) (-2.286)        (2.277)     (0.119)    (0.006)
    xnbt+1           0.375 -0.038 -0.189               0.280      0.314        0.003       2.968      0.099
                    (0.727) (-1.473) (-1.128)         (0.866)    (0.731)      (0.441)     (2.700)    (0.002)
    xrcbt+1          0.000       0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000        0.000       0.000      0.000
                    (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)    (1.000)
    yt+1            -0.042       0.002      0.015 -0.029      0.957           -0.000       0.125      0.869
                   (-0.769)     (0.816)    (0.778) (-0.935) (19.692)         (-0.260)     (1.204)    (0.000)
    (d − p)t+1      -0.980 -0.027 -0.362 -0.112                   1.428    0.962          -1.074      0.932
                   (-0.539) (-0.262) (-0.757) (-0.102)           (1.457) (44.524)        (-0.401)    (0.000)
    sprt+1           0.019       0.000 -0.004          0.017      0.024       -0.000    0.741         0.540
                    (0.506)     (0.175) (-0.298)      (0.802)    (0.779)     (-0.138) (10.975)       (0.000)


  Cross-Correlation of Residuals
                      rtb         xr        xnb        xrcb          y       (d − p)       spr
    rtb              0.545       0.239      0.389     -0.462      -0.384      -0.240       0.181
    xr               -           7.751      0.228     -0.355      -0.170      -0.981       0.025
    xnb              -           -          2.670      0.543      -0.764      -0.245       0.195
    xrcb             -           -          -          1.236      -0.414       0.337       0.112
    y                -           -          -          -           0.255       0.202      -0.776
    (d − p)          -           -          -          -           -           7.932      -0.058
    spr              -           -          -          -           -           -           0.172


    Note: rtbt = ex post real T-Bill rate, xrt = excess stock return, xrcbt = excess real consol bond return,
(d − p)t = log dividend-price ratio, yt = nominal T-bill yield, xnbt = excess nominal long bond return, sprt
= yield spread. The bond is a 5-year nominal bond in the quarterly dataset and a 20-year for the annual
dataset.
                                            TABLE B (Ctd.)
                                VAR Estimation Results
              Nominal Bills, Stocks, Real Consol Bond, and Nominal Bond
                                 B: Annual Sample (1890 - 1998)
   Dependent          rtbt       xrt        xnbt       xrcbt        yt       (d − p)t      sprt        R2
    Variable           (t)       (t)         (t)        (t)         (t)         (t)         (t)        (p)
  VAR Estimation Results
    rtbt+1           0.305 -0.052           0.122      0.002      0.700       -0.004      -0.781      0.240
                    (2.258) (-1.314)       (0.902)    (0.026)    (2.380)     (-0.147)    (-1.177)    (0.000)
    xrt+1           -0.093       0.074 -0.098 -0.212 -0.025                    0.132       1.869      0.059
                   (-0.262)     (0.616) (-0.332) (-1.114) (-0.036)            (2.371)     (1.251)    (0.305)
    xnbt+1           0.223       0.106 -0.196          0.023 -0.117            0.012       2.566      0.393
                    (1.890)     (2.954) (-1.485)      (0.274) (-0.333)        (0.612)     (5.118)    (0.000)
    xrcbt+1          0.000       0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000        0.000       0.000      0.000
                    (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)    (1.000)
    yt+1            -0.059 -0.012           0.036 -0.017      0.925           -0.005       0.029      0.779
                   (-2.239) (-1.746)       (1.280) (-1.037) (12.568)         (-1.115)     (0.249)    (0.000)
    (d − p)t+1      -0.373 -0.124           0.363      0.197 -0.642      0.840            -2.198      0.723
                   (-1.260) (-1.174)       (1.163)    (1.103) (-0.992) (13.412)          (-1.459)    (0.000)
    sprt+1           0.030       0.002 -0.013          0.011      0.083        0.004       0.791      0.543
                    (1.593)     (0.415) (-0.649)      (0.953)    (1.557)      (1.142)     (8.432)    (0.000)


  Cross-Correlation of Residuals
                      rtb        xr         xnb        xrcb          y       (d − p)       spr
    rtb              7.592     -0.168      -0.020     -0.842       0.115       0.101      -0.155
    xr               -         17.422      -0.017      0.166      -0.146      -0.723       0.195
    xnb              -          -           5.099      0.257      -0.651      -0.059       0.262
    xrcb             -          -           -         12.416      -0.585      -0.026       0.618
    y                -          -           -          -           1.221       0.191      -0.894
    (d − p)          -          -           -          -           -         15.996       -0.179
    spr              -          -           -          -           -           -           0.975


    Note: rtbt = ex post real T-Bill rate, xrt = excess stock return, xrcbt = excess real consol bond return,
(d − p)t = log dividend-price ratio, yt = nominal T-bill yield, xnbt = excess nominal long bond return, sprt
= yield spread. The bond is a 5-year nominal bond in the quarterly dataset and a 20-year for the annual
dataset.
                     TABLE C
  Mean Asset Demands with Hypothetical Real Bonds
            (Annual Sample: 1890 - 1998)
      A: Nominal Bills, Stocks, and Real Consol Bond
      State Variables:                   Constant           Full VAR
    γ = 1, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.92
      Stocks                              200.45             226.91
      Real Consol Bond                    -54.43             -64.46
      Cash                                -46.02             -62.45

    γ = 2, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.92
      Stocks                              100.58             140.21
      Real Consol Bond                     -1.02             -10.05
      Cash                                  0.43             -30.16

    γ = 5, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.92
      Stocks                               40.67              65.69
      Real Consol Bond                     31.03              44.67
      Cash                                 28.30             -10.36

    γ = 20, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.92
      Stocks                               10.71              17.40
      Real Consol Bond                     47.06              82.94
      Cash                                 42.24              -0.34

    γ = 2000, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.92
      Stocks                                0.82              -0.84
      Real Consol Bond                     52.34              97.86
      Cash                                 46.84               2.98

    Note: “Constant” column reports mean asset demands when the VAR system only has a constant in
each regression, corresponding to the case in which risk premia are constant and realized returns on all
assets, including the short-term real interest rate, are i.i.d. “Full VAR” column reports mean asset demands
when the VAR system includes all state variables. The nominal bond is a 5-year nominal bond in the
quarterly dataset and a 20-year in the annual dataset.
                         TABLE C (ctd.)
          Mean Asset Demands with Hypothetical Real Bonds
                    (Annual Sample: 1890 - 1998)
  B: Nominal Bills, Stocks, Real Consol Bond and Nominal Bond
      State Variables:                   Constant                  Full VAR
    γ = 1, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.92
      Stocks                              198.39                    232.42
      Real Consol Bond                    -68.22                    -97.56
      Nominal Bond                        143.96                    301.23
      Cash                               -174.13                   -336.09

    γ = 2, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.92
      Stocks                               99.61                    137.51
      Real Consol Bond                     -7.54                    -30.05
      Nominal Bond                         68.06                    163.36
      Cash                                -60.13                   -170.81

    γ = 5, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.92
      Stocks                               40.34                     60.01
      Real Consol Bond                     28.87                     39.15
      Nominal Bond                         22.51                     64.02
      Cash                                  8.27                    -63.18

    γ = 20, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.92
      Stocks                               10.71                     15.95
      Real Consol Bond                     47.08                     81.05
      Nominal Bond                         -0.26                     19.78
      Cash                                 42.47                    -16.79

    γ = 2000, ψ = 1, ρ = 0.92
      Stocks                                0.93                      0.61
      Real Consol Bond                     53.09                     95.75
      Nominal Bond                         -7.77                      7.58
      Cash                                 53.75                     -3.94

    Note: “Constant” column reports mean asset demands when the VAR system only has a constant in
each regression, corresponding to the case in which risk premia are constant and realized returns on all
assets, including the short-term real interest rate, are i.i.d. “Full VAR” column reports mean asset demands
when the VAR system includes all state variables. The nominal bond is a 5-year nominal bond in the
quarterly dataset and a 20-year in the annual dataset.
                    TABLE D
          Mean Value Function (ψ = 1 Case)
           (Annual Sample: 1890 - 1998)
      γ              E[Vt ]
Nominal Bills and Stocks
      1               0.164
      2               0.088
      5               0.050
     20               0.015
   2000               0.000
Nominal Bills, Stocks, and Nominal Bond
      1              14.911
      2               0.446
      5               0.086
     20               0.018
   2000               0.000
Nominal Bills, Stocks, and Real Consol Bond
      1               0.175
      2               0.090
      5               0.053
     20               0.038
   2000               0.014
Nominal Bills, Stocks, Nominal Bond, and Real Consol Bond
      1              37.37
      2               0.526
      5               0.095
     20               0.023
   2000               0.014
