                                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE GEOGRAPHIC REACH OF MARKET AND NON-MARKET CHANNELS OF
       TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER: COMPARING CITATIONS AND LICENSES OF
                          UNIVERSITY PATENTS


                                               David C. Mowery
                                               Arvids A. Ziedonis


                                              Working Paper 8568
                                      http://www.nber.org/papers/w8568


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        October 2001


Authors listed in alphabetical order. This paper builds on earlier research by Michael Barnes, David Mowery, and Arvids
Ziedonis. Research support was generously provided by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Andrew Mellon Foundation,
the California Policy Seminar, the U.S. Air Force Office of Scientific Research, and the Mack Center for Technological
Innovation at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. We are indebted to Dr. Suzanne Quick and Lynn
Fissell of the University of California Office of Technology Transfer, Michael Barnes of the University of California
Office of the President, and Sandra Bradford of the Stanford University Office of Technology Licensing for generous
access to data at their respective universities. We also thank Bhaven Sampat for data from Columbia University.
Bronwyn Hall, Richard Nelson, Bhaven Sampat, Scott Stern, Rosemarie Ziedonis, and seminar participants at UC
Berkeley, University of Pennsylvania, the University of Maryland, the University of Reading, and the Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia gave us many helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.



© 2001 by David C. Mowery and Arvids A. Ziedonis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
The Geographic Reach of Market and Non-Market Channels of Technology Transfer:
Comparing Citations and Licenses of University Patents
David C. Mowery and Arvids A. Ziedonis
NBER Working Paper No. 8568
October 2001
JEL No. O31, O32, R12



                                               ABSTRACT


        The growth of high-technology clusters in the United States suggests the presence of strong
regional agglomeration effects that reflect proximity to universities or other research institutions. Using
data on licensed patents from the University of California, Stanford University, and Columbia University,
this paper compares the geographic “reach” of knowledge flows from university inventions through two
important channels: non-market “spillovers” exemplified by patent citations and market contracts
(licenses). We find that knowledge flows through market transactions to be more geographically
localized than those operating through non-market “spillovers.” Moreover, the differential effects of
distance on licenses and citations are most pronounced for exclusively licensed university patents. We
interpret these findings as reflecting the incomplete nature of licensing contracts and the need for licensees
to maintain access to inventor know-how for many university inventions. Such access appears to be less
important for inventions that are non-exclusively licensed (e.g. “research tools”).




David C. Mowery                                                    Arvids A. Ziedonis
Haas School of Business                                            The Wharton School
University of California, Berkeley                                 University of Pennsylvania
and NBER                                                           2000 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
                                                                   University of Pennsylvania
                                                                   Philadelphia, PA 19104-6370
                                                                   Email: ziedonisa@wharton.upenn.edu
1.     Introduction

       A substantial body of recent research has examined the contributions of university

research to regional economic development and technological innovation (Jaffe 1989; Jaffe,

Trajtenberg, and Henderson 1993; Acs, Audretsch, and Feldman 1992, 1994; Audretsch and

Stephan 1996; Zucker, Darby, and Armstrong 1998; Agrawal 2000; Adams 2001). Interest in

this topic has been sparked by the extensive historical and anecdotal evidence of links between

U.S. university research and the growth of high-technology industries such as semiconductors,

computer software, and biotechnology. The growth of these high-technology clusters in the

United States suggests the presence of strong regional agglomeration effects that reflect

proximity to universities or other research institutions. Accordingly, much of the literature on

the economic contributions of university research has focused on the extent to which these

contributions are localized.

       This literature suggests that the channels through which university-based research affects

regional economic or innovative activity may be divided into two broad categories: knowledge

“spillovers” (i.e., positive externalities from university research that affect the performance of

nearby firms) and “market-based” channels such as technology licensing or various types of

employment relationships between academic scientists and firms. Most of this empirical

research suggests that the economic or innovative contributions of university-based research tend

to be geographically concentrated, but little or no empirical research has yet compared the

geographic “incidence” of these market and nonmarket channels of interaction. This paper

undertakes such an analysis, comparing the localization of outflows of university-based research

through citations to university patents and through licenses that involve these same patents.

       We conduct this analysis at the regional rather than the state level, disaggregate among

broad technological areas, and control for inter-regional differences in industrial composition and


                                                  2
population. Our empirical analysis contains important limitations. The data are drawn from a

small set of research universities that may not be representative of all U.S. universities. In

addition, our comparative analysis of knowledge flows in patent citations and licensing

agreements excludes other potential channels of interaction. Nevertheless, the opportunity to

consider multiple avenues of technology transfer for the same set of inventions allows us to

address questions that thus far have been overlooked in the literature.

       A finding that the geographic “reach” of knowledge spillovers differs from those of

market-based channels has significant implications for industrial managers and university

administrators. Managerial decisions on the location of R&D and other knowledge-intensive

activities often are influenced by beliefs about the characteristics of the channels through which

academic knowledge is transferred to industrial practice. And for university administrators,

especially those in public universities, the renewed concern of federal and state policymakers

with the level of economic returns from university-based research is matched only by these

policymakers’ concerns with the national and regional distribution of these returns.

       Immediately below, we consider the reasons for the observed localization of the effects of

university research and discuss some of the prior literature on geographic localization. This

section is followed by an explanation of our data sources and methodology. Section 4 presents

and discusses our empirical findings, and Section 5 concludes the paper.


2.     Why Are the Effects of University Research Localized?

       The extensive literature on technology management and the economics of innovation

argues that virtually all technologies contain important “tacit” elements such as aspects of know-

how, performance, operations, etc., that cannot be easily codified in a blueprint, a published

article, or a contractual document. Oral communication of tacit knowledge over long distances



                                                  3
may be ineffective or infeasible. As a result, technology transfer is frequently described as a

“contact sport,” in which the transfer or exchange of personnel is essential. The limited

geographic reach of such channels for the exchange of information and know-how is widely

cited as one of the leading causes of regional agglomeration economies. Marshall (1896) pointed

out in his celebrated discussion of this topic that in such areas, “the mysteries of the industry are

in the air,” and therefore presumably more accessible to local participants or would-be entrants.

       Despite the enormous outpouring of literature on “industrial districts” and regional high-

technology complexes such as Silicon Valley in Northern California or Route 128 in

Massachusetts, the mechanisms that create and sustain these regional concentrations are not well

understood. Knowledge “spillovers,” which are widely believed to be important to these

localized economic and innovative effects, are defined by economists to be “externalities,” for

which the source of the spillover is not fully compensated. For example, technical knowledge

acquired through the trade press or by participation in industry conferences constitutes a

knowledge spillover. In other words, pure knowledge “spillovers” operate through non-market

mechanisms. But many other channels for technology transfer that sustain regional

concentrations of industry are market-based. For example, the extensive regional high-

technology infrastructures in the Boston or San Francisco areas of lawyers, venture capitalists,

consultants, equipment suppliers, and the like all operate within markets for labor, services, and

information. At the same time, however, contracts for new or complex technologies frequently

are incomplete, markets for such technologies are often thin and subject to “small-numbers”

problems, and contracts rarely can codify all knowledge necessary for the exploitation of the

technology (Arrow 1962, Williamson 1975, Mowery 1983). There are strong reasons to suspect




                                                  4
that these and other factors limit the geographic reach of market mechanisms for the transfer of

relatively new technologies.

       The literature on universities’ regional economic effects also reaches a mixed verdict on

the relative importance of market and non-market-based channels in the realization of these

effects. Jaffe, Trajtenberg and Henderson (1993) examine the extent to which “spillovers” of

university-based research are locally concentrated using citations to university patents to

measure spillovers. These scholars measure the localization of these spillovers by examining the

relative proportions of university patents and a “control sample” of patents from the same years

and technology classes that are cited by inventors in the same state and in the same “standard

metropolitan statistical area” (SMSA).1 They find significant localization effects; inventors of

patents that cite university patents are more likely to be in the same state or SMSA than are

inventors that cite patents from their control sample.

       No attempt is made to compare the strength of localization effects by technological area,

although Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Henderson do note that these localization effects are similar for

patent citations that span patent classes and those within patent classes. Although their analysis

excludes self-citations, their data do not enable Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Henderson to control for

the potential existence of market relationships (e.g., licenses) between firms citing university

patents and the universities or inventors whose patents are cited. To the extent that these market

relationships exist, these scholars’ findings of localization may reflect the operation of market

and non-market channels of knowledge transfer, rather than a pure knowledge spillover.

       Indeed, recent research by Lynne Zucker and Michael Darby and their co-authors

(Zucker, Darby, and Armstrong 1998; and Zucker, Darby, and Brewer 1999) suggests that a




                                                 5
significant fraction of knowledge transfer between universities and biotechnology firms can be

attributed to market-mediated interactions between a relatively small number of “star”

university-based scientists and biotechnology firms.2 Rather than spillovers, Zucker and

colleagues argue that knowledge flows from universities to industry through these “star”

academic scientists’ industrial roles as principals, consultants, employees, or members of

scientific advisory boards. Their analysis shows that co-authorship between industry scientists

and academic “stars” has a significant and positive effect on the number of new products being

developed by biotechnology firms. Related (less robust) results suggest that knowledge transfer

between university scientists and firms is enhanced further by contractual affiliations between

the scientists and the firms in the sample. These results suggest that the geographic “knowledge

networks” that link academic researchers and industrial innovators operate largely through

market channels.

        Zucker and Darby’s results contrast with those of Audretsch and Stephan (1996), who

examined interactions between university-based scientists and firms based on disclosures in

biotechnology firms’ initial public offering (IPO) documents about academic researchers’ roles

in the firms. Audretsch and Stephan find that “approximately 70 percent of the links between

biotechnology companies and university-based scientists are non-local” (p. 649), and conclude

that “While proximity matters in establishing formal ties between university-based scientists and

companies, the influence is anything but overwhelming” (p. 650). The Audretsch-Stephan

results introduce yet another interpretation of the channels of interaction between universities

1
  The “control sample” of patents provides a means of controlling for regional variations in industry
composition, since the citation of patents in the same year and technology class as those from local
universities is (other things equal) likely to reflect local industrial concentration.
2
  Zucker, Darby, Armstrong, and Brewer define “star” scientists as those active researchers at the “leading
edge” of basic science research. In biotechnology, they identified 327 scientists worldwide who reported




                                                    6
and industry. Like Zucker and Darby, Audretsch and Stephan argue that university-industry

knowledge interactions operate primarily through market channels. But Audretsch and Stephan

find that proximity is not essential to the operation of these market channels:

        “…geographic proximity matters when knowledge spillovers are informal. But
        an important conclusion of this paper is that when knowledge is transmitted
        through formal ties between researchers and firms, geographic proximity is not
        necessary, since face to face contact does not occur by chance but instead is
        carefully planned.” (p. 651)

        Agrawal (2000) examines the role of geography in university-industry interaction for a

sample of 124 electrical, mechanical, and software technologies licensed from the Massachusetts

Institute of Technology (MIT). Although geographic proximity is positively associated with the

likelihood and extent of product commercial success (measured by probability of product

introduction and level of licensing royalties) for these technologies, this significant effect

vanishes when Agrawal controls for the intensity of university researchers’ involvement with the

licensee.3 Although it is apparent from the analysis that for many university-invented

technologies, which are often at an early stage of development, inventor interaction is important,

geographic localization effects may still be important. The sample in the Agrawal study is

selected from licensed technologies only, and these technologies may be licensed by nearby



at least 40 genetic sequencing discoveries in the Genebank database or published a minimum of 20
genetic sequencing discoveries.
3
  Zucker, Darby, and Armstrong, and Brewer operationalized firm-scientist interaction as article co-
authorship and Audretch and Stephan categorized scientist roles from information in IPO documents.
Agrawal measures the intensity of interaction between university researchers and licensees as the number
of hours that university researchers devote to direct collaboration with the licensee firm to solve technical
and development problems after the invention is licensed from MIT, but before revenues are generated.
Interestingly, although the licensing agreement represents a market-based instrument for interaction,
interaction between the firm and university researchers may or may not be governed by contractual
agreements. For example, some MIT faculty may maintain consulting, employment, or founding
relationships with the firms in Agrawal’s sample of licensees. Likewise, involvement by graduate student
researchers with licensee firms may occur through employment or thesis research. Nevertheless, it is
clear from the analysis that collaboration with MIT researchers aided the commercial success of licensees,
no matter how these collaborations were organized.


                                                     7
firms because of the ability to interact with university researchers that geographic proximity may

afford.4

           Taken together, the findings of these four studies suggest that geographic proximity to

university research is important not only for non-market spillovers, but also for market channels

of interaction and knowledge exchange.5 But none of these studies directly compares

localization of market and non-market channels of technology transfer for the same set of

inventions. That issue is the focus of our empirical investigation.


3.         Data and Methods

           The primary sources of data for our empirical analysis are the technology transfer offices

at Columbia University, the University of California, and Stanford University. According to a

recent licensing survey by the Association of University Technology Managers’ (AUTM 2000),

these three universities were among the top five recipients of gross licensing income from patent

licenses among U.S. universities in fiscal year 1999 ($96 million, $81 million, and $40 million,

respectively). The University of California has been a licensor of faculty-invented technology

since at least the 1950s, while Stanford established its Office of Technology Licensing (OTL) in

1970. Columbia established its technology transfer office in 1981, shortly after passage of the

Bayh-Dole Act, which simplified the process by which universities could retain and license

intellectual property resulting from federally funded research. Our sample includes inventions

from the Stanford and Columbia campuses, plus all nine University of California campuses

4
  In a survey of sixty-two university technology transfer offices, Jensen and Thursby (2001) found that
48% of licensed technologies were at only the “proof of concept” stage of development, and that for an
additional 29% only a lab-scale prototype existed at time of licensing. These findings suggest that many
licensed university technologies are characterized by substantial uncertainty and require sizeable
development efforts. In light of these characteristics of the university inventions, it is not surprising that
personal interaction between researcher and firm often is necessary for commercial success.




                                                      8
(Berkeley, Davis, Irvine, Los Angeles, Riverside, San Diego, San Francisco, Santa Barbara, and

Santa Cruz), or eleven inventing locations in all.

        Internal records at these three university technology transfer offices contain a wealth of

information on the inventions of faculty, students, and research staff. University policies require

that researchers “disclose” new inventions through a formal invention disclosure document.

“Invention disclosures” from these universities enable one to trace (1) whether a patent

application was filed in the U.S. and other industrial economies; (2) whether a patent was issued

for the invention; (3) whether the patent was licensed to private firms, the general terms (e.g.,

exclusive or nonexclusive) of the license, and the identity and location of the licensee; and (4)

the amount if any of license fees and royalties for each license. The University of California data

cover more than 10,000 invention reports dating back to the 1950s, the Columbia University data

contain information on 1,600 inventions disclosed since 1981, and the Stanford University data

contain over 3,000 invention disclosures.

        Our analysis compares the extent of localization of two channels through which

university inventions may affect innovative firms or individuals: (1) a non-market channel

represented by citations to university patents in the patent applications filed by these firms or

individuals, and (2) a market channel represented by licensing agreements of various types.

Locational information associated with each of these channels enables us to identify the extent of

localization of each channel for technology outflow.

        Much previous work on the regional effects of academic research has employed a variant

of the “knowledge production function” developed by Griliches (1979). In Jaffe, Trajtenberg,

and Henderson (1993), patterns of localization are analyzed for a sample of academic patents and

5
 Recent studies of federal research labs (Jaffe, Fogarty, and Banks 1998) and the semiconductor industry
(Podolny and Shepard 1996 and Almeida and Kogut 1999) suggest that non-market spillovers are


                                                   9
a “control population” of non-cited patents of similar vintage and industrial classification. This

general procedure is less well-suited to the concerns of this paper, however, which seeks to

compare the regional patterns of citations to academic patents with the regional distribution of

licenses for these patents. A “control population” of patents can be constructed, but there is no

obvious “control population” for licenses. Instead, we use the Census Bureau’s Metropolitan

Statistical Area data to formulate two dependent variables: (1) the number of patents from a

given campus that are linked to that geographic region through citations to those patents, and (2)

the number of licenses to entities in that region from that campus for patented inventions. We

base these dependent variables on patents issued during 1975-88; for each patent, we include

only citations or licenses during the 8 years following the patent’s issue.

        We separately analyze patents that are licensed exclusively and nonexclusively. We also

disaggregate our analysis by technological “area,” producing a campus-technology-region

“triple” as our unit of analysis. Our dependent variables represent the “intensity” of licensing or

citing activity to campus i’s patents in technology area j (defined below), accounted for by

geographic region k (defined below).

        Patent citations have been used in previous studies as measures of technological

knowledge “spillovers,” i.e., the use of knowledge by an inventor of the work of a previous

inventor where no contractual agreement is necessary and where in many cases no compensation

is paid. When the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office grants a patent, the granting officer

includes a list of all previous patents on which the granted patent is based. This list is made

public as part of the publication of the patent at the time it issues. The patent officer is aided in

compiling a list of previous patents by the patent applicant, who is legally bound to provide with



geographically mediated in these settings as well.


                                                     10
the application a list of all patents that constitute relevant “prior art.”6 Citations of prior patents

thus serve as an indicator of the technological lineage of new patents, much as bibliographic

citations indicate the intellectual lineage of academic research.

        Our use of licenses and patent citations as indicators of market and non-market

technology transfer introduces an interesting measurement issue. A license clearly signifies a

market transaction between licensor and licensee, but a patent citation may not indicate a

knowledge spillover. For example, a patent attorney or patent examiner at the USPTO may add

citations during the patent application process. If the inventor were not aware of such prior art,

these citations would overstate the level of non-market knowledge spillover. Jaffe, Fogarty, and

Banks (1998) found that up to one-third of all citations to patents issued to a sample of patents

assigned to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration appeared not to represent

knowledge spillovers. Similarly, a survey of patent holders by Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Fogarty

(2000) suggests that up to one-half of all citations may not constitute spillovers. Nevertheless,

the authors of these two studies conclude that patent citations, while “noisy,” are valid measures

of knowledge spillovers.7

        Citations to patents typically peak in applications filed 4–5 years after the date of issue of

the cited patent. As a result, data on citations to patents issued during 1975–96 will be “right-

truncated,” i.e., more recent patents will be underrepresented in the citations data. For this

reason, we examined citations to patents issued during 1975–1988 (for these three universities, a

total of 840 patents), and for each year’s cohort of patents, analyzed only citations made in

6
  In addition to the legal requirement, it is in the applicant's interest to be forthcoming in this list because
a more complete description of prior art is likely to reduce the prospects of an interference being declared
during processing of a patent application.
7
  To the extent that the likelihood that a citation does not represent a non-market spillover is related to the
distance between the inventors of the citing and cited patents, our citation equation results could be




                                                      11
applications appearing during the 8 years following that year. Since our geographic analysis is

limited to the United States, we exclude citations made by patents that list only inventors in non-

US locations. In order to make our patent citation and licensing samples as comparable as

possible, we also exclude citations by those entities that are not likely to be licensees:

universities, non-profit foundations, non-profit hospitals, and governmental agencies (although

we include citations by patents jointly assigned to a university or governmental agency and a

private firm or individual).8 Similarly, we exclude patents that are not cited by another US

patent and licensed in the US. Table 1 presents the total numbers of patents, licenses, and

citations generated by the Columbia, Stanford, and California samples, and the number of

patents, licenses, and citations that remain after these exclusions.


                                        *** Table 1 Here ***

Geographic Regions and Distance: We employ the Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) used

by the U.S. Bureau of the Census to define economically distinct geographic regions in the

United States. MSAs are defined to be an “integrated economic and social unit with a large

population nucleus.” MSAs with a population of at least 1 million are disaggregated into sub-

units called Primary Metropolitan Statistical Areas (PMSA). PMSAs in these regions combine

to form a Consolidated Metropolitan Statistical Area (CMSA).9 In 1999, the Census Bureau



biased. But Jaffe, Fogarty, and Banks (1998) and Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Fogarty (2000) find no evidence
of such bias in their analyses of citations and spillovers.
8
  We include citations to university patents made by three “foundations:” The Battelle Institute, The Gas
Research Institute, and the Electric Power Research Institute. These three foundations, while nominally
non-profit, have large industrial clienteles and therefore could conceivably represent potential licensees.
9
  For example, the San Francisco CMSA is composed of seven PMSAs: San Francisco and San Mateo
Counties, Santa Clara County, Santa Cruz County, Alameda and Contra Costa Counties, Marin County,
Solano and Napa Counties, and Sonoma County. In contrast, the San Diego region constitutes one MSA.
Four of our eleven campuses are located within the San Francisco CMSA (University of California
campuses at Berkeley, San Francisco, and Santa Cruz, and Stanford University). One of our campuses is
located within the San Diego MSA (University of California at San Diego).


                                                    12
defined 18 CMSAs and 258 MSAs in the United States. In this paper we consider only CMSAs

and MSAs, and restrict our analysis to the largest fifty regions, based on “manufacturing value-

added” attributed to each region in the 1987 Economic Census. Table 2 lists these geographic

areas, their share of total US manufacturing value-added, and their shares of sample licenses and

patent citations.


                                         *** Table 2 Here ***

        We obtained the zipcodes for each university campus and for the central business district

for the largest city of each of the fifty metropolitan regions in our analysis. For each of the

campusi-CMSA/MSAk pairs in our analysis, we computed distance as the number of miles

between their respective zipcodes, DISTi , k . We also included a variable for the square of

distance, DISTSQi ,k in order to capture non-linearity in the distance relationship to licensing or

citing activity. In cases where multiple inventors were listed in the citing patent, we used the

city and state location of the first listed inventor.10 We also include a variable, SAMEREGi ,k ,

that equals 1 if the campus is located in the citing or licensing CMSA/MSA.

Industry Location and Population: We control for the regional composition of industrial activity

by Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) in each region in order to avoid confounding pure

“distance” effects with those resulting from high concentrations of potential user firms in

different industries. Using data from the US Census Bureau’s 1987 Census of Manufactures, we




10
  In cases where both foreign and U.S. inventors were listed, we use the location of the first listed U.S.
inventor.


                                                     13
compute the “manufacturing value added” reported in the two digit SIC a that “owns” three digit

SIC j in CMSA/MSA k, as a share of US manufacturing value added in the two digit SIC:11

                               (1987 Manufacturing Value - Added    )
                                                            a| j ,k
            VALADD       =                                                               (1)
                  a| j ,k (1987 US Manufacturing Value - Added )
                                                                 a| j

        Note that we are not assuming that the location of industry is exogenous with respect to

the location of Columbia, Stanford, or the University of California campuses. Instead, we

assume only that there is no difference in the locational “pull” exerted by these campuses for

firms seeking to exploit university inventions through citing their patents and those seeking to

exploit university inventions through licensing these patents.

        To further control for the substantial differences among our regions in size and economic

“pull,” we also include the log of the population count for each CMSA/MSAk from the 1990

census, LNPOPk .

Technology Classification: Patents are classified by the US Patent and Trademark Office into

“fields of invention” at the time of issue. Unfortunately, the USPTO fields of invention are not

compatible with the structure of the SIC system. We therefore employ a concordance developed

by Silverman (1996) to aggregate the sample patents into 3-digit Standard Industrial

Classifications (SICs), and report results for the 25 three-digit SICs accounting for the majority

of patents in our sample.12 This concordance produces non-integer “counts” of licenses and

citations generated by each SICj-CMSA/MSAk pair, and we use these counts as the dependent

variables in our analysis.

11
   The US Census Bureau does not consistently report CMSA/MSA level data on manufacturing value
added at the 3-digit SIC level, because such disclosure would make it possible to identify firm-specific
output in some regions.
12
   For a patent assigned by the USPTO to a particular international patent class (IPC), the Silverman
concordance calculates the likelihood that this patent would be employed in a particular “SIC of use” and



                                                   14
Other Controls: Differences in the importance of patents as a means for appropriating the returns

to invention in different technology fields affect the probability that inventors are scanning

patented “prior art” assiduously and influence the importance of formal licensing agreements for

the exploitation of university inventions. Where patent protection is of great importance, patent

citations are likely to be a more reliable guide to intellectual antecedents of patented invention

and licensing agreements are likely to be economically significant. We utilize data from the

original Yale Survey of Technological Opportunity and Appropriability (Levin, Klevorick,

Nelson, and Winter 1987), which represents the assessment by senior industrial R&D managers

(circa 1983) of the importance of formal instruments of intellectual property protection for

capturing the returns to industrial innovation in their 3-digit SIC. Several questions in the survey

address the issue of the ability of patents to enable the innovator to appropriate the returns to

innovation. Our measure of the importance of formal patent protection uses the mean scores on

a 7-point Likert scale for responses to the following question (I.B.1): “In this line of business,

how effective are patents in preventing competitors from duplicating an improved product?”

Survey responses are reported at the 4-digit SIC level. Since our analysis is at the 3-digit SIC

level, we aggregate the responses for each 4-digit SIC sub-level to its “parent” 3-digit level,

weighting each 4-digit mean response by its corresponding manufacturing value-added from the

1987 Census of Manufactures.

        We also include indicator variables for the top five SICs that account for the bulk of our

licensing activity: SIC 283 (drugs), 382 (measuring and controlling devices), 367 (electronic

components), 366 (communications equipment), and 384 (medical instruments). Finally, we




assigns “weights” to each SIC equal to its likelihood. For a detailed description of the construction and
validity of this concordance, see Silverman 1996.


                                                    15
include indicator variables identifying Stanford patents and Columbia patents (with UC patents

as the left-out category).

        Table 3 summarizes the definitions and notation for our variables.


                                      *** Table 3 Here ***

        Our university patents are contained in 9 2-digit SICs: 23 (textiles), 28 (chemical

products), 30 (rubber), 32 (stone, clay, and glass products), 34 (fabricated metal products), 35

(non-electrical industrial equipment), 36 (electrical and electronic equipment), 38 (scientific and

measurement instruments), and 39 (miscellaneous manufacturing industries). Our CMSA/MSA

sample accounts for 59% of total US manufacturing value-added, 81% of all citations within 8

years of our sample patents, and 93% of all licenses within 8 years (Table 2).

        The potential number of observations in each of our specifications equals the number of

campuses (11) times the number of selected SICs (25) times the number of selected

CMSA/MSAs (50), yielding a possible 13,750 “observations.” But this maximum is reduced by

several factors. First, although the University of California campuses of Santa Barbara and Santa

Cruz have patents that are licensed and cited during the 1975-96 time period, none of these

campuses’ patents are cited by industrial firms, nor are they licensed by industrial firms on an

exclusive or non-exclusive basis. We therefore exclude these campuses from the analysis. The

UC Riverside campus reports no exclusively licensed patents that are cited, and the UC Irvine

campus data contain no non-exclusively licensed patents that are cited; these campuses also were

excluded from the appropriate regressions.

        Second, our data on the importance of patents as a means of capturing the returns from

innovation do not cover three of the SICs included in this study (SICs 239, 307, and 385). Since

PATIMPj could not be calculated for these three SICs, they were dropped from the sample.


                                                 16
       The structure of the resulting cross-sectional dataset consists of 9,900 observations for

our analyses of overall licensing and citing activity and 8,800 observations when we

disaggregate our sample into citations and licensing agreements for exclusively and non-

exclusively licensed patents (due to the exclusion of UC Riverside and UC Irvine, respectively).

       Table 4 displays the descriptive statistics for the primary independent variables for the

overall patent sample, the subset of exclusively licensed patents, and the subset of

nonexclusively licensed patents.


                                       *** Table 4 Here ***

       Our empirical strategy is to conduct separate regressions for licensing and citing activity

and compare the magnitude and direction of the corresponding coefficients in those equations.

The regression specifications for licenses and citations accordingly contain the same set of

observations, corresponding to the number of campuses, regions, and industries in the sample.

The independent variables in each of these equations are also identical. The dependent variables

measure licensing or citing activity and are described more fully in Table 3. We construct

similar variables for the exclusively licensed and non-exclusively licensed patent sub-samples.

       The analysis is complicated by several factors. First, we are unable to observe much of

the substantial heterogeneity among regions and among industries located within each region.

For example, transportation costs between regions and campuses may depend on the location of

airline hubs (a factor that affects flight schedules and travel time) and airfares between cities.

The presence of venture capital that could facilitate the commercialization of university

technology varies by region. The presence of other research universities from which a firm may

license or cite patents also varies by region, and is unrelated to distance from our campuses.

Moreover, different types of industrial facilities (e.g., manufacturing plants, design centers, and



                                                  17
headquarters offices) may be concentrated in different regions. In order to account for our

ignorance of many of these differences, we use random-effects regression equations with SICj-

CMSA/MSAk (industry-region) specific effects. We also control for the left truncation at zero of

our dependent variables by using a tobit formulation of the random-effects model.13 A

representative model is defined below:

            yijk = α + β ' X ijk + ε ijk    if β X ijk + ε ijk > 0                       (2a)

            yijk = 0                          otherwise                                  (2b)

            ε ijk = ui + v jk + w jk                                                     (2c)

where y jk is the level of citing or licensing activity represented by each SICj-CMSA/MSAk pair,

α is the y-intercept, β ' X ijk are the coefficients and independent variable vectors, and ε ijk is the

residual. ε ijk is further decomposed into a cross sectional error component, ui , v jk , (a residual

specific to each SICj-CMSA/MSAk pair), and a combined error component, w jk . Each of these

error components is assumed to be normally distributed around a mean of zero. We further

assume that individual error components are uncorrelated with each other and are not correlated

with the independent variables. More specifically, we assume that SICj-CMSA/MSAk pair

residuals, v jk , are uncorrelated with our independent variables that measure distance, population,

and industrial activity.15


13
   We are unable to use Poisson or negative-binomial “count” data models because our derived “counts”
of licenses and citations are not uniformly integers.
14
   Our “share” dependent variables are also theoretically right truncated at one by construction. However,
inspection of the data in Table 2 shows that no individual SICj-CMSA/MSAk pair generates all of the
licensing or citing activity in our sample, so we do not observe right truncation. Therefore, since
incorporating right truncation into the model would not affect our results, we account for left truncation
only.
15
   Although a “fixed-effects” model does not make this assumption, the left truncation of the dependent
variable produces biased estimates. Another alternative would be to employ a two-stage Heckman


                                                    18
        We first report the results of regressions for all licensed and cited patents in our sample,

then separately report results for licenses covering exclusively and nonexclusively licensed

patents and the citations to the patents associated with each type of agreement. We compare the

results of specifications for the geographic distribution of citations to patents that are licensed

exclusively with those for the geographic distribution of the licensees signing exclusive licensing

agreements, and compare citations to patents that are licensed on a nonexclusive basis with the

geographic distribution of nonexclusive licensees. Separating licensed patents by type enables

us to analyze the effects of distance on several different forms of market transactions and

compare these with the effects of distance on “spillovers” associated with a reasonably

comparable set of inventions.

        The licensing and citation specifications measure the impact of geographic localization

on different dependent variables. Therefore, we cannot directly compare coefficients between

these two sets of regressions. Instead, we convert our coefficient estimates to “standardized” or

“beta” coefficients and use these coefficients as a basis for comparison.16 A representative

standardized coefficient and its standard error are shown below:

                       sx ˆ
             βˆ x* =      βx                                                                (3)
                       sy




selection model. The selection equation requires that we specify independent variables that affect the
probability that we would observe licensing or citing activity, but not the level of licensing activity
estimated in the regression equation (conditional on a non-zero observation). We do not use the Heckman
model because we lack a theory that would suggest such variables. Instead, we assume that our
independent variables affect both the incidence and the level of licensing or citing activity. (In this case,
the Heckman model reduces to a tobit specification (Heckman 1979).)
16
   A standardized coefficient is generated by multiplying the coefficient estimate for a regressor X by its
standard deviation and dividing by the standard deviation of the dependent variable Y. Since the original
coefficient is a slope, multiplying by the ratio of the standard deviations removes both the units of Y and
X. Such a variable can thus be interpreted as measuring the effect (in standard deviations) on the
dependent variable by a one standard deviation change in the value of the independent variable, enabling
direct comparison of the influence of different independent variables on a dependent variable.


                                                     19
                       sx
             sβˆ * =      sˆ                                                                               (4)
               x
                       sy βx

        Since standardized coefficients are normalized and free of scale, we can use these

coefficients to compare the relative influence of corresponding independent variables in the

licensing and citation equations on their respective dependent variables (number of licenses or

citations). Thus, we can compare the influence of the same independent variable on different

channels of technology transfer. To determine whether these effects are significantly different,

we test the null hypothesis that the licensing and citation standardized coefficients are equal:

             H o : βˆxL
                     *
                        − βˆxC
                            *
                               =0                                                                          (5)

             H A : βˆ xL
                      *
                         − βˆ xC
                              *
                                 ≠0                                                                        (6)

using the following derived test statistic:17

                                           βˆ xL* − βˆ xC
                                                       *
             Z=                                                                                            (7)
                       VAR ( βˆxL
                               *
                                  ) + VAR( βˆ xC
                                              *
                                                 ) + 2 × COV ( βˆ xL
                                                                  *
                                                                     , βˆ xC
                                                                          *
                                                                             )

and conducting a two-tailed test assuming that βˆ xL
                                                  *
                                                     − βˆxC
                                                         *
                                                            is distributed normally.


4.      Results and Discussion

        A comparison of the numbers of patent citations and license agreements accounted for by

leading CMSA/MSAs (Table 2) suggests that the market-mediated licensing agreements are

17
   The denominator in equation (6) is the standard deviation (square root of the variance) of the combined
licensing and citation standardized coefficients in the random effects models and can be expressed in
terms of the underlying coefficients using the basic definition of the variance of two jointly distributed
                   2                          2
           S                    S                              S  S           
variables:  xL  VAR ( βˆ xL ) +  xC        VAR ( βˆ xC ) + 2 ×  xL  ×  xC      × COV ( βˆ xL , βˆ xC ) . ( S xL , S xC ,
            S yL                 S yC                           S yL   S yC   
                                                                              
S yL , and S yL are conditional on the sample and are assumed to be constants in this calculation.) The
covariance term accounts for the correlation between corresponding variables in these equations. We




                                                              20
somewhat more “localized” than the knowledge spillovers captured through patent citations.

Column 3 in Table 2, corresponding to the number of citations among regions to our sample of

patents, shows that almost all of the 50 leading regions are home to citers of our university

patents (the lone exception being the Lancaster, PA MSA). Column 6 reports the incidence of

licensing among the top 50 regions and indicates that licensing activity is more concentrated –

only 27 of the 50 regions are locations of licensees of the patents in our sample, and these

regions tend to be those with the largest manufacturing value-added.

        These regional statistics nonetheless mask considerable inter-industry variation.

Moreover, the aggregate data for both patent citations and license agreements display a strong

“bicoastal” pattern: New York, Boston, San Francisco, and Los Angeles account for significant

shares of both citations and license agreements, while Chicago, Houston, Minneapolis, and other

large metropolitan areas distant from the coasts account for much smaller numbers of licenses

and citations. This pattern of exploitation of inventions from our three universities complicates a

simple “distance-decay” interpretation of university economic effects. We expect the “distance

squared” variable, DISTSQi ,k , in our regression equations to account for the bi-coastal patterns

present in the data.

        Table 5 contains the results of our random-effects tobit analysis of the entire sample of

university patents, Tables 6 and 7 respectively contain results for exclusively licensed and non-

exclusively licensed patent sub-samples. In each table, the first four models consider the effects

of the independent variables on the number of licenses accounted for by each observation, and

the last four models consider the effects of these same variables on the number of citations to the

same set of patents. In each table, the basic specification (L1 and C1) reports the influence of


estimate the covariance of the underlying coefficients, COV ( βˆ xL , βˆ xC ) , by regressing the licensing and



                                                       21
population, manufacturing value-added, patent importance, and whether the campus is located in

the CMSA/MSA, on licensing and citing activity. We then add measures for distance and the

square of distance in equations L2 and C2. The third set of equations (L3 and C3) controls for

university differences by including indicator variables for Stanford and Columbia observations.

Finally, the fourth set of equations (L4 and C4) adds additional controls for technology by

including indicator variables for the five leading SICs in our sample (SICs 283, 382, 367, 366,

and 384).

        Table 8 contains standardized coefficients that are analogous to the coefficients

for LNPOPk , VALADDa| j , k , PATIMPj , SAMEREGi ,k , and DISTi ,k in the licensing and citation

specifications in which we add distance measures to the basic controls (models L2 and C2 in

Tables 5–7). Table 8 also reports the results of our tests of the hypothesis that the standardized

coefficients generated from the licensing and citation equations are equal (columns 3 and 4 of

Table 8).

        We turn first to the results for the overall patent sample (Table 5).


                                        *** Table 5 Here ***

        The coefficients for the regional population and industrial activity variables, LNPOPk

and VALADDa| j , k , are generally positive and significant for all eight specifications (with the

single exception of the lack of significance for the VALADDa| j , k coefficient in equation 5C2).

This result is not surprising, as we expect more populous and industrially active regions to more

intensively license or cite university inventions, ceteris paribus.




citation equations jointly using the “seemingly unrelated regression” (SUR) technique (Zellner 1962).


                                                   22
       At first glance it appears that overall population affects licensing and citing activity

differently than does regional industrial activity. The coefficients for LNPOPk in licensing

equations 5L1–5L4 are consistently smaller than the coefficients in the citation equations 5C1–

5C4, while the comparable coefficients for the corresponding VALADDa| j , k coefficients are

larger in the licensing equations compared to the coefficients in the citation equations. When we

consider the licensing standardized coefficients for LNPOPk and VALADDa| j , k in Table 8,

however, we see that both population and industrial activity affect licensing more than citations.

This difference in the standardized coefficients for LNPOPk is consistent with the patterns

exhibited in Table 2 that licenses tend to be more concentrated among the larger metropolitan

areas, while citations are distributed more evenly among all sizes of regions in our sample.

Moreover, the significant difference in size of the standardized coefficients for industry location

effects reported in Table 8 supports the argument that knowledge flows through licensing

agreements are more sensitive to regional industry composition than are citation-based

spillovers, which reflect a generalized information dissemination process.

       The coefficient for PATIMPj is also positive and significant in equations 5L1–5L3,

suggesting that licensing contracts are more important in accessing university inventions for the

technology classes in which patent protection is judged to be an important mechanism for

appropriating the returns to innovation. (We omitted PATIMPj in equations 5L4 and 5C4 due to

collinearity with the SIC indicator variables in those equations). But differences among

technologies in the importance of patents as mechanisms for capturing the returns to invention

should have a smaller effect on citation than on licensing, a hypothesis that is supported by the

ratio of the standardized coefficients for licensing and citations in Column 5 in Table 8 . This




                                                 23
ratio for PATIMPj is 2.5, suggesting that patent appropriability influences licensing activity to a

much greater extent than it influences citing activity, consistent with our expectation.

       In equations 5L2 and 5C2, we introduce the variables of particular interest in our

analysis, the distance variables DISTi ,k and DISTSQi ,k . In these and subsequent equations,

DISTi ,k is consistently negative and significant, while DISTSQi ,k is positive and significant. The

negative coefficients on DISTi ,k suggest that greater distance is associated with lower licensing

or citing activity. Conversely, the positive coefficients for DISTSQi ,k indicate that beyond some

distance from our universities, licensing and citation begin to increase again, revealing an

upwardly concave relationship between distance and the share of citations or agreements

accounted for by a given CMSA/MSA-SIC pair. This result reflects the “bicoastal” distribution

of licensees and citers of university patents visible in Table 2.

       The DISTi ,k coefficients for patent citations (equations 5C2–5C4) are smaller than for

licensing agreements (equations 5L2–5L4), indicating that citation-based “spillovers” decline

less sharply as distance from the patent-holding university increases than does the market-based

channel of licensing. Moreover, the difference between the corresponding standardized

coefficients for licensing and citations (column 4 of Table 8) is highly significant. Table 8

provides further evidence that distance affects licensing activity more heavily than it does

citations. First, the ratio of the standardized coefficients for DIS in the licensing and citations

equations exceeds two (column 5), suggesting that this decline is twice as rapid for licensing.

Furthermore, in the licensing equation (column 1), the standardized coefficient for distance (-

2.39) is more than twice as large as the next largest standardized coefficient (1.13 for LNPOPk ).

This difference is much smaller (-1.03 compared to 0.79) for the citation equation (column 2). In



                                                  24
other words, increasing distance has a much greater marginal effect on licensing activity than

does a change in the next most influential variable, population. For citation activity, by contrast,

the marginal effects of distance and population differ by much less. These results all suggest that

distance has a stronger effect on licensing than on citation activity, and they support the

argument that the incomplete nature of licensing contracts limits the ability of more distant firms

to exploit such advances, contradicting the conclusions of Audretsch and Stephan (1996).

        The positive and significant coefficient for SAMEREGi ,k in all eight equations indicates

that the presence of a Columbia, Stanford, or University of California campus within a region is

associated with a higher level of licensing or citing activity, implying that geographic

localization is important for both citing and licensing activity. But the difference in the

corresponding standardized coefficients is not statistically significant (Column 4 of Table 8),

suggesting that firms located close to one of our university campuses benefit from both market

and non-market channels of technology transfer.

        The variables identifying Columbia and Stanford patents, DUMCU and DUMST , are

inserted in equations 5L3 and 5C3 to control for differences among our three universities. The

positive and significant coefficients indicate that patents issued to Stanford and Columbia are

more intensively licensed and cited than are University of California patents.18 Equations 5L4

and 5C4 also control for industry effects associated with the five largest industries in the sample.

The insertion of indicator variables to control for campus and 3-digit SIC effects does not change

the coefficient estimates for LNPOPk , VALADDa| j , k , PATIMPj , SAMEREGi ,k , DISTi ,k , and




18
   These differences do not persist completely when the patent samples are disaggregated by those
licensed exclusively and nonexclusively (see Tables 6 and 7). While Stanford patents are associated with
higher levels of licensing and citation for both exclusively and non-exclusively licensed patents, licensing
intensity (but not citing intensity) of Columbia’s exclusively licensed patents is below UC’s.


                                                    25
DISTSQi ,k , although the significance of the coefficients for most of these variables suggests the

presence of strong industry-specific and university-specific effects.

         Table 5 reports the results of two tests of the validity of each model. The Wald statistic

tests the null hypotheses that all coefficients in each model are jointly equal to zero. The positive

and significant Wald statistics allow us to reject this hypothesis for all eight models. ρ

represents the contribution to the total variance of the SICj-CMSA/MSAk variance component,

v jk :

                      σ v2
             ρ=                                                                        (8)
                  σ ε2 + σ v2

When ρ = 0 , the variance component v jk is unimportant, and the random effects estimator is not

significantly different from a pooled tobit estimator. The σ v = 0 test compares the random

effects estimator with the pooled tobit estimator, and the results of this test are also reported in

Table 5. The test statistic is significant for all equations, supporting our use of the random

effects models rather than the standard tobit technique.

         Table 6 reports results for the subsample of exclusively licensed patents.


                                       *** Table 6 Here ***

         These results are broadly similar to those reported for the overall sample of patents.

DISTi ,k is negative and significant and DISTSQi ,k is positive and significant in licensing models

6L2–6L4 and citation models 6C2–6C4. The hypothesis test results in Table 8 (column 3)

indicate that distance has a significantly greater effect on licensing than on citation to these

exclusively licensed patents as well. The DISTSQi ,k standardized coefficient ratio in Table 8 for

the sub-sample of exclusively licensed patents is twice the corresponding ratio for the overall



                                                  26
sample, however (
                    βˆ xL
                       *
                                    for distance equals 4.7 for exclusively licensed patents compared to
                            βˆ xC
                               *




2.3 for the overall sample). This suggests that for exclusively licensed inventions, the greater

influence of proximity on licensing, by comparison with its influence on citations, is particularly

pronounced.

       Wald statistics are significant for all of our regressions using data for exclusively licensed

patents. Likewise, test statistics for the difference between the random-effects and pooled tobit

estimators are also significant, with the exception of equations 6L2 and 6L4. For these models,

unreported pooled tobit regressions produced similar estimates.

       The evidence provided in Tables 5 and 6 of greater localization for licensing agreements

compared to citation-based spillovers receives further support from the last set of regression

specifications in Table 7, which cover non-exclusive licensing agreements and patent citations

for the patents associated with these agreements.


                                              *** Table 7 Here ***

       Coefficients for DISTi ,k and DISTSQi ,k , remain statistically significant (and continue to

exhibit the upwardly concave U-shape) for nonexclusively licensed patents. Moreover, the

negative coefficients for DISTi ,k are slightly larger in the licensing specifications 7L1–7L4

relative to the corresponding coefficients in the citation specifications 7C1–7C4. The results for

nonexclusive licenses reported in Table 8 indicate that the influence of distance on licensing is

significantly greater than its influence on citations, consistent with the findings for the overall

sample and the subsample of exclusively licensed patents reported earlier. Comparing the ratio

of DISTSQi ,k standardized coefficients for licensing and citation (column 5 of Table 8) reveals

that the difference in market/non-market geographic localization is smaller for non-exclusively


                                                        27
licensed patents than it is for exclusively licensed patents by almost a factor of three.


(
    βˆ xL
       *
                    equals 1.6 for nonexclusively licensed patents and 4.7 for exclusively licensed patents).
            βˆ xC
               *




This result is consistent with our earlier finding that the greater influence of proximity on

licensing, relative to citations, is particularly large for exclusively licensed inventions.

               Wald statistics for the regressions in Table 7 are significant. The statistics for the test

σ v = 0 are not significant for three of the eight models, which may reflect the smaller number of

patents for this set of inventions. We conducted pooled tobit estimates for these three models

and found little difference between those estimates and the random-effects estimates reported in

Table 7.


5.             Conclusion

               Previous studies have found that knowledge-intensive economic interactions tend to

benefit from geographic proximity, but have said little about the effects of distance on the flow

of knowledge through different channels. This paper compares the geographic “reach” of

knowledge flows from university inventions through two important channels: non-market

“spillovers” exemplified by patent citations and market contracts centered on licensing. We find

a consistent tendency for knowledge flows through market transactions (in the narrow sense

defined above) to be more geographically localized than those operating through non-market

“spillovers,” contradicting some previous research. This result seems to reflect the necessarily

incomplete nature of licensing contracts, as well as the need for licensees to maintain access to

know-how that is difficult to transmit through documents, faxes, or even phone or e-mail

communication.




                                                           28
       The differential effects of distance on licensing and citations are most pronounced for

exclusively licensed university patents. This finding may reflect other, unobserved differences

between the characteristics of university inventions that are licensed exclusively and non-

exclusively. Our interviews with university technology transfer managers suggest that firms

seek exclusive licenses for inventions with uncertain commercial potential that require

considerable investments in development. Such inventions more closely conform to the “proofs

and prototypes” that require the transfer of complementary know-how, as analyzed by Jensen

and Thursby (2001) and Arora (1995). But the transfer of such know-how may be less critical

for inventions such as research tools that are licensed non-exclusively. These types of inventions

tend to require less transfer of tacit know-how from the original inventor and are therefore less

constrained by geographic distance.

       Universities are an important source of technology and knowledge for firms in many

industries. Our study highlights the importance of additional research on how firms manage the

acquisition of these technologies through contractual agreements and through spillovers.

Knowledge flows embodied in patent licenses and citations co-exist within a broader

environment of technology outflows from universities through other channels that include the

dissemination of research findings through publication and conferences, sponsorship of research,

employment of university graduates, and faculty consulting. Moreover, knowledge flows

between universities and industry, particularly in the life sciences, are increasingly governed by

“materials transfer agreements” (MTAs). The channels we examine in this study undoubtedly

are affected by and simultaneously affect this broader environment. The interaction of these

various channels of market and non-market technology transfer suggests fruitful areas of future

research, and we look forward to further investigation in this area.




                                                 29
Table 1: Licenses and Citations to Sample University Patents, 1975-1988
                                       Columbia      Stanford      University    Total
                                       University University of California      Sample
 Sample University Patents
 Issued Patents                           41           310           498         849
 Cited Patents                            41           309           489         839
 Licensed Patents                         21           208           182         411
   Patents Licensed Exclusively           13           155           114         282
   Patents Licensed Non-Exclusively        8            29            24          61
 Cited and Licensed Patents               21           207           174         402

 Licenses to Sample University Patents
 Total Licenses within 8 Years           63           335           204          602
  Less Non-Top 50 MSA Licenses            2            27            16           45
  Less Licenses to Non-Cited Patents      0             1             8            9
 Total Licenses Remaining in Sample      61           307           180          548

 Citations to Sample University Patents
 Total Citations within 8 Years         486          3804          4142         8432
  Less University Citations             112           683           700         1495
  Less Non-US Citations                  86          1030          1002         2118
  Less US Government Citations            6           144            89          239
  Less Other Institution/
                                         16            69           134          219
  Foundation Citations
  Less Citations by Licensees            18           224            75          317
  Less Non-Top 50 MSA Citations          43           266           355          664
  Less Citations to Non-Licensed
                                         51           487          1217         1755
  Patents
 Total Citations Remaining in Sample    154           901           570         1625




                                           30
Table 2: Top 50 CMSA/MSA Shares of Value Added, Patent Citations, and Licenses
                       Column 1       Column 2          Column 3        Column 4      Column 5      Column 6
                                       % of US
MSA/CMSA              1987 Manuf.    1987 Manuf.        US Patent      % of All US
                          Value         Value           Citations in     Patent      US Licenses   % of All US
                        Added ($)       Added             8 Years       Citations     in 8 Years    Licenses
New York CMSA             81,959.2       7.0%             588            9.4%            73         12.1%
Los Angeles CMSA          72,520.5       6.2%             535            8.5%           117         19.4%
Chicago CMSA              49,773.3       4.3%             151            2.4%            12          2.0%
San Francisco CMSA        38,913.2       3.3%            1255           20.0%           169         28.1%
Detroit CMSA              31,043.7       2.7%               81           1.3%              1         0.2%
Boston CMSA               29,713.5       2.5%             602            9.6%            27          4.5%
Philadelphia CMSA         28,940.8       2.5%             156            2.5%            24          4.0%
Dallas CMSA               19,641.4       1.7%               67           1.1%              2         0.3%
Houston CMSA              18,596.9       1.6%             114            1.8%              1         0.2%
Cleveland CMSA            17,262.2       1.5%             101            1.6%              1         0.2%
Minneapolis MSA           15,732.2       1.3%             118            1.9%              9         1.5%
St. Louis MSA             14,115.0       1.2%               48           0.8%            11          1.8%
Atlanta MSA               13,345.7       1.1%               26           0.4%              0         0.0%
Cincinnati CMSA           12,831.7       1.1%               22           0.4%              0         0.0%
Rochester, NY MSA         12,409.0       1.1%               67           1.1%              2         0.3%
Milwaukee CMSA            11,609.4       1.0%               67           1.1%            17          2.8%
Greensboro, NC MSA        10,910.7       0.9%               11           0.2%              0         0.0%
Seattle CMSA              10,895.9       0.9%             112            1.8%              5         0.8%
Baltimore MSA              9,675.6       0.8%               68           1.1%              3         0.5%
Kansas City MSA            9,124.0       0.8%               11           0.2%              4         0.7%
Louisville MSA             8,320.8       0.7%                4           0.1%              0         0.0%
Phoenix MSA                8,179.8       0.7%               44           0.7%              1         0.2%
Charlotte MSA              8,153.6       0.7%                3           0.0%              0         0.0%
Denver CMSA                8,037.3       0.7%               51           0.8%              5         0.8%
Hartford, CT MSA           7,596.9       0.7%               29           0.5%              0         0.0%
Columbus, OH MSA           7,079.1       0.6%               15           0.2%              0         0.0%
Buffalo MSA                7,025.5       0.6%               15           0.2%              0         0.0%
Richmond, VA MSA           6,833.0       0.6%                8           0.1%              0         0.0%
Indianapolis MSA           6,806.0       0.6%               32           0.5%              7         1.2%
Washington, DC CMSA        6,788.0       0.6%             217            3.5%              9         1.5%
Portland, OR CMSA          6,445.4       0.6%               43           0.7%              0         0.0%
San Diego MSA              6,426.8       0.6%             212            3.4%            42          7.0%
Pittsburgh MSA             6,322.8       0.5%               23           0.4%              4         0.7%
Dayton MSA                 6,284.6       0.5%               13           0.2%              0         0.0%
Grand Rapids MSA           5,967.7       0.5%                2           0.0%              0         0.0%
Miami, FL CMSA             5,700.2       0.5%               43           0.7%              4         0.7%
Providence, RI MSA         5,493.1       0.5%                8           0.1%              0         0.0%
Nashville, TN MSA          4,989.5       0.4%                3           0.0%              0         0.0%
Greenville, SC MSA         4,967.5       0.4%                2           0.0%              0         0.0%
Toledo MSA                 4,925.1       0.4%               14           0.2%              0         0.0%
Raleigh-Durham MSA         4,728.5       0.4%               36           0.6%              5         0.8%
Allentown, PA MSA          4,693.8       0.4%                3           0.0%              1         0.2%
New Orleans MSA            4,314.7       0.4%               37           0.6%              0         0.0%
Norfolk, VA MSA            4,285.3       0.4%                9           0.1%              0         0.0%
Tampa MSA                  4,139.8       0.4%                8           0.1%              0         0.0%
Wichita MSA                4,122.8       0.4%                1           0.0%              0         0.0%
Memphis MSA                4,114.2       0.4%                7           0.1%              1         0.2%
Lancaster, PA MSA          3,883.7       0.3%                0           0.0%              0         0.0%
Oklahoma City MSA          3,653.4       0.3%                4           0.1%              0         0.0%
Springfield, MA MSA        3,542.1       0.3%                2           0.0%              0         0.0%
TOTAL                    682,834.9      58.6%            5088           81.1%           557         92.5%
US Total               1,165,746.8     100.0%            6272          100.0%           602        100.0%



                                                   31
Table 3: Variable Definitions
 Variable            Definition
 Dependent Variables
 LICENSEi,j,k        “Number” of licenses to inventing campus i’s patents in SIC j from
                     CMSA/MSA k.
 CITEi,j,k           “Number” of citations to inventing campus i’s patents in SIC j from
                     CMSA/MSA k.
 EXLICi,j,k          “Number” of licenses to inventing campus i’s exclusively licensed patents
                     in SIC j from CMSA/MSA k.
 NONEXLICi,j,k       “Number” of licenses to inventing campus i’s non-exclusively licensed
                     patents in SIC j from CMSA/MSA k.
 EXCITEi,j,k         “Number” of citations to inventing campus i’s exclusively licensed
                     patents in SIC j from CMSA/MSA k.
 NONEXCITEi,j,k      “Number” of citations to inventing campus i’s non-exclusively licensed
                     patents in SIC j from CMSA/MSA k.
 Independent Variables
 DISTi,k             Distance (in thousand mile units) between inventing campus i and
                     licensing or citing CMSA/MSA k.
 DISTSQi,k           Square of distance between inventing campus i and licensing or citing
                     CMSA/MSA k.
 POPk, LNPOPk        Total population in 1990 of CMSA/MSA k ; natural log of POPk.
 VALADDa|j,k         Share of US manufacturing value-added in 1987 in 2-digit SIC “owner”
                     of 3-digit SIC j, accounted for by CMSA/MSA k.
 PATIMPj             Reported importance of formal patent protection in 3-digit SIC j.

 SAMEREGi,k           Indicator variable equal to 1 if campus i is located in licensing or citing
                      CMSA/MSA k.
 SIC283               Indicator variable equal to 1 if SIC j = 283, 0 otherwise.

 SIC366               Indicator variable equal to 1 if SIC j = 366, 0 otherwise.

 SIC286               Indicator variable equal to 1 if SIC j = 286, 0 otherwise.

 SIC349               Indicator variable equal to 1 if SIC j = 349, 0 otherwise.

 SIC382               Indicator variable equal to 1 if SIC j = 382, 0 otherwise.

 DUMCU                Indicator variable equal to 1 if campus i is Columbia University,
                      0 otherwise.
 DUMST                Indicator variable equal to 1 if campus i is Stanford University,
                      0 otherwise.




                                               32
Table 4: Descriptive Statistics
                                                                    Standard
 Variable                  Minimum       Maximum        Mean        Deviation
 Independent Variables
   DISTi,k                          0            2.70        1.72         0.74
   POPk                       422,822      19,800,000   2,731,237    3,461,290
   VALADDa|j,k                      0       14,826.70    1,052.14        0.019
   PATIMPj                       1.50            6.53        4.12         1.15
 Dependent Variables
 Overall University Patent Sample, N=9,900
   LICENSEi,j,k                     0           20.95        0.05         0.46
   CITEi,j,k                        0           36.12        0.15         1.01
 Exclusively Licensed Patent Sample, N=8,800
   LICENSEi,j,k                     0           17.86        0.03         0.31
   CITEi,j,k                        0           29.75        0.13         0.80
 Nonexclusively Licensed Patent Sample, N=8,800
   LICENSEi,j,k                     0           10.54        0.02         0.23
   CITEi,j,k                        0           12.37        0.04         0.37




                                           33
Table 5: Random-Effects Tobit, Overall University Patent Sample
                                           Dependent Variables = LICENSE, CITE
                                                  Random-Effects Tobit
                                    LICENSES                                  CITATIONS
 Model No.           5L1         5L2       5L3        5L4         5C1       5C2      5C3                   5C4
 Model              Basic        Add       Add       Add         Basic      Add      Add                   Add
 Type              Controls    Distance   Univ.      Tech.     Controls   Distance   Univ.                 Tech.
                    0.69***     0.59***     0.65***         0.65***    0.91***     0.92***     0.92***     0.91***
 LNPOP
                    (0.04)      (0.03)      (0.04)       (0.04)        (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)
                     4.90***     3.43***     4.31***      3.99***       4.83***     2.25        3.50**      3.19*
 VALADD             (1.45)      (1.06)      (1.43)       (1.39)        (1.69)      (1.74)      (1.76)      (1.67)
                     0.06***     0.08***     0.07***                    0.07***     0.07***     0.08***
 PATIMP             (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)                     (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)
                     0.90***     0.29***     0.29***      0.29***       1.42***     0.96***     1.09***     1.10***
 SAMEREG            (0.10)      (0.11)      (0.10)       (0.10)        (0.15)      (0.16)      (0.15)      (0.15)
                                -1.50***    -1.11***     -1.11***                  -1.42***    -1.00***    -0.98***
 DISTA                          (0.12)      (0.14)       (0.14)                    (0.0005)    (0.16)      (0.16)
                                 0.43***     0.31***      0.31***                   0.52***     0.38***     0.37***
 DISTSQB                        (0.05)      (0.05)       (0.05)                    (0.06)      (0.06)      (0.06)
                                             0.48***      0.47***                               0.60***     0.59***
 DUMCU                                      (0.06)       (0.06)                                (0.07)      (0.07)
                                             1.29***      1.28***                               1.91***     1.90***
 DUMST                                      (0.05)      (0.05)                                 (0.06)      (0.06)
                                                          0.49***                                           0.74***
 SIC283                                                  (0.11)                                            (0.12)
                                                          0.39***                                           0.79***
 SIC382                                                  (0.11)                                            (0.12)
                                                          0.07                                              0.43***
 SIC367                                                  (0.12)                                            (0.13)
                                                          0.04                                              0.33***
 SIC366                                                  (0.12)                                            (0.13)
                                                          0.22**                                            0.37***
 SIC384                                                  (0.11)                                            (0.13)
                   -11.82       -9.40      -10.81       -10.50        -14.88      -14.28      -14.85      -14.52
 CONST.             (0.62)      (0.48)      (0.62)       (0.60)        (0.63)      (0.64)      (0.66)      (0.62)
     Log
                     -4055      -4007        -3617          -3607       -8687       -8643       -8123      -8087
 Likelihood
 No. of Obs.        9,900        9,900       9,900       9,900          9,900       9,900       9,900       9,900
  Groups            1,100        1,100       1,100       1,100          1,100       1,100       1,100       1,100
    Wald           803.0***    1329.8***   1276.7***   1320.5***      1201.4***   1223.0***   2001.0***   2138.6***
       ρ             0.15        0.003       0.17         0.16           0.07        0.08        0.11        0.09
 χ 2 (σ u2 = 0 )
                   148.6***      5.0**     153.6***     122.2***       74.6***     85.1***    163.7***    104.7***


Notes: AUnits in 1000 miles.
       B
         Units in (1000 miles)2.
       Standard errors in parentheses.
       *** p>0.01       ** p>0.05      * p>0.10




                                                       34
Table 6: Random-Effects Tobit, Exclusively Licensed University Patents
                                          Dependent Variables = EXLIC, EXCITE
                                                 Random-Effects Tobit
                                   LICENSES                                  CITATIONS
 Model No.           6L1        6L2       6L3        6L4         6C1       6C2      6C3                   6C4
 Model              Basic       Add       Add       Add         Basic      Add      Add                   Add
 Type              Controls   Distance   Univ.      Tech.      Controls  Distance   Univ.                 Tech.
                   0.48***     0.43***     0.41***         0.41***    0.91***     0.69***     0.68***     0.68***
 LNPOP
                   (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.04)         (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.03)
                    5.84***     4.40***     4.72***     4.38***        4.83***     3.71***     4.61***     4.29***
 VALADD            (1.06)      (0.90)      (0.93)      (0.90)         (1.69)      (1.41)      (1.43)      (1.35)
                    0.04**      0.04***     0.05***                    0.07***     0.05**      0.05***
 PATIMP            (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)                     (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)
                    0.88***     0.33***     0.20**      0.20**         1.42***     1.07***     0.98***     0.99***
 SAMEREG           (0.08)      (0.09)      (0.09)      (0.09)         (0.15)      (0.14)      (0.13)      (0.13)
                               -1.27***    -1.31***    -1.32***                   -0.70***    -0.64***    -0.62***
 DISTA                         (0.10)      (0.14)      (0.11)                     (0.14)      (0.16)      (0.16)
                                0.38***     0.38***     0.38***                    0.27***     0.22***     0.22***
 DISTSQB                       (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)                     (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.05)
                                           -0.18***    -0.19***                                0.11*       0.10*
 DUMCU                                     (0.06)      (0.06)                                 (0.067)     (0.06)
                                            0.73***     0.72***                               1.441***     1.43***
 DUMST                                     (0.05)      (0.04)                                 (0.05)      (0.05)
                                                        0.28***                                            0.48***
 SIC283                                                (0.08)                                             (0.10)
                                                        0.32***                                            0.73***
 SIC382                                                (0.08)                                             (0.10)
                                                        0.09                                               0.36***
 SIC367                                                (0.08)                                             (0.10)
                                                        0.03                                               0.23**
 SIC366                                                (0.09)                                             (0.10)
                                                        0.13*                                              0.28***
 SIC384                                                (0.08)                                             (0.13)
                   -8.57       -6.98       -6.67       -6.51         -14.88      -11.02      -11.03      -10.83
 CONST.            (0.48)      (0.43)      (0.44)      (0.42)         (0.63)      (0.52)      (0.53)      (0.50)
     Log
                    -2658      -2574       -2415           -2406       -7129       -7110       -6553      -6617
 Likelihood
 No. of Obs.        8,800       8,800       8,800       8,800          8,800       8,800       8,800       8,800
  Groups            1,100       1,100       1,100       1,100          1,100       1,100       1,100       1,100
    Wald           828.1***   1100.8***   1173.5***   1229.2***      1129.7***   1142.6***   1820.6***   1953.8***
       ρ             0.08      0.00006      0.03        0.02           0.07        0.07        0.11        0.09
 χ 2 (σ u2 = 0 )
                   33.0***      0.01        6.0**           1.9       61.7***     67.1***    139.3***     87.5***


Notes: AUnits in 1000 miles.
       B
         Units in (1000 miles)2.
       Standard errors in parentheses.
       *** p>0.01       ** p>0.05      * p>0.10




                                                      35
Table 7: Random-Effects Tobit, Non-Exclusively Licensed University Patents
                                       Dependent Variables = NONEXLIC, NONEXCITE
                                                   Random-Effects Tobit
                                   LICENSES                                  CITATIONS
 Model No.           7L1        7L2        7L3         7L4       7C1       7C2      7C3               7C4
 Model              Basic       Add        Add        Add       Basic      Add      Add               Add
 Type              Controls   Distance    Univ.       Tech.    Controls  Distance   Univ.             Tech.
                   0.48***    0.42***    0.48***         0.47***    0.55***   0.38***     0.64***     0.63***
 LNPOP
                   (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)      (0.03)        (0.01)     (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.03)
                    0.37      -0.53      -0.14       -0.46          3.93**    -0.40       -1.34       -1.60
 VALADD            (0.93)     (0.79)     (0.89)      (0.89)        (1.80)     (1.01)      (1.08)      (1.03)
                    0.06***    0.07***    0.06***                   0.03       0.02        0.07***
 PATIMP            (0.02)     (0.01)     (0.02)                    (0.03)     (0.02)      (0.02)
                    0.71***    0.29***    0.32**      0.33**        1.42***    0.10        0.45***     0.46***
 SAMEREG           (0.07)     (0.08)     (0.07)      (0.07)        (0.15)     (0.10)      (0.09)      (0.09)
                              -0.97***   -0.68***    -0.68***                 -0.95***    -0.55***    -0.56***
 DISTA                        (0.09)     (0.10)      (0.10)                   (0.11)      (0.116)     (0.11)
                               0.29***    0.19***     0.20***                  0.32***     0.22***     0.22***
 DISTSQB                      (0.03)     (0.03)      (0.03)                   (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)
                                          0.48***     0.47***                              0.85***     0.83***
 DUMCU                                   (0.04)      (0.04)                               (0.05)      (0.05)
                                          0.93***     0.92***                              1.02***     1.01***
 DUMST                                   (0.04)      (0.04)                               (0.04)      (0.04)
                                                      0.47***                                          0.55***
 SIC283                                              (0.07)                                           (0.08)
                                                      0.30***                                          0.26***
 SIC382                                              (0.07)                                           (0.08)
                                                      0.05                                             0.18**
 SIC367                                              (0.08)                                           (0.08)
                                                      0.03                                             0.21**
 SIC366                                              (0.08)                                           (0.08)
                                                      0.21***                                          0.25***
 SIC384                                              (0.07)                                           (0.08)
                   -8.31      -6.87      -8.09       -7.74         -9.85C     -6.77      -10.74      -10.35
 CONST.            (0.45)     (0.39)     (0.46)      (0.42)                   (0.49)      (0.48)      (0.46)
     Log
                    -2332      -2280      -1912          -1894      -4089      -4099       -3171      -3150
 Likelihood
 No. of Obs.        8,800      8,800      8,800       8,800          8,800     8,800       8,800       8,800
  Groups            1,100      1,100      1,100       1,100          1,100     1,100       1,100       1,100
    Wald           648.1***   838.5***   963.1***   1015.2***      57294***   435.5***   1276.7***   1343.9***
       ρ             0.10      0.003       0.14        0.11           0.70      0.81        0.12        0.09
 χ 2 (σ u2 = 0 )
                   40.7***      2.2*     66.9***     38.4***       864.4***    981.5      69.6***     41.1***


Notes: AUnits in 1000 miles.
       B
         Units in (1000 miles)2.
       C
         Did not converge.
       Standard errors in parentheses.
       *** p>0.01       ** p>0.05      * p>0.10




                                                    36
Table 8: Standardized Coefficients and Hypothesis Tests: H o : βˆxL
                                                                 *
                                                                    − βˆxC
                                                                        *
                                                                           =0
                  Standardized      Standardized
                   Coefficient       Coefficient
                   LICENSES         CITATIONS                                        βˆ xL
                                                                                        *

                     ( βˆxL
                         *
                            )          ( βˆxC
                                           *
                                              )         βˆ xL
                                                           *
                                                              − βˆxC
                                                                  *
                                                                       Z-Statistic           βˆ xC
                                                                                                *

                       (1)               (2)                (3)           (4)           (5)
 Overall University Sample
                      1.13             0.79
 LNPOP                                                     0.34         4.54***        1.4
                     (0.06)            (0.04)
                      0.14              0.04
 VALADD              (0.04)                                0.10         1.76**         3.5
                                       (0.03)
                      0.20              0.08
 PATIMP                                                    0.12         2.14**         2.5
                     (0.04)            (0.03)
                      0.08              0.13
 SAMEREG             (0.03)            (0.02)
                                                          -0.05        -1.02           0.6
                     -2.39             -1.03
 DIST                (0.19)            (0.12)
                                                          -1.36        -5.93***        2.3
 Exclusively Licensed Patents
                      1.21             0.74
 LNPOP                                                     0.47         5.24***        1.6
                     (0.08)            (0.04)
                      0.27              0.09
 VALADD              (0.06)                                0.18         2.75***        3.0
                                       (0.03)
                      0.16              0.06
 PATIMP              (0.06)            (0.03)
                                                           0.10         1.53*          2.7
                      0.14              0.17
 SAMEREG             (0.04)            (0.02)
                                                          -0.03        -0.75           0.8
                     -3.02             -0.64
 DIST                (0.25)            (0.13)
                                                          -2.38        -8.40***        4.7
 Non-Exclusively Licensed Patents
                     1.56              0.88
 LNPOP                                                     0.68         5.57***        1.8
                     (0.10)            (0.08)
                     -0.04             -0.02
 VALADD              (0.06)                               -0.02        -0.27           2.0
                                       (0.05)
                      0.32              0.06
 PATIMP              (0.07)            (0.05)
                                                           0.26         3.14***        5.3
                      0.16              0.03
 SAMEREG             (0.04)            (0.05)
                                                           0.13         2.27**         5.3
                     -3.07             -1.90
 DIST                (0.30)            (0.23)
                                                          -1.17        -3.12***        1.6


Notes: Standard errors in parentheses.
       *** p>0.01       ** p>0.05      * p>0.10




                                                   37
Bibliography:

Acs, Z.J., D.B. Audretsch, and M.P. Feldman (1992). “Real Effects of Academic Research:
Comment,” American Economic Review 82: 363-367.

Acs, Z.J., D.B. Audretsch, and M.P. Feldman (1994). “R&D Spillovers and Innovative Activity,”
Managerial and Decision Economics 15: 131-138.

Adams, J.D. (2001). “Comparative Localization of Academic and Industrial Spillovers,” NBER
Working Paper #8292.

Almeida, P. and B. Kogut (1999). “Localization of Knowledge and the Mobility of Engineers in
Regional Networks,” Management Science 45(July): 905-917.

Agrawal, A. (2000). “Economic Issues Concerning the Mobility of Scientific Inventions,”
Unpublished PhD Dissertation, University of British Columbia.

Arora, A. (1995). “Licensing Tacit Knowledge: Intellectual Property Rights and the Market for
Know-How,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology 4:41-59.

Arrow, K.J. (1962). “Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources of Invention,” in R.R.
Nelson, ed., The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economics and Social Factors.
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press): 609-25.

Association of University Technology Managers, Inc. (2000). AUTM Licensing Survey, Fiscal
Year 1999. (Norwalk, CT: Association of University Technology Managers).

Audretsch, D.B., and M.P. Feldman (1996). “R&D Spillovers and the Geography of Innovation
and Production,” American Economic Review 86: 630-640.

Audretsch, D.B., and P.E. Stephan (1996). “Company-Scientist Locational Links: The Case of
Biotechnology,” American Economic Review 86: 641-652.

Griliches, Z. (1979). “Issues in Assessing the Contribution of R&D to Productivity Growth,”
Bell Journal of Economics 10: 92-116.

Heckman, J. (1979). “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error,” Econometrica 47: 153-
161.

Henderson, R., M. Trajtenberg, and A.B. Jaffe (1998). “Universities as a Source of Commercial
Technology: A Detailed Analysis of University Patenting, 1965-88,” Review of Economics and
Statistics 80(1): 119-127.

Jaffe, A.B. (1989). “Real Effects of Academic Research,” American Economic Review 79: 957-
970.




                                              38
Jaffe, A.B., M.S. Fogarty, and B.A. Banks (1998). “Evidence from Patents and Patent Citations
on the Impact of NASA and Other Federal Labs on Commercial Innovation,” The Journal of
Industrial Economics 46(2): 183-205.

Jaffe, A.B., M. Trajtenberg, and M.S. Fogarty (2000). “The Meaning of Patent Citations: Report
on the NBER/Case-Western Reserve Survey of Patentees,” NBER Working Paper #7631.

Jaffe, A.B., M. Trajtenberg, and R. Henderson (1993). “Geographic Localization of Knowledge
Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics: 577-598.

Jensen, R. and M. Thursby (2001). “Proofs and Prototypes for Sale: The Tale of University
Licensing,” American Economic Review 91: 240-259.

Levin, R.C., A.K. Klevorick, R.R. Nelson, and S.G. Winter (1987). “Appropriating the Returns
from Industrial Research and Development,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 3: 783-
820.

Marshall, A. (1896). Industry and Trade. (London: Macmillan Publishing Company).

Mowery, D.C. (1983). “Economic Theory and Government Technology Policy,” Policy Sciences
16: 27-44.

Mowery, D.C., R.R. Nelson, B.N. Sampat, and A.A. Ziedonis (2001). “The Growth of Patenting
and Licensing by U.S. Universities: An Assessment of the Effects of the Bayh-Dole Act of
1980,” Research Policy 30: 99-119.

Podolny, J. and A. Shepard (1996). “When are Technological Spillovers Local? Patent Citation
Patterns in the Semiconductor Industry,” Working Paper, Stanford University.

Silverman, B.S. (1996). “Technical Assets and the Logic of Corporate Diversification,”
Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Haas School of Business, University of California, Berkeley.

Stata Corp. (2001). Stata Statistical Software: Release 7.0. (College Station, TX: Stata
Corporation).

Williamson, O.E. (1975). Markets and Hierarchies. (New York: Free Press).

Williamson O.E. (1985). The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. (New York: Free Press).

Zellner, A. (1962) “An Efficient Method of Estimating Seemingly Unrelated Regressions and
Tests for Aggregation Bias,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 57(June): 348-368.

Zucker, L.G., M.B. Darby, and J. Armstrong (1998). “Intellectual Capital and the Firm: The
Technology of Geographically Localized Knowledge Spillovers,” Economic Inquiry
36(January): 65-86.

Zucker, L.G., M.B. Darby, and M. Brewer (1999). “Intellectual Capital and the Birth of U.S.
Biotechnology Enterprises,” American Economic Review 88(1): 290-306.



                                                39
