                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           COURTS AND RELATIONAL CONTRACTS


                                            Simon Johnson
                                            John McMillan
                                         Christopher Woodruff


                                          Working Paper 8572
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8572


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2001




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.



© 2001 by Simon Johnson, John McMillan and Christopher Woodruff. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Courts and Relational Contracts
Simon Johnson, John McMillan and Christopher Woodruff
NBER Working Paper No. 8572
October 2001
JEL No. D2, G0, K0, O1



                                               ABSTRACT


        Post-communist countries offer new evidence on the relative importance of courts and
relationships in enforcing contracts. Belief in the effectiveness of courts has a significant positive effect
on the level of trust shown in new relationships between firms and their customers. Well-functioning
courts also encourage entrepreneurs to try out new suppliers. Courts are particularly important when
specific investments are needed for a relationship to develop. While relationships can sustain existing
interactions, workable courts help new interactions to start and develop.




Simon Johnson                      John McMillan                           Christopher Woodruff
Sloan School of Management         Graduate School of Business             Graduate School of International
MIT                                Stanford University                     Business and Pacific Studies
and NBER                           mcmillan_john@gsb.stanford.edu          UCSD
sjohnson@mit.edu                                                           cwoodruff@ucsd.edu
                                                                                        Johnson et al. 1


1. Introduction

       Contracts are maintained both by invoking the law and through the incentives that come
with interfirm relationships. When firms have ongoing dealings, the relationship itself can
induce cooperation – the sanction for any deviation being the breaking off of the relationship and
the cessation of the gains from trade. Where legal institutions are weak, bilateral relationships
can substitute for the courts in supporting contracting. Relational contracting is strengthened if it
is embedded in a social system, with third parties both helping to match the trading partners
initially and joining in the sanctioning in the event of a breach of contract (Ellickson 1991, Greif
1993, Greif, Milgrom, and Weingast 1994). But where courts function, what is the role of
relational contracting? And when relational contracting is effective, what do courts add?
       Anecdotal evidence from the United States, in Macaulay’s classic 1963 paper, shows that,
even under an effective legal system, contracting relies not just on the courts but also on interfirm
relationships (see also Galanter, 1981, Williamson, 1983, 1994). Relational contracts have an
advantage over the courts in that the participants may have better information than any third
party. A disadvantage of relational contracts, on the other hand, is that they might cause firms to
stick with established relationships rather than working with new, untried partners, thereby
creating barriers to entry. In this paper we quantify the relative role of the courts and
relationships in supporting contracting between firms, and measure the role of the courts in
lowering the entry barriers that relational contracting can give rise to.
       An experiment in the interaction between the courts and relational contracting is offered
by the transition of formerly planned economies of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
The governments in these countries have attempted to build market-oriented legal systems to
replace the bureaucratic controls of the old planned economy. At the same time, firms have been
entering and developing new relationships among themselves, replacing the networks that broke
down with the end of the planned economy (Blanchard and Kremer, 1997, Roland and Verdier,
1999). These countries have functioning but relatively weak court systems; cross-country
indicators suggest that their courts are worse than in most developed countries but better than
those in very poor countries. There is considerable variation both across and within our sample
countries—Russia, Ukraine, Poland, Slovakia, and Romania—in the extent to which
entrepreneurs believe the legal system can be used to enforce contracts. We use this variation to
                                                                                        Johnson et al. 2


examine how the courts affect contracting. We have three sets of results. First, relational
contracting is the main form of contractual assurance for the firms in our sample; we empirically
identify conditions under which relational contracting is effective. Second, entrepreneurs who
say the courts are effective have measurably more trust in their trading partners, but the effect is
mainly with new partners, not longstanding ones. Third, transaction costs are lower when courts
are effective than when firms must rely solely on relational contracts, and firms are more likely to
seek out new trading partners.
       We distinguish two roles of the courts. A simple role is helping ensure bills are paid. A
more complex role arises where the quality of goods is hard to verify and specific investments
are needed. For such transactions, the courts can serve to clarify the parties’ responsibilities in
the event of a dispute, thus facilitating their day-to-day interactions and reducing the likelihood
that disputes will arise. We find clear evidence that the courts are providing the former service,
and some evidence that they are providing the latter.
       Our bottom line, then, is that while informal relationships are the main basis for our
firms’ contracting, the formal institutions also foster contracting. Firms can have productive
interactions even when the courts cannot be used to enforce contracts; but workable courts
encourage firms to take on new partners. It is by making it easier for new firms to enter that
having workable courts improves on relational contracting and boosts overall productivity. The
courts are serving to foster efficient transacting even though, by comparison with those of
Western Europe or the United States, they are quite imperfect.


2. Summary of Results
       Firms’ characteristics, and the actions they take, are difficult for other firms to observe
(Wilson, 1985). A customer might or might not be dependable in paying its bills. A supplier
might or might not be competent to produce goods of an acceptable quality and on time, and even
if competent might or might not have incentives to do so. A firm can learn about its potential
customers’ and suppliers’ reliability by making inquiries via a trade association, a social network,
or other firms in the same line of business. It also learns about its trading partners through its
experience in dealing with them. A firm can give a trading partner an incentive not to renege on a
deal either by a legally enforceable contract (provided the legal institutions exist and the actions
                                                                                         Johnson et al. 3


in question are verifiable) or by the prospect that acceptable performance will be rewarded with
profitable future business.
        We examine relational contracts in a set of seller-buyer relationships and investigate the
level of trade credit offered to customers. To offer trade credit is to trust that it will be repaid.
Our survey ascertains how much firms trust each other in ongoing relationships. The questions
about both beliefs and actions in our survey are straightforward, easy to translate, and contain
important consistency checks. The survey methodology is designed to be replicable in both
developing and developed countries.
        We find that relationships are the basis of most of the transactions between firms
(Sections 3 and 4). Entrepreneurs say disputes with trading partners are usually settled without
third-party assistance. Relationships particularly support trade credit when the seller has
obtained prior information about the customer. Having obtained information about the customer
from other manufacturers is associated with about 15% more of the bill being paid with delay. If
a family member or friend is the customer, about 15% more of the bill is paid with delay. We
provide some new evidence that relational contracting operates after the two firms have had
some experience in dealing with each other. Trust develops quickly. Customers pay 12
percentage points more of their bill on credit after only two months of trading. We also confirm
that trade associations sometimes help with contracting. Those firms belonging to trade
associations that provide information or arbitration services (about one-third of the sample) grant
4% more trade credit.
        These results on interfirm relationships corroborate results from other countries with
inadequate legal systems, such as Ghana and Vietnam (Fafchamps 1996, McMillan and
Woodruff 1999b). More novel is our finding that the courts have a perceptible effect on the level
of trust in relationships with customers. Our first main result is that entrepreneurs who say the
courts are effective grant 5% more trade credit on average. More specifically, however, belief in
the courts has a significant effect on trade credit for new relationships but does not appear to
have any effect in longer lasting relationships. With trading partners with whom they are
unfamiliar, firms rely on the courts, but with customary trading partners it is the relationship that
shapes the transactions.
                                                                                          Johnson et al. 4


        Helping to ensure bills are paid is a straightforward role for the courts. A more subtle way
in which the courts can underpin transacting is in helping to ensure that the goods delivered are
of adequate quality and in allowing specific investment to be undertaken. This presumes a higher
level of sophistication in the courts, but it also places more stress on interfirm relationships. The
characteristics of the goods exchanged are usually more easily checked by the buyer and seller
than by a court. Where goods are complex and assets are specific, therefore, ongoing
relationships are still more needed than where the only issue is that bills get paid. For such
transactions, the parties have an added incentive to preserve continuity and to resolve disputes by
themselves. Even in countries with well functioning legal systems, disputes typically reach the
courts only when a relationship has come to an end (Macaulay, 1963; Galanter, 1981,
Williamson, 1983, 1994). The main role of the courts, in this case, is to be the locus of ultimate
appeal, delimiting and enforcing threat positions. Functioning courts make it harder for a seller to
defect by producing substandard goods.
        We use three measures of complexity of the goods traded. We define the goods to be
complex if the supplier makes the good solely for our respondent; if our respondent has no
alternative supplier for this input; or if the contract is written rather than oral. The fact that our
firm is the sole customer for its supplier’s output might mean the supplier has had to undertake
specific investments to make the input, or it might merely be a symptom of the thinness of
markets in these transition economies. Our data do not allow us to distinguish these two effects,
but the distinction is not material: in either case the risk of reneging is larger than when there
exist multiple suppliers. Similarly, the fact that our firm has a single supplier for an input might
mean that specific investments are needed to make it, or it might reflect market thinness; either
brings reneging risks. Written, rather than oral, contracts are used for complex transactions in
which there is a need to write things down for the sake of clarity, as well as to help in proving a
breach should a dispute arise.1
        To examine the relative roles of relationships and the courts in supporting transactions in
complex goods, we investigate the firms’ relationships with their suppliers (Section 5). Trust in
existing suppliers may make firms reluctant to purchase from new suppliers. Because buyers
have more information about suppliers with whom they have had previous dealings, they are
willing to pay more to an incumbent supplier than to one with whom they have never worked.
                                                                                       Johnson et al. 5


Higher switching costs of this nature result in barriers to entry, as new firms have a difficult time
attracting customers and more productive firms gain market share more slowly (Klemperer
1995). Our second main result is that courts lower switching costs and thereby reduce entry
barriers. We asked firms whether they would abandon their incumbent supplier if offered a 10%
lower price by a new, previously unknown firm, and we use the answers to this question to
estimate the determinants of switching costs. We find that switching costs are higher when the
input is more complex and, by some measures, when the buyer is more certain about the quality
and fit of the existing input. Members of trade associations also have lower switching costs.
Even controlling for these effects, entrepreneurs who perceive the courts to be effective have
significantly lower switching costs.
       For the subset of transactions where the goods are customized to the buyer--rather than
standard goods made to inventory--we find that buyers who say the courts are effective are
significantly less likely to reject the new, lower-priced offer than those who say the courts are
ineffective. Effective courts, by clarifying threat positions, generate extra confidence within
complex transactions.
       It follows that effective courts arguably have another efficiency-enhancing effect. By
encouraging firms to undertake specific investments, the development of the courts changes the
composition of economic activity, enabling more complex goods to be produced (Williamson,
1991). We cannot test for this effect in our data, but the result that, when the courts are effective,
firms buying complex inputs are more ready to switch to new suppliers suggests that such a
change has already begun in these countries.
       The development of legal institutions, then, brings indirect efficiency gains, by lowering
entry barriers, in addition to direct efficiency gains through strengthening confidence in contracts.
We find that the main effect of courts is on the willingness to work with a new supplier at all.
Courts do not affect the likelihood of severing established relationships. The main effect of belief
in the court system is to encourage the formation of new relationships. These results suggest that
even weak courts can have significant positive effects in encouraging innovation and entry.
                                                                                          Johnson et al. 6


3. Contract-Enforcement Mechanisms
        We surveyed privately owned manufacturing firms with between seven and 270 workers
in Poland (303 firms), Slovakia (308), Romania (321), Russia (269) and Ukraine (270). The
survey, described in more detail in Johnson, McMillan and Woodruff (2000), was designed to find
similar firms in similar cities in all five countries. Most of the surveyed firms are small, with 84%
having fewer than 100 employees. Some were spun off from state-owned enterprises, others were
started from scratch.2 We adapted the survey methodology developed for Vietnam by McMillan
and Woodruff (1999b), though that work did not focus on the relative importance of the courts
and relational contracting, since the courts there were ineffective. The survey asked about the
manufacturer's relationship with its oldest continuous customer and its newest customer, and its
oldest continuous and newest supplier. We examine how cooperation in each of the four trading
relationships is affected by the availability of the courts and relational contracting.


3.1 The courts
        Our survey asked managers whether they believed the courts were effective in enforcing
contracts with trading partners. We first asked whether the courts could hypothetically be used to
enforce contracts with customers and suppliers, i.e., whether the firm could use the courts if a
dispute arose, even if it had never actually had a dispute with a trading partner. More than two-
thirds of entrepreneurs across the five countries say the courts can be used (see Table 1). The
percentage is highest in Romania (87%) and Poland (73%) and lowest in Ukraine (55%). For
comparison, when we asked entrepreneurs in Vietnam the same question, almost no one—just
9%—said the courts could be used (McMillan and Woodruff 1999b).


                                            --Place Table 1 Here—


        We also asked whether the firms have, in fact, been involved in a contractual dispute.
Most (58%) said they had. Among those firms reporting at least one dispute, more than half in
Russia and Ukraine and almost half in Poland said they used the courts in their most recent
dispute with a customer or supplier. Courts were used in less than a third of disputes in Slovakia
and Romania.3 Romanian firms are most likely to say they can use the courts but least likely to
                                                                                        Johnson et al. 7


have used them. Polish firms, on the other hand, are less likely to say courts can be used but more
likely to have used them.
       Measuring the impact of courts on contracting is difficult. The incidence of disputes is
not a good measure because with a very efficient court system (in which the court’s decisions are
predictable and there is a small but positive cost of going to the court), we should observe few
disputes. For this reason we prefer the measure of whether entrepreneurs believe the courts could
be used if a dispute arose, while acknowledging the obvious problems with such a hypothetical
question. While this question is hypothetical, the theory of repeated games models just such
beliefs, i.e., the relevant question is precisely not what the entrepreneur did last time he or she
had a dispute, but what he or she believes would happen if there is a dispute in the future. In the
regressions we also use the data on actual court use as an alternative measure to check the results
obtained using the hypothetical measure.4
       Our data on court effectiveness are roughly in line with those obtained for our countries
in other studies. Indexes of the countries’ legal environments for business show that all five
countries have legal systems that function to some extent. The Wall Street Journal’s panel of
investment professionals rated the countries according to an index of the rule of law at the end of
1997. Poland scored 9.0 on a scale of one to ten (with a higher score indicating stronger rule of
law), Romania scored 6.4, Slovakia 6.2, Russia 5.4, and Ukraine 3.9 (Wall Street Journal, 1998).
The EBRD’s 1997 index of how commercial laws are being enforced and administered, based on
a survey of lawyers in the region, scored Poland best (with “clear commercial laws that are
supported by an effective court system”), Slovakia, Romania and Russia together in the middle
(with “clear commercial laws not fully supported by the court system”), and Ukraine scored
worst (with “commercial legal rules that are generally unclear and sometimes contradictory”).5
       Other firm-level surveys in these countries also find similar beliefs about the court
effectiveness. Pop-Eleches (1998) finds that 67% of small retailers in Romania say they can use
the courts for business disputes. Frye and Shleifer (1997) report that 45% of retailers in Poland
respond similarly, roughly consistent with our findings, though they find more optimism among
Russian retailers, with 65% saying they can use courts. Hendley, Murrell, and Ryterman (1999)
find that 61% of Russian enterprises filed or threatened to file claims against delinquent
customers in the previous two years, and 25% against suppliers. Hellman, Jones and Kaufmann
                                                                                         Johnson et al. 8


(2000) asked managers whether they were affected by the “sale of court decisions in commercial
cases.” Poland and Romania fare relatively well, with just 18% and 17% of firms saying that the
sale of verdicts is a problem. Slovakia (25%), Ukraine (26%) and Russia (27%) fare somewhat
worse. Thus our data on court effectiveness are consistent with what others have observed.
        In our survey, why would firms within a given country vary in their assessments of the
courts’ effectiveness? They operate, after all, under the same laws. Within-country differences
could arise in three ways. (a) The accessibility of the courts could be objectively different for
different firms or for different entrepreneurs. There could be fixed costs either of using the courts
or of investigating their use; larger firms would then be more likely to say the courts are usable.
Younger entrepreneurs might adapt more quickly to the rapidly changing institutions in transition
economies. (b) The perceived ability to use courts may be associated with unmeasured
characteristics of the entrepreneurs interviewed that are unaffected by the actual status of the
courts. Those with “a trusting nature” may be more likely to say courts can be used. (c)
Entrepreneurs could differ in random ways in their perceptions of the courts’ effectiveness; given
the speed of change of these countries’ institutions, some errors of perception are to be expected.
Differences in responses arising from (a) and (c) imply real or perceived differences in the ability
to use courts. To the extent that the within-country differences are explained by (a) and (c) and
we include proxies for (a) as controls in the regressions, our regression coefficients will not be
misestimated, provided the entrepreneurs act on their reported beliefs in their credit-granting
decisions. A positive association between the stated ability to use the courts and higher levels of
credit granted to customers can then be interpreted as an effect of the institutions on trust.
Running regressions with the reported effectiveness of the courts as the dependent variable (see
Appendix B), we find that, consistent with (a), belief in the courts is significantly more likely
among managers who are younger and in larger firms.
        Workable courts offer some assurance that debts will be paid. Our first hypothesis,
therefore, is that firms that express faith in the courts will offer more trade credit. In the
regressions to follow we test this, taking as our main measure of courts’ effectiveness the answer
to the question of could you use the courts if you had a dispute. Despite the hypothetical nature of
this question, theory suggests it is a better measure than experience with courts, because courts
                                                                                         Johnson et al. 9


might be used less frequently the more effective they are. We will, however, use the question
about actual court use as a check on the regression results.

3.2 Relational contracting
        In countries lacking workable laws of contract, relational contracting is used in place of
the law. Even in countries with sophisticated legal systems, however, relational contracting is
needed, for the law does not work frictionlessly. The transaction costs of appealing to the law
sometimes exceed the transaction costs of using relational contracting. Market participants have
some advantages over judges in deciding whether commitments have been lived up to, as
identified by Charny (1990). First, market participants are more expert than courts in monitoring
other participants' conduct. Second, their decisions can be more nuanced than the binary decision
of liability or no liability that the court must make. Third, they can consider information that
cannot be introduced in court, such as impressionistic evidence about business trends or
judgments about the quality of items sold. They can base their decisions on a firm's behavior over
time, on probabilistic patterns that would not be admissible evidence in court. For these reasons,
as Macaulay (1963) showed, courts are seldom used to resolve disputes between trading partners
even in the United States, and using them generally marks the termination of the trading
relationship.6 Firms generally rely on relational contracting. We test four sets of predictions
about when contracting can be supported by informal punishments.7
        First, the most straightforward punishment is refusing to deal with the trading partner in
the future. The threat of severing a relationship gains force if it is costly to find alternative
trading partners (Kranton, 1996; Ramey and Watson, 1996). Firms work to sustain relationships
to avoid searching for new trading partners. The first hypothesis to be tested, therefore, is that
customers with higher search costs receive more trade credit.8 We proxy the customer’s cost of
finding a new supplier, i.e., an alternative to the interviewed firm, by the number of competitors
to the interviewed firm located near it (within 1 km). We expect to find that a larger number of
competitors located nearby is associated with firms providing less credit to their customers.
        Second, information is important in assessing credit risk. The business ability and
competitive position of the customer, its reliability, and the level of its investments affect the
likelihood of repayment. Entrepreneurs were asked how they first made contact with their oldest
and newest customers. We are primarily interested in relationships arising from two different
                                                                                       Johnson et al. 10


types of information networks, which we refer to as social networks and business networks.
Either of these networks may provide information about trading partners; either may also provide
the ability to sanction trading partners by sullying their reputation within the network. If a firm
initially learns about its customer from other firms in the industry or through family connections,
it might be more willing to offer trade credit. The regressions also include two other variables
representing information available at the start of the relationship, indicating information from
banks or credit bureaus, and other miscellaneous sources of information. Each of these represents
a small part of the sample. The remaining base group against which the coefficients are measured
is relationships in which our manufacturer had no information about the customer at the start of
the relationship.
       Third, the history of the trading relationship might affect the level of trust. Cooperation
might build up gradually, as the supplier learns through trading about the customer’s reliability.
By gradually increasing the amount of trade credit it offers, the firm might be able to sort fly-by-
night firms from those with longer time horizons (Ghosh and Ray, 1996; Watson, 1995). The
regressions will test the hypothesis that more trade credit is offered when the relationship is of
longer duration.9
       Finally, refusing to deal with the trading partner is most effective if the future profits from
forgone trade are large enough to outweigh the current gains from not cooperating; this depends
on the size of the discount rate or the frequency of the interaction. A hypothesis to be tested in
the regressions to follow is that more trade credit is granted to customers that buy more
frequently. This hypothesis must be treated with care, however, for the timing of purchases might
not be exogenous but rather determined at the same time as the extent of trade credit.
       In addition, trade associations are an alternative to using courts and may be
complementary to reliance on relational contracts. In market economies such associations
sometimes provide arbitration services for disputes involving their members (Bernstein, 1996;
Woodruff, 1998). Almost half of the firms we surveyed are members of a trade association.
Membership is highest in Russia and Ukraine, and lowest in Poland (see Table 1, row 4). Two-
thirds of these firms (37% of all firms) say their association offers assistance in locating new
trading partners and information on the reliability of existing or potential trading partners (thus
helping relationships to develop), and/or arbitration of disputes with trading partners (thus
                                                                                     Johnson et al. 11


substituting for the courts).10 We hypothesize that, because trade associations provide
information about potential trading partners’ reliability and help arbitrate disputes, membership
in a trade association (a) increases the amount of trade credit a firm offers and (b) makes a firm
more ready to switch to a new supplier.
       Relational contracts and the courts also have implications for the costs of switching
between suppliers (as we will discuss in Section 5).


4. Determinants of Trade Credit
       From the discussion in Section 3, we expect the level of trade credit to be decreasing in
the number of similar manufacturers located nearby and increasing in the duration of the
relationship, use of information networks, and membership in a trade association. Controlling
for these factors, we want to test whether belief in the effectiveness of courts has any effect on
the amount of trade credit.
       In this section we report regressions in which the percentage of the bill paid with delay is
the dependent variable and our proxies for contract enforcement mechanisms are the independent
variables. The survey was administered to 1471 firms, yielding 2942 potential manufacturer-
customer relationships. Just over a quarter (27%) of the customers are state-owned enterprises,
and about 7% are export customers located outside the manufacturer’s country. We eliminate
these relationships from the main sample because courts and networks may operate differently
with these two groups of customers.11 After eliminating these relationships and observations
with relevant data missing, our sample is 1460 for most of the trade credit regressions.


                                      --Place Table 2 Here—


       The dependent and independent variables are summarized in Table 2. On average, more
than half of the bill is paid with delay. Delayed payment is most common in Poland, where an
average of 84% of the purchase price is paid with delay and 72% is paid more than a week after
delivery, and least common in Russia, where only 11% of the purchase price is paid with delay
and 3% more than a week later (Table 2). In the whole sample, 30% pay everything on or before
delivery and 48% pay everything within a week after delivery. 12
                                                                                         Johnson et al. 12


        The percentage of the bill paid with delay is the outcome of both the supply of credit and
the demand for credit. The reduced-form equation is:
        TCi = α + βRi + γSi + δBi + φDi + µi ,                                                   (1)
where TC is the observed trade credit, Ri is a vector of variables characterizing the relationship,
Si is a vector of seller characteristics, Bi is a vector of buyer characteristics, Di is a vector of
industry and country dummies. The subscripts i represent the (i=1…n) buyer-seller pairs in the
sample. Our focus is the willingness of sellers to grant credit, given repayment uncertainties
represented by the vector of relationship and seller characteristics. A single seller may have two
relationships represented in the sample. We allow for correlation in the error term µi across
observations with the same seller by adjusting for clustering at the level of the firm.13
        Trade credit is operationalized in several different ways. First, we assess the willingness
of sellers to allow the buyer to pay any portion of the bill after delivery (line 1 of Table 2), using
a probit. We then consider the percentage of the bill paid after delivery. In 29% of the cases, no
part of the bill is paid with delay. In another 45% of the cases, the entire bill is paid with delay.
We use a two-tailed tobit model when the dependent variable is defined as the percentage of the
bill paid after delivery. We also define credit as the percentage of the bill paid more than 8 days
after delivery, and as the percentage of the bill multiplied by the percentage of the seller’s
production sold to the given customer. In the last case, we use a one-tailed tobit rather than a
two-tailed tobit because there is no mass at 100%. For each of our dependent variables, we adjust
for clustering of errors at the level of the seller.
        In the United States, buyers typically receive a 2% discount for payments made within 10
days of delivery, with the balance due in 30 days. The implicit interest rate on payments made
after 10 days is 44%, far in excess of bank loan rates. The literature's standard measure of trade
credit granted by (to) a firm is its accounts receivable (payable). Given the high implicit interest
rate, a firm's aggregate level of trade credit is presumed to be driven primarily by the buyers'
demand for credit. Our situation differs in several ways. First, our measure trade credit is specific
to a given relationship. We measure credit as the proportion of the bill paid as soon as one day
after delivery. As in the United States, the short delay is often interest free. In Romania, for
example, regulations require trade credit, when offered, to be interest free for at least 10 days. As
a result, the observance of delays of short periods is driven entirely by the willingness of the
                                                                                      Johnson et al. 13


seller to supply credit. Second, the evidence suggests that interest rates on credit exceeding any
interest-free period are comparable to bank loan rates in our countries. For delayed payments in
Poland, interest is typically 0.09% per day, not much higher than the 25% annual interest rate on
bank loans prevailing in Poland in the fall of 1997. In Romania, interest after the 10 day grace
period is allowed at a rate of 0.15% per day, which again is comparable to the commercial banks'
nominal lending rate of 55% per year prevailing in Romania at the time of our survey.14 Finally,
the credit-reporting services that are standard in developed economies have yet to be broadly
introduced in these countries; just 1% of our respondents said they used such a service to check
customers. Hence, a willingness to supply credit would be expected to play an important role in
determining the observed level of trade credit in our data.


4.1 The basic contract-enforcement regressions
        The dependent variable in our contract-enforcement regressions (presented in Table 3) is
trade credit. There are three sets of regressors in which we are mainly interested. The first set is
variables measuring the effect of bilateral relational contracting. The second set measures the
effect of trade associations, business networks and social networks. The third measures the
effects of courts.
        All of the regressions reported on Table 3 include country/industry fixed effects. We
include interacted controls because the factors affecting trade credit in the food industry in
Poland, for example, may differ from factors affecting trade credit in the food industry in Russia.
Since some surveyed manufacturers have two customers in the sample, we adjust all standard
errors for clustering at the firm level.


                                           --Place Table 3 Here—


        The first column of Table 3 is a probit regression with the dependent variable
representing a relationship in which the customer pays any part of the bill with delay. We focus
our discussion on the column 1 regression, which is the simplest of the regressions. The other
regressions vary among other things the measure of trade credit. The alternative specifications
produce results which are very similar to those in column 1.
                                                                                      Johnson et al. 14


       These regressions give clear evidence on the efficacy of relational contracting. Credit is
more likely to be granted to customers who are locked in by search costs; whose relationship
with the seller is longstanding; and who were located through third-party recommendations. The
courts also matter, for credit is more likely to be granted when the seller believers it can use the
courts. The details of these findings follow.
       We find weak evidence for the effect of bilateral lock-in through high search costs.
Customer search costs are inversely related to the number of competitors to our manufacturer
located near (within 1 km) the interviewed manufacturer. About 17% of manufacturers report 1-
4 competitors located nearby, while 4% report having more than 5 competitors located nearby.
We use two dummy variables to differentiate these two groups of firms from those indicating no
nearby competitors. Firms with more than 5 competitors located nearby are about 14% less likely
to allow customers to pay any part of their bill with delay. The variable indicating 1-4
competitors has the wrong sign but is not significant.
       Payment after delivery increases with the duration of the relationship. Our data indicate
that most of the experience effects occur very rapidly, within the first 2 months of the
relationships. Relationships with a duration longer than 2 months but 12 months or less are 15%
more likely to involve credit than are relationships 2 months old or less, an effect which is
significant at the .01 level.15 The incremental effect of experience beyond the first year of the
relationship is much smaller.
       These duration effects may be the result of any of several factors. First, sellers learn about
the reliability of buyers through trading experience. At the beginning of the relationship when the
buyer’s type is unknown, credit is not offered. As the seller learns about the reliability of the
buyer, the level of credit offered is increased. Hence, learning through trading is one possible
cause of the observed duration pattern. Second, sellers and buyers may learn to cooperate over
the course of the relationship, as in Sobel’s (1985) and Watson’s (1995) models of building a
relationship. We are unable to separate these two effects, but view them both as aspects of
building up relationships through learning about trading partners.16 A lack of data prevents us
from ruling out a third possibility, that selection without learning explains some part of the
observed duration effects. For selection without learning to be important, some relationships
would have to involve immediate trust. In these relationships, sellers would offer trade credit
                                                                                         Johnson et al. 15


from the start of the relationship and continue to do so as long as the relationship lasts. Other
relationships would have to involve less trust and be less likely to endure. If this were the case,
then there would be a positive correlation between credit and duration without any learning.17
Manufacturers in Vietnam described a process of learning (McMillan and Woodruff 1999a), and
we believe that learning likely explains the duration effect we observe in these data.
        Third-party information also matters for these firms; manufacturers learn about the
trustworthiness of trading partners by talking to others. Entrepreneurs were asked how they first
made contact with their oldest and newest customers. Firms found about 45% of their customers
through information from other manufacturers. More than three-fourths of these “other
manufacturers” were themselves customers of the interviewee, with the remainder being
suppliers, competitors or other firms. About 17% of sampled firms’ customers are managed by a
family member or by someone who was a friend of the interviewed entrepreneur when the
trading relationship began.18 This percentage is highest in Romania, where previous social
connections characterize 31% of customer relationships, and lowest in Poland where only 7% of
customers are managed by a family member or friend. The regression coefficients on Table 3
compare customers identified through business and social networks to those about whom the
seller had no information at the start of the relationship. Customers identified through business
and social networks are 18% and 17%, respectively, more likely to receive trade credit (Table 3,
rows 9 and 10).19 Both of these effects are significant at the .01 level. We also find that sellers
who are members of trade associations providing information about trading partners are 6% more
likely to grant credit to their customers, an effect significant at the .05 level in the first regression.
        That access to courts matters is shown by the regression in column 1. Manufacturers
who express confidence that courts can enforce contracts with trading partners are 8% more
likely to offer their customer’s credit. The effect is significant at just above the .01 level.
        In column 2 we use the percentage of the bill paid with delay as the dependent variable.
The regressions are two-tailed tobits, adjusting for mass points at both 0 and 100%. The
coefficients reported in columns 2-7 of Table 3 represent the slope in the uncensored range. The
coefficients and significance levels in column 2 are very similar to those in column 1. Again, the
relational contracting variables are significant at beyond the .01 level, trade associations at the
.10 level, and courts at the .05 level.
                                                                                        Johnson et al. 16


        The variables in the regressions in the first two columns measure characteristics of the
buyer-seller relationship. Column 3 adds controls for buyer and seller characteristics. The former
include variables measuring the number of employees the customer has, (1-15 (base group),16-
50, 51-100 and more than 100), a variable indicating foreign ownership, a variable indicating the
customer is located outside the seller’s city, and variables indicating that the buyer is a
retailer/wholesaler or an individual. The seller controls include the age and size of the firm, the
age and education level of the entrepreneur, and a variable indicating that the seller had a bank
loan in the year preceding the survey.
        Each of the buyer characteristics is statistically significant. (The coefficients are shown in
Appendix B.) For example, buyers with more than 100 employees pay an additional 8% of their
bill with delay compared to smaller firms. Buyers which are foreign owned pay an additional 9%
of their bill with delay. Compared to manufacturing customers, customers who are individuals
pay 9% less of their bill with delay, and retailer/wholesalers pay 6% more of their bill with delay.
We would expect firms which are large and foreign-owned to have more access to credit from
other sources, and customers who are individuals to have less access to credit from other sources.
Also, large firms and foreign-owned firms typically are better risks than small firms and
domestically-owned firms, for reputation matters more to them; having many suppliers, they bear
a higher reputational cost if word gets out that they have reneged on a deal. Thus the signs of
these variables are consistent with credit being supply-driven rather than demand-driven. The
seller characteristics have less significant effects, but firms started more than 10 years before the
survey allow customers to pay 16% less of their bill with delay.
        A comparison of columns 2 and 3 indicates that the addition of buyer and seller
characteristics has very little effect on the relational contracting variables. The effect of courts is
somewhat smaller when the additional controls are added (5.1% vs. 5.5%).20
        Next we consider two alternative formulations of the dependent variable. Column 4 uses
the percentage of the bill paid more than 8 days after delivery. The effect of courts is both larger
and more significant with the longer delay in payment (compare columns 4 and 3), with firms
saying that courts are effective allowing customers to pay 7% more of their bill with delay.
Business networks, on the other hand, have somewhat smaller effects. Search costs have smaller
effects and lose significance. These changes are consistent with longer delays requiring a higher
                                                                                       Johnson et al. 17


degree of trust.21 For the regression in column 5, we multiply the percentage of the bill paid with
delay by the percentage of the manufacturer’s production which is sold to the identified
customer. This gives us an approximation of credit as a percent of the manufacturer’s total
revenue, providing an alternative measure of the seller’s risk. By this measure, a customer paying
20% of his bill with delay but purchasing 50% of the manufacturer’s production represents more
risk than a customer paying 50% of his bill with delay but purchasing 1% of production. Both the
proportion of the bill paid on credit and the percentage of sales going to a given customer
increase as the relationship matures. A comparison of the results in columns 3 and 5 indicates
that the resulting duration effect is somewhat more prolonged when credit is measured as a
percent of the manufacturer’s sales (column 5). The difference between relationships between 3
and 12 months old and those 1-2 years old is much more pronounced in column 5. Comparing
column 5 with column 3, the relational contracting variables have higher significance levels and
the courts variable a lower significance level. This suggests that the former play a stronger role in
governing the decision to rely more heavily on a single customer.
       Column 6 controls for the amount of credit received from suppliers. Each additional 10
percentage points of credit received from suppliers is associated with an additional 2.7
percentage points of credit offered to customers, an effect that is highly significant. The
magnitude and significance of the effect suggests that the variable is measuring more than just a
relaxation of the manufacturer’s credit constraint. The inclusion of this control dampens the
effect of most of the other independent variables somewhat, and causes two variables – trade
association membership and customer search cost – to lose significance. Perhaps supplier credit
controls for heterogeneity in the sample not picked up by our industry/country controls. One
interpretation of the loss of significance of the search cost and trade association variable is that
the effects measured by these variables occur across and not within narrow industries. For
example, perhaps in addition to providing our manufacturers information about their customers,
trade associations provide suppliers with information about our manufacturers, leading to higher
credit levels both up- and downstream. If this is the case, then the regression in column 6
understates the effect of trade association membership, since part of the effect of the trade
association’s activities are picked up by the supplier credit variable.22
                                                                                        Johnson et al. 18


        Column 7 adds three factors which may affect the ability to sustain cooperation with a
customer but which may be endogenous—the frequency with which goods are delivered, talking
with other suppliers of the customer, and visiting the customer before the first sale. The
construction of the variables is described in Appendix C. Because of the potential endogeneity,
the coefficients on these variables should be interpreted with some caution. Of the 3, visiting the
customer before the first sale and the frequency of delivery are significantly associated with the
extension of trade credit. The importance of visits may reflect information gathering; prior visits
may also indicate a previous social connection (and indeed, visits are positively correlated with
information from social networks). Talking with other suppliers of the given customer does not
have the expected sign, but is not significant at the .10 level.
        Finally, the regression reported in Column 8 replaces belief in the courts with experience
with the courts, again using percentage of the bill paid with delay as the dependent variable. But
most firms in the sample report that they have had at least one dispute with a trading partner, and
about 28% of those firms say the courts played some role in resolving the dispute (Table 2).
Experience with the courts may be taken as a stronger indication of their effectiveness.23 Court
experience has a positive but insignificant effect when the specifications used in columns 1-3 and
5-7. But having used the courts is significant when credit is defined as payments beyond 8 days,
as shown in column 8.
         The importance of the use of networks on the credit decision is robust across all of the
specifications on Table 3. Relationship duration has similarly robust effects. The seller’s belief in
the courts also has a significant effect on the credit decision across all of the specification.
However, the effect of courts is smaller than the effect of networks. In the next subsection, we
examine whether the importance of courts depends on the age of the relationship.


4.2 Courts and the strength of relationships
        Credit relationships are established rapidly among our sample firms. Within two months,
12 percentage points more of the bill is paid with delay, a number which represents 20% of the
sample mean credit level (Table 2). Buyers lose their anonymity quickly. It is reasonable to
expect courts to have their greatest impact when buyers are still unknown, during the first few
months of the relationship. The courts can be expected to be involved more in new relationships
                                                                                      Johnson et al. 19


than in longstanding ones, for it is in new relationships that the poor risks get discovered and
weeded out. To test this, we divide the sample into young and old relationships. We use a cutoff
of 2 months. Column 1 of Table 4 reports the results of a regression with the same specification
as Table 3, column 3, but with the sample limited to relationships of less than two months, about
17% of the sample. 24 The effect of courts is much larger in new relationships (β=16.6, column 1)
than in the sample of relationships older than one year (β=4.5, column 2). The latter coefficient is
insignificant even though relationships older than one year represent a much larger part of the
sample (53%) than relationships younger than 2 months. The difference between the two
coefficients is significant at the .05 level (t=2.33). Moreover, firms that believe courts are
effective are distributed randomly across the two duration subsamples. There is no correlation
between a belief that courts are effective and the duration of relationships (r=.04, p=0.19).25


                                       --Place Table 4 Here—


       We also have a measure of the manager’s opinion about the extent to which his firm and
the customer are locked in a bilateral relationship. We asked managers how long it would take
them to find an alternative buyer for goods refused by the specified customer. We also asked
them how long they thought it would take the specified customer to find alternative supplies of
the good traded if they failed to deliver. Where the manager responded “a day” or “less than a
week” to both of these questions (32% of the sample), we categorize the relationship as “market-
based.” Where managers responded “more than a week” to both of these questions (39% of the
sample), we categorize the relationship as “bilateral.” Columns 3 and 4 of Table 4 show
regressions using the market-based and bilateral subsamples, respectively. Consistent with the
results from the duration subsamples, we find that courts are more important when relationships
are weaker, in market-based transactions. In the sample of market-based relationships, belief in
courts is associated with 10 percentage points more of the bill being paid after delivery. Courts
have no significant effect in the sample of bilateral relationships. The difference in coefficients is
significant at the .10 level (t=1.74). There is a positive correlation between belief in courts and
market-based relationships (r=.08, p=0.01).26
                                                                                      Johnson et al. 20


        A further division of the sample is shown Table 4. Relationships in which the buyer is
located in the same city as the manufacturer are separated from relationships in which the buyer
is in a different city. Taking legal action against a customer usually requires use of the courts in
the customer’s city. This implies substantially higher costs when the customer is located in
another city. Since courts are locally administered there may also be “home town” advantages.
Firms are likely to have a better understanding of the nuances of particular courts and judges in
their own city. Hence the use of courts in a distant city adds an additional element of uncertainty.
The data are consistent with these expectations. Courts have a large and significant effect among
relationships with customers located in the same city (β=6.6, t=1.98), but no significant effect in
relationships with customers located in other cities (β=0.9, t=0.25). The difference between the
two coefficients is not significant at the .10 level (t=1.24).27


4.3 Robustness Checks
        Private protection rackets are famously rife in Russia and Ukraine, though they are less
active in the other post-communist countries. In a survey of Russian shopkeepers by
Zhuravskaya and Frye (1998), 33% reported that one of the roles of private protection
organizations was to enforce agreements (though far more reported their role was to “protect” the
shopkeepers from other criminals). According to anecdotes, though, the mafia plays a larger role
with shops than with manufacturing firms of the sort we surveyed. Firms reporting disputes with
trading partners were asked whether “an informal private agency specializing in such cases”
aided in the resolution of the dispute. Only 5% of firms gave this response, though 48% of
Russian firms and 26% of Ukrainian firms reporting disputes said they used such an agency.
        We create two variables that provide some control for the availability of private
enforcement. When added to the basic regression reported in column 3, neither “other third party
enforcement” (β= - 2.81, t=0.75) nor using “an informal private agency specializing in such
cases” (β= - 8.70, t=1.21) has a significant effect on credit. Their inclusion has almost no effect
on the relational contracting variables or on the courts variable.
        The results shown on Table 3 are also robust to modifications in the sample criteria. All
of the reported coefficients remain significant and of close to the same magnitude when
relationships and/or firms started more than 10 years before the survey – prior to the beginning of
                                                                                       Johnson et al. 21


economic reforms – are excluded from the sample. The results are similarly robust to limiting the
sample to the three Eastern European countries. Including state-owned and export customers also
has only modest effects. A regression with state enterprises and export customers is shown in
Appendix B, along with separate regressions for each country. (Russia and Ukraine are combined
because of the small sample sizes in these countries.) Courts are positively associated with credit
in each of the country level regressions, though the effect is significant only in Slovakia.28 With
the exception of social networks in Poland, the information network variables also have the right
sign everywhere, and are significant most of the time.
       We have also run random effects and OLS regressions for all of the specifications. The
results are very similar to those we report in Table 3. Moreover, firm level fixed effects
regressions produce very similar estimates for the effect of relationship duration, business
networks, and social networks.29 These and the other results referenced in this subsection are
available from the authors.
       Finally, Glaeser et al. (2000) raise the possibility that survey questions inquiring how
much an interviewee trusts others may in fact be good measures of the trustworthiness of the
interviewee. To the extent that our question on courts is correlated with the overall level of trust
the manager has in others, Glaeser et al.’s argument would be that managers responding
affirmatively to the courts question are more trustworthy. This implies that that those believing
courts are effective should receive more credit from their suppliers. We checked this by running
regressions similar to those in Table 3 with the level of credit received by the interviewed firm
from the suppliers identified in the survey. The buyer’s belief in the effectiveness of courts has
no effect on the level of credit received by our firms. We take this as evidence supporting the
claim that our question on the effectiveness of courts is measuring something more than the
trusting nature of the interviewee.


4.4   Summary of trade-credit regressions
       Trust between trading partners is supported by both institutions and relational contracting.
Manufacturers who express confidence in courts allow their customers to pay about 5 percentage
points more of their bill with delay. But the effect of courts is much larger at the start of
relationships. During the first 2 months of a relationship, belief in courts is associated with about
                                                                                      Johnson et al. 22


17% more of the bill being paid with delay. By comparison, the level of credit increases by about
12 percentage points during the first few months of a trading relationship. Customers found
through social or business networks pay about 15 percentage points more of their bills with
delay. Trade associations have a smaller effect. With the exception of trade association
membership, these findings are robust to alternative definitions of the dependent variable, and to
changes in specification.


5. Determinants of Switching Costs
       The courts play a significant role, then, in encouraging trade credit when relationships are
new. Are they also important in determining when new relationships begin?
       Our data allow us to explore the formation of relationships in the following way. With
respect to each firm’s oldest and newest supplier relationship, we asked entrepreneurs: "If
another firm you have never purchased from offered to supply this input for a price 10% less than
this supplier, would you purchase from the new firm instead of this supplier?" Firms gave one of
three answers: they would refuse this offer, accept the offer and abandon the existing supplier, or
buy from the new supplier while continuing to purchase from the old supplier.


                                          --Place Table 5 Here—


       Their answers, summarized in Table 5, suggest there is significant resistance to taking on
new partners. Over half said they would pass up the apparently better deal, in whole or in part, to
maintain the relationship with the existing supplier and a sixth said they would pass it up
completely. Romanian firms were most likely to say they would drop their existing supplier in
favor of the cheaper supplier, giving this response in almost two-thirds of the cases. (This may be
related to the fact that most of the Romanian firms’ transactions are simple—as Table 5 shows,
fewer goods are made to order in Romania than in any of the other countries bar Ukraine—and
with simple transactions there is less risk in dropping the existing supplier.) Less fragile
relationships are indicated in Poland and Slovakia, where around half of the firms would
abandon existing suppliers completely. In Russia and Ukraine, almost all firms say they would
buy from the new supplier without breaking the relationship with the existing supplier.30, 31
                                                                                      Johnson et al. 23


       Welfare is lower, arguably, when switching costs are high. A supplier that knows its
customer is locked in can charge a relatively high markup. Lowering switching costs brings
prices closer to marginal cost, making the market for inputs more competitive overall.
       There is a substantial literature on buyer switching costs, both in economics and in
marketing. The economics literature is primarily theoretical, and focuses on pricing behavior of
sellers in multi-period models with switching costs (Klemperer, 1995). The marketing literature
is primarily empirical, and focuses on how brand loyalty is affected by factors such as advertising
(see for example Erdem and Keane, 1996).32 Asymmetric information is central in both of these
literatures. Buyers have more information about the products of sellers from whom they have
previously purchased.33
       Assume the buying firm knows something about the supplier from which it is currently
buying: its reliability in delivering on time, the quality of its products. It knows nothing about the
new potential supplier except that its offered price is 10% less. This gives the incumbent an
advantage over the new supplier. We can think about this in the following simple framework.
Suppose the value to the manufacturer of goods supplied by the existing supplier (denoted by
subscript e) is given by


                       Ue = U(Ve + ηe - Pe)                                                   (2)


where Ve is the expected value of the good supplied, ηe is a random parameter with mean zero
and variance σe2, Pe is the price paid to the existing supplier, and U is a concave utility function,
inducing risk aversion. The value of the input should be interpreted broadly to include not only
the quality of the physical good, but the quality of service – on-time delivery, replacement of
defective merchandise, and so on. The value to the manufacturer of the good (potentially)
supplied by the new supplier is similarly


                       Un = U(Vn + ηn – Pn)                                                   (3)


where the subscript n represents the new supplier. Since more is known about the existing
supplier, σe2 < σn2. We assume the new supplier is drawn randomly from the population of
                                                                                      Johnson et al. 24


suppliers, so that Vn is the population average value of the input. The good supplied by the
existing supplier may have an expected value either higher or lower than this, depending on the
specific draw. On average, we might expect to find Ve > Vn more often then the reverse, since
good draws are more likely to survive (and be picked up in our data).
       Finally, we add the possibility of a percentage discount offered by the new supplier to
induce the manufacturer to switch. This is denoted D. The value of the good supplied by the new
supplier is then increased by a percentage D. The manufacturer will switch to the new supplier
when E[Un | D] > E[Ue], that is when the expected utility from the input supplied by the new
supplier plus the price discount exceeds the expected utility from the input supplied by the
existing supplier.
       Whether, for a given discount D, the buyer chooses to switch will depend on three
factors. First, the expected value of the good supplied by the existing supplier, or how Ve
compares with Vn. Second, the respective variances around the expected value of the good; and
in particular, the downside risks of switching to the new supplier. And third, the degree of risk
aversion of the manufacturer matters. Together, these determine how E[Ue] compares to E[Un ].
Given some degree of risk aversion, switching is less likely if the expected value of the input
supplied by the existing (new) supplier is higher (lower), and if the variance surrounding the
estimated value of the input provided by the existing (new) supplier is low (high).
       We have empirical proxies for each of these three effects. Some of our proxies affect both
the estimate and the variance of the input’s value. For example, the expected value of the inputs
delivered by the existing supplier should be positively correlated with the duration of the existing
relationship, since high value relationships are more likely to endure. Because trading experience
also provides information about the quality of inputs provided by a supplier, the variance
surrounding the estimated value of the input should fall with the duration of the relationship.
Both of these effects contribute to an expectation that switching costs are positively correlated
with the duration of the relationship with the existing supplier.
       The sources of information about the existing supplier should have similar effects. We
expect that the use of information networks and more intensive information gathering by the
manufacturer should also be associated with higher switching costs. We use the frequency of the
visits to the current supplier’s factory and the frequency of delivery of the inputs as indicators of
                                                                                        Johnson et al. 25


information gathering efforts. Note that information gathering is more likely to be exogenous in
this regression than in the trade credit regression, since the visits refer to the existing supplier
rather than the new supplier.
        The characteristics of the input involved affect both the probability a supplier will fail to
deliver as promised and the cost to the manufacturer of that event. Some inputs are standardized
and available off the shelf from many suppliers. The physical quality of these inputs can often be
determined at the time of purchase. Failure of a supplier to make a delivery is quickly and easily
remedied. Hence the risk of non-performance is low. Other inputs are made specifically for the
buyer, and are produced to order. The advantage of the incumbent supplier is smaller for the first
type of good: Vn is closer to Ve, and σn2 is closer to σe2. We measure the differences in the
characteristics of the input with indicators that the input is produced only for our manufacturer
and that the quality specifications are written down. We also include a variable indicating that the
manufacturer has a second supplier of the input.34
        Functioning courts, by strengthening the enforcement of contracts, reduce the scope for
deviant behavior on the part of the unknown supplier. Thus, we expect to find that functioning
courts reduce switching costs and increase the willingness to switch suppliers.
        Trade associations providing arbitration services may perform a similar role to the courts.
Trade associations may have an additional effect as well, through information services that they
provide their members. Buyers who are members of trade associations are more likely to be able
to obtain information about the new supplier’s past behavior, and will also have the ability to
report a deficient supplier to the association. Both of these decrease the likelihood that the
supplier will be deficient.
        Finally, the level of risk aversion certainly varies across the firms and entrepreneurs in
our sample, in ways that we can only imperfectly measure. The size of the firm is a reasonably
good proxy for its risk aversion; larger buyers tend to be more diversified and less risk averse.
Other factors such as the age and education level of the entrepreneur and the age of the firm may
account for some differences in entrepreneurs’ risk aversion.
        A more complete model would include the effect of switching on future purchases as
well. This may be important because manufacturers who chose to switch may burn their bridges
with their existing suppliers by doing so. In that case, the manufacturer may be unable to return
                                                                                      Johnson et al. 26


to the existing supply relationship in future periods. The cost of switching would then be affected
by the cost of searching for yet another supplier. This leads to another potential benefit provided
by trade associations. Information provided by trade associations about the location and
reliability of new suppliers reduces the cost of searching for yet another supplier should the new
relationship fail.
        Switching costs are a function of the variables outlined above. To induce the buyer to
switch suppliers, the new supplier must offer a discount equal to at least the switching cost.
Econometrically, the required discount would then be estimated as:
                D*i = α + β Ci + γ Si + δEi + ϕ Ti + φMi + εi ,                               (4)
Where Ci is a vector of variables measuring the complexity of the input, Si is a vector of
variables describing the relationship with the existing supplier, Ei indicates the availability of
enforcement through courts, Ti indicates membership in a trade association, and Mi is a vector of
firm/entrepreneur characteristics which measure, among other things, the degree of risk
aversion,. As with the trade credit regressions, our surveyed manufacturers may show up in two
relationships. We adjust the error εi for clustering at the level of the buyer. With our data, we
observe only whether D falls below or above 10%. Denoting rejection of the offer by R i = 1, we
observe:
        R i = 1 if εi > 10% - (α + βRi + γCi + δEi + ϕ Ti + φMi )
        R i = 0 otherwise.                                                                    (5)
We estimate this with a probit model.


5.1 Basic Switching Cost Regressions
        Firms responded to our question in one of three ways. About a sixth of them said they
would reject the new supplier outright. Another half said they would switch entirely to the new
supplier. The remaining third said they would buy from both suppliers, presumably reducing
quantities purchased from the existing supplier but not abandoning it. In the regressions, we look
at the decision to reject the lower-priced offer vs. the decision to accept it (whether or not the
buyer continues to deal with the incumbent supplier). That is we sum the responses of those who
say they would buy entirely from the new supplier and those who say they would buy some from
the new supplier and some from the incumbent. It is the decision to accept or reject the new offer
                                                                                       Johnson et al. 27


that is most relevant from the point of view of assessing barriers to entry, for this is what
determines whether a new entrant can make any sales.35
       The independent variables described above are shown on Table 5. As with trade credit,
we exclude import and state-owned suppliers from the sample. Our main findings can be shown
with simple tests for differences of means. The sample can be divided into relationship involving
inputs of two types. The first, which we term standard, are produced to inventory and sold by the
supplier to multiple manufacturers. Inputs are standard in 76% of the supplier relationships in the
sample. The remaining 24% of the sample are custom inputs. These are produced to order,
produced uniquely for our manufacturer, or both. Switching suppliers in the latter relationships
involves higher risk on the part of the manufacturer. Consistent with switching cost theory,
manufacturers say they would reject the lower-price offer in 13% of the relationships involving
standard goods, but 25% of the relationships involving custom goods. (The difference is
significant, t=4.67.) How does a belief in the effectiveness of courts affect the level of switching
costs? Entrepreneurs who believe that courts are effective are less likely to reject the offer from
the anonymous supplier outright. They do so 14% of the time, compared to a rejection rate of
22% among those who say courts are not effective. The difference is statistically significant
(t=3.20).
       The regression results shown on Table 6 show that these basic results hold when other
controls are added. The regression reported in column 1 includes our basic variables plus
industry/country controls. The second regression adds firm-level and entrepreneur-level control
variables (described in the note to the table), and the third replaces confidence in courts with
experience using courts.


                                           --Place Table 6 Here—


       More complex inputs imply higher risk of non-compliance by suppliers. The basic
regressions measure this with three variables. First, a minority (11%) of the suppliers produce a
good sold only to the interviewed manufacturer. Second, in 32% of the cases, the manufacturer
has no alternative supplier for the input. In these cases, the risk of accepting the deal outright is
increased. The new relationship can fail in more ways than with standard inputs— inspecting
                                                                                       Johnson et al. 28


quality before purchase is more difficult in the first case and timely delivery is more important in
the second. Finally, in 85% of the cases, quality specifications are written down, indicating more
complex inputs. All of these variables have the expected positive sign, and the first two are
significant at the .01 level in each of the regressions reported in columns 1-3. Having written
quality specifications is significant only in the first regression. The magnitude of the coefficients
indicates these variables are important. A supplier producing a good sold only to our
manufacturer is 18% less likely to be abandoned than one producing a good sold to multiple
buyers; having no alternative source of the input is associated with an 10% higher rejection rate;
and supply relationships using written quality specifications are about 5% less likely to be
abandoned.36
        The precision of the estimated value of the good supplied by the existing supplier
depends on how much information the buyer has about that supplier. This we measure with
variables similar to those used in the trade credit regression. Relationships of longer duration, use
of business and social networks, and visits with the supplier before the first transaction are all
expected to result in higher information levels. More frequent deliveries should also lead to
better information and make cooperation easier to sustain. By providing more information about
the existing relationship, we expect each of these variables to lead to higher switching costs.
        The new supplier is most likely to be rejected if the relationship with the existing supplier
is less than 2 months old. The probit indicates that buyers are 5-7% less likely to reject the new
supplier (i.e., switching costs are lower) when the relationship with the existing suppliers is 3-12
months old than when the relationship is 0-2 months old. The new supplier is also less likely to
be rejected when the relationship with the existing supplier is more than 9 years old. Cohort
effects may explain the latter result. The oldest relationships started early in the transition, when
there was less competition among, and less information about, suppliers. But cohort effects are
unlikely to explain the difference between relationships 1-2 months old and 3-12 months old.
This is perhaps because the supplier has incurred set-up costs to make the specific good, and the
buyer would suffer reputational consequences from switching partners too often. With a
relationship of less than two months, it is just too early to judge the existing supplier’s
reliability.37
                                                                                      Johnson et al. 29


       More frequent deliveries and more frequent visits before the first transaction lead to
higher switching costs. Delivery frequency is measured in categories of daily, weekly, bi-weekly,
monthly, every 1-3 months, and less often. A movement of one category is associated with a 2%
lower chance that the relationship is abandoned. Thus, relationships with weekly deliveries are
4% more likely to reject the new supplier outright than relationships with monthly deliveries. An
additional visit by the supplier to the manufacturer before the relationship began is associated
with a 1% higher probability of rejecting the deal. Visits may be higher when inputs are more
complex. Membership in a trade association providing information or arbitration services
significantly reduces the probability of rejecting a new partner: trade association members are 7-
8% less likely to reject the new supplier.
       How does access to courts affect switching costs? Here the data are very clear. Firms
expressing confidence in the ability to rely on the courts have lower switching costs. They are 7%
less likely to reject the deal with the new supplier. Having used the court in resolving the last
dispute with a trading partner has a slightly smaller effect (5%) on the propensity to switch
suppliers.




5.2 Custom and Standard Inputs
       As we noted above, the majority of the suppliers maintain inventories of the goods and
sell them to multiple buyers. The risk to the buyer should be much lower where standard inputs
are involved. The willingness to switch depends on the nature of the goods being purchased. If
goods are custom-made, then the downside risk of switching may be high. If the new supplier
fails to deliver at the promised time or to manufacture to the promised specifications, it will be
hard find a replacement supplier. With standard items, by contrast, the consequences of
nonperformance by the new supplier are less severe, as substitute suppliers are likely to be
available. Functioning courts lower the downside risk of switching when the goods are custom-
made, because the new supplier can be legally held to its promises on delivery time and
specifications.
       Courts, therefore, are predicted to have a greater effect on the propensity to switch when
goods are customized than when they are standardized. Again, a simple test of differences in
                                                                                       Johnson et al. 30


means suggest that this is the case. In relationships involving custom inputs, buyers who believe
that courts are effective reject the offer 21% of the time, while those saying courts are not
effective reject the offer 33% of the time (t=2.12, n=263). Buyers of standard goods who believe
that courts are effective are also less likely to reject the new offer, but the difference is much
smaller (13% vs. 16%, t=1.67, n=846). The regressions in columns 4 and 5 of Table 6 confirm
this difference. The sample in column 4 is limited to custom inputs. Firms who believe courts are
effective are 21% less likely to reject the offer, controlling for other factors. Among relationships
with standard inputs (column 5), the effect of courts is a much smaller 4%. The difference
between the two coefficients is significant at the .01 level (t=2.84). There is a significant positive
correlation between the purchase of standard inputs and a belief that courts are effective (ρ=0.11,
p<.001).
       These differences across types of goods are robust to other categorizations of the goods.
A second categorization of complex relationships includes those where there is no alternative
supplier or goods which are produced uniquely for the buyer. Belief in courts has a significant
effect on the likelihood the offer is rejected for these goods (β= - 0.17, t=3.03, 37% of the
sample) but not for more standard goods (β= - 0.01, t=0.76, 63% of the sample). We also asked
firms how long it would take them to find alternative supplies if the supplier failed to delivery as
promised. The responses were “a day or less” (15% of responses), 1 day to 1 week (31%), a week
to a month (33%), more than a month (17%) and “it would be impossible” (3%). Courts have a
significant effect among the subsample of goods that take more than a week to replace (β= - 0.1,
t=2.79, 37% of the sample), but not among inputs that could be replaced in a week or less (β= -
0.04, t=1.54, 63% of the sample). By either of these divisions, the coefficients of courts in the
two subsamples are significantly different from one another at the .10 level or higher.


5.3 Robustness Checks
       The results reported on Table 6 are robust to the inclusion of other controls, and to
alternative measures of the complexity of the inputs. Neither the availability of other private third
party enforcement (β= -0.01, t=0.23) nor the use of private enforcement in resolving the firm’s
most recent dispute (β= 0.02, t=0.71) has a significant effect on the probability of rejecting and
offer. The magnitude of the courts effect increases marginally to 8% when second of these is
                                                                                      Johnson et al. 31


included in the regression. Using independent country and industry controls makes no difference
to the results.
        As an alternative measure of the complexity of the input, we used the question regarding
how long it would take the buyer to find alternative inputs if the seller failed to deliver. Longer
replacement times imply more risk on the part of the buyer. The time to replace is correlated with
both the production of inputs sold only to this buyer (ρ = .20) and with having no alternative
supplier (ρ = .34). The time to replace is not significant when it is included with these other two
variables, but is when it is used in place of these other variables. The measured effect of courts is
not changed with the time to replace is added to the regression; the courts effect is somewhat
larger (9%) when time to replace is used in place of the other two variables. Finally, we included
measures of the frequency of ongoing visits by the supplier to the manufacturer and measures of
the competitiveness of the buyer’s market, and the proportion of the incumbent suppliers bill
which the buyer pays with delay. Ongoing visits from the supplier to the customer are
significantly associated with higher rates of rejection of the new supplier. One measure of
competitive markets (the manager’s estimate of demand elasticity) is significant and indicates
that buyers in more competitive markets are more likely to reject the offer. Two measures of
competitiveness—the number of competitors located nearby and an indication that the buyer
prices its goods with reference to competitor’s prices rather than through bargaining with the
customer—are not significant. Credit received from the existing supplier also has no significant
effect. None of these variables has any effect on the estimated magnitude of the effect of courts.
        Excluding relationships and firms started more than ten years before the survey has no
effect on the magnitude of the courts effect. Neither does limiting the sample to the three Eastern
European countries. Including state-owned and import suppliers in the sample has no effect on
the magnitude of courts, but increases the precision of the measurement somewhat (β= - 0.06, t =
2.99, see Appendix B). At the single country level, courts have a significant negative effect only
in Slovakia. The measured effect of courts is very close to zero in Poland, though it is negative
and close to significant when the Polish sample is limited to custom inputs (See Appendix B).
         Random effects and linear probability (OLS) regressions produce similar results on the
key variables. The random effects regression with the same variables as column 1 results in an
insignificant coefficient on written quality specifications and on the variable indicating a
                                                                                     Johnson et al. 32


relationship duration of 3 to 12 months. In the subsample of standard inputs (column 5
regression), both the linear probability and random effects regressions produce significant
coefficients for the effectiveness of courts. However, the magnitude of the coefficient remains
much small than in the subsample of custom inputs. The significance levels of the other
complexity measures, of trade association membership, and of courts remains the same.38


5.4 Summary of Switching Results
       Controlling for the complexity of the relationship and the level of information about the
existing supplier, we estimate that the threshold for switching costs is significantly lower for
firms that can rely on courts. Firms that cannot rely on the courts to enforce contracts are willing
to pay higher costs to maintain relationships with existing suppliers. The effect of courts is much
larger and more significant when the supply relationship involves specialized inputs.
       As Klemperer (1987, 1995) and others have shown, higher switching costs can lead to
collusive price levels even in competitive markets. Switching costs may also result in barriers to
entry, as new firms have a difficult time attracting customers, and more productive firms gain
market share more slowly. The development of legal systems leads to efficiency gains in the
economy beyond those represented by the effects courts have on sustaining cooperation in
existing relationships.
       Relational contracting, then, has ambiguous effects. Ongoing relationships can improve
efficiency by supporting deals that the legal system is unable to enforce. But exclusion is the
corollary of ongoing relationships. Continuing to deal with a particular supplier means being
reluctant to deal with new suppliers. If firms routinely reject lower-priced deals, low-cost
producers will find it difficult to get new customers and high-cost producers will not be driven
out. Where networks govern interfirm relationships, the rewards to low cost suppliers will be
smaller. In a primitive economy, customers are stuck with their suppliers because of quality
uncertainty; in a sophisticated economy, trading partners might be locked in by specific assets.


6. Conclusion
       Relational contracting is the main mechanism governing contracting in Russia, Ukraine,
Poland, Romania, and Slovakia. Relational contracting works better when the seller has
                                                                                        Johnson et al. 33


information about the customer, obtained either prior to beginning trading or during the course of
the relationship. Trust builds up quite quickly, within the first two months of the relationship.
Relational contracting also works better in supporting trade credit when the customer is locked in
by high costs of searching for another supplier.
        The courts also significantly affect contracting. Entrepreneurs who say the courts work
behave differently from those who say they do not work. An entrepreneur who believes in the
courts grants more trade credit than one who does not. The effect of courts is significantly
stronger in certain types of relationships: with new customers and where lock-in is low. In an
established bilateral relationship it is the relationship itself that determines the degree of
cooperation, regardless of whether the courts are effective.
        In addition to their direct efficiency gains, in improved contractual assurance, the courts
improve efficiency by lowering entry barriers. Under relational contracting, a new entrant finds it
hard to sell its goods, since buyer firms will tend to stay with suppliers with whom they have
established relationships. The courts reduce this reluctance to switch. Courts therefore foster new
entry and overall economic development.
        These data provide one of the few quantitative estimates of the relative importance of
courts and relationships.39 While we are unable completely to rule out the possibility that missing
variables affect the estimated coefficients, we believe the results from sub-sample regressions
indicate that the measured effect of courts is not overwhelmed by missing variable bias. Courts
have a significant effect in new relationships, in relationships with little friction, and in
relationships with local customers. There is little evidence of a correlation between a manager’s
belief in the effectiveness of courts and the nature of the customer relationships identified in the
survey. Courts are also significantly more important in the willingness to work with a new
supplier when the input being purchased cannot be easily traded in a cash transaction.
        Functioning courts have two roles: in simple transactions, helping ensure bills are paid;
and in complex transactions, facilitating relational contracting by delimiting threat points. For the
first category of transaction, the courts become increasingly needed as the economy develops.
When market-supporting institutions are weak, market information is likely to be poor, so firms
find it hard to find alternative trading partners. In such an economy, our results suggest, it matters
little that the courts are ineffective, for relational contracting works well. Customers pay their
                                                                                     Johnson et al. 34


bills because they have nowhere else to go if they lose their current supplier. As market
information improves and finding alternative trading partners becomes easier, the courts become
more important in supporting simple transactions because customers’ temptation to renege
increases.
       Courts become increasingly needed as the economy develops, also, to the extent that there
is a change in the composition of economic activity, with an increased demand for customized as
opposed to standard goods. Buyers of customized goods, we found, are reluctant to change
suppliers even for a 10% lower price. This reluctance is less when the courts function than when
relationships are the only source of contractual assurance. The courts lower the costs of switching
when goods are custom-made. Effective courts improve the functioning of the market by
fostering the establishment of new relationships.
       The legal systems in these countries are very far from perfect. The most advanced of our
sample, Poland, received a score of only 2.9 out of 9 from the 1999 World Competitiveness
Yearbook on its question about fairness in the administration. Yet the courts are perceptibly
improving the efficiency of business activity. From the perspective of development policy, this
provides some reason for optimism. An effective legal system, it is often said, cannot be built in
less than a generation. Our data suggest that a legal system that, while imperfect, has beneficial
effects can be set up much more quickly than that.
                                                                                        Johnson et al. 35


References

Altonji, Joseph G., and Nicolas Williams. 1997. “Do Wages Rise with Seniority? A Reassessment,”

unpublished, Northwestern University.



Arrighetti, Alessandro, Reinhard Bachman, and Simon Deakin. 1997 "Contract Law, Social Norms and

Inter-Firm Cooperation," 21 Cambridge Journal of Economics 171-195.



Ausubel, Lawrence. 1991. “The Failure of Competition in the Credit Card Market,” 81 American

Economic Review 50-81.



Banerjee, Abhijit, and Esther Duflo. 2000. “Reputation Effects and the Limits of Contracting: A Study of

the Indian Software Industry,” 115 Quarterly Journal of Economics 989-1017.



Bernstein, Lisa. 1996 "Merchant Law in a Merchant Court: Rethinking the Code's Search for Immanent

Business Norms," 144 University of Pennsylvania Law Review 1765-1821.



Bigsten, Arne, Paul Collier, Stefan Dercon, Marcel Fafchamps, Bernard Gauthier, Jan Willem Gunning,

Anders Isaksson, Abena Oduro, Remco Oostendorp, Cathy Patillo, Mans Soderbom, Francis Teal, and

Albert Zeufack. 2000. “Contract Flexibility and Dispute Resolution in African Manufacturing,” 36

Journal of Development Studies 1-17.



Blanchard, Olivier, and Michael Kremer. 1997. “Disorganization,” 111 Quarterly Journal of Economics

1091-1126.
                                                                                     Johnson et al. 36


David Charny. 1990. “Nonlegal Sanctions in Commercial Relationships,” 104 Harvard Law Review 373-

467, 415-416.



Ellickson, Robert C. 1991. Order without Law Cambridge: Harvard University Press.



Erdem, Tûlin and Michael Keane. 1996. “Decision Making Under Uncertainty: Capturing Dynamic

Brand Choice Processes in Turbulent Consumer Goods Markets,” 15 Marketing Science 1-20.



European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) 1997. Transition Report 1997 EBRD,

London.



Fafchamps, Marcel. 1996. “The Enforcement of Commercial Contracts in Ghana,” 24 World

Development 427-448.



Frye, Timothy, and Andrei Shleifer. 1997. “The Invisible Hand and the Grabbing Hand,” 87 American

Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 354-358.



Galanter, Marc. 1981, "Justice in Many Rooms: Courts, Private Ordering, and Indigenous Law," 19

Journal of Legal Pluralism 1-47.



Ghosh, Parikshit, and Debraj Ray. 1996. "Cooperation in Community Interaction without Information

Flows," 63 Review of Economic Studies 491-519.



Glaeser, Edward, David Laibson, Jose Scheinkman, and Christine Soutter. 2000 “Measuring Trust,” 115

Quarterly Journal of Economics 811-846.
                                                                                       Johnson et al. 37




Greif, Avner. 1993. "Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade: The Maghribi

Traders' Coalition," 83 American Economic Review 525-548.



Greif, Avner, and Eugene Kandel. 1995. "Contract Enforcement Institutions: Historical Perspective and

Current Status in Russia,” in E. P. Lazear, Ed., Economic Transition in Eastern Europe and Russia:

Realities of Reform. Stanford: Hoover Institution Press.



Greif, Avner, Paul Milgrom, and Barry Weingast. August 1994. “Coordination, Commitment, and

Enforcement: The Case of the Merchant Guild,” 102 Journal of Political Economy 745-76.



Gustafson, Thane. 1999. Capitalism Russian-Style Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.



Haley, John. 1978. "The Myth of the Reluctant Litigant," 4 Journal of Japanese Studies 359-390.



Hay, Jonathan R., and Andrei Shleifer. 1998. “Private Enforcement of Public Laws: A Theory of Legal

Reform,” 88:2 American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 398-403.



Hellman, Joel S., Geraint Jones, and Daniel Kaufmann. 2000 “Seize the State, Seize the Day: State

Capture, Corruption, and Influence in Transition,” unpublished, World Bank.



Hendley, Kathryn, Barry W. Ickes, Randi Ryterman, and Peter Murrell. 1997.“Observations on the Use

of Law by Russian Enterprises,” 13 Post-Soviet Affairs 19-41.
                                                                                           Johnson et al. 38


Hendley, Kathryn, Peter Murrell, and Randi Ryterman. 1999. “Law, Relationships, and Private

Enforcement: Transactional Strategies of Russian Enterprises,” unpublished, University of Wisconsin.



Hendley, Kathryn, Peter Murrell, and Randi Ryterman. forthcoming 2001. “Law Works in Russia: The

Role of Legal Institutions in the Transactions of Russian Enterprises,” in P. Murrell, ed., Assessing the

Value of Law in Transition Economies, University of Michigan Press.



Johnson, Bryan T., Kim R. Holmes, and Melanie Kirkpatrick. 1998. Index of Economic Freedom, The

Heritage Foundation and the Wall Street Journal.



Johnson, Simon, and Gary Loveman. 1995. Starting Over in Eastern Europe: Entrepreneurship and

Economic Renewal Boston: Harvard Business School Press.



Johnson, Simon, John McMillan, and Christopher Woodruff. 2000. "Entrepreneurs and the Ordering of

Institutional Reform: Poland, Slovakia, Romania, Russia, and Ukraine Compared," 8 Economics of

Transition 1-36



Kandori, Michihiro. 1992. “Social Norms and Community Enforcement,” 59 Review of Economic

Studies 63-80.



Klein, Benjamin and Keith B.Leffler. 1981. "The Role of Market Forces in Assuring Contractual

Performance," 89 Journal of Political Economy 615-641.



Klemperer, Paul, 1987, “Markets with Consumer Switching Costs, 102 Quarterly Journal of Economics

375-94.
                                                                                       Johnson et al. 39




Klemperer, Paul. 1995. “Competition when Consumers have Switching Costs: An Overview with

Applications to Industrial Organization, Macroeconomics, and International Trade,” 62 Review of

Economic Studies 515-39.



Koford, Kenneth, and Jeffrey B. Miller. 1998. "Contractual Enforcement in an Economy in Transition,"

unpublished, Department of Economics, University of Delaware.



Kranton, Rachael. 1996. "Reciprocal Exchange: A Self-Sustaining System," 86 American Economic

Review 830-851.



Macaulay, Stewart. 1963. "Non-Contractual Relationships in Business: A Preliminary Study," 28

American Sociological Review 55-70.



Mayer, Colin, and Ian Alexander. 1990 “Banks and Securities Markets: Corporate Financing in Germany

and the United Kingdom,” 3 Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 450-475.



McMillan, John and Christopher Woodruff. 1999a. “Dispute Prevention without Courts in Vietnam,” 15

Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 637-658.



McMillan, John and Christopher Woodruff. 1999b. "Interfirm Relationships and Informal Credit in

Vietnam," 114 Quarterly Journal of Economics 1285-1320.



Petersen, Mitchell A. and Raghuram G. Rajan. 1997. "Trade Credit: Theories and Evidence," 10 Review

of Financial Studies 661-692.
                                                                                        Johnson et al. 40




Pop-Eleches, Cristian. 1998. “Transition in Romania: Three Essays on Private Sector Development,”

unpublished B.A. thesis, Harvard University.



Ramey, Garey and Joel Watson. 1996. "Bilateral Trade and Opportunism in a Matching Market,"

unpublished, University of California, San Diego.



Roland, Gerard, and Thierry Verdier. 1999. “Transition and the Output Fall,” 7 Economics of Transition

1-28.



Sharpe, Steven. 1997. “The Effect of Consumer Switching Costs on Prices: A Theory and its Application

to the Bank Deposit Market,” 12 Review of Industrial Organization 79-94.



Sobel, Joel. 1985. “A Theory of Credibility,” 52 Review of Economic Studies 557-573.



Wall Street Journal. 1997-98 Central European Economic Review Volume 5, Number 10, p. 15.



Watson, Joel. 1995. "Building a Relationship," unpublished, University of California, San Diego.



Williamson, Oliver E. 1983. “Credible Commitments: Using Hostages to Support Exchanges,” 73

American Economic Review 519-540.



Williamson, Oliver E. 1991. Comparative Economic Organization: The Analysis of Discrete Structural

Alternatives,” 36 Administrative Science Quarterly 269-296.
                                                                                      Johnson et al. 41


Williamson, Oliver E. 1994. "The Institutions and Governance of Economic Development and Reform,"

in M. Bruno and B. Pleskovic, eds., Proceedings of the World Bank Annual Conference on Development

Economics Washington, DC: World Bank.



Wilson, Robert. 1985. “Reputations in Games and Markets,” in Alvin E. Roth, ed., Game-Theoretic

Models of Bargaining Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.



Woodruff, Christopher. 1998. "Contract Enforcement and Trade Liberalization in Mexico's Footwear

Industry," 26 World Development 979-991.



World Competitiveness Yearbook, Lausanne, Switzerland, IMD, 1999



World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Report, 1996.



Zhuravskaya, Ekaterina, and Timothy Frye. 1998. “The Rise of the Racket in Russia,” unpublished,

Harvard University.
                                                                                     Johnson et al. 42



Appendix A: The Sample and the Survey
       The data reported here are from surveys undertaken in Russia and Ukraine in May and

June 1997, and in Poland, Romania and Slovakia in September-December 1997. Pilot surveys

were undertaken in Russia and Ukraine in January-February 1997, in Poland and Slovakia in

March 1997 and in Romania in August 1997. The sample of about 300 firms in each country

was drawn from a list provided by the country’s Statistical Institute. In order to increase the

cross-country comparability of the sample, the initial selection was limited to one medium-sized

city in each country: Katowice (Poland), Brasov (Romania), Bratislava (Slovakia), Volgograd

(Russia) and Dnepopetrovsk (Ukraine). Only in Slovakia did we have trouble identifying a large

enough sample of firms meeting the established size criteria who were willing to participate. In

the final sample, about one-quarter of the Slovakian firms are located in Bratislava, one-quarter

in Kosice, and the remaining half are spread across seven other cities. Participation rates were

high among the firms contacted—in excess of 70% in Poland and Romania, and 68% in

Slovakia. We believe the resulting sample is reasonably representative of small and medium-

sized manufacturing firms in each country, though it is not a census.

       Table A-1 provides a summary of the characteristics of firms in the sample. Most were

started in 1990 or after; many within 3 years of the survey. Only in Poland was a significant

share of the firms started before 1988. The majority of firms in Russia and Ukraine were

privatized, or spun off from state-owned enterprises; the majority in the other three countries

started from scratch, with none of their equipment coming from state-owned enterprises.



                                     --Place Table A-1 Here—



       At least 85% of the entrepreneurs in each of the countries report that they have previous

experience working in an SOE. Previous work experience in the private sector is much more

common for startup firms than spin-offs. At least 29% of startup entrepreneurs have prior private

sector experience in every country except Romania. In all five countries the educational
                                                                                     Johnson et al. 43



background of entrepreneurs is similar; the average amount of schooling is 15-16 years

everywhere.

        Measured by employment, in all five countries privatized firms were much larger in their

first year of operation than the startups. The startups were smallest at birth in Slovakia and

largest in Poland, though there is not a large difference among the countries in the average size of

startups in their first year.

        In Poland, Romania and Slovakia, the sample was drawn so that one-quarter of the firms

were from the same industry, metal parts and products. Nearly a fifth of the Ukrainian firms and

one-eighth of the Russian firms are also produce metal products. The remaining firms are spread

across manufacturing sectors, as shown in Appendix Table 1.

        The survey was administered face-to-face by interviewers contracted in each country,

with responses provided by the general manager or deputy general manager of each firm. The

largest part of the survey is a series of questions related to the longest running and newest

customer and supplier relationships. There are also sections on the resolution of contract disputes

with customers and suppliers, access to formal bank finance, hidden and unofficial payments,

and a set of general questions regarding the size and profitability of the firms.
                                                                                        Johnson et al. 44


Appendix B: Additional Regressions


B1: Regressions on the Effectiveness of Courts


        Belief in the usefulness of courts varies in systematic ways across firms and
entrepreneurs. A probit regression using belief in courts as the dependent variable shows that
firms with more than 50 employees are about 10% more likely to say that courts are effective
than are smaller firms (t = 2.62). Entrepreneurs younger than 40 are also about 10% more likely
to express faith in courts than are older entrepreneurs (t = 2.38). Variables measuring the
education level of the entrepreneur and age of the firm are not significant at customary levels.
Confidence in courts is also associated with the sector in which firms operate. Firms buying and
selling a larger share of inputs and outputs in another country are less likely to say courts are
effective, while firms doing more business with state-owned enterprises are more likely to say
that courts are effective. The latter two effects are significant at the .05 and .01 level,
respectively. The regression controls for country/industry fixed effects. The results are shown on
Table B-1. These regression results give us some confidence that the different responses reflect
real differences in the ability to use courts.


                                          -- Place Table B-1 Here—




B2: Regression Results by Country
        The initial samples exclude customers and suppliers which are state-owned firms, as well
as export customers and import suppliers. These exclusions are justified statistically because chi-
square tests indicate that the group of coefficients were are interested in have different effects on
trade credit and switching costs across the different customer types. Nevertheless, we have run
regressions including these observations in the sample. A trade credit regression with the same
specification as Table 3, column 3 is reported in the first column of Table B-2. A switching cost
regression with the same specification as Table 6, column 1 is reported in column 1 of Table B-3.
In the trade credit regression, neither search costs nor trade association membership are
significant at the .10 level in the full sample. Other variables, including effective courts, remain
                                                                                        Johnson et al. 45


significant. All of the variables of interest in the switching cost regression retain their
significance.


                                       --Place Tables B-2 and B-3 Here—


           Both belief in the effectiveness of courts and the average level of trade credit are
significantly lower in Russia and Ukraine than in the other three countries. Column 2 of
Appendices B-2 and B-3 reports a regression which excludes observations from Russia and
Ukraine. The results are little changed from those reported in Tables 3 and 6 (columns 3 and 1,
respectively), suggesting that the inclusion of data from Russia and Ukraine are not skewing the
results.
           Courts may be more effective in some countries than in others; social networks may
become less important as market institutions develop. Our last set of regressions repeat the basic
trade credit and loyalty regressions using the subsample from each country. The results are
shown on Table B-2 (trade credit) and Table B-3 (switching costs). Because of the limited
number of complete observations in Russia and Ukraine, these countries are combined for the
trade credit regressions. Even combined, there are not enough observations to run loyalty
regressions for Russia and Ukraine without using state-owned and import suppliers.
           The smaller sample sizes yield fewer statistically significant results. With a few
exceptions, all of the trade credit variables (Table B-2) retain the expected sign in each of the
countries. The effects of business networks are notably consistent across these countries, and
always significant at the .10 level. Social networks have the biggest impact in Romania and in
Russia and Ukraine, where they are most commonly used (see Table 2), and no significant impact
in Poland, where their use is infrequent. Customer search costs have a significant effect only in
Slovakia, though in Poland the measured effect is nearly the same magnitude as the overall
sample. Finally, the relationship duration variables indicate that relationship start quickly in
Romania and take longer to build in Poland (though trade credit levels in general are much
higher in Poland.)
           Courts have a positive coefficient in each of the four country-level regressions, but the
effect is significant only in Slovakia. When the sample is limited to relationships of two months
                                                                                        Johnson et al. 46


or less, belief in effective courts is significant in Poland. The courts coefficient is also positive in
the young relationship sample in Slovakia, but is near zero in Romania.
        In the switching cost regressions, the input complexity variables retain the expected sign
throughout. Having a supplier which produces a good sold only to this buyer is significant in
each of the regressions, and having no alternative supplier is significant everywhere but Slovakia.
Again, courts have significant effects only in Slovakia. Trade association membership reduces
switching costs significantly in Poland, Slovakia and Romania. When the sample is limited to
custom inputs, the effects of courts falls below the .10 significance level in Poland (t=1.50).


                                      --Place Table b_4 Here—
                                                                                          Johnson et al. 47


                              Appendix C: Relevant Survey Questions:


The most relevant survey questions are listed below. In many cases, we also note how the

question was used to create the dependent or independent variables (in italics).

Questions asked about oldest and newest customer:

(55)    How often do you deliver goods to this customer?
        1      Daily                                                                            {310}
        2      Weekly
        3      Every 2 weeks
        4      Monthly
        5      Every 1-3 months
        6      Less often

        Frequency of delivery is 5 for daily, 4 for weekly, and so on.


(61)    Before you began working with this customer, what was your primary source of information
        about this firm/person?

                                                   YES     NO
1 It is managed or owned by my family               1       2     Q 63                         {316}
2 It is managed or owned by a friend                1       2     Q 63                         {317}
3 I used to work for this firm                      1       2     Q 63                         {318}
4 From a previous business acquaintance             1       2     Yes Q 62, No Q 63            {319}
5 Through a government agency                       1       2     Q 63                         {320}
6 Through a bank                                    1       2     Q 63                         {321}
7 Through a credit rating agency                    1       2     Q 63                         {322}
8 Through a business association                    1       2     Q 63                         {323}
9 Other: (specify)                                  1       2     Q 63                         {324}
                 ……………………..
                                                                                 {.......325}
       The most common “other” responses were “he contacted us” (44%), “advertisement” (12%),
       “met at a market fair” (9%) and “we found the company ourselves” (8%). Social networks are
       indicated by yes responses to either of the first 2 questions; business networks by yes responses to
       3, 4 or 8.

(63) How many times did your company’s representatives visit this customer’s factory or store before
     you sold to him?
                                          1       Never                         {327}
                                            2     1-3 times
                                            3     4-6 times
                                            4     More than 6 times
                                                                                         Johnson et al. 48


        Question 63 was used for the “visited customer before first transaction” variable. “Never” was
given a value of 0; “1-3 times” a value of 2; “4-6 times” a value of 5; and “More than 6 times” a value
of 7. Thus, the visits variable takes on values from 0 to 7.

(67)     What proportion of the customer’s payment is made at the following times:
         1      ___ % When the order is placed                            {334-35}
         2      ___ % On delivery                                         {336-37}
         3      ___ % 1-7 days after delivery                            {338-39}
         4      ___ % 8-30 days after delivery                           {340-41}
         5      ____ % More than 30 days after delivery                          {342-43}
        6       ____ % Other Schedule (Specify)

        Firms specifying some amount for “other schedule” were dropped from the sample (42 cases or
1.5% of the sample). Payment after delivery is the sum of 3, 4 and 5; payment eight days or more after
delivery is the sum of 4 and 5.
(76) Currently, does your company talk with other suppliers of this customer?
                                       1        No                                    {354}
                                       2        Yes, daily
                                       3        Yes, weekly
                                       4        Yes, monthly
                                       5        Yes, but infrequently

        Response 1 was given a value of 0, response 5 a value of 1, 4 a value of 2, 3 a value of 4 and 2 a
value of 5.

Questions asked about oldest and newest supplier:
(121) Does this supplier make
                                1   The exact same product for other firms,            {514}
                                  2 Is the input specific to your firm?

(130)      Before you began working with him, what were your sources of information about this supplier?
                                                    YES NO
1   It is managed or owned by my family              1       2    Q 132                        {523}
2   It is managed or owned by a friend               1       2    Q 132                        {524}
3   I used to work for this firm                     1       2    Q 132                        {525}
4   From a previous business acquaintance            1       2    Yes Q 131, No Q132           {526}
5   Through a government agency                      1       2    Q 132                        {527}
6   Through a bank                                   1       2    Q 132                        {528}
7   Through a credit rating agency                   1       2    Q 132                        {529}
8   Through a business association                   1       2    Q 132                        {530}
9   Other: (specify)                                 1       2    Q 132                        {531}
                    ……………………..


       Same as question 61 above. The most common “other” responses were “advertisement” (30%),
“He contacted us” (19%), “met at a fair” (11%), and “found company ourselves (7%).

(137) Do you have other suppliers of this input?                Yes           1
                                                              No          2
                                                                                          Johnson et al. 49




(138) If this supplier failed to deliver, how long would it take you to find replacement supplies?
                     1 A day or less
                      2 More than a day, less than a week
                      3 More than a week, less than a month
                      4 More than a month
                     5 Would be impossible
        Response 1 was coded as 1, response 2 as 2, and so on.

(146)    If another firm you have never purchased from offered to supply this input for a price 10% less
         than this supplier, would you purchase from the new firm instead of this supplier?
                                         Yes                1
                                         No                 2
                                         Buy from both       3
(147)    If your company had a dispute with this supplier, would your other suppliers find out about it?
                                     Yes      1                                        {563}
                                     No       2

         This question was used for the variable “other suppliers would know about dispute.”

Contract Disputes:
 (183) Even if you never had a contract dispute could you please tell me which of the following third
         parties can enforce an agreement with a customer or supplier?
                                                                           YES     NO
1 Court                                                                      1       2
                                                                                             {707}
2 The national government                                                    1       2       {708}
3 The local government                                                       1       2       {709}
4 A non-governmental organisation (such as a trade association               1       2       {710}
5 Other                                                                      1       2       {711}
6 There is no one                                                            1       2       {712}
         Confidence in courts is indicated by a yes response to question 183_1.Other private enforcement
is indicated by a yes response to question 183_5.

(186) Has a customer ever failed to pay for a product after you have delivered it?
                       Yes       1                                                      {720}
                       No         2

(187)    Has a supplier ever refused to accept the return of defective merchandise or to refund money for
         merchandise returned because of low quality?
                          Yes       1                                                   {721}
                          No         2

(189)    What organisations assisted in the case of your most recent payment dispute?
                                                                  YES NO
1   Courts                                                           1     2                    {725}
2   Local government authorities                                     1     2                    {726}
3   A formal private agency specialising in such cases               1     2                    {727}
4   An informal private agency specialising is such cases            1     2                    {728}
                                                                                                        Johnson et al. 50


5 No one                                                          1       2                   {729}
        A yes response to question 189_1 indicates the courts were used in the most recent dispute with a
trading partner. For a no response to 189_1, or where the firm reports that it has not had a dispute with
a trading partner, use of courts takes a value of 0.

General:

(11) Number of full time employees at the end of first half of 1997...........................{109-111}

(12) What is your main business activity?

01   Metal parts and products                                   06      Chemical products        For         {112-113}
02   Wood products and furniture                                07      Paper and packaging      official
03   Food products and beverages                                08      Handicrafts and art      Use
04   Clothes, footwear, and leather goods                       09      Electrical machinery     only
05   Construction materials                                     10      Miscellaneous


        Used to create 10 industry dummies.

(201)   How many other producers of goods similar to yours are located
        Within 1 km of your factory........................                                       {758-59}
        Within same city......................................................................   {760-61}

(206)   Is your company a member of any type of business or trade association?
                   Yes      1                                                                        {768}
                   No       2

(207)   What benefits do companies get from business or trade associations?
                                                                 YES NO
Information about technology                                      1       2                                   {769}
Information about the identity and location of new                1       2                                   {770}
Customers/suppliers
Information about the trustworthiness of customers/suppliers      1       2                                   {771}
Contract and/or dispute arbitration                               1       2                                   {772}
Other (specify)                                                   1       2                                   {773}
                ..............................................
                                                                              {..........774}
        The trade association variable is one if the response to question 206 is yes and there is at least
one yes response to the second, third, or fourth part of question 207.

(242) If it were possible for you to decrease the price of your main product by 10% (without your
    competitors changing their prices), how much do you think your sales would increase as a
    percentage of your current sales?
                                                         ...........................% {907-8}
                                                                                             Johnson et al. 51



     *
         We thank George Baker, Simon Board, Serder Dinc, Robert Gibbons, Daniel Hamermesh, Takeo
Hoshi, David McAdams, Chiaki Moriguchi, Masahiro Okuno-Fujiwara, Barry Naughton, Anna Paulson,
Steven Raphael, Garey Ramey, James Rauch, David Riker, Joel Sobel, Oliver Williamson, and two
referees. We also thank the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) for funding
the surveys in Poland, Slovakia, and Romania, and the National Council for Soviet and East European
Research for funding the surveys in Russia and Ukraine. For support, Simon Johnson thanks the MIT
Entrepreneurship Center and John McMillan the Stanford Graduate School of Business.


1
    With highly complex contracts, it may not be feasible to write things down; but with the relatively
simple production processes used by small firms in the transition economies, such extreme complexity is
probably rare.


2
    In our sample for Poland, Romania, and Slovakia startups far outnumber spin-off firms, whereas in
Russia and Ukraine spin-offs dominate. For an explanation of why private sector development started
earlier in Poland, but is similar in nature to what has occurred elsewhere in Eastern Europe and the
former Soviet Union, see Johnson and Loveman (1995).


3
 Although Russian and Ukrainian firms are most likely to use courts given a dispute, they are least likely
to report having had a dispute, so the percentage of firms having experience with courts is actually lowest
in those countries. The percentage of firms reporting disputes is only 16% in Russia and 20% in Ukraine,
compared to more than 75% of in each of the other three countries. While this may reflect a difference in
the interpretation of the question across countries, it may also reflect more personalistic relationships
with customers and suppliers given the much smaller number of customers the Russian and Ukrainian
firms have.

4
    The propensity to use the courts to settle disputes varies across countries even when legal systems are
well developed. Macaulay (1963) gives examples of US firms being reluctant to go to court in a dispute.
Japanese firms are still more reluctant than US firms; Haley (1978) argues that the costs of using the
Japanese courts are so high that suing usually does not pay. Arrighetti, Bachman and Deakin (1997,
p.188) asked some European firms about the likelihood of legal action against a customer or supplier
committing a breach of contract: of about 20 firms in each country, 40% of British firms, 79% of Italian
firms, and 95% of German firms said it was unlikely or very unlikely.
                                                                                                Johnson et al. 52



5
    Relative to developed market economies, however, the legal systems of all the countries in our sample
remain underdeveloped The 1999 World Competitiveness Yearbook in its question on fairness in the
administration of justice gave Poland 2.9 out of 9. This compares over 8 generally for rich industrial
countries, and the low 1.3 for Russia. The World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Report of
1996, in its question on confidence in the fair administration of justice, gives 2.92 to Poland. This
compares to 5.78 for New Zealand at the top, and 1.77 for Russia at the bottom.


6
    In our data, too, we find that the use of courts generally signals the severing of a relationship with a
trading partner. In Poland, for example, the relationship was severed in 98% of the cases where courts
were used to resolve a dispute, compared to 78% of the cases where they were not used in a dispute.

7
    Koford and Miller (1998), for Bulgaria, and Hendley, Murrell, and Ryterman (1999), for Russia, also
find relational contracting to be the main form of contracting. In developing countries, as well as
transition countries, relational contracting is common: see for example Fafchamps (1996), Bigsten et al.
(2000).


8
     Search costs also affect the relative bargaining power of seller and buyer, but we would expect this
bargaining-power effect to show up in the price that is agreed to, and not the likelihood of trade credit.

9
     Banerjee and Duflo (2000) find that a firm’s reputation determines the nature of its contracting with its
trading partners, but in their analysis the reputation adheres to the firm in general (it is proxied by the age
of the firm) whereas in our analysis reputation is developed within a specific relationship.


10
     The Russian Chamber of Commerce, according to Greif and Kandel (1995), provides its members with
information on companies that have been alleged to have violated contracts. Some of the trade
associations may have evolved from institutions of the old planned economy. But startup firms are as
likely as privatized firms to be members of trade associations everywhere except in Slovakia, which
suggests the services the associations offer are valuable.


11
     Chi-square tests confirm that the coefficients on courts and networks are significantly different for
state-owned and export customers. We present results including these customers in Appendix B.
                                                                                               Johnson et al. 53



12
     In aggregate, trade credit is important for these firms. Their reported accounts payable amounts to
54% of external finance for the Polish firms in our sample, 57% for the Slovakian firms, and 45% for
Ukrainian firms. Only in Russia is trade credit uncommon, representing 2% of external finance. (Our data
do not allow us to compute this number for Romania.) Like their counterparts in developed market
economies, the small- and medium-sized firms have more trade credit than bank loans (Mayer and
Alexander, 1990).

13
     In Section 4.3 below we consider the possibility that the error term may have individual- or time-
specific (first/last customer) components. Allowing these components to enter the error term as random
variables has very modest effects on the estimated coefficients. Allowing for fixed seller effects also
produces results similar to those shown on Tables 3 and 4, though the set of variables which can be
estimated with fixed effects models excludes courts and trade association membership, as these vary only
across sellers.


14
     The Polish interest rates are reported at http://www.meximedia.com/ECO/22pol.html and at
http://www.oecd.org/publications/observer/213/indicato-eng.htm. The Romanian regulation and
prevailing interest rate come from http://www.businesseurope.com/romania/markrom.htm.


15
     We ran a regression allowing the duration effect to differ for each month during the first year. These
results (available from the authors) indicate that relationships which are between 1 and 2 months old are
8% more likely to receive credit than those which have a month or less of duration. The effect is not
statistically significant. The duration effect reaches the 15% level for relationships 2 to 3 months old, and
levels off after that. A chi-square test indicates that the additional duration variables are not jointly
significant (χ2 =10.4 (11), p=.50), suggesting our variable measuring 2-12 months adequately captures
the trend.


16
     The problem here is comparable to separating matching and job training effects in a wage-tenure
profile. Labor economists have taken great care to differentiate the job matching effects of tenure from
job training effects of tenure in employment relationships (see, for example, Altonji and Williams, 1997).
Data limitations prevent us from replicating their analysis.


17
     A final possibility is that duration effects may be caused by cohort effects. Relationships begun at
certain points in time—for example during financial crises—may be more or less likely to involve credit.
                                                                                                Johnson et al. 54



However, given that the largest duration impacts occur within the first two months of the relationship, it
is unlikely that cohort effects are significant contributor to the observed duration effects.

18
     Firms were allowed to indicate more than one source of initial information, though few did so. In only
nine relationships did entrepreneurs indicate that both business and social networks were used in locating
a customer.


19
     In 21% of the cases, the manufacturer responded that the customer “contacted them” or gave an
equivalent response. These responses are the base group for the regression coefficients. The remaining
cases are identified in the regression with 2 other information variables. The first of these groups is
customers identified through government agencies, bank or credit agencies (4.6% of the sample). The
second represents customers identified through other responses which indicate some initial information
(9.8% of the sample) such as “met at a market fair” or “through a marketing agent.”

20
     Inclusion of buyer/seller characteristics has a similarly minor effect on the results of the probit reported
in Column 1.

21
     About 8% of the manufacturers report that customers pay part of the bill more than 30 days after
delivery. It is possible that these cases represent delinquent payments rather than normal credit.
Excluding observations with any part of the bill paid more than 30 days after delivery improves the fit
and increases the magnitude of the variable indicating effective courts (β=8.58, t=2.99). The other
coefficients are unaffected.


22
     An alternative interpretation is that the causation runs in the other direction: firms offering credit to
customers have a greater demand for credit from their suppliers.


23
     There are two concerns with this interpretation. First, we don’t know what role the courts played in the
resolution of the dispute. In Mexico, for example, manufacturers said they often used courts to certify
losses for tax purposes, after giving up any hope of recovering the loss (Woodruff 1998). Second, more
than 40% of the firms said they have never had a dispute. These firms are coded the same as firms who
have had disputes but not used the courts. Coding firms who said they had never had a dispute as not
having used the court may increase the noise in our measure. But excluding these firms from the sample
                                                                                               Johnson et al. 55



makes little difference. The effect of experience with courts on credit remains insignificant (β=2.77,
t=1.01).


24
     The regressions in Table 3 included 31 industry times country controls. These controls lead to
singularities in some of the smaller samples used in Table 4. We have therefore replaced them with 9
industry and 4 country controls. We checked the independent country and industry controls on the full
sample. They produce results very similar to those in Table 3. In general, the magnitude and significance
of the variable indicating 5 or more competitors nearby are somewhat higher. The magnitude and
significance of courts changes little. For example, in the column 3 specification, courts have a coefficient
of 4.81 (t=1.88) when the independent controls are used and 5.10 (t=1.99) when the interacted controls
are used.


25
     The other specifications of Table 3 produce similar results. The difference between young and old
relationships does not hinge on the specific sample cutoff points. Courts are significant when the young
sample is defined by any period between 2 months and one year, though the results are stronger with
earlier cutoffs. Courts are insignificant in older relationships when the sample is defined by any period
beyond nine months. Almost all of the observations in Russia and Ukraine have durations beyond 1 year.
Even when these are excluded, the effect of courts is insignificant in any sample that removes
relationships younger than 9 months.


26
     The correlation is driven by differences across regions, with relationships more likely to be bilateral in
Russia and Ukraine, where courts are perceived to be less effective. When the sample is limited to
Poland, Slovakia and Romania, there is no correlation between belief in courts and the degree of lock-in
in relationships (ρ=.02, p=0.58). The finding that courts matter only in market based relationships still
holds—indeed, it is stronger--when the sample is limited to the three Eastern European countries.

27
     Courts do have a significantly different effect when Russia and Ukraine are dropped from the sample
(t=1.96). There is no significant correlation between belief that courts are effective and location of
customers.


28
     Slovakia may provide the best results because it has intermediate levels of both trade credit and belief
in effectiveness of courts. Additionally, the survey covered several cities in Slovakia and only one city in
                                                                                             Johnson et al. 56



each of the other countries. Since business courts are administered locally, the multiple cities may
provide more variation in the effectiveness of courts in Slovakia.


29
     Because our measure of courts varies only across firms, we are unable to confirm these results with
fixed effects regressions. The fixed effects regressions are linear regressions with the sample limited to
firms with two private, domestically-owned customers. There are 552 such firms, of which 202 report
different credit levels for their 2 customers. The coefficient on business networks is 10.7 (t=2.85) and on
social networks is 14.2 (t=3.17), both of which are close to those reported in Table 3, column 3. The
duration effect is somewhat more prolonged (β=13.0 for 3-12 months, β=20.9 for 13-24 months).


30
     We checked the validity of the hypothetical question by examining data on the duration of actual
customer and supplier relationships identified in the survey. When the sample is limited to firms begun in
1987 or later (more than 90% of the firms in every country except Poland), the average duration of
relationships as a ratio of the age of the firm is lowest in Romania, highest in Russia and Ukraine, and
between the two in Poland and Slovakia. These results indicate that firms drop suppliers most frequently
in Romania, and least frequently in Russia and Ukraine, consistent with the responses to the hypothetical
question.

31
     The number of observations in Russia and Ukraine is small because the majority of suppliers there are
state-owned firms. When we include state-owned and import suppliers, there are 288 observations from
Russia and 295 observations from Ukraine. Appendix C includes a regressions for the full sample.


32
     Ausubel (1991) offers switching costs as an explanation of price stickiness in the credit card market.
Sharpe (1997) also examines pricing in markets with switching costs, finding that interest rates paid by
banks are higher in markets with a more rapid turnover in households.


33
     Klemperer (1995) identifies five other factors that contribute to switching costs: compatibility with
other inputs; routine transactions cost of switching; costs of learning to use new brands; discounts
offered by existing supplier; and psychological or other non-economic costs. We focus our discussion on
asymmetric information, because that is the area most affected by the quality of formal institutions. Some
of the control variables we use in the regressions—especially those measuring the complexity of the
input—could be interpreted as reflecting compatibility issues or learning costs. We have no information
on how discounts by existing suppliers or psychological costs vary across the sample.
                                                                                             Johnson et al. 57




34
     These variables may also be taken as measuring potential compatibility issues. More complex inputs
are more likely to be specialized to inputs provided by other suppliers. Though we have no problem with
this interpretation, we focus on asymmetric information because our question presumes the new supplier
provides the same input.


35
     Buying from both the new supplier and the incumbent may reflect additional considerations not in our
analysis: it may be an effort to reduce risk rather than to accept risk. For example, in more than 90% of
the cases in Russia and Ukraine for which we have complete information, entrepreneurs indicate that
they would buy from both suppliers. These two countries have the least developed and thinnest markets
among our countries, suggesting perhaps that these entrepreneurs are responding to the opportunity to
diversify existing risk by adding a new supplier.


36
     Production to order has no significant effect on the rate of rejection, and so was dropped from the
regression. It is highly correlated with production of an input sold only to out buyer (ρ=.43).


37
     When 3-5 months is separated from 6-12 months, the rejection rate is lower during months 3 to 5 (β=-
.08) than during months 6 to 12 (β=-.04) of the relationship (column 1 specification). The additional
variable does not have significant explanatory power to justify its inclusion.


38
     There are 375 firms with two domestic, private suppliers. But only 48 of these would reject the offer
for one of their suppliers but not the other. As a result, the dependent variable in the fixed effect
(difference) regression has little variation. We therefore interpret the fixed effect results with some
caution. They show, however, significant positive coefficients for having no alternative suppliers and
visits before the first transaction. The fixed effects regression also produces positive coefficients for each
of the three variables indicating relationship duration of more than a year, with the variable indicating
relationships of 2 to 9 years being significant at the .10 level.

39
     Hendley, Murrell and Ryterman (1999) provide evidence that ability to contract formally is important
for Russian firms, by showing that when lawyers are involved in writing contracts, relationships with
customers which are more successful. Bigsten et al. (2000), using data from firms in six African
countries, find that firms with access to courts are involved in more complex transactions with trading
partners.
                                                                             Johnson et al.   57



                                            Table 1
                               Dispute Resolution Mechanisms
                                   All firms Poland SlovakiaRomania   Russia Ukraine
Percent of firms saying courts can
   enforce contracts                68.4% 72.9% 67.9% 86.9%           55.8% 54.6%
Percent of firms reporting having had
   a dispute                        57.7% 78.2% 83.4% 78.8%           17.2% 20.2%
Percent of firms with dispute who used
   courts in last dispute           39.8% 48.2% 33.3% 30.4%           54.3% 66.7%

Member of trade association        47.8%   28.9%   31.5%   44.2% 74.4% 67.3%
Member of trade association
providing customer/supplier
information or arbitration         36.5%   18.0%   22.1%   33.8% 57.8% 57.4%

Always or almost always resolve
  disputes without a third party   61.1%   56.0%   52.7%   74.6%       NA      NA

NA denotes that data are not available.
                                                                                              Johnson et al.   58


                                                           Table 2
                                              Dependent and Independent Variables

                                                     All firms Poland Slovakia Romania Russia Ukraine

Number of observations                                 1460     382     422     447     95         118

When bill is paid
 -some part of bill paid after delivery                69.9%   85.7%   76.6%   62.2%   21.1%      62.7%
 -percent of bills paid after delivery                 60.9%   83.6%   70.4%   48.9%   11.4%      38.2%
 -percent of bills paid over 7 days after delivery     45.5%   72.4%   56.9%   28.3%    3.0%      17.5%
 -percent of bill paid after delivery * percent of
sales to this customer                                 9.6%    12.6%   10.2%   7.2%    3.6%       12.4%

Customer Search Costs:
Percent with 1-4 similar firms within 1 km             17.2%   17.7%   18.7%   22.1%   4.2%       1.7%
Percent with 5 or more similar firms within 1km         3.9%    3.4%    8.8%    1.6%   0.0%       0.0%

Duration of relationship:
Duration of relationship 3-12 months                   17.4%   15.4%   21.2%   23.5%    1.1%       0.0%
Duration of relationship 3-12 months                   30.1%   37.9%   34.1%   30.0%   12.6%       4.2%
Duration of relationship 13-24 months                   8.5%    5.5%    8.5%   10.3%    7.4%      11.9%
Duration of relationship 25-36 months                   8.9%    7.0%    6.9%   11.6%   14.7%       6.8%
Duration of relationship 3 - 9 years                   32.5%   27.0%   28.2%   24.4%   61.1%      73.7%
Duration of relationship more than 9 years              2.6%    6.8%    0.9%    0.2%    3.2%       3.4%

Manufacturer Information:
First information from business association            45.1%   43.6%   48.1%   35.8%   43.2%      73.7%
Customer managed by family/friend                      17.4%    7.0%   13.0%   30.6%   20.0%      13.6%
Member of trade association providing
customer/ supplier information                         28.6%   16.9%   21.8%   34.9%   47.4%      50.8%

Courts:
Percent of firms saying courts can enforce contracts   74.1%   71.7%   68.8%   88.8%   53.7%      60.2%
% of those w/ dispute who used
courts in last dispute                                 28.3%   38.7%   29.6%   24.6%   6.3%       19.5%
                                                                                                                                        Johnson et al.    59
                                                                                 Table 3
                                                                         Trade Credit Regression Results
                                           Probit
                                         Regression                                         Tobit Regressions
                                              (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)            (5)          (6)         (7)           (8)
                                          Probit for % paid after % paid after % > 1 week % after delivery % paid after % paid after % > 1 week
                                       credit/no credit delivery   delivery    after delivery * % of sales    delivery   delivery    after delivery
Customer Search Costs:
1-4 similar firms                            0.04          3.65           4.11           3.96            1.50           5.06           3.35           3.65
 within 1 km                                (1.10)        (1.09)         (1.28)         (1.20)          (1.56)         (1.66)         (1.05)         (1.11)
More than 5 similar                         -0.14         -14.57         -13.57          -5.71          -3.13           -6.62         -13.38          -6.06
 firms within 1 km                          (1.75)        (2.37)         (2.26)         (0.94)          (1.71)         (1.16)         (2.24)         (1.01)
Duration of relationship:
Duration of relationship                     0.15         11.86          12.55          11.67            5.16          12.17          12.34          12.25
  3-12 months                               (4.79)        (3.74)         (4.06)         (3.72)          (6.49)         (4.03)         (4.03)         (3.87)
Duration of relationship                     0.17         15.30          14.17          15.23           12.33          13.82          12.58          15.89
  13-24 months                              (4.18)        (3.76)         (3.55)         (3.63)          (7.75)         (3.62)         (3.19)         (3.76)
Duration of relationship                     0.18         17.24          17.26          14.00           10.34          16.96          16.39          14.55
  25-36 months                              (4.73)        (4.39)         (4.45)         (3.64)          (8.54)         (4.52)         (4.28)         (3.80)
Duration of relationship                     0.23         16.17          16.02          13.90            9.08          15.67          15.20          14.06
  3 - 9 years                               (7.15)        (5.13)         (5.11)         (4.39)         (10.12)         (5.08)         (4.90)         (4.41)
Duration of relationship                     0.21         24.84          28.51          27.83           10.72          28.89          29.33          28.59
  more than 9 years                         (3.20)        (3.35)         (3.84)         (3.61)          (5.34)         (4.30)         (3.91)         (3.70)

Delivery at least bi-weekly                                                                                                            1.49
                                                                                                                                      (1.75)
Manufacturer Information:
First information from                       0.18         16.21          14.87           9.23            4.44          13.45          11.71           9.49
    business network                        (5.26)        (5.32)         (5.06)         (3.28)          (5.15)         (4.83)         (3.97)         (3.38)
First information from                       0.17         14.67          14.66          14.29            4.64          14.84          10.94          14.61
   social network                           (4.47)        (4.17)         (4.29)         (4.33)          (4.10)         (4.55)         (3.21)         (4.40)
Member of trade association                  0.06          4.08           4.38           0.68            1.66           3.42           3.98           0.76
  with customer, supplier services          (1.97)        (1.66)         (1.78)         (0.27)          (2.09)         (1.49)         (1.66)         (0.29)
Dummy for visited customer before                                                                                                      9.63
  first sale                                                                                                                          (4.09)
Dummy for talk to other suppliers of                                                                                                   -4.04
  this customer                                                                                                                       (1.45)

Courts:
Courts can enforce contracts (0-1)           0.08          5.54           5.10           6.64            1.44           3.95           4.54
                                            (2.53)        (2.09)         (1.99)         (2.41)          (1.82)         (1.66)         (1.81)
Used court in most recent dispute (0-1)                                                                                                               7.15
                                                                                                                                                     (2.87)
Other Variables:
Average percent of bill paid to                                                                                         0.27
 suppliers after delivery                                                                                              (8.13)
Industry/country controls                    Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes
Seller/manager characteristics               No            No             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes
Buyer control characteristics                No            No             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes

Number of observations                      1460          1460           1460           1460           1437            1460           1460           1460
% obs not censored                                       20.96%         20.96%         15.75%         69.45%          20.96%         20.96%         15.75%
Chi-square (degrees of freedom)           123.8 (13)    114.8 (13)     198.6 (36)     175.7 (36)     342.3 (36)      301.0 (37)     224.0 (39)     177.7 (36)
p-value                                     <.001         <.001          <.001          <.001          <.001           <.001          <.001          <.001
T-statistics are in parentheses, calculated from standard errors corrected for multiple observations per firm. Coefficients in bold are significant at the .10
level or better. The reported chi-square test is for the joint significance of all variables except the country/industry controls. Column 1 is a probit
regression; columns 2-4 and 6-8 are two-tailed tobits; column 5 is a one-tailed tobit. The first column reports the change in the probability of giving credit;
Columns 2-8 report the marginal effects in the uncensored range.
All regressions include 31 industry/country controls (8 industry groups in 3 countries and Russia/Ukraine), and two variables indicating intial infomration
from sources other than business and social networks. Seller characteristics include variables indicating the firm has 16-50 employees, 51-100
employees, or more than 100 employees (15 or fewer employees is the comparison group); the firm was started 3-5 years ago, 6-9 years ago, or 10 or
more years ago; a variable indicating that the firm received a bank loan in 1996, a variable indicating that the firm was spun off from a state-owned firm;
variables indicating that the entrepreneur is younger than 30, between 30 and 40 years old, or between 40 and 50 years old; variables indicating the
manager has between 13 and 16 years of schooling and 17 or more years of schooling; and a variable indicating the manager was formerly a high level
manager in a state-owned firm.
Buyer controls include variables indicating the customer is a retailer/wholesaler, the customer is an individual, the customer is foreign-owned, the
customer is located in a different city, and variables indicating the customer has 16-50 employees, 51-100 employees, or more than 100 employees (15 or
fewer employees is the comparison group).
                                                                                                                   Johnson et al.    60


                                                                         Table 4
                                                              Trade Credit Regression Results
                                                                      Split Samples

                                         (1)           (2)                 (3)          (4)                       (5)         (6)
                                     Duration 2 Duration more           Relationships which are                  Customer located:
                                    months or less than 1 year         Market-based Bilateral                  Same city Other city
Customer Search:
1-4 similar firms                       8.65         1.04                    -2.30        10.75                   4.57           -2.24
 within 1 km                           (1.43)       (0.28)                  (0.53)        (1.98)                 (1.22)         (0.43)
More than 5 similar                    -12.39       -17.05                  -16.23        -33.15                 -20.22          -7.18
 firms within 1 km                     (1.01)       (2.66)                  (1.78)        (2.88)                 (3.00)         (0.79)

Manufacturer Information:
First information from                 13.24          8.68                  11.85         16.54                  11.72          16.06
    business network                   (1.99)        (2.11)                 (2.51)        (3.45)                 (3.23)         (3.39)
First information from                 13.80          7.71                   6.84         25.43                  14.18          16.95
   social network                      (1.98)        (1.70)                 (1.29)        (4.37)                 (3.36)         (3.18)
Member of trade association             -5.01         6.13                   6.46          4.58                   5.64           1.93
 with customer, supplier services      (0.82)        (2.21)                 (1.52)        (1.30)                 (1.89)         (0.52)

Courts:
Courts can enforce                     16.60          4.51                  10.33          0.59                   6.61           0.90
 contracts                             (2.60)        (1.54)                 (1.93)        (0.17)                 (1.98)         (0.25)

Industry and country controls           Yes           Yes                    Yes            Yes                   Yes               Yes
Seller characteristics                  Yes           Yes                    Yes            Yes                   Yes               Yes
Buyer control characteristics           Yes           Yes                    Yes            Yes                   Yes               Yes

Number of observations                  254           767                   467             558                  974             486
% obs not censored                     9.06%        26.73%                15.63%          26.34%               20.33%          22.22%
Chi-square (degrees of freedom)       81.4 (31)    61.1 (34)             104.0 (35)      99.4 (35)            140.3 (35)      88.7 (35)
p-value                                <.001         0.009                 <.001           <.001                <.001           <.001

T-statistics are in parentheses, calculated from standard errors corrected for multiple observations per firm. Coefficients in bold are
significant at the .10 level or better. The reported chi-square test is for the joint significance of all variables except the
country/industry controls. The reported coefficients are the marginal effects in the uncensored range. All regressions include 31
industry/country controls (8 industry groups in 3 countries and Russia/Ukraine) and two variables indicating intial infomration from
sources other than business and social networks.
Seller characteristics include variables indicating the firm has 16-50 employees, 51-100 employees, or more than 100 employees (15
or fewer employees is the comparison group); the firm was started 3-5 years ago, 6-9 years ago, or 10 or more years ago; a variable
indicating that the firm received a bank loan in 1996, a variable indicating that the firm was spun off from a state-owned firm;
variables indicating that the entrepreneur is younger than 30, between 30 and 40 years old, or between 40 and 50 years old; variables
indicating the manager has between 13 and 16 years of schooling and 17 or more years of schooling; and a variable indicating the
manager was formerly a high level manager in a state-owned firm.
Buyer controls include variables indicating the customer is a retailer/wholesaler, the customer is an individual, the customer is foreign-
owned, the customer is located in a different city, and variables indicating the customer has 16-50 employees, 51-100 employees, or
more than 100 employees (15 or fewer employees is the comparison group).
                                                                                     Johnson et al.   61



                                                     Table 5
                             Switching Costs: Dependent and Independent Variables
                                           All firms Poland SlovakiaRomania Russia Ukraine
Number of observations                        1115    335     395     321    40      24

Loyalty to existing suppliers
    Refuse offer of new supplier               15.5%     17.3%   21.3%    8.7%    5.0%    4.2%
    Buy from both                              34.4%     40.3%   26.1%   26.8%   95.0%   87.5%
    Buy from new supplier                      50.1%     42.4%   52.7%   64.5%    0.0%    8.3%

Complexity of Input:
Supplier produces good unique to your firm 11.0%          8.7%   16.7%    5.9%   17.5%    8.3%
Firm has no alternative supplier for this input  31.7%   27.5%   30.9%   37.4%   27.5%   33.3%
Supplier produces good to order                  20.5%   24.2%   19.6%   17.4%   25.0%   16.7%
Quality specifications are written               77.4%   58.8%   83.5%   86.6%   90.0%   91.7%
Input is produced to inventory and sold
   to others (Standard)                          76.2%   72.5%   74.6%   81.6%   75.0%   83.3%
Input is produced to order or is unique (Custom) 23.8%   27.5%   25.4%   18.4%   25.0%   16.7%

Information:
Duration of relationship 3-12 months           35.1%     34.0%   34.2%   41.4%   15.0%   12.5%
Duration of relationship 13-24 months          14.2%     14.9%   14.9%   14.6%    0.0%    8.3%
Duration of relationship 2 - 9 years           36.2%     36.7%   38.0%   26.2%   77.5%   66.7%
Duration of relationship more than 9 years      2.8%      5.0%    1.8%    0.0%    7.5%   12.5%
First information from business network        50.9%     51.0%   57.7%   40.8%   55.0%   66.7%
First information from social network           8.9%      3.0%    8.6%   14.6%   17.5%   12.5%
Trade associations provide
  customer/supplier services                    26.0%    19.1%   22.0%   35.2%   45.0%   33.3%
Frequency of delivery (0-6)                      2.82     2.79    2.85    2.92    2.23    2.29
Visits from supplier before 1st purchase (0-14) 1.74      1.64    2.05    1.43    1.25    3.33

Courts:
Courts can enforce contracts                   76.5%     78.5%   70.1%   88.5%   42.5%   50.0%
Used court in most recent dispute              28.1%     35.8%   27.8%   24.0%    7.5%   12.5%
                                                                                                                                     Johnson et al.   62

                                                                          Table 6
                                                      Switching Costs -- Probability of Rejecting Deal
                                                                         Probit Regressions
                                                     (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)
                                                                                      Custom      Standard
                                                                                     Inputs only Inputs only
Complexity:
Supplier produces good                             0.18              0.14             0.14              0.23
unique to your firm                               (4.59)            (4.03)           (3.91)            (5.24)
Firm has no alternative                            0.10              0.09             0.10              0.16              0.07
  supplier for this input                         (4.30)            (4.35)           (4.47)            (3.36)            (3.50)
Quality specifications                             0.05              0.03             0.03              0.05              0.04
  are written                                     (1.97)            (1.22)           (1.33)            (1.21)            (1.94)

Information:
Duration of relationship                           -0.05            -0.07            -0.07             -0.18             -0.04
  3-12 months                                     (1.91)            (2.79)           (2.67)            (3.92)           (1.59)
Duration of relationship                           0.005            -0.02            -0.02             -0.07            -0.004
  13-24 months                                    (0.14)            (0.75)           (0.85)            (1.42)           (0.14)
Duration of relationship                          -0.004            -0.01            -0.01             -0.11              0.01
  2 - 9 years                                     (0.13)            (0.47)           (0.55)            (2.06)           (0.29)
Duration of relationship                           -0.09            -0.09            -0.09               (a)             -0.06
 more than 9 years                                (1.63)            (2.18)           (2.15)                             (1.74)

First information from                             0.03              0.03             0.03              0.02              0.03
    business network                              (1.06)            (1.30)           (1.17)            (0.32)            (1.15)
First information from                             0.10              0.12             0.12              0.05              0.15
   social network                                 (1.95)            (2.44)           (2.30)            (0.68)            (2.92)
Trade associations provide                        -0.08             -0.07            -0.07             -0.05             -0.06
  customer/supplier services                      (3.92)            (3.68)           (3.72)            (1.33)            (3.40)
Frequency of delivery                              0.02              0.02             0.02              0.03             0.003
 (0-6)                                            (1.84)            (2.07)           (2.20)            (2.13)            0.35
Visits from supplier                               0.01              0.01             0.01              0.01             0.003
before 1st transaction (0-14)                     (2.38)            (1.79)           (1.93)            (1.66)            (0.68)

Courts:
Courts can enforce                                -0.07             -0.07                              -0.21             -0.04
 contracts                                        (2.65)            (2.79)                             (3.79)            (1.81)
Used court in most                                                                   -0.05
recent dispute                                                                       (2.47)

Industry/country controls                           Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes
Buyer/Manager control variables                     No               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes
Supplier control variables                          No               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes

Number of observations                             1115              1115             1115               264              839
pseudo r-square                                    0.18              0.26             0.26              0.42             0.29
Observed percent reject offer                     15.5%             15.5%            15.5%             24.2%            12.9%
Predicted percent reject offer                    11.1%              9.0%             9.1%              7.7%             6.0%
Notes: (a) Combined with cell above because of a lack of variation in the cell. The dependent variable is 1 if the firm says it
would reject the new offer and 0 otherwise. T-values are in parentheses. Coefficients in bold are significant at the .10 level or
better. The coefficients are marginal effects at the means values. All regressions also include 31 country *industry indicators
and two variables indicating intial infomration from sources other than business and social networks.

Buyer characteristics include variables indicating the firm has 16-50 employees, 51-100 employees, or more than 100
employees (15 or fewer employees is the comparison group); the firm was started 3-5 years ago, 6-9 years ago, or 10 or more
years ago; a variable indicating that the firm received a bank loan in 1996, a variable indicating that the firm was spun off
from a state-owned firm; variables indicating that the entrepreneur is younger than 30, between 30 and 40 years old, or
between 40 and 50 years old; variables indicating the manager has between 13 and 16 years of schooling and 17 or more years
of schooling; and a variable indicating the manager was formerly a high level manager in a state-owned firm.

Seller controls include variables indicating the supplier is a retailer/wholesaler, the supplier is an individual, the supplier is
foreign-owned, the supplier is located in a different city, and variables indicating the supplier has 16-50 employees, 51-100
employees, or more than 100 employees (15 or fewer employees is the comparison group).
                                                                                        Johnson et al.   63



Appendix: Table A-1
Sample Comparisons
                                          Poland Slovakia Romania Russia Ukraine
Number of firms surveyed:                     303     321     308     269   270

Year Founded:
before 1988                                   68       13        0        4       17
1988-1989                                     38        7        3       13       21
1990-1993                                    138      199      204      182      152
1994-1997                                     59       89      114       64       74

Percent privatized                         21.8%    22.7%    12.5%    51.8% 69.1%

Manager worked previously:
  Private sector                           35.2%    28.3%     8.4%    20.5%    11.9%
  Public Sector                            93.7%    87.3%    88.5%    98.8%    95.6%
was a public sector manager                35.1%    25.8%    29.6%    57.8%    62.2%
was a public sector engineer               34.0%    38.9%    51.7%    38.2%    35.6%
was a public sector ordinary worker        37.6%    34.5%    17.7%     5.1%     2.2%
Years schooling of manager                   15.7     16.2     16.1     15.3     15.2

Number of employees in 1st year               44       42       54       34       60
Number of employees end of 1996               63       57       57       35       60
Employment in first year--spinoff firms       83      119      257       47       73
Employment in first year--startups            33       19       25       22       32

Percent of firms in sector:
Metal parts and products                   27.7%    26.0%    27.7%    12.7%    18.6%
Wood products/furniture                     5.9%     9.4%    11.5%     2.6%     5.2%
Food products                              11.9%    10.7%    19.6%    10.1%     6.3%
Footwear/clothing                          16.5%    12.7%    14.6%    14.9%     4.5%
Construction materials                      9.2%    10.4%    11.5%    14.9%    15.6%
Chemical products                           9.9%     8.1%     7.8%     6.3%     9.7%
Paper and packaging                         1.6%     4.2%     2.5%     7.1%     1.9%
Handicrafts and art                         1.3%     0.7%     1.6%     1.1%     1.9%
Electrical machinery                        8.3%     8.4%     0.6%    12.3%    11.1%
Miscellaneous                               7.6%     9.4%     2.5%    17.9%    25.3%
                                                           Johnson et al.   64




Table B-1
Probit for Response that Courts are Effective

                                     (1)


Firm Characteristics:
Age 3-5 years                               -0.04
                                           (0.72)
Age 5-9 years                               -0.08
                                           (1.56)
Age 10 or more years                        -0.03
                                           (0.41)
16-50 employees                              0.04
                                           (1.18)
51 or more employees                         0.10
                                           (2.62)
Firms was a de novo                         -0.05
   startup                                 (1.33)
Percent of sales and supplies                0.08
   from state-owned firms                  (2.41)
Percent of sales and supplies               -0.11
   from foreign firms                      (2.85)

Manager Characteristics:
Manager 40 or younger                        0.10
                                           (2.38)
Manager 41 - 50 years old                    0.03
                                           (0.68)
Manager has 13-16                           -0.07
  years of schooling                       (1.58)
Manager has more than                       -0.06
 16 years of schooling                     (1.20)

Industry/country controls                    Yes

Number of observations                      1210
pseudo r-square                              0.11

       Notes: T values in parentheses. The coefficients
represent the marginal change in the probability of
saying courts are effective at mean values.
Coefficients in bold are significant at the .10 level or
better.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Johnson et al.   65




                                                                                                       Table B-2
                                                                                       Trade Credit Regression Results by Country

                                       (1)               (2)              (3)                 (4)              (5)               (6)            (7)                (8)              (9)
                                  All countries    Poland, Slovakia     Poland             Slovakia         Romania       Russia/Ukraine      Poland            Slovakia         Romania
                                with SOEs, Exports and Romania only          ------------Private, domestic customers only-----------     ------------Private, domestic customers only----------
                                                                                                                                             ------------Duration 2 months or less-----------
Customer Search:
1-4 similar firms                           3.91               4.37            0.003             0.01              0.13             -0.32             0.16              0.18              0.10
 w/in 1 km                                (1.29)             (1.37)           (0.07)           (0.17)            (1.81)            (1.57)           (2.46)            (1.21)            (0.62)
More than 5 similar                        -8.65            -13.57             -0.12            -0.17             -0.01                                 (a)            -0.14             -0.05
 firms w/in 1 km                          (1.51)             (2.28)           (1.16)           (1.81)            (0.02)                                               (0.57)            (0.18)

Duration of relationship:
Duration of relationship                   12.87              12.33             0.04             0.14              0.22
 3-12 months                              (4.40)             (4.01)           (1.01)           (3.00)            (3.45)
Duration of relationship                   15.95              13.01             0.05             0.05              0.28              0.17
 13-24 months                             (4.39)             (3.05)           (0.77)           (0.75)            (4.07)            (1.07)
Duration of relationship                   16.54              17.84             0.10             0.09              0.25              0.11
 25-36 months                             (4.90)             (4.26)           (2.11)           (1.34)            (3.75)            (0.67)
Duration of relationship                   15.81              15.96             0.08             0.19              0.33              0.05
 3 - 9 years                              (5.68)             (4.87)           (2.05)           (4.01)            (5.81)            (0.44)
Duration of relationship                   25.51              32.34             0.07               (a)               (a)             0.12
 more than 9 years                        (4.84)             (3.20)           (1.31)                                               (0.56)

Manufacturer Information:
First information from                     14.69              14.81             0.13             0.15              0.18              0.21             0.14              0.22              0.17
   business network                       (5.51)             (4.94)           (3.90)           (2.89)            (2.74)            (1.66)           (1.34)            (1.70)            (1.44)
First information from                     15.31              13.00            -0.05             0.15              0.25              0.06            -0.23              0.39              0.21
  social network                          (4.77)             (3.73)           (0.85)           (2.42)            (3.67)            (0.78)           (1.46)            (2.85)            (1.56)
Member of trade association                 3.13               3.18            -0.01             0.04              0.08              0.16            -0.30             -0.13              0.07
 w/ cust, supplier services               (1.50)             (1.11)           (0.31)           (0.75)            (1.34)            (1.94)           (2.03)            (1.04)            (0.57)

Courts:
Courts can enforce                          4.22               6.02             0.02             0.11              0.07              0.06             0.31              0.15              0.01
 contracts (0-1)                          (2.07)             (1.99)           (0.62)           (2.22)            (0.75)            (0.78)           (2.71)            (1.16)            (0.07)

Industry controls                            Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes
Industry/country controls                    Yes               Yes              NA               NA                NA                Yes               NA               NA                NA

Number of observations                     2221               1247              382               419              446               213                59                89               105
pseudo r-square                                                                0.16              0.18             0.13              0.06              0.42              0.22              0.05
Observed percent with credit                                                 85.9%             76.6%            62.1%             44.6%             76.2%             60.8%             37.1%
Predicted percent with credit                                                90.0%             81.3%            63.8%             44.1%             90.9%             64.5%             36.4%

Notes: (a) Combined with cell above or below because of lack of variation within the cell.
       T-statistics in parentheses. Standard errors are corrected for multiple observations per firm. Coefficients in bold are significant at the .10 level or better.
       The regressions in columns 1 and 2 are two-tailed tobits with 17.0% and. 25.8% of the observations uncensored, respectively. The specifications are the same as
Table 3, column 3, with 31 country*industry controls (23 for column 1). The other variables are jointly significant at better than the .001 level (Chi-square=182.7 (36) in
column 1 and 226.3 (34 d.f.) in column 2).
       The country-level regressions are probits, with specifications as in Table 3, column 1. The coefficients represent the marginal change in the probability of giving
credit at mean values.
       The variables measuring durations of more than 9 years in Slovakia and Romania and the variables indicating more than 5 proximately located firms and durations of
3-12 months Russia/Ukraine are dropped because there is no variation in the cells. There are an insufficient number of relationships with durations three months or less in
Russia and Ukraine to run a regression for these countries.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Johnson et al.   66




                                                                                                           Table B-3
                                                                                 Switching Costs -- Probability of Rejecting Lower-priced Offer

                                         (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)               (5)                (6)                   (7)                  (8)               (9)                (10)
                                    All countries     Poland, Slovakia      Poland            Slovakia          Romania         Russia/Ukraine            Poland              Slovakia         Romania         Russia/Ukraine
                                  with SOEs, Imports and Romania only       -------Private, domestic suppliers only------       with state-owned /   Private, domestic suppliers only       With state-owned and import suppliers
Complexity:                                                                                                                     import suppliers          --------------------------Custom inputs only-------------------------
Supplier produces good                         0.22               0.20             0.21               0.21              0.17                0.30                  0.23                 0.36              0.16                0.26
unique to your firm                          (7.63)             (4.69)           (2.42)             (2.97)            (2.99)              (6.21)                (2.21)               (3.63)            (2.12)              (1.63)
Firm has no alternative                        0.12               0.10             0.17               0.07              0.05                0.21                  0.12                 0.05              0.14                0.50
  supplier for this input                    (6.69)             (3.88)           (3.39)             (1.45)            (1.79)              (6.25)                (1.33)               (0.43)            (2.19)              (3.60)
Quality specifications                         0.06               0.05             0.03               0.06              0.05                0.04                 -0.02                 0.21
  are written                                (2.55)             (2.00)           (0.56)             (1.08)            (2.49)              (0.75)                (0.25)               (2.22)

Information:
Duration of relationship                      -0.07              -0.06            -0.14              -0.02             -0.01                -0.09                -0.11              -0.25               -0.01                 (a)
  3-12 months                                (2.49)             (1.85)           (2.45)             (0.28)            (0.52)               (1.87)               (0.65)             (1.65)              (0.20)
Duration of relationship                      -0.03               0.01             0.01               0.05             -0.05                -0.09                 0.21              -0.20                  (a)             -0.24
  13-24 months                               (1.07)             (0.23)           (0.08)             (0.57)            (1.93)               (1.64)               (0.95)             (1.38)                                 (1.50)
Duration of relationship                      -0.04              -0.01            -0.11               0.05              0.02                -0.03                 0.06              -0.14                 (a)                 (a)
  2 - 9 years                                (1.31)             (0.19)           (1.66)             (0.71)            (0.87)               (0.53)               (0.31)             (0.87)
Duration of relationship                      -0.08                 (a)              (a)                (a)               (a)               -0.03                   (a)                (a)                (a)                 (a)
 more than 9 years                           (2.13)                                                                                        (0.53)                                                                         (1.40)

First information from                         0.03               0.03             0.06               0.09             -0.03                -0.03                 0.11               0.19
    business network                         (1.15)             (1.08)           (1.06)             (1.41)            (1.16)               (0.96)               (0.92)             (1.18)
First information from                         0.11               0.10             0.01               0.28            -0.004                -0.03                 0.19               0.11
   social network                            (2.49)             (1.82)           (0.05)             (2.47)            (0.14)               (0.65)               (0.85)             (0.49)
Trade associations provide                    -0.05              -0.10            -0.11              -0.10             -0.06                 0.02                -0.11              -0.02               -0.09               0.08
  customer/supplier services                 (2.92)             (4.24)           (2.63)             (2.07)            (3.14)               (0.67)               (1.20)             (0.19)              (1.80)             (0.48)
Frequency of delivery                          0.02               0.02             0.03               0.02            -0.003                -0.01                 0.02               0.05
 (0-6)                                       (2.21)             (2.07)           (1.71)             (1.44)            (0.28)               (0.50)               (0.61)             (1.15)
Visits from supplier                           0.01               0.01             0.01               0.02             0.003                 0.02                 0.03               0.02
before 1st transaction (0-14)                (3.45)             (2.62)           (0.84)             (1.93)            (0.62)               (2.63)               (1.37)             (0.75)

Courts:
Courts can enforce                            -0.06              -0.07            -0.01              -0.12             -0.01                -0.02                -0.16              -0.44               -0.09               0.13
 contracts                                   (3.09)             (2.45)           (0.10)             (2.38)            (0.26)               (0.67)               (1.50)             (3.04)              (1.11)             (0.95)

Industry controls                              No                 No                Yes               Yes                Yes                 Yes                   Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
Industry/country controls                      Yes                Yes               NA                NA                 NA                  Yes                   NA                 NA                 NA                 Yes

Number of observations                       2148               1051               335               395                321                 583                     92               100                107                   91
pseudo r-square                               0.18               0.17              0.17              0.19               0.23                0.28                  0.30               0.32               0.31                0.40
Observed percent reject offer               16.8%              16.2%             17.3%             21.3%               8.7%               17.0%                 23.9%              33.0%              16.8%               42.0%
Predicted percent reject offer              12.6%              11.8%             13.2%             16.7%               3.8%               10.0%                 15.5%              23.7%               6.2%               33.0%

Notes: (a) Combined with cell above or below because of lack of variation within the cell.
       T-values in parentheses. The coefficients are marginal effects at the mean values. Coefficients in bold are significant at the .10 level or better. The regressions are probits. The specification is the same as in
Column 1 of Table 7.
      The regression in the first column includes 31 country*industry dummies.
       The regression for Russia and Ukraine includes state-owned and import suppliers, since there was not enough variation in the dependent variable when the sample was restricted to private, domestic
suppliers.
                                                                                                   Johnson et al.   67


                                                       Table B-4
                                       Customer and Manufacturer Characteristics
                                      From Regression Reported in Table 3, Column 3


Customer Characteristics                                          Manufacturer Characteristics:
Customer has 16-50                     -1.10                      Manufacturer has 16-               1.81
employees                             (0.37)                      50 employees                     (0.61)
Customer has 51-100                    -1.94                      Manufacturer has 51-               2.10
employees                             (0.50)                      100 employees                    (0.68)
Customer has 101 or                     7.62                      Manufacturer has 101               3.39
more employees                        (2.12)                      or more employees                (0.81)
Customer is located in                 -4.14                      Firm had loan in 1996             -0.53
the same city                         (1.87)                                                       (0.21)
Customer is a retailer                  6.07                      Firm started operation            -2.49
or wholesaler                         (2.44)                      3-5 years ago                    (0.76)
Customer is an                         -9.27                      Firm started operation            -4.05
individual                            (2.69)                      4-6 years ago                    (1.10)
Customer is foreign                     9.29                      Firm started operation          -16.54
owned                                 (2.27)                      3-5 years ago                    (2.93)
                                                                  Firm started de novo               2.94
                                                                                                   (0.89)
                                                                  Manager less than 30               3.16
                                                                  years old                        (0.55)
                                                                  Manager 30-40 years               -4.11
                                                                  old                              (1.22)
                                                                  Manager 40-50 years                0.38
                                                                  old                              (0.12)
                                                                  Manager 13-16 years                8.95
                                                                  of schooling                     (2.40)
                                                                  Manager 17 or more                 1.98
                                                                  years of schooling               (0.56)
                                                                  Manager was high                   4.37
                                                                  level SOE manager                (1.64)


See the notes to Table 3. Reported coefficients are
from the column 3 regression. T-statistics in
parentheses. Standard errors are corrected for multiple
observations per firm. Coefficients in bold are
significant at the .10 level or better.
