NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL TECHNOLOGY DIFFUSION
Wolfgang Keller
Working Paper 8573
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8573
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2001

I would like to thank Sourafel Girma for providing some regression results. I have also benefited from
conversations with Bob Baldwin and Elhanan Helpman, as well as from comments by Sam Kortum and
Maurice Schiff. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2001 by Wolfgang Keller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

International Technology Diffusion
Wolfgang Keller
NBER Working Paper No. 8573
October 2001
JEL No. F1, F2, O3, O4

ABSTRACT
I discuss the concept and empirical importance of international technology diffusion from the
point of view of recent work on endogenous technological change. In this literature, technology is viewed
as technological knowledge. I first review the major concepts, and how international technology diffusion
relates to other factors affecting economic growth in open economies. The following main section of the
paper provides a review of recent empirical results on (i) basic results in international technology
diffusion; (ii) the importance of specific channels of diffusion, in particular trade and foreign direct
investment; (iii) the spatial distribution of technological knowledge, and (iv) other issues.

Wolfgang Keller
Department of Economics
University of Texas
BRB 3.152
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
keller@eco.utexas.edu

1. Introduction
Technology is important in explaining income levels across countries. The
accumulation of physical and human capital matters as well, but that cannot
explain much of today’s cross-country incomes differences (Easterly and Levine
2001, Prescott 1988). If the rate of technical change differs across countries, this
affects the world’s distribution of income. New information and communication
technologies (ICTs) have been developed relatively fast in the United States
(U.S.), for example, and this might explain why the U.S.’ lead in per capita
income over Japan has increased from 10% in 1990 to 20% by 1999.
Recent work has shown, however, that the major sources of technical
change leading to productivity growth in OECD countries are not domestic;
instead, they lie abroad (Eaton and Kortum 1999, Keller 2001a).2 The
international diffusion of technology is therefore a major determinant of percapita income in the world. Because most developing countries spend relatively
less on basic science and innovations—formal R&D spending, for instance, is
highly concentrated in a handful of OECD countries—poorer countries rely even
more on foreign sources of productivity growth than OECD countries do.
This means that convergence in income turns on the degree of
international technology diffusion. Strong diffusion is a force towards
convergence, because it equalizes differences in technology across countries.
Conversely, the absence of international technology diffusion favors divergence.
Technical change in the presence of non-uniform international technology
Eaton and Kortum (1999) estimate for example that foreign research accounts for 87% of
productivity growth in France (Table 5). See section 3 for further results.
2

2

diffusion is at the heart of the recent ''digital divide'' discussion, for example--the
widespread fear that the development of the Internet might not lead to
convergence, but instead to a further polarization of the world’s income
distribution.
While it has been recognized since the classic ‘Solow residual’ paper
(Solow 1957) that rates of factor accumulation do not account for the major part
of economic growth, the view that technological change has both domestic and
foreign sources is less common. Arguably, the rapidly rising level of economic
integration in the late 20th century, fostered by advances in transportation as well
as in information and communication technology, makes the exclusive focus on
domestic technological change obsolete. Sometimes the reason for productivity
increases does indeed lie in purely domestic activities, such as the learning effects
resulting from cumulative production for domestic demand. However,
productivity also increases due to learning through the interaction between
foreign and domestic firms. The greater importance of technology adoption from
abroad--versus domestic technical change--in less developed compared with
more developed countries suggests that learning through international economic
activity might be particularly important for less developed countries.
This paper takes a look at the evidence to expand on these ideas. In the
next section, I discuss the concept of international technology diffusion. I also
provide some references to the underlying theories; the sections that follow are
first and foremost a review of recent empirical work. Basic results on
international technology diffusion are discussed in section 3. Section 4 is devoted
to international trade, foreign direct investment, and other channels of diffusion.
3

In section 5, I review the evidence on the heterogeneity of diffusion across
products and industries. Section 6 discusses findings on the geographic
localization of international technology diffusion, and section 7 examines how
this has changed over time. In section 8 I discuss some evidence on major
country-specific determinants for successful international technology diffusion.
Finally, section 9 summarizes the major findings, suggests directions for future
research, and discusses policy implications.

2. Conceptual issues
International technology diffusion in this paper
It is central to much of the recent work to view technology as knowledge, as
emphasized in the theories of endogenous technical change that emerged about
ten years ago (Aghion and Howitt 1992, Grossman and Helpman 1991, Romer
1990, and Segerstrom, Anant, and Dinopoulos 1990).3 In this framework,
technology has three major characteristics:4
1. Technology is non-rival in the sense that the marginal costs for an
additional firm or individual to use the technology are negligible.

3 See Grossman and Helpman (1995) and Aghion and Howitt (1998) for broader overviews. I will
also discuss some related work on learning-by-doing and human capital accumulation that falls
into the broad category of models of knowledge accumulation.
4 See Romer (1990). Many of these ideas have been discussed in the literature before; important
contributors include Paul David, Giovanni Dosi, Robert Evenson, Jan Fagerberg, Richard Nelson ,
Keith Pavitt, Nathan Rosenberg, Vernon Ruttan, Luc Soete, Sidney Winter, Larry Westphal, and
others (see Fagerberg 1994 and Evenson and Westphal 1995 for overviews). What distinguishes
the recent work is that it includes fully specified general equilibrium models. This means that
these technology effects can in principle be simulated and estimated in a well-defined framework.

4

2. The return to investments towards new technology are partly private and
partly public; and
3. Technological change is the outcome of activities by private agents who
intentionally devote resources towards the invention of new products and
processes.
Out of these, points 1 and 2 are key for my purposes. The first characteristic
means that technological knowledge can serve users beyond those who are
currently employing it without raising the costs to the original set of users. Other
authors have coined the terms ‘perfectly expansible’ (David 1992) and ‘infinitely
expansible’ (Quah 2001a,b) to positively define this characteristic. It
distinguishes knowledge from rival factor inputs such as human and physical
capital; the latter can only be used by one firm at a time, or put differently, the
marginal costs to use the same factor for a second firm are infinite.
The partially private, partially public nature of the return to technological
investments implies that while there is a force that might be strong enough to
sustain the private incentive to innovate (the private return, which is often a
temporary monopoly), technological investments may also create benefits to
firms and individuals external to the inventor by adding to their knowledge base
(the public return). These benefits are usually called knowledge spillovers. An
example is that the design of a new product might speed up the invention of a
competing product, because the second inventor can learn from the first by
carefully studying the product, or even the production design.
One contribution of these theories of technical change is that they have
supplied improved micro foundations for thinking about knowledge spillovers.
5

My survey of international technology diffusion is largely an analysis of the
empirical literature of international technology spillovers and their effects on
productivity.

Two basic mechanisms for international economic activities to lead to
technology diffusion have been emphasized:5

a. Direct learning about foreign technological knowledge.
b. Employing specialized and advanced intermediate products that
have been invented abroad.

Technological knowledge in this literature is typically the design, or
blueprint, for a new intermediate product. Direct international learning about
such technology means that a blueprint is known not only to a firm in the country
where the blueprint was first developed (or firms, if there are domestic
spillovers), it also becomes known to firms in other countries. Such learning
involves a positive externality—hence: spillover--if the technological knowledge is
obtained at less than the original cost to the inventor.
The productivity of domestic invention is assumed to be increasing in a
country’s stock of knowledge, which itself is typically proportional to the number
of domestically known product designs. This assumption captures the idea that
creating a new product becomes easier as the number of already known product
designs is larger. Thus, by adding to the domestic knowledge stock, international
5

See Rivera-Batiz and Romer (1991) for an exposition.

6

spillovers raise the productivity of domestic inventive activity. It might be called
an active spillover, in the sense that the foreign blueprint becomes part of the
domestic R&D laboratories’ stock of knowledge that can be actively used to invent
new products.

According to point b., technology diffuses internationally through foreign
intermediate goods. The idea is that employing the foreign intermediate good
involves the implicit usage of the design knowledge that was created with the
R&D investment of the foreign inventor. In this sense, the technological
knowledge of the blueprint is embodied in the intermediate good. As long as the
intermediate good costs less than its opportunity costs—which include the R&D
costs of product development--, there is a gain from having access to foreign
intermediate goods. This might be called a passive technology spillover: although
an importing country has indirect access to the results of foreign R&D, the
technological knowledge embodied in the imported intermediate as such is not
available to domestic inventors—only the manufactured outcome of it is.
What kind of international activities could lead to such active or passive
spillovers? Clearly, the latter might be related to international trade and foreign
direct investment through intermediate goods imports and purchases from
foreign-owned multinational subsidiaries, respectively. Employing the
intermediate good that embodies technological knowledge is necessary for
passive spillovers to occur. An implication of this is that the patterns of passive
international technology spillovers might share certain characteristics of
international trade and FDI. For instance, the volume of international trade
7

between two countries is declining with bilateral geographic distance (see Leamer
and Levinsohn 1995). This suggests that to the extent that passive spillovers are
important, international technology diffusion might have such a spatial structure
as well.

By contrast, the purchase of intermediate goods is neither necessary nor
sufficient for spillovers of the active kind. The technological knowledge that
allows the inventor to produce a new product (or operate a new process) is often
summarized in a production plan, or blueprint. Typically, this is now stored in
electronic format, say, on a computer diskette. This blueprint is non-rival, or,
infinitely expansible, in the above sense. What governs the access to this
technological knowledge, or, put differently, what are the major determinants of
active international technology spillovers? There might be legal constraints such
as patents that allow the owner to exclude others from using the blueprint
knowledge.6 If the focus is on technological feasibility, however, the knowledge
codified in the blueprint can diffuse in any way and pattern in which a file on a
computer disk can be distributed. And since the late 20th century, it can be sent at
very low cost over computer networks to even remote places in the world.

Should one therefore expect that active technology spillovers are, in the
absence of legal constraints, global? Not necessarily. Consider first that from the
point of view of the inventor, the leaking out of knowledge to others is the
opposite of what he or she is interested in. Unless there is an explicit technology
6

Indeed, in most standard models it is assumed that the knowledge is patent-protected.

8

licensing contract, the inventor has the incentive of keeping the knowledge secret.
If international economic relations involve person-to-person contacts of people
who have the technological knowledge and others who do not, this could make it
more difficult for the inventor to prevent knowledge spillovers from occurring.
From the point of view of the learner, international contacts make it easier to
copy foreign technologies. At a broader level, international activity such as
importing, exporting, or FDI might also help to establish and sustain channels of
communication that stimulate cross-border learning of production methods,
product design, organizational methods, consumer preferences, and market
conditions.7

These considerations are strengthened when one explicitly recognizes the
fact that the view of technological knowledge that is limited to codified
knowledge is too narrow. In addition to the information that is codified in the
blueprint, there is other information that must be acquired if the technological
knowledge is to be utilized effectively. Many careful studies of technology and
how it is transferred conculde that only the broad outlines of technological
knowledge are codified—the remainder remains ‘tacit’ (Polanyi 1958).8 In
Polanyi’s view, knowledge is to some extent tacit because the person who is
actively engaged in a problem-solving activity cannot necessarily define (and
hence prescribe) what exactly he or she is doing. In this view, technological

It might also be possible to acquire the technological knowledge embodied in an intermediate
good by taking it apart and reverse-engineering it. This would require importing one unit of a
particular good, but not a substantial quantity of them.
8 The following draws also on Arrow (1969), David (1992), Evenson and Westphal (1995), Teece
(1977), von Hippel (1994), and references given there.
7

9

knowledge is only partially codified because it is impossible or at least very costly
to do so.

Teece (1977), for instance, finds that the non-codified part of the costs of
transferring technology between plants is substantial. In his sample of 26
projects, he estimates that the costs of the transfer were on average almost 20%
of the total project costs.9 It is of course possible to convert tacit to codified
knowledge (software expert systems do just that), and the costs of doing this has
fallen in some areas over recent years. However, also more recent analysis has
shown that non-codified knowledge continues to be important for understanding
patterns in the creation and diffusion of knowledge (von Hippel 1994).
What are the implications of non-codified knowledge for the role of
international economic activity in technology diffusion? Polanyi (1958, 53) argues
that tacit knowledge can be passed on only “by example from master to
apprentice”. A broader view is that non-codified knowledge is usually transferred
through demonstrations, through personal instructions, as well as through the
provision of expert services (David 1992, 221). In general, if knowledge is partly
non-codified, then person-to-person communication becomes relatively more
important for the diffusion of knowledge.

For transferring machinery equipment technology, this share was 36% (Teece 1977, 248).
Teece’s estimates are a lower bound for technology transfer to less developed countries, as his
sample includes to two-thirds relatively advanced countries. He lists the following types of costs
(245-6): pre-engineering of technological exchanges, costs associated with transferring the
process/product design and the associated engineering, R&D personnel costs during the transfer
phase, pre-start-up training and excess manufacturing costs. Teece also shows suggestive
evidence on when these costs are particularly high or low, for instance in relation to similar
production experience (-) or general level of development (-).

9

10

No doubt, the quality of communication between persons at different
locations has dramatically improved recently. However, person-to-person
communication means often still face-to-face communication. Together with the
fact that it is costly for people to move in geographic space, this suggests that the
higher is the relative importance of non-codified knowledge, the more are
technology creation and diffusion geographically centralized.10 Further, engaging
in international economic activity such as trade or FDI is invariably accompanied
by communication, not infrequently in form of face-to-face contacts. From this
perspective of partially-codified knowledge, it appears that not only passive
spillovers--embodied technology in intermediate goods--, but also active
spillovers are linked to the patterns of international economic activity, instead of
being uniformly distributed (or distributable) throughout the world.11

Alternative views on technological knowledge and its diffusion
Evidence supporting this view is provided in von Hippel (1994) and Feldman and Lichtenberg
(1997). The former finds that when technological knowledge is non-codified, the problem-solving
activity must often be located on-site—it cannot be done effectively from a distance. Von Hippel
also finds that when knowledge is non-codified in different locations, optimal business strategy
typically implies to adopt a sequential and iterative, not simultaneous, pattern of problemsolving. Feldman and Lichtenberg (1997) construct measures of tacitness of knowledge for their
study of R&D activities in the European Union. They find that the more tacit knowledge is, the
more centrally located are the R&D activities.
11 Note another distinction frequently made in the literature on spillovers, that between rent and
knowledge spillovers (e.g., Griliches 1995). The former are productivity spillovers only in a
measurement sense, because they occur solely because, for example in computing the productivity
of the intermediate good-using industry, one does not properly take account of the high quality of
the intermediate good. This leads to an overestimate of the productivity of the intermediate-using
industry. Major reasons for that are unavailable, or slowly adjusted price indices. By contrast,
knowledge spillovers are ‘true’ spillovers in the sense that they involve a positive externality. In
practice, it has been difficult to separate these two types of spillovers empirically. Because passive
spillovers as characterized above involve the purchase of goods, they might involve often an
element of rent spillovers. Productivity calculations are also complicated by the need to do this in
a way that accounts for new goods (see Feenstra, Markusen, and Zeile 1994).
10

11

Alternative views include Mankiw (1995) and Parente and Prescott (2000)
who think of technological knowledge as a global pool of knowledge, available to
firms and individuals in all countries. Their explanations for differences in per
capita income across countries differ though. In Mankiw’s view, the explanation
lies in differences in complementary factor accumulation, especially of physical
and human capital.12 Recent analysis suggests that this hypothesis is difficult to
maintain (Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare 1997, Hall and Jones 1999). Instead, a
large part of cross-country differences in income per capita have to do with total
factor productivity (TFP).13

In Parente and Prescott’s (2000) view, even though technological
knowledge is global, productivity differences are not primarily explained by
differences in the availability of rival factors. Instead, the main cause of crosscountry productivity differences is that there exist differences in the actually
employed technological knowledge. According to Parente and Prescott, this
results in turn from cross-country differences in the countries’ resistance to adopt
the world’s frontier technological knowledge.
This emphasis on policy differences resulting from different politicaleconomy equilibria is a priori plausible. At the same time, while policy
12 It often involves noting that rich countries have higher-quality capital than poorer countries.
Differences in technological knowledge are thereby subsumed into differences in the quality of
capital goods. For example, Mankiw (1995, 281) argues that countries share the same production
function, but “when an economy doubles its capital stock, it does not give each worker twice as
many shovels. Instead, it replaces shovels with bulldozers”. Following this line of argument leads
to an analysis of growth from an accounting perspective. It is not very helpful, though, for
explaining the fundamental causes of growth and income differences. See also Romer (1992).
13 See also Prescott (1998) and Easterly and Levine (2001), as well as other contributions at the
recent World Bank conference on cross-country growth regressions, at
http://www.worldbank.org/research/growth/regressions.htm

12

differences play a certain role, it seems at this point ambitious to show that policy
differences are the central reason for cross-country TFP differences. There are
plenty of instances where linking TFP differences to the activities of lobbies, state
bureaucracies, or self-interested politicians is not obvious. More empirical work
is needed that identifies the resistance-to-new-technology factor and shows that
it has major productivity effects at the macro-level.14 Moreover, if technological
knowledge is global and countries differ in their resistance to adopt it, then TFP
is country-specific, and bilateral or spatial characteristics should play no role for
the distribution of technological knowledge in the world. This implication
conflicts with the evidence that I discuss in section 6.

Finally, in a set of papers, Quah has discussed characteristics that might
characterize the knowledge-driven, or ‘weightless’ economy (e.g., Quah 2001a,b).
In his framework, technological knowledge is disembodied, codified, and global,
whereas human capital is embodied, tacit, and local knowledge. This might be a
good starting point to further study international technology diffusion. Instead,
Quah’s main interest is to analyze how certain infinitely expansible product
innovations such as computer software, video entertainment, and genetic
databases might lead to a process of technical change that is much more
influenced by consumers (or, demand) than previously, and less so by
entrepreneurs (or, supply).
Before turning to the discussion of empirical results on international
technology diffusion, I highlight in the following that not all growth effects that
14

The debate surrounding Olson’s (1982) thesis might be instructive as well.

13

have been discussed in this context have to do with international technology
diffusion.

Growth effects that are not related to international technology
diffusion
The degree of international economic activity, from the one extreme of
autarky to the other of full integration, can have important implications for a
country’s productivity through mechanisms other than international technology
spillovers. Among the important ones are:15

Trade and domestic monopoly: The liberalization of international trade
might reduce the monopoly power of domestic firms, thereby affecting pricing
behavior and the efficiency with which domestic resources are utilized (Tybout
2000 discusses the evidence). Clearly, this effect is not related to technological
knowledge diffusion from abroad.16

Trade and knowledge accumulation through learning-by-doing: If
trade liberalization triggers changes in the domestic resource allocation, this
might lead to changes in a country’s growth rate. Young (1991) for instance
develops a model with two countries, North and South, that each produces a

For simplicity, I focus here on international trade, but analogous arguments apply as well to
FDI and other forms of international economic activity.
16
Instead, this mechanism is similar to the “nontechnological” and “policy” determinants of TFP
that are emphasized in Solow (2001) and Klenow (2001), respectively; it is also related to Parente
and Prescott’s (2000) main thesis.
15

14

range of products. A country’s growth rate is determined by the prevailing level of
learning-by-doing, which is the cost-lowering effect from cumulative production.
The potential for learning-by-doing is high for more recently invented products
while for older products, learning-by-doing effects are exhausted. Young shows
that trade liberalization might slow down the rate of growth in the South relative
to autarky. This happens if the North has a comparative advantage in newly
invented products so that trade liberalization leads to a specialization in the
South on goods in which learning-by-doing is exhausted.

Trade and endogenous technical change: Grossman and Helpman (1991,
Ch.6) show that such results can be obtained also in models of endogenous
technical change. Assume that there are two final goods, X and Y, produced with
varying factor intensity, plus an R&D activity that produces inputs for the X good.
Productivity growth is related to X production, because analogous to the static
model of Ethier (1982), an increasing set of specialized intermediate inputs
allows the production of more output with the same amount of inputs. In this
situation, the growth effects of trade liberalization depend on whether it raises or
lowers the relative price of good Y (that is, it again depends on comparative
advantage). If trade liberalization raises it, resources move out of X production
(and the R&D laboratories) and into the Y sector. As a consequence, growth slows
down relative to before. The opposite occurs if trade liberalization lowers the
relative price of good Y.

15

Trade liberalization might have important growth effects through changes
in the domestic resource allocation, although I am not aware of much evidence
that shows this to be the case (see also the overview in Tybout 2000, pp.37-38). It
is worth emphasizing, though, that these particular models do not involve the
international diffusion of technology. This is clear from the fact that it is possible
to find a tax and subsidy policy that affects the domestic resource allocation in
just the same way as trade liberalization does, and which therefore has the same
growth effects. 17 These models highlight the fact that there might be growth
effects from trade liberalization that are not related to international technology
diffusion. Arguably, one might expect the diffusion effects associated with
international trade to be of dominant importance, at least for less developed
countries. I will discuss the available evidence below. In any case, insofar as what
diffuses is additional knowledge, it is difficult to see how this could lower a
country’s growth rate and welfare relative to autarky: access to more, rather than
less, knowledge, just like more choices, should leave a country at least weakly
better off.
I now turn to discussing basic results on the international diffusion of
technology.

17

The standard mechanisms of international technology diffusion are not present in either
Grossman and Helpman’s or Young’s model. In the former model, neither are the specialized
intermediate inputs internationally tradable, nor are there domestic learning effects from foreign
R&D. In the latter model, each country’s stock of knowledge depends only on its range of
production; there is no direct link between domestic and foreign stocks of knowledge. Moreover,
the learning-by-doing stages that the North has passed through are not transferable: they have to
be repeated by the South.

16

3. International technology diffusion: basic
magnitudes
A number of different approaches have been employed to study empirically
the importance of international technology diffusion. The first and largest set of
papers consists of so-called international R&D spillover regressions. 18 This
literature studies the productivity effects of foreign R&D on domestic
productivity. It is analogous to the literature that has examined the effects of
other firms’ R&D on a given firm’s productivity in a closed economy (Griliches
1979, 1995; Scherer 1984). Typically, a production function approach is used to
relate TFP to measures of domestic (R) and foreign R&D (S) activities

ln TFPct = α c + α t + β r ln Rct + β s ln S ct + ε ct ,
where c indexes country and t subscripts time; αc and αt make for a generalized
and time-varying intercept, and εct is an error term. The definition of S, the term
capturing the impact of foreign R&D, is typically given by a weighted sum of
other countries’ R&D:

S ct = ∑ ω cht S ht ,
h≠c

where ωcht is a bilateral weight that captures the relative importance of R&D in
country h for productivity in country c. In the earlier literature on inter-industry
technology diffusion in a given country, the ω are often input-output shares.
More recent studies of international R&D spillovers, for example by Mohnen
(1992) and Coe and Helpman (1995), have employed import shares shares as
18

See Mohnen (2001) for a recent survey.

17

weights. Depending on the particular channel of technology diffusion that
authors analyze, also FDI or other weights have been employed (see section 4
below).

These regressions are partial-equilibrium in nature, and the R&D
expenditures, as well as the weights ω, are often endogenous. In addition,
omitted variables might be causing biases. The work in this literature varies in
the extent to which the authors address these potential problems. At its best, this
approach provides useful information on the long-run average relationship
between R&D and productivity in a reduced-form framework.

The importance of international technology diffusion can be calculated in
a number of ways. One approach is to compare the TFP elasticities of domestic
and foreign R&D. Coe and Helpman (1995) estimate for their sample of 22
industrialized countries a domestic R&D elasticity of about 8% for the 15 smaller
countries, and 23% for the G-7 countries.19 The corresponding elasticities with
respect to foreign R&D are about 12% and 6%, respectively. Thus, for the 15
smaller countries, the effect from foreign R&D is larger than that from domestic
R&D, with a factor of about 1.5. The share of about 20% for foreign R&D in the
total elasticity effect for the G-7 countries is similar to Keller’s (2001c) estimate in
his analysis of the G-7 countries plus Sweden using data at the industry level. By
contrast, Park (1995) in his analysis of aggregate data for ten OECD countries
(including the G-7) estimates that foreign R&D accounts for about two thirds of
19

These are Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States.

18

the total effect of R&D on productivity (domestic R&D elasticity of 7%, foreign
R&D elasticity of 17%).

In a series of papers, Eaton and Kortum (1997, 1999) and Eaton, Gutierrez,
and Kortum (1998) have developed general equilibrium models in which
productivity growth is related to increases in the quality of intermediate goods.20
As is often the case in empirical work based on a structural model, in order to
arrive at a framework that can be estimated, Eaton and Kortum have to make
some strong assumptions. For instance, the quality of technological knowledge
that is discovered in a country in Eaton and Kortum (1999) is a random variable
with a Pareto distribution, while the distribution of the time until it has diffused
to other countries is exponential. Assumptions such as these are difficult to test in
the context of a given model. Eaton and Kortum’s empirical results are thus
better viewed as estimating or simulating a particular model, rather than
selecting one model among several, or testing it.
Eaton and Kortum’s work shows that the pay-off to this can be high. Their
framework allows not only studying the reduced-form relationship between R&D
and productivity, but also the models’ predictions for the transitional adjustment
path to the long-run equilibrium (Eaton and Kortum 1997). They also examine
the effects of changes in economic policy (Eaton, Gutierrez, and Kortum 1998),
and Eaton and Kortum (1999) model R&D and the diffusion of knowledge
together with the related activity of international patenting. With regard to the
relative importance of technology diffusion from abroad, the latter paper
20

This is as in the ‘quality-ladder’ model of Aghion and Howitt (1992); see also Howitt (2000).

19

presents results based on data for the G-5 countries around the year 1988. Eaton
and Kortum estimate that the part of productivity growth that is due to domestic
as opposed to foreign R&D is between 11% and 16% in Germany, France, and the
U.K.; it is around 35% for Japan, and about 60% for the United States (1999,
Table 5).

The recent work by Keller (2001a,b) represents a third approach. Unlike
Eaton and Kortum’s work based on general equilibrium models, Keller studies
the relationship between productivity and foreign R&D in a single-equation,
partial equilibrium framework. And unlike the R&D spillovers literature
discussed above, Keller (2001a,b) estimates the TFP effect of foreign R&D jointly
with the importance of one or more channels of diffusion for foreign R&D. One
can view this as estimating the weights ω of the foreign R&D variable together
with the parameter β that measures the TFP elasticity. Estimating the weights
instead of assuming particular weights that are taken from data tables means to
impose less structure ex-ante. Given how little is known on international
technology diffusion to date, this seems to be reasonable. Using this method,
Keller (2001a) estimates that between 1983 and 1995, the contribution of
technology diffusion from G-5 countries is on average almost 90% of the total
R&D effect on productivity in nine other OECD countries (Table 6).21

These are Australia, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, and
Sweden.
21

20

This shows that irrespective of which particular approach is taken, the
results invariably point to a substantial contribution of foreign technological
activity to domestic productivity. It also seems that the relative contribution of
international technology diffusion to domestic productivity growth is inversely
correlated with economic size and with the level of development.22

4. Channels of technology diffusion
Many authors have studied through which mechanisms, or channels,
international technology diffusion primarily occurs. I first look at work that has
considered international trade.

Trade
Coe and Helpman (1995) are the first to provide evidence on the
importance of trade for international technology diffusion along the lines of
recent theory. Using the spillover regressions framework shown on p.16 with
bilateral import shares as weights, these authors examine two predictions. First,
Coe and Helpman (1995) study whether a country’s productivity is increasing in
the extent to which it imports from high- as opposed to low-knowledge countries
(an import composition effect). Second, for a given composition of imports, these

This would be very important for less developed countries. Primarily due to the much greater
difficulty in obtaining comparable and high-quality data for less developed countries, there is a
relative paucity of results in this regard. See, however, Coe, Helpman, and Hoffmaister (1997),
Connolly (1998), and Mayer (2001), as well as the discussion below.

22

21

authors analyze whether a country’s productivity is higher, the higher is its
overall import share. Coe and Helpman’s regression results suggest that there is
support for both predictions. The authors conclude that international R&D
spillovers are related to the composition of imports, and that the overall level of
imports is important for international technology diffusion as well. Coe, Helpman
and Hoffmaister (1997) find similar effects in their analysis of foreign technology
diffusion from highly industrialized to 77 less developed countries.23

By contrast, Eaton and Kortum (1996) find that once distance and other
influences are controlled for, bilateral imports do not help to predict bilateral
patenting activity, the indicator of international technology diffusion in their
model. Moreover, Keller (1998) repeats the Coe and Helpman (1995) regressions
with counterfactual ‘import’ shares.24 For there to be strong evidence for traderelated international R&D spillovers, he argues, one should estimate a positive
effect from foreign R&D when bilateral import shares are employed, but no
strong effect when counterfactual ‘import’ shares are used. Keller finds similarly
high coefficients and levels of explained variation when counterfactual instead of
actual import shares are used. He concludes that, on the basis of their analysis,
Coe and Helpman’s claim cannot be upheld: the import composition of a country
has not a strong influence on the regression results. 25 Keller’s (1998) results have
led some to doubt the importance of trade for international technology diffusion.

Nadiri and Kim (1996) show results from estimating cost functions in OECD countries; their
approach also uses the bilateral-imports weighted spillover variable.
24 That is, instead of bilateral import shares, Keller (1998) uses counterfactual (or, made-up)
shares in creating the foreign R&D variable S (see p.16).
25 Keller (1997a) presents analogous results in the context of inter-industry technology flows.
23

22

More recent work has strengthened the evidence for import-related
international technology diffusion. Keller (1997b, 2000) has extended his
analysis of estimating international R&D spillovers with counterfactual data by
moving to industry-level data for eight industrialized countries. His results
suggest that import composition might not matter for technology diffusion if
countries’ import patterns are more or less symmetric, but they do matter if
countries receive a relatively high share of its total imports from one particular
country—such as is the case for Canada, for example, which imports about 80%
from the United States.26

Moreover, Xu and Wang (1999) show that the import composition effect is
robust when one considers capital goods trade instead of all-manufacturing
goods trade. Xu and Wang show that if the weights in the construction of the
foreign R&D variable S are capital goods import shares, one obtains an R2 of
77.1%, versus 74.9% with Keller’s (1998) counterfactual shares, and 70.9% in Coe
and Helpman (1995). Also Lumenga-Neso, Olarreaga, and Schiff (2001) have

As Coe and Hoffmaister (1999) emphasize, Keller (1998) creates his counterfactual ‘import’
shares in a way that makes their variance across different simulations rather small, and values
higher than 0.3 are essentially never obtained. Thus, his import shares are not fully random in
that sense. This was first pointed out in 1996 by an anonymous referee at the European Economic
Review to both Keller and the editor, Elhanan Helpman. Keller’s (1998) paper includes therefore
results with the unweighted sum of foreign R&D as well. These do not support the Coe and
Helpman (1995) claim that international R&D spillovers are related to the composition of imports
either, which is Keller’s (1998) point (see his Table 2). In a different context, Keller (1997b, 2000)
shows that certain randomizations of import shares lead to equally strong empirical results as
those based on observed imports, while others do not. He also discusses the relationship between
random import shares and unweighted sum-of-foreign-R&D regressions. Coe and Hoffmaister
(1999) show that for three types of randomizations of import shares, the Coe and Helpman (1995)
framework does not lead to a finding of international R&D spillovers. This means that the
bilateral import shares have some power.

26

23

revisited the results of Coe and Helpman (1995) and Keller (1998). Instead of
computing the foreign knowledge variable as a bilateral-import share weighted
sum of foreign R&D, Lumenga-Neso, Olarreaga, and Schiff construct an
alternative variable that aims at taking account of previous rounds of imports as
well. This captures the case that even if some country c imports only from some
other country h, for instance, the former might still gain access to technology
from countries other than h—if country h has in turn imported from those other
countries before. Using this variable, Lumenga-Neso, Olarreaga, and Schiff find
slightly stronger results than Keller (1998).

Other evidence on the importance of trade for international technology
diffusion includes Sjöholm (1996), who examines citations in patent applications
of Swedish firms to patents owned by inventors in other countries. Patent
citations as indicator for knowledge flows have proven to be useful recently in a
number of other studies (see the following section, section 6, and section 9).
Controlling for a number of other correlates and also conducting an extremebounds analysis, Sjöholm finds a positive correlation between Swedish patent
citations and bilateral imports. This result is consistent with imports contributing
to international knowledge spillovers.

Two recent papers by Eaton and Kortum (2001a,b) also focus on the
importance of trade for the international diffusion of technology. The authors
combine the structure of technology diffusion and growth in Eaton and Kortum
(1999) with that of the Ricardian trade model due to Dornbusch, Fischer, and
24

Samuelson (1977). A country’s productivity level is related to its implicit access to
foreign technology through equipment good imports. Thus, their notion of
technology diffusion is one of passive (embodied) technology diffusion. Transport
costs that increase in geographic distance imply that productivity in remote
countries is relatively low, ceteris paribus, or equivalently, the price of equipment
goods is relatively high. Eaton and Kortum (2001a) use this framework to predict,
for example, that 25% of the cross-country productivity differences among 34
more- as well as less developed countries can be attributed to differences in the
relative price of equipment. It would be interesting to see how international trade
might at the same time increase the likelihood of active knowledge spillovers.
This would also allow the estimation of the relative importance of active and
passive spillovers for international technology diffusion.

The work discussed so far focuses on technology diffusion related to
imports. Learning through exporting, however, might be important as well (e.g.,
Rhee, Ross-Larson, and Pursell 1984). A number of recent studies, including
Bernard and Jensen (1996)--using U.S. data--, and Clerides, Lach, and Tybout
(1998)--using data from Colombia, Mexico, and Morocco--have used micro data
to see whether there is evidence for learning-through-exporting. While exporting
firms tend to be more productive than non-exporters in the cross-section, neither
paper finds robust evidence that past exporting experience (Granger-) causes
improvements in performance once other differences across firms have been

25

taken into account. Thus, the available evidence does not point to strong
learning-through-exporting effects.27

Other mechanisms
Foreign direct investment
Foreign direct investment (FDI) often involves the transfer of knowledge
from one country to another (e.g., Carr, Markusen, and Maskus 2001), making it
a potentially important vehicle for international technology diffusion.28

Lichtenberg and van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie (1996) have analyzed the
importance of FDI for international technology diffusion in thirteen OECD
countries with the same R&D weighting approach that Coe and Helpman (1995)
and Keller (1998) use for imports. Lichtenberg and van Pottelsberghe de la
Potterie (1996) find that a country’s outward FDI gives access to foreign
technology. At the same time, they do not find significant effects from inward
FDI. Baldwin, Braconier, and Forslid (1999) find some positive inward FDI
spillover effects in their industry-level study, but overall, the results are mixed.
To some extent, this might have to do with the fact that good data on bilateral
FDI is available to a much lesser extent than for trade. Therefore, the two above
studies employ data on FDI stocks that is derived from balance-of-payments
For more details see Tybout (2001).
Blomström and Kokko (1998) have recently surveyed a number of ways how FDI could lead to
spillovers.
27

28

26

accounts. However, good measures of multinational activity, such as subsidiary
GDP, sales, or its number of employees, are related to FDI stocks derived from
balance-of-payment data only with a considerable amount of error.29

Xu (2000) uses the Bureau of Economic Analysis’s data on U.S.
multinational enterprise (MNE) activity to study the relationship between U.S.
outward FDI and productivity growth in the host country. His analysis covers
total manufacturing between 1966 and 1994 for 40 countries, of which about half
are more and half are less developed countries. Xu finds generally a positive
correlation between productivity growth and the ratio of subsidiary value added
to host country GDP. This effect is stronger and more robust in the more
developed countries than in the less developed countries.

As the availability of micro data has become greater, the study of FDI
spillovers has increasingly turned to it. Aitken and Harrison (1999) examine data
on Venezuelan plants between 1976 and 1989. They estimate a negative
relationship of increased FDI presence and TFP of domestic plants. This can be
rationalized if the estimates pick up a combination of the knowledge spillover
effect (which is non-negative) and competitiveness or other effects. It could also
arise from multinationals being attracted to industries where domestic
competitors are structurally weak, if the estimation fails to fully control for this
simultaneity effect. In any case, the effects could be short-term responses; as

One important reason for this is that FDI does not necessarily involve net flows of capital,
because the latter can be raised in local capital markets.

29

27

Aitken and Harrison note, their analysis may fail to capture the long-run effects
of FDI (p.617). 30
Girma and Wakelin (2001) use micro-data from the U.K. Census of
Production to study the effects of inward FDI in the United Kingdom. The
authors focus on the electronics industry between 1980 and 1992. Girma and
Wakelin (2001) test whether plant productivity growth is systematically
correlated to the ratio of foreign-owned plants to all plants in a given four-digit
industry (and also by foreign investor country). Other variables are FDI in a given
geographic region within the U.K., and FDI in a given two-digit industry. The first
tests for intra-industry FDI spillovers, the second and third for FDI spillovers
from geographic and technological proximity, respectively. The authors find a
positive productivity effect from Japanese and Other foreign FDI, but not from
U.S. FDI. There is also evidence in support of FDI spillovers from technological
proximity, but no evidence that within-region spillovers are stronger than those
across regions.31

Haskel, Pereira, and Slaughter (2001) use the same database, but add both
more years and plants from all of manufacturing to the sample. They confirm the
Girma and Wakelin (2001) findings that technological proximity seems to matter
30 FDI presence in Aitken and Harrison (1999) is measured as the share of employment of
foreign-owned firms in total employment. This variable can change without a change in
employment by foreign-owned firms. Aitken and Harrison report, however, that including foreign
employment and domestic employment separately in the regression leads to similar results
(p.610). This point applies also to the studies by Girma and Wakelin (2001) and Haskel, Pereira,
and Slaughter (2001), discussed below. I have not seen a discussion of this point in the latter
papers, so I assume that it does not alter the results there either.
31 Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Henderson (1993) as well as Adams and Jaffe (1996) find evidence that
distance matters for domestic technology diffusion. To be consistent with that, Girma and
Wakelin’s result might have to be interpreted as saying that conditional on technology coming
from abroad, geographic distance within a country does not matter. See also section 6 below.

28

for FDI spillovers, whereas geographic proximity within the U.K. does not. By
contrast, Haskel, Pereira, and Slaughter (2001) estimate positive spillovers from
U.S. and French FDI, whereas Japanese FDI is here negatively correlated with
productivity growth.32

Kinoshita (2000) presents firm-level evidence on the effects of inward FDI
in the Czech Republic between 1995 and 1998.33 Unlike the other studies,
Kinoshita has information on R&D expenditures of the domestic firms, which
might be an important omitted variable. Controlling for R&D, Kinoshita fails to
find positive spillovers from inward FDI into the Czech Republic; however, there
is a robust effect if the FDI variable is interacted with the firm’s own R&D
spending. A plausible interpretation of this is that the effects of international
technology diffusion through FDI are conditional on a relatively high ‘absorptive
capacity’ (Cohen and Levinthal 1989), as measured by own R&D investments.34

The differences in results relative to Girma and Wakelin (2001) could be in part related to
differences in the estimation technique. Girma and Wakelin favor a variant of the Olley and Pakes
(1996) technique, whereas Haskel, Pereira, and Slaughter (2001) employ a time differencing
approach. The former method is conceptually more appealing, but it also requires making more
specific assumptions that are difficult to test. Based on supplemental results for the Girma and
Wakelin study using the time differencing method—provided to me by Sourafel Girma--, I can
compare their FDI spillover results using the modified Olley and Pakes technique with those
based on time differencing. At a 5% significance level, there are qualitative differences in 3 out of
10 of the key estimated coefficients in their Table 7. This does not settle the question of which
estimates are closer to the true parameters. However, in my view it suggests that to examine
whether some of the assumptions in the Olley and Pakes framework can be tested or generalized
is an interesting research project.
33 The data comes from two surveys of the Czech Statistical Office. Because there is relatively little
documentation on these so far, some caution is required in interpreting what follows.
34 Haskel, Pereira, and Slaughter (2001) find the FDI effects to be strongest for plants at the lowto medium range of the distribution of skill intensities (skilled to unskilled workers); this seems to
be not the plants with the highest absorptive capacity. Kinoshita (2000) also distinguishes FDI
spillover effects for domestically-owned from those for foreign-owned firms, finding that only the
former benefit. It would be interesting to see whether this also holds in the UK sample.
32

29

Globermann, Kokko, and Sjöholm (2000) analyze 220 patent applications
by Swedish MNEs and non-MNEs in the year of 1986. These applications contain
patent citations that the authors relate to both inward FDI from the cited
countries as well as to outward FDI to the cited countries. Using a conditional
logit estimation framework, Globermann, Kokko, and Sjöholm (2000) estimate a
robust correlation between outward FDI and patent citations—not only for
MNEs, but also for non-MNEs--, whereas there is none on the inward side.
Branstetter (2001a) analyzes a larger number of patent applications and patent
citations between the U.S. and Japan.35 While Branstetter (2001a) can measure
FDI only by establishment counts, he can control for the firms’ R&D spending,
which is a plus (see above). The data also allows him to distinguish product
development subsidiaries—which presumably are relatively knowledge-intensive-from other subsidiaries. Branstetter finds that more FDI is associated with more
patent citations, both from U.S. firms to Japanese firms and vice versa.

Communication patterns
Some evidence has begun to emerge on the importance of communication
for international technology diffusion. Recent innovations have improved the
communication and monitoring abilities between geographically distant plants,
which has made it easier to outsource certain stages of production. This suggests
that communication between geographically distant persons might also play a
more important role today than it used to. At the same time, this does not

35

This is based on data for Japanese-owned FDI in the United States.

30

necessarily mean that person-to-person communication patterns have become
aspatial, for at least two reasons. First, remote communication might only be an
imperfect substitute for face-to-face communication, and this point is reinforced
if knowledge is to some extent tacit. Second, communication is to some extent
spatial as long as international trade is, because trade requires some
communication to develop in the first place. Moreover, more communication is
also the consequence of international trade. Analogous arguments apply to FDI
and other international economic activities.

Keller (2001a,b) uses the imperfect proxy of bilateral language skills in the
population at large to examine the importance of communication patterns for
international technology diffusion among OECD countries. His results suggest
that differences in communication patterns might have quite strong effects. For
instance, if the share of English speakers in Spain (at 17%) would rise to the level
of the share of English speakers in the Netherlands (at 77%), Keller (2001a)
estimates that for Spain, this would be equivalent to a 15% boost of technology
diffusion from English-speaking countries.

Simultaneous analysis of multiple channels of
technology diffusion
Although a few recent studies have considered several channels of
technology diffusion simultaneously, the majority of them still examines only one
31

channel in isolation.36 As documented by Kraay, Isoalaga, and Tybout (2001),
firms do not typically engage in one type of international activity by itself; rather,
they are engaged in several of them. Kraay, Isoalaga, and Tybout use information
on whether a firm is (i) importing intermediate goods, (ii) exporting, or (iii)
foreign owned, as well as combinations of these. As in Clerides, Lach, and Tybout
(1998), the data comes from three panels of firms in Morocco, Mexico, and
Colombia. Kraay, Isoalaga, and Tybout find no significant effects of international
economic interactions on the firm’s marginal cost or the quality of the good that
it produces. By contrast, Keller (2001b)’s industry-level analysis of spillovers
among the G-7 countries finds significant effects for imports, inward FDI, as well
as communication links. In a breakdown of the total effect, he attributes more
than 50% of the total effect to imports, and the remainder to equal parts to FDI
and communication links.

5. Heterogeneity and inter-industry effects
R&D spending is highly concentrated by industry. Among OECD countries,
for instance, Keller (2001a) reports that about 80% of all manufacturing R&D is
conducted in four three-digit ISIC industries: chemical products (including
drugs), electrical and non-electrical machinery (including computers and
telecommunication equipment), and transportation equipment. Because it is a
priori plausible that international technology diffusion is most important in
industries that account for a substantial part of all R&D, some authors have
See, however, Globermann, Kokko, and Sjöholm (2000) and Lichtenberg and van Pottelsberghe
de la Potterie (1996), who both analyze trade and FDI.

36

32

restricted their analysis right from the start to such ‘high-technology’ industries
(e.g., Bernstein and Mohnen 1998). Other authors have tried to compare the
magnitude of effects across industries. These studies fall primarily into the
following two broad categories.

A first set of papers, including Coe, Helpman, and Hoffmaister (1997) and
Meyer (2001), is based on studies that explore the importance of international
trade as a mechanism of international technology diffusion (see also Xu and
Wang 1999, discussed in section 4 above). Using foreign knowledge stocks that
are constructed as import-weighted sums of R&D in industrialized countries,
Coe, Helpman and Hoffmaister (1997) find stronger and more robust evidence
for North-South spillovers using machinery and equipment import data (SITC
class 7) than employing either all-manufacturing or total import data.37 Meyer
(2001) argues that this includes still many consumption and equipment goods
that are unlikely to lead to much technology diffusion. His focus on machinery
imports is confirmed in the sense that the machinery-imports based variable
enters with a coefficient that is twice as large as in the corresponding regression
using the variable based on all SITC imports (Meyer 2001, Tables 6,8). 38

Another way to examine heterogeneity is to see whether the estimated
spillover effects vary in magnitude across industries. Keller (2001a,b) analyzes

37 Connolly (1998) in her cross-country growth analysis of innovation and imitation uses the SITC
class 7 data as well.
38 For similar reasons, Keller (1997b, 2000) uses disaggregated data as well. He relates data on
specialized machinery imports--at the three- and four-digit SITC level—to productivity at the twoand three-digit ISIC class level.

33

panels of twelve manufacturing industries. Eight of these twelve industries
account for only about 20% of all manufacturing R&D, whereas—as mentioned
earlier--the remaining four industries make up for the remaining 80%. Keller
shows separate regression results for the sample of low-R&D industries,
estimating that the elasticity of TFP with respect to R&D there is only about 70%
of the average elasticity for all twelve industries. In his study of trade and
technology diffusion in Latin America using the spillover regressions framework
from above, Blyde (2001) finds stronger effects from OECD imports than from
Latin American imports. He attributes this result primarily to the fact that OECD
imports have a higher embodied technology content than Latin American
imports.

These results are consistent with international technology spillovers varying
greatly in strength across different set of goods. Another literature has started to
assess the importance of international technology diffusion from one set of
products to another. In particular, some authors have suggested that advances in
ICTs might have strong productivity effects in other industries, perhaps even
abroad. Gera, Gu, and Lee’s (1999) estimates of technology spillovers from the
U.S. to Canada suggest that technology spillovers embodied in ICT imports from
the U.S. have about four times the effect on labor productivity in Canadian
industries as spillovers embodied in non-ICT imports.
Keller’s (2001c) analysis provides an estimate of productivity effects from four
different sources of R&D: domestic R&D as well as foreign R&D, both in the same
industry as well as in other industries. Using an input-output matrix to model
34

inter-industry technology flows, his findings suggest that the importance of
foreign R&D outside the industry itself is as important for productivity as the
foreign R&D within the industry.39

6. Geographic localization of international
technology diffusion
It was noted earlier that income convergence depends on whether
technology spillovers are local or global, with strong international diffusion
favoring convergence and geographically localized diffusion making divergence
more likely. Thus, a number of authors, including Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and
Henderson (1993), Irwin and Klenow (1994), Jaffe and Trajtenberg (1998), Eaton
and Kortum (1999), and Branstetter (2001b), provide results on whether
technology diffusion within a country is stronger than across countries.
Using patent citations as their measure of knowledge flows, Jaffe,
Trajtenberg, and Henderson (1993) compare the geographic location of patent
citations with that of the cited patents in the United States. Their key finding is
that U.S. patents are significantly more often cited by other U.S. patents than
they are cited by foreign patents. Branstetter (2001b) uses R&D and patenting
data on U.S. and Japanese firms to compute weighted R&D spillover stocks
analogous to Coe and Helpman’s (1995) bilateral import share weights.40

See also the evidence on spillovers in technologically proximate fields in the section on FDI
above.
40 Patenting data by technological field allows Branstetter to compute weights that are increasing
in the similarity of two firms’ patenting activities; this captures the idea that R&D expenditures of
39

35

Branstetter finds that within-country spillovers are much stronger than betweencountry spillovers. The work on patenting and international technology diffusion
by Eaton and Kortum (1999) and Jaffe and Trajtenberg (1998) supports this
result as well.

However, Irwin and Klenow’s (1994) study of learning-by-doing spillovers
in the semiconductor industry finds the opposite.41 These authors estimate that
for eight vintages of semiconductors introduced between 1974 and 1992, the
learning spillovers from one U.S. firm to another U.S. firm are not significantly
stronger than those between an U.S. firm and a foreign firm. The different results
might be obtained because Irwin and Klenow’s learning-by-doing spillovers,
which are identified from the effects of cumulative production on market shares,
are different from knowledge spillovers as measured in the other studies.42 It
could also be due to the market structure of the semiconductor industry, which
had only relatively few firms that were located primarily in the U.S. and in Japan
during this period.
In order to make further progress, it might therefore be necessary to study
geographic effects in technology diffusion beyond the basic “border effect”. The
most direct approach is to analyze international technology spillovers conditional
on geographic distance and the location of countries relative to each other. By
another firm is more likely to generate spillovers, the closer the two firms are in technology space
(see Jaffe 1986).
41 Learning-by-doing spillovers are most closely related to human capital models (e.g. Lucas 1988,
1993), not to models of endogenous technological change. However, it is not clear that empirical
analysis has been able to separate one from the other so far. I thus include the following
discussion.
42 In particular, the effects captured by Irwin and Klenow are much broader than the notion of
knowledge flows as evidenced by patent citations.

36

estimating whether there is geographic decay in the strength of technology
spillovers, Keller (2001a,b) has done this for OECD countries. For example, if
geographic proximity matters for benefiting from international technology
diffusion, then technology created in the U.S. should have a stronger influence on
productivity in Canada than in Germany; and the latter effect should in turn be
stronger than the effect in Australia, ceteris paribus.
Keller (2001a) uses industry-level data from 14 OECD countries between
1970 and 1995. He relates productivity in nine mostly smaller OECD countries to
R&D conducted in the G-5 countries, and allows for the possibility that the
strength of the R&D effects are conditional on a country’s bilateral distance to the
G-5 countries. He estimates a simple exponential decay function:

ln TFPcit = β ln Rcit + γ ∑ Rhit × e −δD  + α' X + ε cit .
h≠c


ch

Here, Rh is R&D in the G-5 country h, and Dch is the geographic distance between
countries c and h. The vector X is a set of other variables that help to control for
the effects of simultaneity. Of key interest in this framework is the parameter δ:
for δ> 0, variation in productivity levels is best accounted for by giving a lower
weight to R&D conducted in countries that are located relatively far away,
whereas if δ=0, then geographic distance and relative location do not matter.
Keller (2001a) estimates δ to be positive, which is consistent with the geographic
localization of international technology diffusion.43

See also Bottazzi and Peri’s (1999) analysis of geographic effects in the diffusion of technology
among European regions.

43

37

What is the magnitude of this effect? The exponential specification allows
to compute the ‘half-life of technology’ in terms of distance-- the distance after
which half of the technological knowledge that originates from a technology
sending country has disappeared. Keller (2001a) estimates it to be only about
1,200 kilometers. This corresponds to a very rapid geographic decay. If literally
true, it implies that for instance Australia, with its remote geographic location
relative to the G-5 countries, benefits extremely little from international
technology diffusion. Instead of analyzing technology diffusion from the G-5 to
mostly smaller OECD countries, Keller (2001b) studies technology diffusion
among the G-7 countries, which account for about 90% of the world’s R&D
spending. Using similar methods, he confirms the finding of localization of
technology diffusion, estimating a half-life of technology between 800 and 1,900
kilometers.

From an economic viewpoint, the finding that geographic distance matters
is only the first step, of course. The question is, why does distance matter? At a
prescriptive level, it is clearly impossible to design economic policies that “move
Australia geographically closer to the G-5 countries”, at least in a literal sense.
Thus it is important to see whether the geography effect can be related to the
economic interactions across countries, including those discussed in section 4
above.
Keller (2001b) considers the technology diffusion channels of imports,
FDI, and communication. He introduces variables that measure the strength of
each of the respective bilateral channels in analogy to geographic distance in the
38

equation on page 36. According to his analysis, each channel individually has a
positive effect on international technology diffusion. When the channels of
imports, FDI, and communication are considered together with distance, Keller
does not estimate a geographic localization effect anymore.44 This suggests that a
substantial portion of the distance effect in technology diffusion, and may be all
of it, can be accounted for by differences in imports, FDI, and communication
links across countries. 45

7. Changes in the scope and strength of diffusion
over time
Today’s level of economic integration in the world is high by historical
standards (e.g., Feenstra 1995). International trade has been growing faster than
income, and transport costs for goods have been falling. Multinational activity
has been growing faster than trade, spurred in part by the development of new
communication technologies. And the Internet is considered by many to be the
primary symbol of a globally integrated world.
What does this mean for technological diffusion? Is there now a common
pool of global technology, and distance is, as some have suggested, “dead”? The

Keller’s (2001b) results suggest that communication patterns are particularly effective in
accounting for the geographic localization effect (see his Table 7). This, however, might be specific
to the particular sample, where Japan is located most remotely and communicates the least
according to Keller’s data.
45 See also Sjöholm (1996) who finds that bilateral geographic distance between Sweden and other
countries has no robust effect on the number of citations in Swedish patent applications, once
differences in bilateral international trade have been controlled for.
44

39

recent papers by Keller (2001a,b) provide some initial evidence on this. He
estimates whether the parameter that captures localization in his specification
has changed over time. Keller finds that the absolute value of the distance
parameter has fallen substantially between the mid-1970s and the 1990s. This is
consistent with a strong decline over time in the degree to which technology is
geographically localized. It constitutes some initial quantitative evidence that
technological knowledge has become less country-specific recently.

8. Major determinants of successful international
technology diffusion
There are big differences in the degree of success that countries have in
adopting foreign technology. Another strand of the literature has therefore asked
what the major determinants of successful technology diffusion from abroad are.
Differences in the degree of success of technology adoption could mean that
income variation in the world is either increasing (divergence) or decreasing
(convergence) over time. There are some preliminary findings suggesting that
between the years 1983 and 1995, technology diffusion from the G-7 countries
had stronger effects on growth in the relatively rich than in the poorer countries
(Keller 2001d). This might in part explain the trend towards income divergence
for the world as a whole during this period.

Two determinants of successful technology diffusion that have been
emphasized are human capital (Nelson and Phelps 1966) and R&D (Cohen and
40

Levinthal 1989). Both are associated with the notion of absorptive capacity, the
idea that a firm or country needs to have a certain type of skill in order to be able
to successfully adopt foreign technological knowledge.46 This can be, first of all,
in form of science and engineering human capital. It can also be in form of
another factor, first emphasized by Cohen and Levinthal (1989): a firm might
need to invest itself into R&D. These authors argue that this is critical to enabling
the firm to understand and evaluate new technological trends and innovations,
which is a necessary condition for successful technology adoption.

Along these lines, Eaton and Kortum (1996) find that inward technology
diffusion as measured by international patenting is increasing in the level of a
country’s human capital. Xu (2000) provides evidence suggesting that the reason
why relatively rich countries benefit from hosting U.S. multinational subsidiaries,
while poorer countries do not as much has to do with a threshold level of human
capital in the host country. Caselli and Coleman (2001) use data on imports of
office, computing, and accounting machinery as a measure of inward technology
diffusion, arguing that many countries do not have a domestic computer
industry, so that computer technology comes necessarily from abroad. They find
that computer imports are positively correlated with measures of human capital,
which is consistent with the results by Eaton and Kortum (1996) and Xu (2000).
In these three papers, the measures of human capital have only a quantity
dimension, the average number of years of schooling or school enrolment in the
population. Hanushek and Kimko (2000) have recently argued that the quality
46

Keller (1996) presents a model of absorptive capacity in a growth context.

41

dimension of human capital is at least as important. Their results using
standardized science and engineering test scores for around thirty countries
seems to bear this out. I expect that as test score data becomes available for a
larger set of less developed countries, it will be able to show that science and
engineering skills are important in facilitating technology diffusion.

Griffith, Redding, and Van Reenen (2000a,b) have recently emphasized
the importance of indigenous R&D to facilitate technology diffusion from abroad
(see also Kinoshita 2000, discussed in section 4 above). Griffith, Redding, and
Van Reenen (2000a) use industry-level data from twelve OECD countries for the
years 1974 to 1990 to study what are the main determinants of productivity
dynamics in this sample. The authors construct a productivity gap measure,
defined as TFP relative to TFP in the leader country; this is a measure of the
potential for productivity catch-up. Griffith, Redding, and Van Reenen (2000a)
find that subsequent TFP growth is negatively related to the productivity gap,
which is consistent with productivity convergence. If the productivity gap
variable is interacted with R&D, the authors estimate a strong negative
coefficient. This is consistent with absorptive capacity being empirically
important, because it says that catch-up is particularly rapid if there are
substantial R&D investments in low-productivity industries.47
I now turn to a summary and some concluding remarks.

These authors also find that interacting human capital with the productivity gap leads to a
smaller effect.
47

42

9. Summary and implications
It is evident from my discussion that the literature that empirically
quantifies the effects of international technology diffusion is a fairly recent one.
While we know today much more than we did merely a couple of years ago, there
are only few results that are solidly established at this point. To date, different
strands of research on a particular topic give seemingly or actually conflicting
answers; some of the results that I have reviewed above might still be overturned,
and many important topics have not been considered yet at all. Nevertheless, I
will try to draw some general lessons from what we know right now.

In general, there is a substantial amount of evidence that underlines the
importance of international technology diffusion for growth and development.
Once authors allow for technology to be either of domestic or international
origin, I am not aware of studies that did not find international sources to be
important.48 The evidence so far suggests that the relative importance of foreign
sources for productivity growth is decreasing in size and level of development. It
is probably no exaggeration to believe that the relative importance of foreign
technology in most less developed countries is at least 90%, and probably higher.
At the same time, there is no indication that international learning is inevitable or
48

Does this matter relative to analyses that emphasize differences in the endowment with qualityadjusted capital (Mankiw 1995) or in policies towards technology adoption (Parente and Prescott
2000)? It is true that at a given point in time, the process of international technology diffusion
must manifest itself in cross-country technology differences, which translate into income
differences. That all approaches will in the end lead to some statistics in the national income
accounts is not surprising—after all, each of them tries to explain GDP. The important questions
are rather: which framework is helpful for thinking about productivity growth, and which is useful
to guide economic policy towards raising productivity growth.

43

automatic, merely a function of what Gerschenkron (1962) has called economic
backwardness. Instead, differential learning effects seem to be in part explained
by the extent and the way in which firms of different countries engage in
international economic activities. What is the evidence on this so far?

International trade has been a suggested as a major channel for technology
diffusion early on. I think that the refinements of R&D spillover regressions in
response to the papers by Coe and Helpman (1995) and Keller (1998) now point
to a robust link between imports and technology diffusion. This evidence is
strengthened by results from relating patent citations to import patterns as well
as by estimating general equilibrium models of embodied technology diffusion.
While the evidence using micro data is much weaker, especially on learning
effects from exporting, my sense is that at least qualitatively, trade facilitates
international technology diffusion. Some results, for instance by Lumenga-Neso,
Olarreaga, and Schiff (2001), indicate that there might be much to be learned
from future work that studies the full dynamics of trade and technology diffusion
instead of only the long-run stationary relationships.

On FDI as a mechanism of technology diffusion, the results so far are
mixed. The result that FDI does not necessarily lead to strong positive spillovers
is a sensible one. After all, a cornerstone of the theory of FDI says that firms
choose to operate through a fully-owned subsidiary instead of through joint
ventures or technology licensing because FDI helps to keep the private return to
technology investments internal to the firm—that is, no leaking out of knowledge.
44

In general, the evidence for positive effects from inward FDI is stronger for
more developed than for less developed countries. This might have to do with the
fact that outsourcing of relatively low-skill activities is more likely for NorthSouth FDI than for North-North FDI (e.g., Hanson, Mataloni, and Slaughter
2001). The former could have a lower learning potential than the latter, not
necessarily because the activities are different as such, but because they are
integrated with the host country economy to different degrees (in terms of
backward and forward linkages).49 At any rate, the fact that the only study of
those discussed above finding positive effects from inward FDI in a non-OECD
country is one where firm-level data on R&D is available--Kinoshita (2000)-suggests that local effort in adopting advanced foreign technology is very
important.

Other mechanisms such as person-to-person communication have in my
view not been analyzed to a sufficient degree yet. In part, this seems to have to do
with a paucity of relevant data. This channel is also difficult to separate from
trade and FDI, because the ease of communication is affecting the likelihood of
trade relations, for example. To some extent, the relatively large contribution of
trade and the smaller contribution of communication estimated in Keller (2001b)
might simply reflect that trade is a more proximate correlate of international
technology diffusion than communication is.

The processing plants along the U.S.-Mexican border (maquiladoras) might be a good example
of FDI with relatively few backward and forward linkages.
49

45

The literature on technology spillovers has moved increasingly away from
single-channel analyses to multiple-channel analyses, or at least to work that
simultaneously controls for overall (not-further-specified-) spillovers. To analyze
multiple channels especially in the context of a fully-specified general equilibrium
model is not easy, but I believe that the returns from doing this would be high.

There are a number of results suggesting that the strength of technology
diffusion across different sets of products varies: for certain types of high-tech
products, international technology diffusion could easily be two or three times as
strong as for the average manufacturing good, ceteris paribus. However, it is also
true that price deflators for R&D-intensive products are, due to fast-rising
product quality, particularly hard to calculate. While it is plausible that active and
passive spillovers associated with high-tech products are larger than those
associated with lower-tech products, a part of the estimated difference might be
spurious.
The question to what extent foreign technology diffuses throughout the
domestic economy, or affects only a small segment of it is a subject that deserves
further analysis. As the recent debate on whether advances in ICTs have raised
the structural rate of growth in the U.S. and elsewhere has begun to illustrate, the
optimistic view about future productivity growth very much depends on
economy-wide diffusion. The result that there are FDI spillovers in
technologically proximate areas--outside of the narrowly-defined FDI industry
itself--by Girma and Wakelin (2001) and Haskel, Pereira, and Slaughter (2001) is
interesting in this context.
46

Work on the level of geographic localization of technology diffusion has
begun to shed light on whether technology diffusion is a force towards
convergence or divergence. It would be useful to extend this analysis to a broad
set of countries, which would allow to forecast what will happen to the world’s
distribution of income. The same is true for the result by Keller (2001a,b) that
technology has become less localized. It is important to find out whether that has
happened only among OECD countries, or also in a broader set of countries: has
technology become increasingly global, or merely more common among the
relatively rich countries?
We also know very little right now about what are the primary causes that
have led to this lower degree of knowledge localization among OECD countries.
Learning more about these causes is important for thinking about what kind of
policies might be effective in fostering the diffusion of technology from abroad.

Other important issues include the following. First, empirical studies of
international technology diffusion provide to some extent different results
because of conceptual and measurement differences. One important issue is how
narrow or broad the concept of knowledge diffusion is. Patent citations are the
narrowest measure that has been used, which is followed by patents or patent
applications per se. A broader notion of technology diffusion is implicitly utilized
by studies that infer international technology diffusion from the relationship
between foreign R&D and productivity. The least narrow notion of technology
spillovers is implied when some measure of international economic activity is
47

related to productivity (e.g., the share of foreign-owned employment in total
employment in much of the work on FDI spillovers).

The best measure of spillovers in the sense of an externality is probably a
patent citation. All other measures might pick up also market-based technology
transactions (such as royalty payments and licensing fees) and, probably more
importantly, the outcome of changes in the competitive position of firms. These
effects are not externalities, and they might have different welfare implications.
However, a well-known problem of using patent statistics—both applications and
citations—is that technological knowledge is not all patented (Griliches 1990
provides a broader discussion). This could be because applying for a patent, or
citing another patent, is a strategic decision of the firm. Even if this is not an
issue, as long as a large part of knowledge is tacit, patent statistics will necessarily
miss that part, because codification is necessary for patenting to occur.50

Thus, while some approaches to identify technology spillovers capture
more than the pure externality effect, patent statistics might capture less than
what we are interested in. Because a clearly dominating measure to identify
technology diffusion is not available, there are good reasons for applying different
approaches, as long as the relative advantages and disadvantages are recognized.

50 It is also worth keeping in mind that the number of patent applications differs across countries
because the propensity to patent seems to differ across countries. For example, Eaton and Kortum
(1996) scale down the number of Japanese patents by a factor of 4.9 for this reason, an approach
that is widely used in the literature. The value of 4.9 is based on a 1992 working paper by Okada.

48

Second, a promising development for future empirical work on
international technology diffusion is the increasing availability of large micro
(firm or plant) level data sets. At times, there are sometimes exaggerated
expectations. Micro-level data allow avoiding composition and aggregation biases
that are often present in industry- and aggregate-level analysis. Other issues
seem to be becoming even more pressing at the firm-level, such as the
unavailability of price deflators. And to interpret a cross-sectional correlation of
foreign ownership and productivity as evidence for FDI spillovers would be just
inappropriate at the firm level as it is at a more aggregate level. As the studies
discussed above indicate, however, micro-level data can help to take a major step
forward. The biggest contribution of micro-level data sets comes in my view from
a better estimation of micro behavior, as the data records the outcome of
economic decisions right at the decision-taking level. Empirical micro studies of
technology diffusion that reach their full potential involve probably modeling the
micro behavior as well.

Third, the evidence reviewed above indicates that micro-level studies paint
often a more pessimistic picture on the strength of learning externalities through
international economic activity than industry-level or aggregate studies do. This
could be because the former avoid certain biases (see above); it might also have to
do with the fact that data on the learning effort of host country firms has typically
not been available. A third reason could be that micro-level studies so far are not
based on a framework that explicitly allows for learning and spillover
externalities between firms. That is, so far the micro evidence is based on ‘no49

externality’ models. Future empirical work will hopefully employ models where
the presumed learning effects from international economic activity exist as a
matter of theory. At the same time, the empirical analysis should avoid picking up
spurious effects.

What are the policy implications of this literature? The evidence is not
strong enough yet to provide support for specific policy measures, such as a
particular subsidy to a multinational enterprise for locating in a country. This
would require more agreement on quantitative effects than there is right now. At
this point, the results suggest that the international dimension of technological
change is of key importance for most countries. In this situation, a closed-off
international economic regime must have detrimental welfare consequences for a
country.

There is also evidence that the relative importance of the international
technology diffusion has been increasing with the level of economic integration in
the world. This suggests that the performance advantage of outward-oriented
economies over inward-oriented economies will be higher in the future than it is
today. What if future research were to establish that international technology
diffusion raises productivity more in advanced than in less developed countries?
The implication for less developed countries would not be that a turn towards
autarky is beneficial--on the contrary, given the evidence on positive productivity
effects from international technology diffusion. Rather, if the benefits from

50

operating in an international economic environment differ across countries, this
suggests to investigate further the major reasons for this—what works, and why?

While there is no consensus yet on the exact magnitude of spillover
benefits, it is clear that well-functioning markets and an undistorted trade- and
foreign investment regime are conducive to these learning effects. However, the
evidence suggests that the latter are quite difficult to pin down. For one, it does
not seem to be primarily a matter of simply specializing on high-tech goods.
Rather, the goods characteristics are only part of what is important. India, for
example, aimed at producing relatively advanced products during its era of
import substitution policy, but their quality was low compared to international
standards. In contrast, South-East Asian countries such as Hong Kong and South
Korea were initially specializing in relatively low-tech products, and moved
successfully into the range of higher-tech products only gradually.

Instead, technological knowledge spillovers appear to be resulting from a
deliberate commitment to learning and matching international performance
standards through ongoing interaction with foreigners. Local efforts are clearly
necessary for successful technology adoption as well. At the same time, the
ongoing interaction with foreign firms and consumers seems to be a process of
knowledge discovery for firms that cannot be had from interacting only with
other domestic firms. To model as well as empirically capture these in a
convincing way continues to be a challenge.

51

Bibliography
Adams, J. and A. Jaffe (1996), ''Bounding the effects of R&D: An investigation
using matched establishment-firm data'', RAND Journal of Economics 27: 700721.
Aghion, P., and P. Howitt (1998), Endogenous Growth Theory. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Aghion, P., and P. Howitt (1992), ''A Model of Growth through Creative
Destruction'', Econometrica 60: 323-351.
Aitken, B., and A. Harrison (1999), ''Do domestic firms benefit from foreign
direct investment? Evidence from Venezuela'', American Economic Review 89:
605-618.
Arrow, K. (1969), ''Classificatory notes on the production and transmission of
technological knowledge'', American Economic Review Paper and Proceedings
59: 29-35.
Baldwin, R., H. Braconier, and R. Forslid (1999), ''Multinationals, endogenous
growth and technological spillovers: Theory and evidence'', CEPR Discussion
Paper, #2155.
Bernstein, J., and P. Mohnen (1998), ''International R&D Spillovers between U.S.
and Japanese R&D Intensive Sectors'', Journal of International Economics 44:
315-38.
Blyde, J. (2001), ''Trade and Technology Diffusion in Latin-America'', InterAmerican Development Bank Working Paper, Washington, D.C.
Blomström, M., and A. Kokko (1998), ''Multinational corporations and
spillovers'', Journal of Economic Surveys 12: 247-277.
Bottazzi, L., and G. Peri (1999), ''Innovation, Demand, and Knowledge Spillovers:
Theory and Evidence from European Regions'', CEPR Working Paper No. 2279,
London, U.K., October.
Branstetter, L. (2001a), ''Is foreign direct investment a channel of knowledge
spillovers? Evidence from Japan’s FDI in the United States'', NBER Working
Paper # 8015.
Branstetter, L. (2001b), ''Are Knowledge Spillovers International or Intranational
in Scope? Microeconometric Evidence from the U.S. and Japan'', Journal of
International Economics 53: 53-79.

52

Carr, D., J. Markusen, and K. Maskus (2001), ''Estimating the knowledge-driven
model of the multinational enterprise'', American Economic Review 91: 693-708.
Caselli, F., and W. John Coleman II (2001), ''Cross-country technology diffusion:
the case of computers'', American Economic Review P.P. 91: 328-335.
Clerides, S., S. Lach, and J. Tybout (1998), ''Is learning by exporting important?
Micro-dynamic evidence from Colombia, Mexico, and Morocco'', Quarterly
Journal of Economics 113: 903-948.
Coe, D.T., and E. Helpman (1995), ''International R&D Spillovers'', European
Economic Review 39: 859-887.
Coe, D., E. Helpman, and A. Hoffmaister (1997), ''North-South spillovers'',
Economic Journal 107: 134-149.
Coe, D., and A. Hoffmaister (1999), ''Are there international R&D spillovers
among randomly matched trade partners? A response to Keller'', IMF working
paper 99/18, February.
Cohen, W., and D. Levinthal (1989), ''Innovation and learning: The two faces of
R&D'', Economic Journal 99: 569-596.
Connolly, M. (1998), ''The dual nature of trade: Measuring its impact on
imitation and growth'', working paper, Duke University, December.
David, P. (1992), ''Knowledge, property, and the systems dynamics of
technological change'', in Summers/Shah (eds.), Proceedings of the World Bank
Annual Conference on Development Economics 1992, pp. 215-248.
Dornbusch, R., S. Fischer, and P. Samuelson (1977), ''Comparative advantage,
trade, and payments in a Ricardian model with a continuum of goods'', American
Economic Review 67: 823-839.
Easterly, W., and R. Levine (2001), ''It’s not factor accumulation: Stylized facts
and growth models'', paper presented at the conference “What have we learned
from a decade of empirical research on growth?”, February 26, 2001, The World
Bank; forthcoming, World Bank Economic Review.
Eaton, J., E. Gutierrez, and S. Kortum (1998), ''European technology policy'',
Economic Policy 27: 405-438.
Eaton, J., and S. Kortum (2001a), ''Trade in capital goods'', European Economic
Review 45 (7): 1195-1235.
Eaton, J., and S. Kortum (2001b), ''Technology, geography, and trade”, mimeo,
Boston University, May.
53

Eaton, J., and S. Kortum (1999), ''International Patenting and Technology
Diffusion: Theory and Measurement'', International Economic Review 40: 537570.
Eaton, J., and S. Kortum (1997), ''Engines of growth: Domestic and foreign
sources of innovation'', Japan and the World Economy 9: 235-259.
Eaton, J., and S. Kortum (1996), ''Trade in Ideas: Patenting and Productivity in
the OECD'', Journal of International Economics 40: 251-278.
Ethier, W. (1982), ''National and International Returns to Scale'', American
Economic Review.
Evenson, R., and L. Westphal (1995), ''Technology change and technology
strategy'', in Behrman/Srinivasan (eds.), Handbook of Development Economics
Volume 3A, North-Holland Publishers.
Fagerberg, J. (1994), ''Technology and International Differences in Growth
Rates'', Journal of Economic Literature 32 (September): 1147-75.
Feenstra, R. (1995) "Integration of Trade and Disintegration of Production in the
Global Economy", Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall 1998: 31-50.
Feenstra, R., J. Markusen, and W. Zeile (1994), ''Accounting for growth with new
inputs'', International Economic Review 35: 429-447.
Feldman, M., and F. Lichtenberg (1997)'', The impact and organization of
publicly-funded research and development in the European Community'', NBER
Working Paper # 6040.
Gera, S., W. Gu, and F. Lee (1999), ''Information technology and productivity
growth: An empirical analysis for Canada and the United States'', Canadian
Journal of Economics 32: 384-407.
Gerschenkron, A. (1962), Economic backwardness in historical perspective,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Girma, S., and K. Wakelin (2001), ''Regional underdevelopment: Is FDI the
solution? A semi-parametric analysis'', GEP Research Paper 2001/11, University
of Nottingham, U.K.
Globerman, S., A. Kokko, and F. Sjöholm (2000), ''International Technology
Diffusion: Evidence from Swedish Patent Data'', Kyklos 53: 17-38.

54

Griffith, R., S. Redding, and J. Van Reenen (2000a), ''Mapping two faces of R&D:
Productivity growth in a panel of OECD industries'', mimeo, London School of
Economics, November.
Griffith, R., S. Redding, and J. Van Reenen (2000b), ''R&D and absorptive
capacity: from theory to data'', mimeo, London School of Economics, November.
Griliches, Z. (1995), ''R&D and Productivity: Econometric Results and
Measurement Issues'', in P. Stoneman (ed.), Handbook of the Economics of
Innovation and Technological Change, Blackwell, Oxford, pp.52-89.
Griliches, Z. (1990), ''Patent statistics as economic indicators: A survey'', Journal
of Economic Literature 28: 1661-1707.
Griliches, Z. (1979), ''Issues in assessing the contribution of research and
development to productivity growth'', Bell Journal of Economics 10: 92-116.
Grossman, G., and E. Helpman (1995), ''Technology and Trade'', Chapter in
Grossman/Rogoff (eds.) Handbook of International Economics Vol.3, NorthHolland Publishers.
Grossman, G., and E. Helpman (1991), Innovation and Growth in the World
Economy, Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press.
Hall, R., and C. Jones (1999), ''Why do some countries produce so much more
output per worker than others? '', Quarterly Journal of Economics 114: 83-116.
Hanson, G., R. Mataloni, and M. Slaughter (2001), ''Expansion strategies of U.S.
multinational firms'', NBER Working Paper # 8433.
Hanushek, E., and D. Kimko (2000), ''Schooling, labor-force quality, and the
growth of nations'', American Economic Review, December.
Haskel, J., S. Pereira, and M. Slaughter (2001), ''Does inward foreign direct
investment boost the productivity of domestic firms? '', paper presented at the
NBER Summer Institute, August.
Howitt, P. (2000), ''Endogenous Growth and Cross-Country Income Differences'',
American Economic Review.
Irwin, D., and P. Klenow (1994), ''Learning Spillovers in the Semi-Conductor
Industry'', Journal of Political Economy.
Jaffe, A. (1986), ''Technological opportunity and spillover of R&D: evidence from
firm’s patents, profits, and market value'', American Economic Review 76: 9841001.

55

Jaffe, A., and M. Trajtenberg (1998), ''International Knowledge Flows: Evidence
from Patent Citations'', NBER Working Paper # 6507, April.
Jaffe, A., M. Trajtenberg, and R. Henderson (1993), ''Geographic Localization of
Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations'', Quarterly Journal of
Economics 108: 577-598.
Keller, W. (2001a), ''Geographic localization of international technology
diffusion'', forthcoming, American Economic Review.
Keller, W. (2001b), ''Knowledge Spillovers at the World’s Technology Frontier”,
CEPR Working Paper # 2815, May.
Keller, W. (2001c), ''Trade and the transmission of technology'', forthcoming,
Journal of Economic Growth.
Keller, W. (2001d), ''Do the new information and trade links of the 1990s lead to
convergence or divergence? '', paper presented at the NBER Summer Institute,
Cambridge, MA, August.
Keller, W. (2000), ''Do trade patterns and technology flows affect productivity
growth? '', World Bank Economic Review 14: 17-47.
Keller, W. (1998), ''Are international R&D spillovers trade related? Analyzing
spillovers among randomly matched trade partners'', European Economic Review
42: 1469-1481.
Keller, W. (1997a), ''Technology flows between industries: Identification and
productivity effects'', Economic Systems Research 9: 213-220.
Keller, W. (1997b), ''How trade patterns and technology flows affect productivity
growth'', World Bank Policy Research Working Paper # 1831, September.
Keller, W. (1996), ''Absorptive capacity: On the creation and acquisition of
technology in development'', Journal of Development Economics 49: 199-227.
Kinoshita, Y. (2000), ''R&D and technology spillover via FDI: Innovation and
absorptive capacity'', mimeo, William Davidson Institute at the University of
Michigan Business School, October.
Klenow, P. , and A. Rodriguez-Clare (1997), ''The Neoclassical Revival in Growth
Economics: Has it Gone Too Far? '', NBER Macroeconomics Annual 12: 73-102.
Klenow, P. (2001), ''Comments on the paper by Easterly and Levine at the
conference “What have we learned from a decade of empirical research on
growth?”, February 26, 2001, The World Bank; forthcoming, World Bank
Economic Review.
56

Kraay, A., I. Soloaga, and J. Tybout (2001), ''Product quality, productive
efficiency, and international technology diffusion: Evidence from plant-level
panel data'', paper presented at the NBER Summer Institute, July.
Leamer, E., and J. Levinsohn (1995), ''International trade theory: The evidence'',
in Grossman/Rogoff (eds.), Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 3,
Elsevier: Amsterdam.
Lichtenberg, F., and B. van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie (1996), ''International
R&D spillovers: A re-examination'', NBER working paper # 5688.
Lucas, R. (1993), ''Making a miracle'', Econometrica 61: 251-272.
Lucas, R. (1988), ''On the mechanics of economic development'', Journal of
Monetary Economics 22: 3-42.
Lumenga-Neso, O., M. Olarreaga, and M. Schiff (2001), ''On ‘Indirect’ Traderelated R&D spillovers'', mimeo, The World Bank, February.
Mankiw, N. G. (1995), ''The Growth of Nations'', Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 1: 275-310.
Meyer, J. (2001), ''Technology diffusion, human capital and economic growth in
developing countries'', UNCTAD working paper # 154, Geneva, June.
Mohnen, P. (2001), ''International R&D spillovers and economic growth”, in
Matti Pohjola (ed.), Information Technology, Productivity, and Economic
Growth: International Evidence, UNU/WIDER and Sitra, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Mohnen, P. (1992), The Relationship between R&D and Productivity Growth in
Canada and other Industrialized Countries. Ottawa: Minister of Supply and
Services Canada.
Nadiri, M.I., and S. Kim (1996), ''International R&D Spillovers, Trade and
Productivity in Major OECD Countries'', NBER Working Paper No. 5801.
Nelson, R., and E. Phelps (1966), ''Investment in humans, technological diffusion
and economic growth'', American Economic Review 56: 69-75.
Olley, S., and A. Pakes (1996), ''The dynamics of productivity in the
telecommunications equipment industry'', Econometrica 64: 1263-1297.
Olson, M. (1982), The rise and fall of nations, New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press.

57

Parente, S., and E. Prescott (2000), Barriers to Riches, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Park, W. (1995), ''International R&D Spillovers and OECD Economic Growth'',
Economic Inquiry 23: 571-591.
Polanyi, M. (1958), Personal knowledge; towards a post-critical philosophy,
University of Chicago Press, Chicago IL.
Prescott, E. C. (1998), ''Needed: A Theory of Total Factor Productivity'',
International Economic Review 39: 525-51.
Quah, D. (2001a), ''Technology dissemination and economic growth'', working
paper, LSE, April.
Quah, D. (2001b), ''Demand-driven knowledge clusters in a weightless economy'',
LSE, April.
Rhee, Y., B. Ross-Larson, and G. Pursell (1984), Korea’s competitive edge:
Managing the entry into world markets, Johns Hopkins University Press for the
World Bank, Baltimore, MD.
Rivera-Batiz, L., and P. Romer (1991), ''Economic integration and endogenous
growth'', Quarterly Journal of Economics 106: 531-555.
Romer, P. (1992), ''Two strategies for economic development: Using ideas and
producing ideas'', in Summers/Shah (eds.), Proceedings of the World Bank
Annual Conference on Development Economics 1992, pp. 63-91.
Romer, P. (1990), ''Endogenous Technological Change'', Journal of Political
Economy 98: S71-S102.
Scherer, F. (1984), ''Using Linked Patent and R&D Data to Measure Interindustry
Technology Flows'', in Z. Griliches (ed.), R&D, Patents, and Productivity, The
University of Chicago for NBER, pp. 417-461.
Segerstrom, P., T. Anant, and E. Dinopoulos (1990), ''A Schumpeterian model of
the product life cycle'', American Economic Review 80: 1077-1092.
Sjöholm, F. (1996), ''International transfer of knowledge: the role of international
trade and geographic proximity'', Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 132: 97-115.
Solow, R. (2001), ''Applying growth theory across countries'', Comments
presented at the conference “What have we learned from a decade of empirical
research on growth?”, February 26, 2001, The World Bank; forthcoming, World
Bank Economic Review.

58

Solow, R. (1957), ''Technical change and the aggregate production function'',
Review of Economics and Statistics.
Tybout, J. (2001), ''Plant- and firm-level evidence on “new” trade theories'',
NBER Working Paper # 8418, August.
Tybout, J. (2000), ''Manufacturing firms in developing countries: How well do
they do, and why? '', Journal of Economic Literature 38 (March): 11-44.
von Hippel, E. (1994), ''’Sticky information’ and the locus of problem solving:
Implications for innovation'' , Management Science 40: 429-439.
Xu, B. (2000), ''Multinational Enterprises, Technology Diffusion, and Host
Country Productivity Growth'', Journal of Development Economics, 62: 477-493.
Xu, B., and J. Wang (1999) ''Capital Goods Trade and R&D Spillovers in the
OECD'', Canadian Journal of Economics 32: 1258-1274.
Young, A. (1991), ''Learning-by-doing and the dynamic effects of international
trade'', Quarterly Journal of Economics.

59

