                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         ANTIDUMPING AND RETALIATION THREATS


                                            Bruce A. Blonigen
                                              Chad P. Bown


                                          Working Paper 8576
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8576


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2001




Thanks to Tom Prusa for access to some of the industry data used in this paper and also Robert Feinberg for
some helpful early discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Bruce A. Blonigen and Chad P. Bown. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Antidumping and Retaliation Threats
Bruce A. Blonigen and Chad P. Bown
NBER Working Paper No. 8576
November 2001
JEL No. F13, L13



                                               ABSTRACT


        This paper examines how the prospect of foreign retaliation affects the antidumping (AD) process
in the United States. We separate the capacity for retaliation into two channels: (i) the capacity for foreign
government retaliation under the dispute settlement procedures of the GATT/WTO system, and (ii) the
capacity for foreign industry retaliation through reciprocal claims of dumping and the foreign pursuit of
AD duties in countries with AD regimes. Using a nested logit framework and analyzing U.S. AD cases
between 1980 and 1998, we find significant empirical evidence consistent with the theory that U.S.
industry is influenced by the threat of reciprocal foreign ADDs in its decision of which foreign countries
to name in the initial AD petition, and that the U.S. AD authority's antidumping decisions are influenced
by the threat of foreign retaliation under the GATT/WTO dispute settlement mechanism.




Bruce A. Blonigen                                                  Chad P. Bown
Department of Economics                                            Department of Economics, MS 021
1285 University of Oregon                                          Brandeis University
Eugene, OR 97403-1285                                              P.O. Box 549110
and NBER                                                           Waltham, MA 02454-9110
bruceb@oregon.uoregon.edu                                          cbown@brandeis.edu
1      Introduction

In the past decade, there has been a proliferation of countries adopting antidumping (AD) policies.

As documented by Prusa (2001), 29 countries filed over 2000 AD cases from 1987-1997. These

figures represent triple the number of filing countries and five times the AD petitions compared to

the 1980s, when the primary users of AD laws were Australia, Canada, the European Community,

and the United States. Proliferation of countries with AD laws also means an increased chance of

seeing AD wars and retaliatory AD duties breaking out between countries. Anecdotal evidence of this

certainly abounds. One important example is the filing of Canadian antidumping cases against U.S.

steel products in the fall of 1992 and 1993, ostensibly in response to the initiation and subsequent

U.S. antidumping duties levied against Canadian steel products from investigations begun in June

1992. More formally, Prusa and Skeath (2001) examine worldwide patterns of AD use from 1980-1998

and find evidence consistent with “tit-for-tat” retaliatory AD actions. These apparent examples of

retaliation and the rising use of antidumping laws have raised substantial concern that AD activity

may ultimately reverse many of the free trade gains of the GATT rounds.1

     On the other hand, the rising threat of retaliatory AD actions may have an eventual dampening

effect on AD activity, leading to some sort of “cold war” equilibrium. In other words, once other

countries have the ability to retaliate in kind, a country (or petitioning industry) may find it no

longer to their benefit to file antidumping cases. It may even ultimately mean that traditional users

of AD laws may not wish to enforce these laws as stringently as before. For example, Lindsey and

Ikenson (2001) document the rising incidence of worldwide AD activity against U.S. exporters and

recommend that U.S. policymakers consider the effects of defending and promoting AD activity

within the context of the WTO when one considers the interests of all domestic producers, not just

those in import-competing sectors.

     Retaliation as a mechanism toward free trade is not a new idea. For example, a common per-

ception is that the trade wars stemming from the U.S. implementation of the Smoot-Hawley tariffs

may have laid the foundation for the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). Additionally,

the literature on trade negotiations has highlighted that the potential for countries to revert back
    1 Gallaway,   Blonigen and Flynn (1999) report that the collective U.S. welfare cost of U.S. antidumping and coun-

tervailing duties are substantial enough to rank second only to the effects of the Multifiber Arrangement in terms of

most costly U.S. trade protection programs.




                                                            1
to higher tariffs (i.e., retaliation) serves as an important enforcement mechanism for achieving trade

protection reductions.2

   The purpose of this paper is to examine whether threats of retaliation have had any measurable

dampening effect on U.S. AD activity from 1980 through 1998. At first glance, this may seem to be a

poor place to look for such dampening effects from retaliation threats. Law changes in the late 1970’s

led to a blossoming of U.S. AD activity during this time period and the latter half of this period

(the 1990s) saw increased worldwide AD activity and evidence consistent with retaliation against

U.S. exporters, as noted above. There are two important responses to this concern. First, as noted

by Blonigen and Prusa (forthcoming), an important research question is why there are not more AD

petitions, given the relative ease with which domestic industries can obtain AD protection and the

possibilities for collusive outcomes even if petitions do not bring formal AD protection. U.S. AD

petitions often involve very specific and narrowly-defined products and annual activity often involves

a very small portion (less than 5%) of even manufacturing activity. The threat of retaliation may

be one important answer to this research question. Second, although there is evidence consistent

with specific, nontrivial AD retaliation across countries, this in no way rules out the possibility of

substantial reduced activity in general, due to threats of retaliation. Finally, we note that while there

were only a few users of AD laws in the first half of our sample besides the U.S., two of its main

trading partners, Canada and the E.C., were in this group of AD users, providing ample opportunities

for AD retaliation against U.S. AD actions.

   We examine two main channels through which the threat of retaliation may dampen AD activity

in the U.S. The first channel is through domestic industries which decide whether to initiate an AD

investigation. A straightforward model of reciprocal dumping across countries in a repeated game

setting (presented in Blonigen, 2000, and summarized in the Appendix of this paper) shows that

an industry is more likely to file an AD petition the greater the import penetration and the lower

its “exposure” to retaliation. The industry is more “exposed” to retaliation when the industry has

significant exports to the same country it is petitioning against and when that country has AD

policies in place. Everything else equal, we should observe a lower probability of an AD filing against

a country in our data when the domestic industry has such exposure to retaliation. The AD process
  2 Important   papers in this literature include Maggi (1999), Bagwell and Staiger (1999), Grossman and Helpman

(1995) and Riezman (1991).




                                                        2
affords a unique opportunity to examine this in that the domestic industry, not the government

agencies, decides which countries are targeted (or named) in a petition.

    The second channel through which the threat of retaliation may operate is at the level of the

government agencies that decide the AD cases. In the U.S., the U.S. Department of Commerce

(USDOC) determines whether dumping has occurred, and the U.S. International Trade Commission

(USITC) determines whether the domestic industry has been materially injured due to the import

sources that have been named in the AD petition. The decision to grant AD protection by these

agencies may be influenced by the possibility that such an affirmative AD ruling leads to retaliation

by the foreign countries through the GATT/WTO trade dispute settlement mechanism.3 Since 1989,

over thirty such cases involving AD actions have been filed under the GATT/WTO dispute settlement

mechanism, with eleven of these involving the U.S. as the defendant country.4 Just as with well-

known cases, such as the U.S.-E.U. cases in bananas and beef, adverse judgments by the WTO can

lead to compensation to the foreign country by allowing it to retaliate through the withdrawal of tariff

concessions. Bown (2001a) presents a theoretical model that considers the misuse of AD procedures

under such a situation where recourse is available to the foreign country under the GATT/WTO

dispute settlement process.

    Of course, a plaintiff foreign country needs to have the capacity to retaliate should it win a

dispute settlement over a U.S. AD action, which would involve sufficient consumption of U.S. goods
   3 This   rationale for retaliation threats requires that these agencies’ decisions are not completely determined by the

economic facts of the case, but that they also involve agency discretion. This assumption seems quite reasonable given

the work by Hansen (1990), Moore (1992), and Hansen and Prusa (1997) that clearly shows that political considerations

are important for understanding the pattern of U.S. AD decisions.
   4 Eleven independent examples of formal GATT/WTO trade disputes since 1989 in which the U.S. was a defendant


country in such an AD ‘trade dispute’ are Sweden v. U.S. over ‘Imposition of Anti-Dumping Duties on Imports of

Seamless Steel Hollow Products from Sweden,’ Mexico v. U.S. over ‘Anti-Dumping Duties on Gray Portland Cement

and Cement Clinker from Mexico,’ Norway v. U.S. over ‘Anti-Dumping Duties on Imports of Fresh and Chilled Atlantic

Salmon,’ Korea v. U.S. ‘Anti-Dumping Duty on Dynamic Random Access Memory Semiconductors (DRAMS) of One

Megabit or Above from Korea,’ Korea v. U.S. over ‘Anti-Dumping Measures on Stainless Steel Plate in Coils and

Stainless Steel Sheet and Strip from Korea,’ Japan v. U.S. over ‘Anti-Dumping Measures on Certain Hot-Rolled Steel

Products from Japan,’ EC v. U.S. over ‘United States - Anti-dumping duties on Seamless pipe from Italy,’ India v. U.S.

‘Anti-Dumping and Countervailing Measures on Steel Plate From India,’ EC v. U.S. over ‘Anti-Dumping Measures on

Imports of Solid Urea from the Former German Democratic Republic,’ Korea v. U.S. over ‘Anti-Dumping Duties on

Imports of Colour Television Receivers from Korea,’ and Mexico v. U.S. over ‘Anti-Dumping Investigation Regarding

Imports of Fresh or Chilled Tomatoes from Mexico’ (WTO 1995a and 2001).



                                                             3
exported to their country. In an empirical study of formal GATT trade disputes, Bown (2000)

has found evidence to suggest that countries tend to implement various forms of “GATT-illegal”

protection against trading partners that are unable to credibly threaten substantial retaliation, as

measured by the consumption of the policy-implementing country’s exports by the affected trading

partner. This observation on capacity to retaliate allows us to identify this second potential channel

of retaliation threat effects in our sample. In particular, we expect that smaller U.S. export volumes

to a foreign country means a limited capacity to retaliate by that foreign country, and makes it more

likely U.S. agencies will rule affirmatively on AD cases against such a country. Even more directly,

if a foreign country is not a member of the WTO, this channel of retaliation is obviously closed to

that country, making adverse U.S. AD decisions more likely.

   To test our hypotheses concerning these two channels of retaliation we sample all U.S. AD cases

from 1980 through 1998 and use a nested logit framework that models the U.S. industries’ decisions

of which countries to name in the first stage, and the U.S. government agencies’ AD decision in the

second stage. We find substantial evidence of dampening effects on AD activity from both channels

of retaliation threats. Our estimates suggest that U.S. petitioning industries are less likely to name

foreign countries in an AD petition for which there is higher exposure (in terms of U.S. exports to

countries with AD laws) to retaliation. Additionally, we find that the U.S. government agencies are

more likely to rule affirmatively when the named foreign country has a lower capacity to retaliate

through the WTO dispute settlement process.

   In terms of economic implications, our results can thus be interpreted along two dimensions. First,

it appears that retaliation threats do lower AD activity when examining U.S. AD activity over the

past two decades. This suggests that proliferation of AD laws across countries may not necessarily

lead to more (and could lead to less) worldwide AD activity in the future. On the other hand, the

results point to a shortcoming in the rules of dispute settlement of the GATT/WTO system. Even

increased participation in the system is hampered by the fact that the ‘retaliation-as-compensation’

mechanism of dispute settlement is inherently biased against bilaterally “powerless” countries who

may not be equipped with the capacity to retaliate against a particular trading partner.

   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 introduces the empirical specification more

formally, the data sample, and a brief review of the theory underlying our hypotheses. Section 3 then

presents results from our base specification of our empirical framework. Section 4 provides sensitivity



                                                  4
analyses and a discussion of the economic significance of our estimates. Section 5 concludes.



2      The Econometric Model and Data Construction

In lieu of a formal presentation of the theory describing how the prospect of foreign recourse to ADDs

and/or a GATT/WTO trade dispute can be seen to affect the ADD decision process, the reader is

referred to the Appendix and Bown (2001a). The theoretical implications for each of these models

on the econometric framework and data construction will be discussed in more detail below.


2.1         The Nested-Logit Framework

In practice in the United States, the AD process is multi-staged, and there are other stages beyond

that which we consider here which have been analyzed in other contexts.5 However, the basic

decisions that we consider can be illustrated through a two-level tree, as in Figure 1. In the first

stage of the tree, we take as exogenous the fact that the U.S. industry will initiate an AD petition

against someone. In this first stage our focus rests on the U.S. industry’s decision of which foreign

countries it will ‘name’ versus which it will ‘not-name.’

     The second stage of the model is the outcome stage, where the U.S. AD authority makes a ‘pos-

itive’ ‘negative’ decision with respect to the petition. Empirically, characterization of the outcome

phase is complicated by the fact that petitions can be withdrawn or settled at any point during the

AD investigation. Prusa (1991) suggests that 80-90% of withdrawn cases involve a settlement or some

type of agreement between the domestic and foreign industries, and Prusa (1992) provides empirical

evidence to suggest that the effect of the settlement outcome on trade is at least as restrictive as the

impact of the imposition of duties. We assume that withdrawals that occur after one or more pre-

liminary determinations by the U.S. AD authorities (withdraw late) lead to private settlements and,

hence, ‘positive’ outcomes for the petitioners. On the other hand, cases which are withdrawn early in

the investigation, before either agency even made a preliminary ruling, were mainly cases where the
    5 For   example, Hansen (1990) uses a two-staged nested logit framework in which in the first stage she considers

the binary decision of all 4-digit SIC industries in the U.S. of whether or not to file a petition, and then in the last

stage she considers the decision of the ADD authority, given that a petition has been filed. Prusa (1991) considers a

two-staged nested logit framework focusing on the withdrawal decision. His focus however, is not on retaliation, but

on the economic and political factors that influence the withdrawal of AD petitions.




                                                           5
petitioners quickly realized that they would likely lose if the investigation continued and, hence, we

classify these as negative outcomes. Thus as our benchmark outcome, we define the USITC’s decision

as either ‘Negative’={Reject, Withdraw Early} or ‘Positive’={ADDs, Settle, Withdraw Late}.6 We

do consider alternatives to this specification of the second stage decision variable, which we report

in Section 4 below.

    In estimating the multi-staged decision tree, we employ a nested-logit analysis, as originally

proposed by McFadden (1978).7 Let i ∈ {Name, Not Name} index the industry’s first stage decision,

and let j ∈ {Positive, Negative} index the AD authority’s second stage decision. We assume that

the probability that the final outcome is alternative ij, Pij , can be written as the product of the

conditional probability Pj|i and the marginal probability Pi , where, for example, each probability is

of the binomial logit form



                                                                  eβX
                                      PP ositive|N amed    =                                                         (1)
                                                                1 + eβX
                                                                   1
                                     PN egative|N amed     =                                                         (2)
                                                                1 + eβX
                                                                  eαZ+θIN ame
                                                PN ame     =                    .                                    (3)
                                                                1 + eαZ+θIN ame

In (1) and (2) β is the vector of parameters to be estimated that are associated with the second stage,

AD authority’s decision, and X is the matrix of second-stage covariates. In (3) α is the vector of

parameters to be estimated that are associated with the first stage, U.S. industry’s country ‘naming’

decision, and Z is the matrix of first-stage covariates. Also in (3), IN ame is the standard inclusive

value that the industry derives from choosing alternative i = Name which is defined as




                                               IN ame     = log(eβX ),                                               (4)


and consequently, θ is the parameter to be estimated on the inclusive value, measuring the dissimi-

larity between the alternatives that the industry faces in its ‘naming’ decision.8
   6 This   classification is made by referring to the information released by the USITC in the Federal Register.
   7 Further   details on the econometric theory behind the nested-logit framework can be found in McFadden (1981) or

Greene (2000).
  8 An estimate of θ which is not statistically different from 1 would indicate no dissimilarity between alternatives, or


in other words, the nested logit could be collapsed into a simple multinomial logit framework.




                                                           6
    To estimate the model we will proceed sequentially, using maximum likelihood techniques. As

is customary, we work backward by first estimating the second stage binary choice made by the

AD authority. We then proceed by calculating the inclusive value of (4) using the estimates for β

calculated in the first step, before turning to the estimation of the industry’s ‘naming’ decision of the

first stage.9 We then calculate the first stage standard errors using the Murphy and Topel (1985)

covariance matrix correction for two-step maximum likelihood estimation, before calculating and

reporting the elasticities of interest.10

    Before turning to the results of the estimation, we briefly discuss some of the basics of the

underlying theory and motivate the explanatory variables of interest and data construction.


2.2     Explanatory Variables and Data Construction

In this section, we describe the data sample and standard control variables we use to estimate

each stage of the nested logit framework, beginning with the second-stage decision by the U.S. AD

authority. At the end of the section, we describe our focus variables that we include in each stage to

estimate the impact of potential foreign retaliation.


2.2.1       U.S. AD Authority’s Decision

The data sample for the U.S. AD authority’s decision in the second stage is based on U.S. AD cases

that were initiated and concluded from 1980 through 1998 for the import sources named in U.S.

AD petitions. The domestic industry in a U.S. AD petition is required to name firms from only

one country in each petition, thus the data set includes information identifying the unique parent

country of the foreign firm(s) named in the case, the year of the case, and the USITC’s ultimate

decision in the case. The decision variable at this stage is thus a binary choice indicating either that

the case outcome was ‘positive’ or ‘negative.’ In our sample of years, 645 decisions were made by

the U.S. AD authority, with 370 petitions ending in positive outcomes and 275 petitions ending in
   9 Such   sequential estimation using limited information maximum likelihood (LIML) has been shown to provide

consistent estimates, though they are inefficient. As illustrated in our results described below, however, such LIML

techniques are sufficient to provide us with convincing results as a first step in this analysis.
  10 The calculation of the elasticities of interest is complicated, in the sense that each explanatory variable has a distinct


effect on each alternative at each level of the nested logit tree. For a discussion, see, for example, Greene (2000). The

elasticities are calculated at the mean values of the data, most of which are reported in Table 1.




                                                              7
negative outcomes.11

    As control variables for this second-stage, AD authority decision, we include many of the economic

and political variables that other researchers (see, for example, Hansen and Prusa 1997) in the liter-

ature have shown influence the AD authority’s ultimate positive/negative decision. Such economic

variables are designed to capture the potential injury to the industry and include changes in industry

capacity utilization rates (C CAP) and industry employment (C EMP).12 Political variables often

used include the size of domestic industry as measured by industry employment (EMP), and the in-

dustry’s concentration ratio (CONC) which is designed to capture the ease with which the industry

can coordinate potential lobbying activity and avoid the free-rider problem. As a statutory control,

we include a dummy variable for cases which have been ‘cumulated’ (D CUMULATE), which are re-

lated cases involving the same domestic industry filed against firms from different foreign countries.13

Hansen and Prusa (1996) have shown that there is a significantly increased probability that such

cases will be accepted when they are considered jointly. Finally, macroeconomic variables such as the

national unemployment rate (UNEMRATE) are also used to control for changes in economy-wide

influences.

    The variables of international trade that are also typically included are the foreign country’s

share of U.S. industry imports (IMPSHARE) and the growth rate in the U.S. imports of the product

under investigation from the foreign country from the previous year (C IMP), which looks to capture

the potential for a surge in imports.14 Also typically included is the pre-petition U.S. industry

tariff (TARIFF), suggesting that AD authority may be more willing to provide ADD protection to

industries that have already undertaken substantial liberalization.15
  11 Underlying   this we have 248 formal USITC rejections, 285 cases resulting in the imposition of ADDs and 113

cases which were settled or withdrawn. Based on data limitations, we are also only able to include AD cases in the

manufacturing sector.
 12 In unreported results, we have also controlled for changes in domestic industry shipments, which seem to have


little influence.
   13 In 1984 the antidumping law in the U.S. was amended by Congress to require that the USITC cumulate imports


from countries involved in related petitions when making its injury determination.
  14 In unreported results we have also tried controlling for changes in import share in lieu of changes in the real value


of imports, and this too seems to have little influence.
  15 In addition to this explanation, Bown (2001b) has suggested that industries with low pre-existing tariffs may have


more to gain through a tariff increase for terms of trade reasons.




                                                            8
2.2.2      U.S. Industry’s ‘Naming’ Decision

Consider next the first stage decision of whether or not a firm from a particular foreign country is

‘named’ in a U.S. industry’s petition. For our sample, we obviously observe the import sources that

were named in the petition, but we must also determine the sample of countries that were “eligible”

to be named by the U.S. petitioning industry but which were not-named. To make this determination

we consult the data and the relevant rules for AD procedures. In the petitions that are filed, the

U.S. industry reports the disaggregated, tariff line codes for the products that it claims have been

dumped.16 We thus use the tariff line codes reported by the petitioning industry to identify in the

data which countries were eligible to be named.17 Not all of the import sources are eligible to be

named in AD petitions, however, as many of them have exports to the U.S. that are too small to

satisfy the statute’s “non-negligibility” requirements, which we take as having a share of at least 3%

of the tariff line imports of the product.18 Note, however, that in our sensitivity checks reported

in Section 4, we vary the criterion by which we determine a country as being eligible to ensure our

results are robust to reasonable changes to the eligibility requirements. For the estimation results

reported in Section 3, this approach toward creating a sample of import sources yields 2015 such

sources that are determined by the data as being eligible: the 645 petitions in which countries were

named, and then 1370 non-named countries.

    Given the theory and AD statutes it is clear that the U.S. industry has an incentive to name more

countries, to increase the likelihood of passing the USITC’s injury test, due to the cumulation rule. In

addition, large increases from a particular source should more likely lead to an injury determination.

Thus, we include the foreign country’s share of U.S. industry imports (IMPSHARE) and the growth

rate in the U.S. imports of the product under investigation from the foreign country from the previous

year (C IMP) as control variables in the first-stage naming decision.
  16 For   the period 1980-88, this was generally reported as the 5 or 7 digit TSUSA import category whereas from

1989-1998 this was reported as the 8 or 10 digit HTS import category. These codes are reported in the USITC’s notice

published about the case in the Federal Register.
  17 One caveat is that this approach obviously cannot hope to capture is the idea that U.S. industry might be choosing


TSUSA or HTS categories with these biases already mind.
 18 Section 5.8 of the WTO’s Antidumping Code states, “[t]he volume of dumped imports shall normally be regarded


as negligible if the volume of dumped imports from a particular country is found to account for less than 3 per cent

of imports of the like product in the importing Member...” (WTO 1995b).




                                                          9
2.2.3       The ‘Threat of Foreign Retaliation’ Variables

As stated, the primary contribution of our analysis is to focus on variables that are designed to

measure the impact of the threat of foreign retaliation on whether import sources are named by the

domestic firms and/or given positive AD decisions by the AD authorities. We focus on two possible

channels of retaliation threats that may have an impact on both stages (and decisions-makers) in the

AD process.

    The first channel we consider is the potential retaliatory threat through what we term the

GATT/WTO channel. As detailed by Bown (2001a), foreign countries will be better equipped

to effectively threaten retaliation through the GATT/WTO dispute mechanism if (a) they receive

a large amount of U.S. exports so that they have adequate leverage to retaliate, and (b) they are

GATT/WTO members with experience as a plaintiff in formal trade disputes. In order to proxy

for such a channel of retaliation, we construct a variable that interacts U.S. exports to a particular

foreign import source as a share of total U.S. yearly exports (US EXPSHARE) with an indicator

variable that takes a value of 1 if the foreign country has ever been the plaintiff in a GATT/WTO

dispute against the U.S. (D USPLAINT).19

    We surmise that this GATT/WTO channel of retaliation may be more of a concern for the AD

authority’s decision than the domestic industry decision for a couple of reasons. First, petitioning

firms may not care about such potential for retaliation because it could likely concern products outside

of the petitioners’ own industry.20 Second, the credibility of the AD authority’s decisions may be

adversely affected as more dispute settlement procedures occur, giving them incentives to minimize

such events. Nevertheless, we include this proxy variable of retaliation through the GATT/WTO

channel in both stages of the AD process (industry naming and AD authority decision) and expect

a negative sign, indicating a lower likelihood to name import sources with higher retaliation threat,

everything else equal.

    A second potential channel of retaliation is what we term the AD channel. The domestic country

may be worried about the potential for retaliatory AD actions on the part of the foreign import
  19 In   sensitivity tests below, we consider other constructions of this proxy variable, including substitution of export

levels for export shares and substitution of an indicator variable of GATT/WTO plaintiff experience against any

country rather than GATT/WTO plaintiff against specifically the U.S. (D PLAINT).
  20 For example, in the well-known U.S.-E.U. beef hormone case, the U.S. retaliated against a wide array of products


not connected with beef.




                                                             10
sources. As shown in the Appendix, this would require that U.S. firms had sufficient export exposure

in the foreign country and that the foreign import source had its own AD laws. The petitioning

firms and AD authorities could be worried about retaliation in the same subject product, or more

broadly about related associated products in the industry. We first specify our proxy variable for

retaliation through the AD channel as the interaction between the export share to the foreign import

source in the subject 8-10 digit HTS product and an indicator of whether the foreign import source

country has active AD protection.21 In later estimates presented below, we then consider that AD

retaliation may occur beyond the specific subject product and use the relevant U.S. 4 digit SIC

industry export share to the foreign import source country interacted with an indicator of whether

the foreign import source country has active AD protection. This allows us to account for the idea

that multi-product firms in the U.S. may face the threat of reciprocal AD retaliation in products

outside of the more narrow, 10 digit HTS category, provided they are still within the same 4 digit

SIC industry classification. While the GATT/WTO channel is likely a larger consideration for the

AD authorities decision in the second stage, it seems natural to think that the AD retaliation channel

will be a larger consideration for the petitioning firms’ decision of which import sources to name.

    Finally note that Table 1 reports summary statistics for the covariates used in the estimation, as

well as the expected sign of the parameter estimates in the two stages, where the Stage 1 decision

is Y1 =‘Named’ and the Stage 2 decision is Y2 =‘Positive AD Decisions.’ We next turn to our

estimation results to examine the evidence for these hypotheses.



3     Estimation Results

For each specification of the model we use maximum likelihood to estimate the parameters of interest,

which we then use to calculate the reported elasticities. In this section we consider Tables 2 and 3

which report our first set of results from a nested logit model that estimates the relationship between

the covariates of interest and the choices of both (i) the U.S. AD authority (in its positive/negative

decision) and (ii) the petitioning industry (in its name/not-name decision), given the industry’s

expectation over the U.S. AD authority’s ultimate decision. The results of each stage of the two-

staged model are split up into two broad sections in each of the tables. The columns on the right-hand
  21 For   1980-1988, we use Schedule B exports instead of HTS exports. For concordance between TSUSA imports and

Schedule B exports, see the files of Feenstra (1996,1997).



                                                             11
side indicate the results of the second-stage, AD authority’s decision, whereas the columns on the

left-hand side indicate the results of the first-stage, industry ‘naming’ decision. Each fully estimated

model will give elasticity estimates that are reported in two columns per model.22 In each of the

tables, the cells of the relevant ‘threat of foreign retaliation’ variables are shaded to help focus

attention on the results of primary interest.

    Model (1) in Table 2 presents our base model elasticity estimates. First, we note that in each of

the models estimated, our results yield elasticities on the industry control variables that are broadly

consistent with the results reported elsewhere in the literature.23 Industry variables such as the

change in the capacity utilization rate, the size of industry employment, and the steel dummy are all

of the expected sign and statistically significant. This is also the case for the import market share

of the country named in the petition, the growth rate of imports from the named exporter from

the prior year, and the dummy variable included for cases which were cumulated. The signs and

magnitudes of these control variables remain quite stable through a variety of specifications that we

estimate and report below.

    Consider next the estimates on the threat of foreign retaliation variables in model (1) in Table 2. In

the first row is our interaction variable to estimate the effect of the GATT/WTO retaliation channel.

For both the naming decision and the AD authority decision, the sign of the coefficient is negative, as

expected. In other words, higher potential for foreign retaliation through the GATT/WTO dispute

settlement mechanism is estimated to lower the likelihood of a foreign source being named in a U.S.

AD petition and, if named, lowering the likelihood that it will result in a positive decision. However,

this effect is largest and only statistically significant for the AD authority decision, which accords

with our a priori expectations that the AD authority would be more concerned about potential

retaliation through this GATT/WTO channel than petitioning firms.

    The third row of Table 2 gives the elasticity estimates for our interaction variable that proxies

for the threat of retaliation through the AD channel. This variable is negative, as expected, for

the naming decision, but of the wrong sign for the AD authority decision. For both stages it is

also statistically insignificant. So, at this point, the evidence for the AD channel is weak, though of
  22 For   example, the two column (1)’s of Table 2 refer to the first and second stage estimates of one complete model,

the two column (2)’s would refer to a second complete model, etc.
  23 For a comparison of the sign and statistical significance of the industry control variables, see for example Hansen


and Prusa (1996,1997).




                                                            12
correct sign for the stage we would expect - the naming decision by the petitioners. Evidence for this

AD channel on the naming decision gets much stronger for alternative proxies as we discuss below.

   One initial concern is that there is significant collinearity between our proxy variables for the two

channels of potential retaliation. In model (2) in Table 2 we include only the AD channel variable

in the naming stage and only the GATT/WTO channel in the AD authority stage. As one would

expect, this leads to more precise estimates, resulting in statistically significant negative coefficients

for the appropriate retaliation variable in each stage.

   As mentioned earlier, there are alternative ways that one could plausibly construct these proxy

variables. First, we have used export shares rather than export levels to proxy for the U.S.’s exposure

to foreign retaliation. However, a high export share may not mean much exposure if export levels

are generally low. Thus, an alternative is to use export levels to proxy for retaliation exposure. The

problem with this is that there is no implicit normalization across products/industries as with export

shares that necessarily add up to 100 percent for each product/industry. A certain dollar value of

trade may be a high volume for one industry and low volume for another, depending on the average

size of firms in these industries. In model (3) in Table 2 we run a specification where we use export

levels, rather than shares, to construct our retaliation channel variables. The results are consistent

with our export share results, but with standard errors that are somewhat larger.

   There are also alternative variables that may also characterize experience and ability to use the

GATT/WTO channel for retaliation. Our results in Table 2 specify an indicator variable if the foreign

source country has previously been a plaintiff against the U.S. in a GATT/WTO dispute. Weaker

criteria are whether the foreign source country has been a plaintiff in any GATT/WTO dispute

(model 4) or is even a member of the GATT/WTO (model 5). In Table 3 we present estimates

when we specify our AD channel with these alternative indicators of foreign source country ability

to retaliate through GATT/WTO channels. In model (6) we simply drop all observations involving

China as the foreign country. Regardless of which specification we use, we get results that are almost

quantitatively identical.




                                                   13
4         Further Sensitivity Analysis

There are three different sets of further sensitivity analysis that we report here. First, we consider

alternative specifications to the second stage dependent variable, to ensure that our results are

robust to changes in the characterization of the AD authority’s positive/negative decision. Second,

we consider changes to the eligibility requirements identifying the ‘not-named’ countries. Finally,

we substitute industry level exports for the product level exports. Each will be described in detail

in turn, before we proceed to a brief characterization of the ‘economic significance’ of our results in

Section 4.4.24


4.1        Alternative Formulations for the Second Stage Outcome Variable

Recall again, that the second stage dependent variable in Tables 2 and 3 was characterized as

‘Negative’ = {Reject, Withdraw Early} and ‘Positive’={ADDs, Settle, Withdraw Late}. In Table 4

we recategorize the second stage dependent variable to be ‘Positive’={Reject, Withdraw (either late

or early)} and ‘Positive’={ADDs, Settle}. Under this characterization, of the 645 second stage de-

cisions made by the U.S. AD authority, 345 petitions which were ‘positive’ and 300 petitions which

were ‘negative.’ In terms of the results, while the statistical significance on the first stage ‘threat of

foreign retaliation’ variables is a little weaker, the same general pattern of results arises.25
  24 In   addition to the sensitivity analysis reported here, we have also checked the robustness of our results to different

specifications of how one considers the E.U.. In the analysis presented here, we assume that given the common external

trade policy of the E.U., the ‘E.U.’ is the potential retaliatory threat, so thus we aggregate all AD petitions against

different E.U.-member countries regarding the same product into one E.U. AD case. We characterize the outcome for

this case as the worst (from the E.U.’s countries’ perspectives) outcome of all subcases. For robustness checks, we have

considered specifications in which we (i) do not combine any E.U. observations, (ii) combine some E.U. observations

to allow for the possibility of one E.U. ‘named’ observation and one E.U. ‘non-named’ observation, and (iii) drop all

E.U. observations. The results are not significantly altered by consideration of these alternatives, and thus to conserve

space we have not reported them here. They are available upon request from the authors.
  25 In unreported results available upon request from the authors, we have also considered specifications of the model


in which we characterize the second stage dependent variable as ‘Negative’={Reject} and ‘Positive’={ADDs, Settle,

Withdraw}. The results are consistent, in terms of the statistical significance, with those reported in Table 2.




                                                              14
4.2     Alternative Eligibility Requirements for ‘Non-Named’ Countries

In the estimation results presented, we have broadly followed the GATT/WTO statute in determining

what countries were eligible to be named, but which were ‘not-named’ in the U.S. industry’s first

stage decision. The criterion was that the foreign country had to have a share of the U.S.’s import

market of at least 3% of the products under investigation. In this section we check the sensitivity of

our results to a change in the eligibility definition, which we report in Table 5.

    Model (10) of Table 5 illustrates the results under a more restrictive 5% import share cutoff

for eligibility, model (11) illustrates the results under a less restrictive 1% import share cutoff for

eligibility, and model (12) illustrates the results under a rule in which the import share cutoff is

3% but we only consider observations in which there was an increase in the amount of the relevant

products being imported into the U.S. (i.e. C IMP > 0).26 An inspection of the results suggests no

substantial changes in the estimated elasticities on the ‘threat of foreign retaliation,’ variables.


4.3     Using Industry-Level Exports in lieu of Product-Level Exports

The threat of foreign retaliation through foreign recourse to reciprocal ADDs facing multi-product

U.S. firms may not be adequately captured by focusing only on exports within the same HTS product

category. AD channel retaliation may occur in other products produced by the firm. Thus, as another

robustness check, we consider a specification in which we substitute the industry level 4 digit SIC

export variables in for the product level 8-10 digit HTS export variables that we have been considering

previously.

    The results presented in Table 6 provide evidence that the AD channel retaliation threat does

extend beyond just the product subject to the U.S. AD action. As shown in the table, the AD

channel variables in the naming stage show generally larger elasticities that are statistically stronger

than those reported earlier using data connected with only the product subject to the U.S. AD action

(compare again with Table 2), and further strengthens our evidence for the dampening effect of this

channel of retaliation.
  26 Note   that this results in changes in the number of observations in the industry’s ‘naming’ decision to 1681, 2797

and 1790, respectively.




                                                           15
4.4     Economic Significance

Given that we have established that the estimates of the elasticities of interest appear fairly robust

to subtle changes in the way we construct and aggregate the data, the next question of interest is

whether or not these results have economic significance.

    In Table 7 we report the results of an exercise in which we consider changes in the ‘threat of

foreign retaliation’ variables, and we calculate the relative change in the probability of a positive AD

decision by the U.S. AD authority and on the probability of the U.S. industry’s decision of ‘naming’ a

trading partner. The initial probabilities were determined from the mean values of the second-stage

data, and we consider changes determined by one standard deviation increases in the underlying

data on the variables of interest.27

    For example, consider a one standard deviation increase in the size of the share of U.S. exports to

a country which has been a plaintiff in a GATT/WTO trade dispute against the U.S. That is, for two

otherwise identical trading partners in the average case, the one which receives 13.8% (as opposed

to the mean of 5%) of U.S. exports will face an 10-12% lower probability that the AD authority

will make a positive AD decision.28 The probability difference is 3-4% when using the export levels

measure, as opposed to export shares.

    Next consider a one standard deviation increase in the size of the share of the petitioning U.S.

industry’s 8-10 digit HTS product exports to a country which has an active AD statute. In this case,

for two otherwise identical trading partners in the average case, the one which receives 15.8% (as

opposed to the mean of 4.4%) of the petitioning U.S. industry exports will face an 11-13% lower

probability that it will be named in an AD petition.29 The probability difference is 3-6% when using

the export levels measure, as opposed to export shares.

    Finally consider a one standard deviation increase in the size of the share of the petitioning U.S.

4 digit SIC industry’s exports to a country which has an active AD statute. In this case, for two
 27 Note   that the results on economic significance summarized here are generally taken from the models with the

statistically largest elasticity estimates and hence, are giving an upperbound effect.
  28 For example, in model (2) the conditional probability of a positive AD decision at the means of the data was


58.1%. Ceteris paribus, a one standard deviation increase in the U.S. export share from the mean of 5.0% to 13.8%

causes the conditional probability of a positive AD decision to fall to 52.5%.
  29 For example, in model (2) the probability that a foreign country will be ‘named’ when evaluated at the means of


the data was 33.8%. Ceteris paribus, a one standard deviation increase in the product export share from the mean of

4.4% to 15.8% causes the probability that a foreign country will be named to fall to 29.5%.



                                                         16
otherwise identical trading partners in the average case, the one which receives 15.0% (as opposed

to the mean of 4.8%) of the petitioning U.S. industry exports will face a 17-18% lower probability

that it will be named in an AD petition.30 The probability difference is 12% when using the export

levels measure, as opposed to export shares.

    In summary, we find economically meaningful dampening effects from these potential channels

for retaliation, though they are by no means overwhelmingly large. These effects are obviously

average effects over our entire sample of years. An interesting question we address next is whether

these dampening effects may be increasing in importance as AD activity and GATT/WTO dispute

settlement activity increase.


4.5        Growing Retaliation Threat Effects?

The potential for retaliation has been growing over the past decade. As documented by Miranda et al.

(1998), Prusa (2001), and Lindsey and Ikenson (2001), the number of countries adopting and using

AD laws began to rise substantially in the early 1990s with a concomitant increase in the frequency

of AD cases against U.S. exporters. In addition, the GATT/WTO dispute settlement process only

explicitly began to be used for AD matters in 1990, with the first panel report resulting from a formal

AD-related dispute between the U.S. and Sweden over a U.S. steel AD duty (WTO 1995a).

    Table 8 thus reports results where we interact our retaliation threat variables with dummy vari-

ables to allow for structural breaks with respect to each distinct retaliatory threat channel. Here we

allow for a structural break with respect to the GATT/WTO channel in 1990 and with respect to

the AD channel at 1993.31 With these breaks, the estimated elasticity increases by about 50% on

the GATT/WTO retaliation channel for the AD authority outcome, suggesting that the dampening

effects on positive AD outcomes from this channel increased during the 1990-1998 period, as ex-

pected. Evidence for greater dampening effects from the AD channel on the naming decision across

the two periods is much weaker. One possible explanation is that it takes time for U.S. firms to

realize greater threats of retaliation as other countries adopt AD laws. Alternatively, it may be that

the countries that are adopting AD laws in the 1990s (many of which are less-developed ones) may
  30 For   example, in model (15) the probability that a foreign country will be ‘named’ when evaluated at the means of

the data was 34.4%. Ceteris paribus, a one standard deviation increase in the industry export share from the mean of

4.8% to 15.0% causes the probability that a foreign country will be named to fall to 28.7%.
  31 Alternative, nearby break years give qualitatively similar but less precise estimates than those reported here.




                                                           17
not be ones where U.S. exporters have much export exposure.

    On a final note, there certainly may be other channels of retaliation that our estimates are not

capturing. One such channel may be retaliation through some other form of trade protection other

than AD duties. This alternative may not be that significant in that many other forms of protection

can require more political and economic costs to obtain and are likely not WTO-legal.

    Another way in which retaliation threats may be having dampening effects on the AD process

which we are not examining is the decision by the U.S. firms to petition against any import source in

the first place. To gather data on all import product line codes to estimate the likelihood of a U.S.

AD petition by these product codes and the effect of retaliation threats on that decision is a daunting

task that we leave for future research efforts. Not modeling these effects in the current paper could

create sample selection bias in our current estimates. This sample selection bias would likely occur

because the domestic industry only petitions for product line codes where the threat of retaliation

is generally low across the import sources in that product code. Such a sample selection bias would

make it less likely to find retaliation effects in the steps of the AD process that we actually find.



5     Conclusion

This paper investigates how foreign retaliation threats affected filings and outcomes of U.S. AD cases

from 1980 through 1998. We identify and investigate two different channels through which the threat

of retaliation can affect different critical stages of the AD process, which we label the AD channel

and the GATT/WTO channel.

    We find evidence to suggest that U.S. industries are influenced by the threat of retaliation through

the AD channel. In particular, U.S. industry is less likely to initiate petitions against firms from

countries which have active AD provisions and to which the U.S. petitioning industry sends sizable

exports. This is consistent with the theory that the industry is concerned with the capacity of the

foreign firms to initiate AD investigations and retaliate with reciprocal ADDs.

    We also find evidence to suggest that the U.S. AD authority is influenced by the threat of

retaliation through the GATT/WTO channel. The U.S. AD authority tends to reject petitions

against firms from countries that have experience as a plaintiff in GATT/WTO trade disputes against

the U.S. and to whom the U.S. sends sizable exports. This is consistent with the theory that the




                                                   18
AD authority is using discretion when it is concerned with the capacity of GATT/WTO-sanctioned

foreign retaliation in a potential formal trade dispute.

   As noted in the introduction, these dampening effects are important and, perhaps counterintuitive

with respect to recent literature concerned that more countries are adopting and using AD laws in

the past decade. The dampening effects we estimate are economically significant, though obviously

not large enough to eliminate worldwide AD activity. However, there is some evidence that these

dampening effects grow in magnitude in the latter half of our sample, as AD activity by non-users

and use of the GATT/WTO dispute settlement process grew. Thus, increased AD ability across

countries and familiarity with the GATT/WTO dispute settlement process may ultimately help put

the brakes on AD use by traditional users, leading to more of a “cold war” equilibrium rather than

a larger conflagration of AD protectionism.

   It is important to note that the magnitude of these dampening effects depends on how balanced

retaliation threats are distributed across countries. Poorer, less-developed countries likely have more

limited abilities to retaliate because other countries have relatively little exports to these countries.

Such asymmetries may limit how much retaliation threats can dampen activity. However, if trade

flows are symmetric enough, the possibility exists that a proliferation of AD activity across many

countries may push countries to significantly limit or eliminate such AD laws within the WTO - the

ultimate dampening mechanism.




                                                   19
Variable Definitions and Data Sources
• US EXP: Real (1992) value U.S. annual exports to the identified country. Data taken from
  Feenstra, Lipsey and Bowen (1997) and Feenstra (2000).

• US EXPSHARE: Ratio of U.S. annual exports to the identified country to U.S. total annual
  exports. Data taken from Feenstra, Lipsey and Bowen (1997) and Feenstra (2000).

• D GATT/WTO: Indicator if the foreign country is a GATT/WTO member at the time of
  the case. Data available from the WTO’s website at http://www.wto.org/ .

• D USPLAINT: Indicator if the foreign country has ever been plaintiff to a formal GATT/WTO
  trade dispute filed against the U.S. Data taken from Bown (2000).

• D PLAINT: Indicator if the foreign country has ever been plaintiff to a formal GATT/WTO
  dispute filed against any country. Data taken from Bown (2000).

• IN EXP: Real (1992) value U.S. 4-digit SIC industry annual exports to the identified country.
  Data taken from Feenstra (1997) and USITC (2001).

• IN EXPSHARE: Ratio of U.S. 4-digit SIC annual exports to the identified country to US4-
  digit SIC total annual exports. Data taken from Feenstra (1997) and USITC (2001).

• PR EXP: Real (1992) value U.S. 8-10 digit HTS annual product exports to the identified coun-
  try for 1989-98, and 5-7 digit Schedule B exports for 1980-88. Data taken from Feenstra (1997)
  and USITC (2001).

• PR EXPSHARE: Ratio of U.S. 8-10 digit HTS annual exports to the identified country to
  U.S. 8-10 digit HTS total annual exports for 1989-98, and 5-7 digit Schedule B exports for
  1980-88. Data taken from Feenstra (1997) and USITC (2001).

• D FORAD: Indicator if the foreign country has an active AD statute. Data taken from
  Miranda, Torres and Ruiz (1998).

• IMPSHARE: Ratio of annual U.S. HTS (8-10 digit for 1989-1998) or TSUSA (5-7 digit for
  1980-1988) imports from the foreign country to the total annual U.S. HTS/TSUSA imports.
  HTS/TSUSA tariff line codes taken from Federal Register (various issues). U.S. HTS/TSUSA
  import data taken from Feenstra (1996) and USITC (2001).

• C IMP: Growth rate in the real (1992) value of U.S. HTS/TSUSA imports from the foreign
  country from the previous year. Data taken from Feenstra (1996) and USITC (2001).

• TARIFF: U.S. industry’s pre-investigation tariff level. For 1980-88, the data is 4-digit SIC
  average tariff level obtained from Tom Prusa. For 1989 and after, the data is taken to be the
  8 or 10 digit 1994 average HTS tariff taken from USITC (2001).

• D CUMULATE: Indicator if a case was ‘cumulated.’ Data obtained from Tom Prusa.

• D STEEL: Indicator if the U.S. industry is in the steel sector.


                                             20
• CONC: Four firm concentration ratio. Data taken from the U.S. Bureau of the Census’,
  Census of Manufactures, Concentration Ratios in Manufacturing.

• EMP: 4-digit SIC industry employment. Data taken from Bartelsman, Becker and Gray’s (2000)
  NBER Manufacturing Industry Productivity Database.

• C EMP: Yearly change in 4-digit SIC industry employment. Data taken from Bartelsman,
  Becker and Gray’s (2000) NBER Manufacturing Industry Productivity Database.

• C CAP: Yearly change in the 4-digit SIC industry capacity utilization rate. Data taken the
  U.S. Bureau of the Census, Current Industrial Reports, Survey of Plant Capacity. ‘Practical
  rate’ used for 1980-88, ‘full production rate’ used for 1989 and after (discontinuation of ‘practical
  rate’ series).

• UNEMRATE: U.S. national unemployment rate, taken from the Economic Report of the
  President.

• D PRE 1990: Indicator if the year of the case was before 1990.

• D POST 1989: Indicator if the year of the case was after 1989.

• D PRE 1993: Indicator if the year of the case was before 1993.

• D POST 1992: Indicator if the year of the case was after 1992.




                                                21
Appendix


   This appendix summarizes the theoretical model in Blonigen (2000). Following Brander and

Krugman (1983), assume there are two countries, home and foreign with one firm in each country

producing the identical good, Q. The firms compete in quantities in both markets, and we denote

firms’ quantities as qij , where i indexes the market (“h” for home and “f” for foreign) and j indexes

the firm (“h” or “f”). Price in the home and foreign markets are a function of the total quantity

supplied by each firm to that market, Ph (Qh ) and Pf (Qf ), respectively, where Qh = qhh + qhf and

Qf = qfh + qff . Marginal cost for each firm is a constant, ci , where i = h, f. There are transport

costs of the “iceberg” type when a firm in one country sells its product in the other country, such

that it’s marginal cost for these cross-border transactions is ci /g, where 0 < g < 1. Given this

setup, the markets are segmented and each firm’s decision for its optimal quantity for one market is

independent of it’s optimal quantity choice for the other market. It also means that one can solve

separately for the Nash equilibrium quantities in each market.

   We now extend this basic model to consider the occurrence of AD petitions in the two countries.

First, assume the ability of each firm to petition for an AD duty on its rival, τ , for a cost of K. Also,

assume that the probability of success of the AD petition is an increasing function of the ratio of the

importing firm’s quantity to the domestic firm’s quantity in the previous period, which is denoted by

φh (qhf /Qh) for the home market and φf (qfh /Qf ), where 0 ≤ φh (.) ≤ φf (.) ≤ 1. This functional form

of the AD duty probability is intended to reflect the injury determination in the AD investigation

since this is the main hurdle in real-life AD investigations. To allow for the possibility of retaliation

consider an infinitely repeated two-stage game each period where the firms in each country play a

game in quantities in the first stage and then each firm decides whether to file an AD petition or not.

If filed, an AD duty, τ , with probability φi (.) comes into effect the subsequent period. Consequently,

each period the firm has the decision to petition for AD protection, which (if successful) leads to an

AD duty, or to not petition for AD protection, which leads to no duty or the removal of a duty, if

one was in place in the previous period.

   Given this repeated game, the strategy most commonly discussed to achieve a cooperative out-

come, whereby neither firm files and both avoid AD protection in their export market, is the trigger

(or grim) strategy. With such a strategy, we assume both firms begin by not petitioning and then


                                                   22
choose to continue with that strategy unless the other firm files an AD petition, whereupon they

retaliate and file an AD petition every subsequent period. As is well-known, such a trigger strategy

can support a cooperative equilibrium only if the punishment is large enough for each firm that it

outweighs the gains from deviating. Focusing on the home firm without loss of generality because

of the symmetry of this model, this would imply that the home firm would not deviate from the

cooperative equilibrium by filing for an AD petition, provided that in any given period (t),


                                                       X
                           δφh (·)(Π̂hh − Π∗h
                                           h )−K <           δ t φf (·)(Π∗h − Π̂hf )                (5)
                                                       t=2

where 0 < δ ≤ 1 denotes the discount factor, Π̂hh is the home firm’s profits in the home market when

it has an AD duty in place, Π∗h
                             h is the home firm’s profits in the home market when it does not

have an AD duty in place, Π∗f
                           h is the home firm’s profits in the foreign market when there it does

not face an AD duty in the foreign market, and Π̂fh is the home firm’s profits in the foreign market

when there it does face an AD duty in the foreign market. The lefthand side of (5) is the expected

gains in additional profit the home firm can make in the home market from deviating in a current

period by filing for AD protection that begins next period. The righthand side of (5) represents

the expected losses in profits in the foreign market once the foreign firm retaliates by adopting the

strategy of always filing for AD protection beginning in the following period. Thus, depending on

the parameters of the model, we have a simple setting where the threat of retaliation may matter for

whether we see AD petitions. In fact, the higher the expected loss from retaliation, the more likely

a cooperative outcome from use of strategies such as the grim strategy, and the less likely we are to

see AD petitions being filed.

   Given this model, we can examine alternative scenarios that generate predictions for the empirical

estimation. First, it is trivial to see that if the foreign country does not have AD laws in this game,

the threat of retaliation is zero. This means that the righthand side of (5) becomes zero, making it

more likely the home firm will petition for AD protection. Second, suppose AD laws are in place

in the foreign country and that with symmetric costs the firms are able to attain the cooperative

equilibrium via trigger strategies, such that the condition in (5) is satisfied for both firms; i.e., no

AD petitions are filed in either market. Now suppose the home firm has a cost disadvantage where

ch > cf . This obviously alters optimal quantities and profits so that the condition in (5) may or

may not hold. With respect to the home firm, their market share in both markets will go down.


                                                  23
This means that the probability of a successful petition in the home market increases, while the

probability of a successful petition by the foreign firm against the home firm falls. Likewise, the

profit gain from an AD duty goes up in the home market, while the profit loss from facing an AD

duty in the foreign market goes down. These effects all work toward making it more likely that the

condition in (5) is not satisfied, and the home firms deviates and files an AD petition. Intuitively, a

cost disadvantage raises the potential profit gain of an AD duty in the home market for the home

firm, while lowering its exposure to retaliation (and profit loss) in the foreign market.




                                                  24
References
 [1] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. (1999). “An Economic Theory of GATT,” American Economic
     Review, 89(1): 215-248.

 [2] Blonigen, Bruce A. (2000) “U.S. Antidumping Filings and the Threat of Retaliation,” manuscript, Uni-
     versity of Oregon, December. (available on line at http://darkwing.uoregon.edu/˜bruceb/workpap.html)

 [3] Blonigen, Bruce A. and Thomas J. Prusa. (forthcoming) “Antidumping,” in J. Harrigan, ed., Handbook
     of International Trade. Oxford, U.K. and Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishers.

 [4] Bown, Chad P. (2000) “Trade Disputes and the Implementation of Protection under the GATT:
     An Empirical Assessment,” manuscript, Brandeis University, November. (available on line at
     http://www.brandeis.edu/˜cbown/research.html)

 [5] Bown, Chad P. (2001a) “Antidumping Against the Backdrop of Disputes                          in the
     GATT/WTO System,” manuscript, Brandeis University, July. (available on                      line at
     http://www.brandeis.edu/˜cbown/research.html)

 [6] Bown, Chad P. (2001b) “The Economics of Trade Disputes, the GATT’s Article XXIII and the WTO’s
     Dispute Settlement Understanding,” revised manuscript, Brandeis University, April. (available on line
     at http://www.brandeis.edu/˜cbown/research.html)

 [7] Brander, James and Paul Krugman. (1983) “A ‘Reciprocal Dumping’ Model of International Trade.”
     Journal of International Economics, 15: 313-21.

 [8] Feenstra, Robert. (1996) “U.S. Imports, 1972-1994: Data and Concordances.” NBER Working Paper
     5515 and Accompanying CD-Rom. March.

 [9] Feenstra, Robert. (1997) “U.S. Exports, 1972-1994: with State Exports and Other U.S. Data.” NBER
     Working Paper 5990 and Accompanying CD-Rom. April.

[10] Feenstra, Robert. (2000) “World Trade Flows, 1980-1997, with Production and Tariff Data.” UC-Davis
     mimeo and Accompanying Data CD-Rom. March.

[11] Feenstra, Robert, Robert Lipsey and Harry Bowen. (1997) “World Trade Flows, 1970-1992, with Pro-
     duction and Tariff Data.” NBER Working Paper 5910 and Accompanying CD-Rom. January.

[12] Gallaway, Michael P., Bruce A. Blonigen, and Joseph E. Flynn. (1999) “Welfare Costs of U.S. Unfair
     Trade Laws,” Journal of International Economics 49(2): 211-44.

[13] Greene, William H. (2000) Econometric Analysis New Jersey: Prentice Hall.

[14] Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman. (1995) “Trade Wars and Trade Talks,” Journal of Political
     Economy 103(4): 675-708.

[15] Hansen, Wendy. (1990) “The International Trade Commission and the Politics of Protectionism.” Amer-
     ican Political Science Review 84: 21-46.

[16] Hansen, Wendy and Thomas Prusa. (1996) “Cumulation and ITC Decision-Making: The Sum of the
     Parts Is Greater Than the Whole.” Economic Inquiry 34 (4): 746-69.

[17] Hansen, Wendy and Thomas Prusa. (1997) “The Economics and Politics of Trade Policy: An Empirical
     Analysis of ITC Decision Making.” Review of International Economics 5 (2): 230-245.

[18] Lindsey, Brink and Dan Ikenson. (2001) Coming Home to Roost: Proliferating Antidumping Laws and
     the Growing Threat to U.S. Exports. Washington, D.C.: Cato Institute.

[19] Maggi, Giovanni. (1999). “The Role of Multilateral Institutions in International Trade Cooperation,”
     American Economic Review, 89(1): 190-214.



                                                   25
[20] McFadden, Daniel. (1978) “Modelling the Choice of Residential Location.” in A. Karlquist, ed. Spatial
     Interaction Theory and Residential Location Amsterdam: North Holland, 75-96.

[21] McFadden, Daniel. (1981) “Econometric Models of Probabilistic Choice.” in C. Manski and D. McFad-
     den, eds. Structural Analysis of Discrete Data and Econometric Applications Cambridge: MIT Press,
     198-272.

[22] Miranda, Jorge, Raul A. Torres and Mario Ruiz. (1998) “The International Use of Antidumping: 1987-
     1997.” Journal of World Trade, 32(5): 5-71.

[23] Moore, Michael O. (1992) “Rules or Politics?: An Empirical Analysis of ITC Antidumping Decisions.”
     Economic Inquiry 30: 449-66.

[24] Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel. (1985) “Estimation and Inference in Two Step Econometric
     Models.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 3: 370-379.

[25] Prusa, Thomas J. (1991) “The Selection of Antidumping Cases for ITC Determination” in R.E. Baldwin,
     ed Empirical Studies of Commercial Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

[26] Prusa, Thomas J. (1992) “Why are So Many Antidumping Petitions Withdrawn?” Journal of Interna-
     tional Economics 33: 1-20.

[27] Prusa, Thomas J. (2001) “On the Spread and Impact of Antidumping” Canadian Journal of Economics.
     34(3): 591-611.

[28] Prusa, Thomas J. and Susan Skeath. (2001) “The Economic and Strategic Motives for Antidumping
     Filings,” NBER Working Paper No. 8424, July.

[29] Riezman, Raymond G. (1991) “Dynamic Tariffs with Asymmetric Information,” Journal of Interna-
     tional Economics, 30(3/4): 267-283.

[30] USITC. (2001) “U.S. International Trade Commission Interactive Tariff and Trade DataWeb” available
     on line at http://dataweb.usitc.gov/ , January.

[31] WTO. (1995a) “Panel Reports under the MTN Agreements and Arrangements (Tokyo Round Codes)
     of 1979,” unpublished document.

[32] WTO. (1995b) Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and
     Trade 1994 (Antidumping Code). Geneva: WTO.

[33] WTO. (2001) “Overview of the State-of-Play of WTO Disputes,” WTO on-line document at
     http://www.wto.org/english/tratop e/dispu e/stplay e.doc , May.




                                                   26
                                                U.S. Industry



                                      Name                      Not Name




                                        AD Authority




               Positive AD Decision                       Negative AD Decision




Figure 1: The Decision Tree of the U.S. AD Process, Given that a Petition Has Been Filed




                                              27
Table 1: Summary Statistics for some Covariates of the Two-Staged Model




     Stage 1 :         Y1 = ‘Named’                Stage 2 :         Y2 = ‘Positive
                                                                     AD Decision’
    Covariate                                     Covariate

 [expected sign of         Mean                [expected sign of         Mean
elasticity estimate]                          elasticity estimate]


US_EXPSHARE •              0.0628             US_EXPSHARE •              0.0496
D_USPLAINT [-]                                D_USPLAINT [-]

   US_EXP •                0.0130               US_EXP •                 0.0210
 D_USPLAINT [-]        ($1.3 billion)*        D_USPLAINT [-]         ($2.1 billion)*

PR_EXPSHARE •              0.0618             PR_EXPSHARE •              0.0441
 D_FORAD [-]                                   D_FORAD [-]

   PR_EXP •               0.0560                 PR_EXP •               0.0344
  D_FORAD [-]          ($56 million)*           D_FORAD [-]          ($34 million)*

IN_EXPSHARE •              0.0688             IN_EXPSHARE •              0.0475
  D_FORAD [-]                                   D_FORAD [-]

   IN_EXP •                0.0207                IN_EXP •                0.0127
  D_FORAD [-]          ($207 million)*          D_FORAD [-]          ($127 million)*

 IMPSHARE [+]              0.1507              IMPSHARE [+]              0.1978

    C_IMP [+]             0.049**                 C_IMP [+]             0.068**

  Observations :            2015                 TARIFF [-]              0.0439

                                              D_CUMULATE [+]             0.5612

                                                D_STEEL [+]              0.5457

                                                  CONC [+]               36.76
*1992 dollars
**Median values                                    EMP [+]               1.1807

                                                  C_EMP [-]             -0.0323

                                                  C_CAP [-]              0.0018

                                               UNEMRATE [+]              6.9192

                                                Observations :            645




                                         28
Table 2: Maximum Likelihood Results: Estimated Elasticities in the Two-Staged Nested-Logit Model




                    Stage 1 with Y1=1 is ‘Named’                       Stage 2 with Y2=1 is ‘Positive AD Decision’

                                   (1)         (2)          (3)                           (1)        (2)       (3)

         US_EXPSHARE             -0.308         ---          ---      US_EXPSHARE       -1.439‡   -1.414‡       ---
          • D_USPLAINT           (0.28)                               • D_USPLAINT      (0.32)     (0.31)
             US_EXP                ---          ---          ---        US_EXP            ---        ---     -0.335†
          • D_USPLAINT                                                • D_USPLAINT                            (0.17)
         PR_EXPSHARE             -0.254      -0.373‡         ---      PR_EXPSHARE       0.102        ---        ---
           • D_FORAD             (0.20)       (0.17)                   • D_FORAD        (0.31)
             PR_EXP                ---          ---        -0.038       PR_EXP            ---        ---        ---
           • D_FORAD                                       (0.05)      • D_FORAD
            IMPSHARE             0.494‡       0.461‡      0.437‡       IMPSHARE         1.041‡     1.091‡     0.928‡
                                 (0.12)       (0.12)       (0.11)                       (0.14)     (0.14)     (0.14)
              C_IMP              -0.398       -0.423       -0.348        C_IMP          1.222‡     1.272‡     1.181‡
                                 (0.35)       (0.32)       (0.31)                       (0.54)     (0.54)     (0.53)
               INAME             0.258*       0.314*      0.218*         TARIFF         1.138      1.199      1.056
                                 (0.08)       (0.08)       (0.08)                       (0.87)     (0.86)     (0.86)
           CONSTANT             -0.218‡      -0.227‡      -0.242‡     D_CUMULATE        0.177‡     0.185‡     0.156‡
                                 (0.04)       (0.04)       (0.03)                       (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.06)
           Observations           2015         2015        2015         D_STEEL         0.268‡     0.281‡     0.271‡
                                                                                        (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.06)
                                                                         CONC           -0.002     -0.002     -0.003
        Notes: (i) standard errors in parentheses
                                                                                        (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)
                (ii) ‡ and † indicate |t|>2 and 2>|t|>1.5,                EMP           0.165‡     0.172‡     0.165‡
                respectively, and the MLE is of the predicted
                                                                                        (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)
                sign.
                                                                         C_EMP          0.066      -0.078     0.014
                (iii) * the numbers reported for the inclusive
                values are the parameter estimates and not                              (0.37)     (0.37)     (0.37)
                elasticities.                                            C_CAP          -0.875‡   -0.911‡    -0.796‡
                                                                                        (0.21)     (0.21)     (0.21)
                                                                       UNEMRATE         -0.030     -0.032     -0.040
                                                                                        (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)
                                                                       CONSTANT         -0.175     -0.185     -0.101
                                                                                        (0.20)     (0.20)     (0.20)
                                                                       Observations      645        645        645




                                                                 29
Table 3: Maximum Likelihood Results: Estimated Elasticities in the Two-Staged Nested-Logit Model
(cont)




                    Stage 1 with Y1=1 is ‘Named’                        Stage 2 with Y2=1 is ‘Positive AD Decision’

                                   (4)         (5)          (6)                            (4)        (5)       (6)

         US_EXPSHARE               ---          ---          ---      US_EXPSHARE        -1.127‡      ---        ---
           • D_PLAINT                                                  • D_PLAINT        (0.33)
         US_EXPSHARE               ---          ---          ---      US_EXPSHARE          ---     -1.232‡       ---
         • D_GATT/WTO                                                 • D_GATT/WTO                  (0.33)
         US_EXP SHARE              ---          ---          ---      US_EXP SHARE         ---        ---     -1.317‡
          • D_USPLAINT                                                • D_USPLAINT                             (0.33)
         PR_EXPSHARE            -0.385‡      -0.389‡      -0.306†     PR_EXPSHARE          ---        ---        ---
           • D_FORAD             (0.17)       (0.17)       (0.17)      • D_FORAD
            IMPSHARE             0.454‡       0.455‡      0.404‡       IMPSHARE          1.156‡     1.149‡     1.038‡
                                 (0.12)       (0.11)       (0.12)                        (0.14)     (0.14)     (0.14)
              C_IMP              -0.438       -0.437       -0.489        C_IMP           1.270‡     1.268‡     1.214‡
                                 (0.32)       (0.31)       (0.33)                        (0.54)     (0.54)     (0.54)
               INAME             0.350*       0.346*      0.339*         TARIFF          1.185      1.199      2.459‡
                                 (0.08)       (0.09)       (0.09)                        (0.87)     (0.87)     (0.96)
           CONSTANT             -0.226‡      -0.226‡      -0.227‡     D_CUMULATE         0.187‡     0.185‡     0.254‡
                                 (0.04)       (0.02)       (0.04)                        (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.06)
           Observations           2015         2015        1928         D_STEEL          0.281‡     0.279‡     0.268‡
                                                                                         (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.06)
                                                                          CONC           -0.002     -0.003     -0.000
        Notes: (i) standard errors in parentheses
                                                                                         (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)
                (ii) ‡ and † indicate |t|>2 and 2>|t|>1.5,                EMP            0.178‡     0.178‡     0.208‡
                respectively, and the MLE is of the predicted
                                                                                         (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)
                sign.
                                                                         C_EMP           0.083      -0.080     -0.266
                (iii) * the numbers reported for the inclusive
                values are the parameter estimates and not                               (0.37)     (0.37)     (0.40)
                elasticities.                                            C_CAP           -0.883‡   -0.888‡    -0.831‡
                                                                                         (0.21)     (0.21)     (0.22)
                                                                       UNEMRATE          -0.033     -0.032     -0.026
                                                                                         (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)
                                                                       CONSTANT          -0.170     -0.168    -0.457‡
                                                                                         (0.20)     (0.20)     (0.22)
                                                                       Observations       645        645        645




                                                                 30
Table 4: Estimated Elasticities for an Alternative Formulation of the Second-Stage Dependent Vari-
able




                    Stage 1 with Y1=1 is ‘Named’                       Stage 2 with Y2=1 is ‘Positive AD Decision’

                                   (7)         (8)          (9)                           (7)        (8)       (9)

         US_EXPSHARE             -0.229         ---          ---      US_EXPSHARE       -1.331‡      ---     -1.904‡
          • D_USPLAINT           (0.28)                               • D_USPLAINT      (0.43)                (0.34)
             US_EXP                ---        0.166          ---        US_EXP            ---     -0.311†       ---
          • D_USPLAINT                        (0.14)                  • D_USPLAINT                 (0.18)
         PR_EXPSHARE             -0.132         ---       -0.303‡     PR_EXPSHARE       -0.682‡      ---        ---
           • D_FORAD             (0.20)                    (0.17)      • D_FORAD        (0.33)
             PR_EXP                ---        -0.030         ---        PR_EXP            ---      -0.021       ---
           • D_FORAD                          (0.06)                   • D_FORAD                   (0.08)
            IMPSHARE             0.406‡       0.371‡      0.400‡       IMPSHARE         1.344‡     1.140‡     1.321‡
                                 (0.12)       (0.11)       (0.12)                       (0.15)     (0.14)     (0.15)
              C_IMP              -0.520       -0.464       -0.529        C_IMP          1.547‡     1.495‡     1.573‡
                                 (0.32)       (0.32)       (0.32)                       (0.57)     (0.56)     (0.57)
               INAME             0.523*       0.463*      0.538*         TARIFF         1.273      1.000      1.210
                                 (0.11)       (0.10)       (0.10)                       (0.91)     (0.91)     (0.91)
           CONSTANT             -0.202‡      -0.225‡      -0.206‡     D_CUMULATE        0.324‡     0.281‡     0.323‡
                                 (0.04)       (0.02)       (0.05)                       (0.07)     (0.07)     (0.07)
           Observations           2015         2015        2015         D_STEEL         0.304‡     0.293‡     0.297‡
                                                                                        (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.06)
                                                                         CONC           -0.003     -0.005     -0.004
        Notes: (i) standard errors in parentheses
                                                                                        (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)
                (ii) ‡ and † indicate |t|>2 and 2>|t|>1.5,                EMP           0.183‡     0.184‡     0.187‡
                respectively, and the MLE is of the predicted
                                                                                        (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)
                sign.
                                                                         C_EMP          0.159      -0.032     -0.095
                (iii) * the numbers reported for the inclusive
                values are the parameter estimates and not                              (0.39)     (0.38)     (0.39)
                elasticities.                                            C_CAP          -0.930‡   -0.815‡    -0.952‡
                                                                                        (0.22)     (0.22)     (0.22)
                                                                       UNEMRATE         -0.037     -0.046     -0.036
                                                                                        (0.03)     (0.02)     (0.02)
                                                                       CONSTANT         -0.316‡    -0.202     -0.298
                                                                                        (0.21)     (0.20)     (0.21)
                                                                       Observations      645        645        645




                                                                 31
Table 5: Estimated Elasticities under Alternative Eligibility Requirements for Determining ‘Non-
Named’ Firms




                    Stage 1 with Y1=1 is ‘Named’                        Stage 2 with Y2=1 is ‘Positive AD Decision’

                                  (10)         (11)         (12)                          (10)       (11)       (12)


         US_EXPSHARE               ---          ---          ---      US_EXPSHARE •      -1.395‡   -1.486‡    -1.365‡
          • D_USPLAINT                                                 D_USPLAINT        (0.32)     (0.32)     (0.32)
         PR_EXPSHARE            -0.490‡       -0.210      -0.398†     PR_EXPSHARE •        ---        ---        ---
           • D_FORAD             (0.18)       (0.16)       (0.17)       D_FORAD
            IMPSHARE             0.244‡       0.628‡      0.478‡        IMPSHARE         1.077‡     1.147‡     1.053‡
                                 (0.12)       (0.13)       (0.12)                        (0.14)     (0.14)     (0.14)
              C_IMP              -0.434       -0.432       -0.579         C_IMP          1.255‡     1.337‡     1.228‡
                                 (0.35)       (0.26)       (0.32)                        (0.54)     (0.54)     (0.54)
               INAME             0.327*       0.337*      0.284*         TARIFF          1.183      1.260†     1.157
                                 (0.08)       (0.10)       (0.09)                        (0.87)     (0.87)     (0.86)
           CONSTANT             -0.141‡      -0.282‡      -0.198‡     D_CUMULATE         0.182‡     0.194‡     0.178‡
                                 (0.04)       (0.02)       (0.04)                        (0.06)      (.06)      (.06)
           Observations           1681         2797        1790         D_STEEL          0.277‡     0.295‡     0.271‡
                                                                                         (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.06)
                                                                          CONC           -0.002     -0.002     -0.002
        Notes: (i) standard errors in parentheses
                                                                                         (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)
                (ii) ‡ and † indicate |t|>2 and 2>|t|>1.5,                EMP            0.169‡     0.180‡     0.166‡
                respectively, and the MLE is of the predicted
                                                                                         (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)
                sign.
                                                                         C_EMP           0.077      -0.082     -0.075
                (iii) * the numbers reported for the inclusive
                values are the parameter estimates and not                               (0.37)     (0.37)     (0.37)
                elasticities.                                            C_CAP           -0.898‡   -0.957‡    -0.879‡
                                                                                         (0.21)     (0.21)     (0.21)
                                                                       UNEMRATE          -0.031     -0.033     -0.031
                                                                                         (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)
                                                                       CONSTANT          -0.182     -0.194     -0.179
                                                                                         (0.20)     (0.20)     (0.20)
                                                                       Observations       645        645        645




                                                                 32
Table 6: Estimated Elasticities with Industry Exports in lieu of Product Exports




            Stage 1 with Y1=1 is ‘Named’                       Stage 2 with Y2=1 is ‘Positive AD Decision’

                          (13)         (14)         (15)                         (13)       (14)       (15)

 US_EXPSHARE             -0.039         ---          ---      US_EXPSHARE       -1.422‡      ---     -1.340‡
  • D_USPLAINT           (0.34)                               • D_USPLAINT      (0.48)                (0.32)
     US_EXP                ---        0.193          ---        US_EXP            ---     -0.368‡       ---
  • D_USPLAINT                        (0.15)                  • D_USPLAINT                 (0.18)
  IN_EXPSHARE            -0.527         ---       -0.546‡     IN_EXPSHARE       0.099        ---        ---
   • D_FORAD             (0.29)                    (0.20)      • D_FORAD        (0.40)
      IN_EXP               ---       -0.677†         ---         IN_EXP           ---      0.479        ---
   • D_FORAD                          (0.44)                   • D_FORAD                   (0.52)
    IMPSHARE             0.503‡       0.437‡      0.499‡       IMPSHARE         1.027‡     0.946‡     1.034‡
                         (0.12)       (0.12)       (0.12)                       (0.14)     (0.13)     (0.14)
      C_IMP              -0.387       -0.368       -0.390        C_IMP          1.202‡     1.204‡     1.206‡
                         (0.31)       (0.31)       (0.31)                       (0.54)     (0.53)     (0.54)
       INAME             0.237*       0.244*      0.243*         TARIFF         1.131      1.123      1.136
                         (0.09)       (0.08)       (0.08)                       (0.87)     (0.87)     (0.87)
   CONSTANT             -0.216‡      -0.235‡      -0.217‡     D_CUMULATE        0.174‡     0.162‡     0.175‡
                         (0.03)       (0.04)       (0.04)                       (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.06)
   Observations           2015         2015        2015         D_STEEL         0.265‡     0.283‡     0.266‡
                                                                                (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.06)
                                                                 CONC           -0.002     -0.003     -0.002
Notes: (i) standard errors in parentheses
                                                                                (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)
        (ii) ‡ and † indicate |t|>2 and 2>|t|>1.5,                EMP           0.162‡     0.166‡     0.163‡
        respectively, and the MLE is of the predicted
                                                                                (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)
        sign.
                                                                 C_EMP          0.067      -0.018     -0.074
        (iii) * the numbers reported for the inclusive
        values are the parameter estimates and not                              (0.37)     (0.37)     (0.37)
        elasticities.                                            C_CAP          -0.861‡   -0.806‡    -0.863‡
                                                                                (0.21)     (0.21)     (0.21)
                                                               UNEMRATE         -0.030     -0.039     -0.030
                                                                                (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)
                                                               CONSTANT         -0.175     -0.124     -0.175
                                                                                (0.20)     (0.20)     (0.20)
                                                               Observations      645        645        645




                                                         33
Table 7: Estimated Probability Changes Due to Changes in the ‘Retaliatory Threat’ Variables




          Hypothetical Change                                             Change in Conditional Probability
                                                                          of a Positive AD Decision, given that
                                                                          the Country has been Named


          Increase in share of US exports to a trading partner                          (2)                     (9)
                                                                             -10.22%                  -12.52%
          who has been a plaintiff in a GATT/WTO dispute
          against the US to 13.8% [5.0% ]

          Increase in real US exports to a trading partners                            (3)                     (8)
                                                                              -4.40%                  -3.63%
          who has been a plaintiff in a GATT/WTO dispute
          against the US to $17.8 billion [$2.1 billion]


          Hypothetical Change                                                Change in Probability of Being
                                                                                        Named


          Increase in share of US industry petitioner’s 8-10                            (2)                     (9)
                                                                             -13.67%                  -11.18%
          digit HTS product exports to a trading partner
          country who has an active AD statute to 15.8%
          [4.4%]

          Increase in real value of US industry petitioner’s 8-                        (3)                     (8)
                                                                              -5.75%                  -3.29%
          10 digit HTS product exports to a trading partner
          who has an Active AD statute to $386 million [$34
          million]


          Increase in share of US industry petitioner’s 4 digit                        (13)                     (15)
                                                                             -17.37%                 -18.03%
          SIC industry exports to a trading partner country
          who has an active AD statute to 15.0% [4.8%]

          Increase in real value of US industry petitioner’s 4                                                  (14)
                                                                                                     -11.84%
          digit SIC industry exports to a trading partner who
          has an Active AD statute to $695 million [$127
          million]


          Notes: Sample means in brackets
                  (N)                                         (3)
                      indicates based on model N, for example, is based on specification (3) of Table 2




                                                          34
Table 8: Estimated Elasticities Allowing for Breaks in the AD and GATT/WTO Retaliation Threat
Channels




                           Stage 1 with Y1=1 is ‘Named’                 Stage 2 with Y2=1 is ‘Positive AD Decision’

                                        (16)               (17)                              (16)             (17)


              US_EXPSHARE               ---                 ---       US_EXPSHARE          -1.282‡          -1.218‡
              • D_USPLAINT                                            • D_USPLAINT          (0.40)           (0.40)
                                                                       • D_PRE_1990
              US_EXPSHARE               ---                 ---       US_EXPSHARE          -1.853‡          -1.761‡
              • D_USPLAINT                                            • D_USPLAINT          (0.45)           (0.45)
                                                                      • D_POST_1989
              PR_EXPSHARE             -0.349†               ---       PR_EXPSHARE             ---             ---
                • D_FORAD              (0.18)                          • D_FORAD
               • D_PRE_1993
              PR_EXPSHARE              -0.410               ---       PR_EXPSHARE             ---             ---
                • D_FORAD              (0.36)                          • D_FORAD
              • D_POST_1992
              IN_EXPSHARE               ---               -0.528‡     IN_EXPSHARE             ---             ---
                 • D_FORAD                                 (0.22)       • D_FORAD
               • D_PRE_1993
              IN_EXPSHARE               ---               -0.528      IN_EXPSHARE             ---             ---
                • D_FORAD                                 (0.38)        • D_FORAD
              • D_POST_1992
                IMPSHARE              0.452‡              0.489‡       IMPSHARE            1.105‡           1.105‡
                                      (0.12)              (0.12)                           (0.14)           (0.14)
                  C_IMP                -0.442             -0.409         C_IMP             1.302‡           1.238‡
                                       (0.32)             (0.32)                           (0.53)           (0.54)
                   INAME              0.357*              0.286*         TARIFF             0.947            0.899
                                      (0.09)              (0.09)                            (0.88)           (0.88)
               CONSTANT               -0.227‡             -0.217‡     D_CUMULATE           0.195‡           0.186‡
                                       (0.04)              (0.04)                          (0.06)           (0.06)
               Observations            2015                2015         D_STEEL            0.291‡           0.276‡
                                                                                           (0.06)           (0.06)
             Notes: (i) standard errors in parentheses                   CONC               -0.002          -0.002
                                                                                            (0.00)          (0.00)
                     (ii) ‡ and † indicate |t|>2 and 2>|t|>1.5,
                     respectively, and the MLE is of the predicted        EMP              0.173‡           0.164‡
                     sign.                                                                 (0.03)           (0.03)
                                                                         C_EMP              0.227            0.216
                     (iii) * the numbers reported for the inclusive                         (0.37)           (0.37)
                     values are the parameter estimates and not
                     elasticities.                                       C_CAP             -0.864‡          -0.821‡
                                                                                            (0.21)           (0.21)
                                                                       UNEMRATE             -0.041          -0.039
                                                                                            (0.02)          (0.02)
                                                                       CONSTANT             -0.550          -0.102
                                                                                            (0.27)          (0.20)
                                                                       Observations          645              645




                                                             35
