                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     JOB DISPLACEMENT, DISABILITY, AND DIVORCE


                                         Kerwin Kofi Charles
                                         Melvin Stephens Jr.


                                         Working Paper 8578
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w8578


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2001




We thank Rebecca Blank, Matthew Shapiro, Gary Solon, Lowell Taylor, Robert Willis, two anonymous
referees, and seminar participants at the 2001 ASSA meetings for comments and suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.


© 2001 by Kerwin Kofi Charles and Melvin Stephens Jr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Job Displacement, Disability, and Divorce
Kerwin Kofi Charles and Melvin Stephens Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 8578
November 2001



                                              ABSTRACT


        This paper examines how job displacement and physical disability suffered by a spouse affects
the probability that the person’s marriage ends in divorce. According to the standard economic model of
marriage, the arrival of new information about a partner’s earning capacity that a negative earnings shock
conveys might affect the gains that the couple believes it will receive from remaining married. Shocks
may therefore affect divorce probability. Little previous work has explored this issue. The few efforts that
exist use no explicit measures of earning shocks. Using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, this paper
finds an increase in the probability of divorce following a spouse’s job displacement but no change in
divorce probability after a spousal disability. This difference casts doubt on a purely pecuniary motivation
for divorce following earnings shocks, since both types of shocks exhibit similar long-run economic
consequences. Furthermore, the increase in divorce is found only for layoffs and not for plant closings
which suggests that information conveyed about a partner’s non-economic suitability as a mate due to
a job loss may be more important than the financial losses in precipitating a divorce.




Kerwin Kofi Charles                        Melvin Stephens Jr.
Department of Economics                    H. John Heinz III School of Public Policy and Management
and Ford School of Public Policy           Carnegie Mellon University
University of Michigan                     4800 Forbes Avenue
611 Tappan Street                          Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                        and NBER
kcharles@umich.edu                         mstep@cmu.edu
                                                   Introduction

In standard economic models, marriage is presumed to confer pecuniary gains to spouses.1 Events that

lower a spouse’s earnings capacity may therefore be expected to affect the person’s family in two distinct

ways. First, because they lower a family’s full income, spousal earnings shocks are likely to have a

direct negative effect on the family’s consumption of market and home produced goods and of leisure.

Second, because they potentially change the gains that a married couple receives from being married,

shocks to the earnings of a spouse may affect the probability of the person’s marriage ending in divorce

or separation. A significant and growing literature analyzes the direct effect of earnings shocks on

families’ consumption, but very little research studies how earnings shocks affect marital stability.

         Using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, this paper assesses how negative shocks

to earnings, coming from job displacement or physical disability, affect the probability of marital

dissolution. We study two explicit negative earnings shocks, whereas previous authors have relied on the

difference between actual and predicted earnings as the measure of earnings shocks. We study marriages

between individuals of all ages as well as first and other marriages, so the results we document should be

representative of population-wide effects. We also study negative shocks occurring to both husbands and

wives.

         We find evidence that job loss significantly raises the divorce hazard, whereas spousal disability

has no effect.    We present evidence that this difference does not arise because disability has a smaller

effect on earnings than does job loss, or that a bout of disability is less informative about the future

trajectory of bad health than losing a job is about future episodes of job loss. This result casts doubt on a


1
 Among the pecuniary gains identified by Weiss (1994) and other economists are: (a) greater consumption of public
goods – such as home-heating, or well-fed and well-clothed children – in marriage than either partner in a married
couple could consume in the single state; (b) spouses’ role as creditors where capital markets are imperfect, as occurs
when one spouse helps finance another’s advanced schooling; and (c) insurance spouses provide to their mates, as is
evident in the promise to help each other when negative events occur. We note here that many of the gains from
marriage are obviously not pecuniary, and most are probably outside the realm of standard economic analysis. We
only follow convention in the economics literature in emphasizing pecuniary gains.




                                                          1
purely pecuniary motivation for divorce following an earnings shock. We also find that the increase in

divorce following a job loss is due entirely to layoffs and that there is no effect due to plant closings. We

argue that this last result suggests that information conveyed about a partner’s non-economic suitability

as a mate due to a job loss may be more important than the financial losses in precipitating a divorce



                                                   Overview

In the growing literature on the impact of earnings shocks on family well-being, researchers have

typically focused on the consumption of either of leisure or market-produced goods as the outcome

variable. This focus provides a picture of the welfare effects of shocks on married couples which is not

only incomplete, but which may also be misleading.           Most papers studying how the consumption and

labor supply of married couples are affected by earnings shocks focus on families that remain together

over the interval analyzed.2      But, observed patterns of consumption of leisure and market-produced

goods among families which meet this restriction may differ fundamentally from the average

consumption changes among all families experiencing such shocks.                Indeed, this is necessarily true

unless the likelihood of marital dissolution conditional on an earnings shock being suffered, and

consumption responses to such shocks, are systematically unrelated.

        Brief reflection suggests that this condition is unlikely to be true. In the population of married

couples to whom bad events occur, one would suppose that the couples most likely to divorce would be

those for whom within-marriage utility falls by a particularly large amount as a result of a given bad

event. That is, one would expect couples who remain together in the face of a bad outcome to be those

for whom actual and anticipated consumption and labor supply adjustments are relatively small when

compared to those experienced by people whose marriages break up. Thus, understanding how shocks


2
  Recent examples of some of this work include Cullen and Gruber (2000) and Stephens (Forthcoming) who analyze
whether wives increase their labor supply in response to husbands’ job loss – a test of the well known added-worker
hypothesis (A.W.E.). Stephens (2001) analyzes family consumption changes after husbands’ job loss. Charles
(1999) examines how husbands and wives adjust their labor supply when a spouse’s health worsens.



                                                        2
affect marital stability is vitally important, even if the ultimate interest is on how shocks affect a family’s

consumption.

         Of course, another justification for studying divorce, separation and other forms of marital

dissolution is that these are all directly indicative of the degree to which earnings shocks affect a family’s

well-being.3 However, empirical research in economics on the causes of marital dissolution is relatively

sparse, despite well-established theoretical results. In particular, only a pioneering paper by Becker,

Landes and Michaels (1977) and a more recent study by Weiss and Willis (1997) assess how

unanticipated changes to income and earnings affect marital dissolution.4

         The model by Becker et al (1977) explaining the problem of marital instability is the foundation

of all work by economists in this area. The model argues that at the start of marriage people form

expectations about their and their spouses future earnings streams. Couples are also characterized at the

start of their marriages by their “match quality” – something which measures the likely future stability of

their union because of factors such as similar life experiences and goals, and the intensity of their initial

connection.     Over time, married persons receive information about themselves and their partners which

may cause them to re-evaluate the wisdom of remaining married to the spouse.                  The main point is that

the information likely to cause this type of re-evaluation must be unanticipated, for things that the couple

knew or expected to be true when they became married should have made them dubious about being



3
  Since marital dissolution is something which people choose, this statement may appear initially odd. If people
chose to dissolve a marriage then, by revealed preference, how could their welfare fall as a result of what they freely
chose? Of course, since any individual spouse, if his or her preferences are strong enough, can cause a marriage to
end, it is possible for the other (reluctant) spouse to be made strictly worse off by the new arrangement. There is
evidence (Seeborg (1996)) that ex-wives often suffer financially in the aftermath of a divorce or separation. Even if
both spouses agree that they will both personally fare better if their marriage were to end, it is not obvious that they
fully internalize the interests of any children that they might have. This means that children’s welfare may suffer
after marital dissolution.
4
  Other recent research in economics on the subject of marital dissolution includes Lillard and Waite (1990, 1993).
The theoretical foundations of work on marriage and divorce can be traced to various papers by Becker. See Becker
(1973; 1974; 1991). Weiss (1997) is an excellent summary of research on these questions.




                                                           3
married in the first place.   These unanticipated bits of information, about changes in income, earnings

and other prospects are what we call “shocks” in this paper.

        Empirical tests to gauge the importance of shocks on marital instability are frustrated by the fact

that the quality of a married couple’s initial match is not known to a researcher. The inevitable question

then becomes: Is the fact that a married couple breaks up attributable to the earnings shocks which buffet

them, or to the fact that they were an ill-matched pair to begin with? And, is the deviation between the

couple’s belief about what each will earn and what they actually earn in the future well approximated by

the difference between the researcher’s estimate of the couple’s belief about their prospects and what the

couple actually realizes?

        Both of these problems complicate the empirical work done by Becker et. al (1977) on the causes

of marital instability. Using a large cross sectional data set, the authors examine the importance of

income, children and age at marriage on marital dissolution. Because the data are not longitudinal, they

are not able to account for match quality in their regressions. The authors measure earnings shocks using

(in their words) a crude measure equal to the difference between earnings as predicted by a simple cross-

sectional regression model and actual earnings.

        Weiss and Willis (1997), building on insights from Becker et al., model “surprises” as the

difference between realized earnings and predicted earnings estimated from earnings regressions run on

data from previous years. Their results show that a positive surprise to a husband’s earnings lowers the

chance of marital dissolution, while a positive earnings shock experienced by a wife’s raises the odds of

divorce. Since they use panel data from the National Longitudinal Study of the High School Class of

1972, Weiss and Willis are able to control for possible biases introduced by latent match quality.

However, Willis and Weiss, like Becker et al, use no explicit measure of shocks. Their regressions

therefore relate divorce probability to a measure which may be a very imperfect measure of earnings

changes which are un-anticipated by the couple.




                                                    4
        In this paper, we study two explicit outcomes which satisfy the conventional understanding of the

term “shock” or “surprise”, and which are in keeping with the spirit of the original formulation of

“surprises” due to Becker et al (1977). Our hope is that the effects we identify are therefore truly due to

unanticipated shocks to earnings. Also, because we study two different, explicitly-defined earnings

shocks, our work is able to address the fact that different shocks which have broadly similar effects on

the earnings of a spouse may have quite different effects on the probability of marital dissolution. This is

so for two reasons.

        The first is that two unanticipated shocks which affect current earnings similarly may yet provide

different pieces of information to a partner about a spouses’ future earnings capacity. The second reason

is that the precise nature of the shock may matter in a couple’s dissolution decision because of how

others may react to a divorce or separation which is initiated by a particular type of shock. For example,

friends and other loved ones may withhold their post-separation support if they feel that the separation is

unwarranted, unjust, or petty.   A person concerned about the treatment that they will receive from their

loved ones after their marriage ends might feel that only certain reasons for divorce comfortably pass this

social approval test. Of course, to learn whether different types of shocks affect the dissolution decision

differently, we can only examine these issues if different, explicit indicators must be used in the analysis.

        The analysis in the paper focuses on shocks to earnings arising from the onset of either a physical

disability or a job loss. For both of these negative shocks, we study the short and long-term effects of

the first shock a married couple experiences, as it is this event which brings the couple the new

information that might be the source of their greater divorce probability. Obviously, couples may

experience disabilities or job losses after the first one they experience. Why, then, do we focus on the

first shock?   One answer is that, to the extent that the paper is interested in the effect of negative

earnings shocks, bouts of displacement or disability which follow the first event are, to a considerable

degree, not “shocks” at all; couples can expect these future events once the event ever happens once.

Stevens (1997) finds that ever-displaced workers face an increased risk of future job loss relative to


                                                      5
never displaced persons, and the recurrent nature of health problems is well-known and documented

below.

         Another and perhaps less important reason for emphasizing the first as opposed to subsequent

shocks is that previous research shows that for both displacement (Stevens (1997)) and disabilities

(Charles (1997)), the first job loss is by far the most severe in terms of lost earnings and wages.        As with

earthquakes, first shocks seem to be often accompanied by smaller “aftershocks”. We focus on the initial

important event.

         The paper uses panel data, as do Weiss and Willis. However, Weiss and Willis only study

marital dissolution up to age 32. Their summary statistics reveal that there is a great deal of marital

formation and dissolution by this age, but it is possible that patterns of marital dissolution for such young

couples may differ systematically from the behavior exhibited by the population at large.                   It may

therefore be unwise to generalize from results for this group. Our data cover marriages between people

of all ages and with very different marital histories, so our results should be representative of population-

wide effects.

         In the next section, we briefly lay of the theoretical foundation for the work that follows. The

estimation technique is then briefly outlined. Next, we describe the data used in the analysis, present the

results, and conclude.



            1. Earnings Shocks and Marital Dissolution: Theory and Empirical Strategy

Consider a family i consisting of a husband, h, and a wife, w. Let the utility which the partners jointly

receive from being married in any period t be Vit (Yht , Ywt ) .5 Yjt is the income or labor earnings received

by spouse j, j = h, w in time period t. Assume that marital utility is strictly increasing in its arguments,



5
 The simplest form that the function V can take is a sum, but others obviously are possible. For example, marriage
may be synergistic in the sense that the pair does jointly better than the mere sum of their parts.



                                                         6
so that V1 > 0 and V2 > 0 in every t. In every period, a spouse has an alternative utility which he or she


                                                                          ( )
can receive from not being married to the current spouse - A jt Y jt . These alternatives may be very

different for a husband and a wife in any given marriage, but notice that they depend only on the

characteristics of that particular spouse. If a married person were not with their current spouse, they

could either be single, or with a new partner. If single, their welfare would be determined only by what

they were able to earn.       And, in this simple model where people are distinguished solely by their

earnings capacities, the “quality” of any new spouse one is able to attract depends solely on one’s own

earnings capacity. Finally, suppose that it costs C to dissolve a marriage, with the costs shared by

husband and wife.

        Under these assumptions, the expected gain from remaining married for a married couple i , in

year t may be expressed as the value function

           Gi ! t " ( Vit !Yht ,Ywt " % Et # Max &*Gi (t % ), Awt % % Aht % ) C '+ | I it $ % !it .   (1)
                                                  ,                              -

In (1), the expression (t + ) refers to all time in the future from the perspective of period t. The first part

of (1) reflects the within-family utility in the current period. The second part of (1) is the expectation as

of t of what the couple expects to receive in the future: either the value of remaining together in the next

period or what they would receive from having their marriage dissolve in the future. This is a conditional

expectation because the couple will have, at time t, a body of information summarized by the information

set, I t , which should be pertinent to its dissolution decision. The term !it refers to idiosyncratic factors

which affect a couple in any period: the quality of the couple’s match; and purely random events or

considerations. That is,

                                              !it ( "i % #it                                          (2)

where "i measures latent match quality, and #it is a white-noise random error.




                                                           7
        Larger gains as measured by (1) should increase the durability of a marriage. A variable which,

ceteris paribus, decreases current within-marriage utility or the expected future within-marriage utility

should thus raise the probability of separation. By similar logic, anything which only raises the costs of

divorce lowers the probability of separation.         It follows that a first earnings shock to spouse j in time

period t, D jt , has an ambiguous theoretical effect on the likelihood of divorce. On the one hand, this first

shock decreases the utility that the family currently receives, and might decrease the utility that the

family expects to receive in the future as well, so that

                                   ∂Vit            ∂E Vit + | I t 
                                         < 0, and,                     ≤ 0.                         (3)
                                   ∂D jt                ∂D jt

But the shock should also lower both the current and expected future alternatives of the person suffering

the shock, for it lowers that person’s earnings and renders them less attractive to other possible mates.

So


                           ∂Ajt                ∂E  Ajt + | I t 
                                   < 0, and,                    ≤ 0,   j = h, f .                 (4)
                           ∂D jt                   ∂D jt



        The degree to which a shock lowers expected future within-marriage and alternative returns

depends on the inferences drawn about how the affected person’s future earnings prospects will be

affected. Some types of earnings shocks, occurring to a couple for the first time, may lead a spouse who

does not directly experience the shock to conclude that they have married a person who is likely to face

many similar shocks in the future.          Divorce should be a more likely outcome in such instances.

Alternatively, other types of first shocks may be perceived as having only fleeting influences on a

partner’s earnings, with little or no informative value about how the person is likely to fare in the future.

In these cases, the adverse effect of earnings shocks on separation probability should be smaller,

particularly given that separation is a costly thing.




                                                           8
          The precise nature of the spousal shock may also directly affect separation costs. For example,

suppose that the person suffering the shock is a husband. Married couples promise explicitly to remain

together “in sickness and in health” so that a wife trying to leave a spouse who has fallen ill may meet

with significant societal disapproval (high C).                    Alternatively, to the extent that job loss is a type of

public signal of a husband’s lack of initiative or dedication, a wife might find that leaving him after this

event is met with little societal disapproval (low C).

          We may assume that a marriage dissolves in any period in which the gains from marriage as

given by (1) are less than zero.                Assuming that the first two terms of (1) can be written as a linear

function of observables, a couple’s separation hazard – its probability of dissolving at any time, having

survived up to that point in time – can be written

                                                           k (k *                 k (k *
                      Sit !T " ( $1Tit % $2Zit % $3        .k (1
                                                                    Dhtk   % $4   .D
                                                                                  k (1
                                                                                           wt   % "i % #it .   (5)


Tit is the time that the couple has been married as of year t, so the coefficient β 1 measures the degree

of duration dependence in marital dissolution.                     If β 1 < 0 then marriages become sturdier the longer

they last; β 1 > 0 implies that couples are more likely to separate the longer they have already been

together.      The variable Z it represents all observable characteristics of the couple, presumed to affect

marital stability.        These include variables which measure the nature of initial sorting, such as shared

religious affiliation, or similar education. The variables Dh and Dw measure the years since spouses’

first earnings shocks, from 1 year prior to the date to observation ! k ( 1 " , to 6 years or more prior to the

time period t ! k ( k * " .

          The variable ε it is assumed to be normally distributed, with E (ε it ) = 0, Var (ε it ) = 1,

E (ε it ε i′t ) = 0, and E (ε it , ε it ′ ) = 0 .   In principle, equation (5) can be estimated using multiple years

pooled data, and a simple probit model. The problem is the match quality term "i in the equation. Even




                                                                     9
if "i is not systematically related to any of the regressors of interest, in a non-linear model of the form of

(5), unlike a simple linear model, the parameter estimates may still be biased. (See Madalla (1986)).

We mainly control for marriage-specific match quality with a rich set of variables which include whether

the marriages under examination are the first, second or third or later for each spouse in each marriage;

the religious affiliation of the spouses; and differences in their levels of education.           A very similar

approach is taken by Willis and Weiss, who model the match term as being a linear function of

observables in each period, then directly control for these observables in their regressions.



                                                    2. Data

Marriages

This paper uses data from the standard releases of Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), 1968-1993,

combined with detailed marital histories which were collected beginning in 1985. The PSID is a

nationally representative sample of households in 1968 as well as an oversample of low-income

households. For our paper, we focus on households from the nationally representative sample.6

        To construct the sample used in the paper, we first identify all married couples in all PSID survey

years. Retrospective information on variables such as the date of marriage, and the characteristics of the

spouses at the time of marriage is essential for our work, but this information on marital history is first

asked in the PSID in 1985.        Thus, we delete from the set of all married couples those for which this

retrospective information is not available. It follows that couples which are present in the PSID prior to

1985 must last until 1985 to be included in our analysis sample. A natural concern is that our sample

might contain a disproportionate number of families with idiosyncratically high levels of durability,

given that the initial wave of data collection was in 1968. We believe that having accurate historical

information about the marriages that we study overrides this concern. Moreover, if we find that earnings



6
  Estimation using the nationally representative and poverty sample and using the PSID sample weights yield very
similar results to those presented in the paper.


                                                        10
shocks raise the probability of marital dissolution, even in families which are idiosyncratically stable,

then our results would have to read as conservative lower bounds for the population at large.

           We use information on marital history from the marital history file to determine the date of

marriage and the number of previous marriages for each couple. Couples for whom no date of marriage

is available – people cohabiting – were deleted.7 If a couple is together in the PSID data in one year (say

1973) but give their date of marriage as a later year (say 1977), then we determine their date of marriage

as being the year they report begin married, rather than the date we first observe them living together as a

couple. Both spouses report their marital history separately in either 1985 or in their first year as a head

or a wife if they subsequently enter the survey. In a few cases (less than 5%), the spouses disagree on

their date of marriage. Using either the earlier or the later of the dates (or excluding these households)

yields nearly identical results.

           After the deletions described above, we are left with a sample consisting of all unique husband-

wife in the PSID, who responded to the PSID marital history information in 1985 or later.       Call this the

marriage sample. After a few more deletions related to the two outcomes of interest – disability, and job

displacement – which are outlined below, we are left with the paper’s analysis sample.           We follow

marital dissolution of the couples in the analysis sample from 1985 until the end of the marriage, or until

the end of the survey.



Divorces

From annual questions on marital status, we determine if a couple in the married sample is together in a

given year and, if not, whether they were together in the previous year. If the couple is together in some


7
    The fraction of cohabiting couples in a given year averages less than 5%.




                                                           11
survey year t and not in survey year t+1, we focus on the reason given for their not being together.

Couples at risk to be labeled “divorced” are those for which both spouses are interviewed in year t+1 but

reside in separate households, and those where only one spouse is left in the PSID and the reason for the

other spouse no longer being in the PSID is given as “that spouse moved out”. From the marital history,

we then ask whether such couples were separated or divorced in the time when they are found to reside in

different households. Since the data show that most couples divorce upon becoming separated, we call all

separations “divorces” in the analysis.8



First Job Displacements

Job displacements are determined from a question put to respondents with low levels of current job

tenure about their previous employer: “What happened to that employer (job)?” Our interest is in those

who report either that their plant closed/employer moved and those who were laid off/fired. Workers who

are temporarily laid off at the time of the survey are treated by the PSID as if they are still employed and

are not asked any questions about a previous employer/job. If such a worker is subsequently terminated,

that information would be recorded as a displacement in the following year's survey.

         The year of displacement is measured with some error. The earnings and employment questions

are designed to elicit information for the previous calendar year. However, questions about job loss are

not specific to calendar years. For the first sixteen waves of the PSID, the survey asks what happened to

the last job for those reporting job tenure which is less than one year. Subsequent surveys ask what

happened to the previous job if the current job started since January 1 of the previous calendar year. Due

to the timing of the interviews, job displacements may have occurred either during the previous calendar

year or during the first few months of the current calendar year. For this study, a recorded displacement


8
 We do not allow for re-marriages in our analysis. However, only a small fraction of couples are observed getting
back together after their initial separation. However, since our analysis is performed on all unique husband-wife
pairs which meet the sample restrictions, our data include observations of the same husband (wife) with a different
wife (husband).



                                                         12
is assumed to have occurred during the previous calendar year to match the earnings and employment

data recorded in the same survey.9

         We seek to identify a couple’s first job displacements.              This is generally taken as the first

displacement observed for a married couple.            We drop couples who report a displacement in the first

year of the PSID in 1968, because the displacement report in 1968 refers to any which occurred any time

in the previous 10 years.        For families which first appear in the 1968 survey, the first observed

displacement is therefore actually either the husband's first displacement, or his first one in at least ten

years.   For families which are split-offs from the original sample (e.g., a daughter is married and sets up

her own household), the recorded displacement may not be the first displacement, but it will be the first

one since the household was formed.



First Disabilities

Disability status is recorded from a question which asks “Do you have any physical or nervous condition

that limits the type of work or amount of work you can do?”10 Whereas displacement information refers

to a specific event which occurred within the past year, disability status refers to a subjective state which

can be acute, chronic, or intermittent.

         Because the disability information comes from self-reports, there has been concern that workers

may feel compelled to justify lower amounts of labor force participation, especially retirement, by

claiming they are limited in their work capacity. While such bias exists, there is also an attenuation

measurement error bias since the work limitation responses are a noisy measure of true work capacity. In

fact, the disability literature finds that these opposing biases appear to cancel out one another and


9
  Stephens (Forthcoming) presents evidence from the unemployment experience of displaced workers in the PSID
which suggests that this dating of displacements is the correct approach to use.
10
   The wording of this question has remained constant throughout the PSID, with the exception of 1969-1971. In
these years, disability is recorded from two questions, the first which asks if a condition limits the type of work and
the second which asks if a condition limits the amount of work. A disability in these years is recorded as an
affirmative response to either question.



                                                          13
concludes that health limitation questions such as those found in the PSID are a good proxy of a worker's

disability status (Stern 1989; Bound 1991; Bound et al 1998).

        Another issue with the disability measure is determining the date of onset. For this study, a

disability is assumed to have occurred within the year prior to the survey date when the respondent first

reports an affirmative answer to the disability question. One potential problem with this method is that

although people may be reporting a disability for the first time as limiting their work ability, these

disabilities could have affected them for varying lengths of time before work activities were affected.

Unfortunately, the date of disability onset is only available in a few of the early PSID years and is not

used here.11 “First” disabilities are taken as the first observed disability during a couple marriage,

provided there is a period of no report of a disability in the preceding year. This means that couple who

are disabled are the first year of the survey in 1968 are not counted, because there are no pre-disability

observations for these couples. Hourly wage and annual earnings regressions estimating the long-run

effect of disability using this measure yield results very comparable to Charles (1997).                   As with

displacement, we focus on disabilities which occur during the time that the couple has been together.

        The analysis presents results for both husbands’ and wives’ first shock, consistent with the

specification in equation (5) which says that controls for the shocks of both spouses should be

simultaneously controlled for. The final analysis sample consists of observations for families in which

neither the husband nor wife reported a disability in the first year they were observed in the PSID.



Data Summary

Table 1 presents the summary statistics for the sample used to study the effect of men’s shocks. The

sample consists of 2555 couples, about 43% of which experience no shock over the interval studied.

The first several rows of the table reveal that few differences between families where the husband


11
  In 1969-1975 and 1978, the PSID asks the respondents how long they have been limited. Charles (1997) uses this
information to construct a year of onset variable and to impute year of onset where this variable in not available.



                                                        14
experienced a shock and those where he did not. For example, in all families, the marriage in question is

the first for both 80% of husbands and wives, and husbands were about three years older than their

partners at the time of marriage.      Similarly, more than ninety percent of husbands are white in the three

sets of families.

         The various types of families do differ with respect to their levels of education. Families in

which there is no shock suffered by the husband tend to be better educated by more than a year for both

husbands and wives. In the case of job loss, this might be explained by the fact that the jobs of the better

educated display greater job security. And, it is well established in empirical health economics that there

is a strong positive relationship between good health and better education.           (See Kenkel 1991).

         Perhaps more noticeable than differences across the families in education may be the differences

in the observed incidence of divorce. Couples for whom no earnings shock is experienced by the

husband seem much more likely, on average, to experience a marital dissolution in the years after 1984,

relative to couples where the husband either lost his job or had a disability. What is the explanation for

this? The answer has to do with the way in which match quality, divorce incidence and the onset of

shocks interact. If shocks appear randomly over a couple’s life together, the chances that we observe a

couple experiencing a shock obviously rises the longer the marriage lasts.                  But suppose that some

marriages are initially bad matches; the partners know soon after marriage that they do not get along.

These bad matches will fail quickly. And, because they fail quickly, they are likely to fall into the

category of marriages for which no earnings shock is observed during the marriage.12 The average

number of years that the couple is observed in the P.S.I.D., and the average marital duration of the couple

over the years that the couple is observed in the data are consistent with this argument.




12
   Families with no earnings shocks – the control group – in the regressions are systematically “badly-matched”.
This means that if we find evidence that families with earnings shocks are more likely to divorce relative to this
group, then our results are conservative lower bounds on the adverse effect of disability and job loss on marital
stability.



                                                          15
         The table shows that the couples where the husband had no shock were in marriages which were

observed for only twelve years, as compared to nineteen and sixteen years for families with the two types

of shocks.    And, during the years that the couple was in the PSID, they had been married for an average

of only 14 years, versus 26 and 18 years for families with the two types of shocks. Because they broke

up so quickly, these marriages were simply not together long enough for a bad event like an earnings

shock to happen to them.

         Table 1b shows the means with the analysis sample separated by the whether the wife suffered a

shock.       A comparison of these results with those in Table 1a show that the same basic patterns are

evident across the two tables.

         Table 2 assesses the extent of sorting among the married couples in terms of observable

characteristics. The table shows patterns for race, education and religion – variables which are probably

important determinants of the degree to which a couple is well matched. The first column shows the

remarkable degree to which the couples in our analysis are of the same race. There is significantly less

sorting along the dimension of religion, as the second column shows. Nonetheless, the fact that more

than 60% of all couples share the same religious affiliation, at least nominally, suggests that substantial

sorting occurs with respect to religion as well.

         The similarity in schooling between husbands and wives is explored in the remaining columns.

Tables 1 show evidence of educational sorting.     Table 2 simply breaks education down into more cells

to assess that sorting more carefully. We separate completed schooling into three categories: high-school

or less (HS); some college, but no college degree (C); and at least a four year college degree (C+).   The

husband’s education is always listed first. Overall, sixty-four percent of husbands and wives have the

same level of completed schooling. This level of sorting is about the same as is observed for religion.

Unlike religion, however, these patterns mask large differences among the various types of families.

Most noteworthy is the relatively rarity of couples in which both the husband and wife have at most a

high school education among the set of people who are not observed to experience shocks. The 32%



                                                    16
incidence of the HS/HS educational match among couples where the husband experiences no shock is

much smaller than is true for the other couples where the incidence is 54% and 52%, respectively. And,

the C+/C+ outcome is also is clearly most common among couples who experienced no shock.

         Overall, there is a smaller level of educational similarity among families in which the husband

experienced a shock. If possessing similar schooling implies that partners have much in common, then it

is possible that greater educational dissimilarity might cause marriages to be less stable, with the result

that these marriages break up more quickly, and are not together long enough for a spouse to experience a

shock.

         The next section presents the results of the estimation procedures summarized in Section 2.



                                                     3. Results

Table 3 presents results for the effect of husbands’ and wives’ disability and job loss on the subsequent

likelihood of divorce for the couple. The dependent variable is a binary variable indicating whether the

marriage ends in divorce by the next year. Probit equations were run on pooled observations for all

couples, and the specification is as given by equation (5).13       The standard errors reported in the table

allow for arbitrary correlation between the disturbance terms within a couple. All of the regressions

presented in the Table use a rich set of variables to control for marital history, family structure, and

observable match quality – the degree to which spouses have the same education, religion and race.

The full results are presented in the Appendix, but we how these variables affect marriage stability before

turning attention permanently to the effect of earnings shocks.

         In all of the regressions, the marital history variables are found to be significant determinants of

divorce hazard. The individuals who are older at the date of marriage are less likely to become divorced.

This is consistent with the argument in the theoretical literature on marital search that more time spent


13
 We estimated several random effects probit models to help account for unmeasured heterogeneity. The results
which are very similar to those we present, and are available upon request.



                                                      17
search for a spouse, the better the quality of the match when a spouse is found. The theoretical

prediction of how having been previously married should affect divorce probability is ambiguous. On

the one hand, that a person has had one or more failed marriages could mean that they are not a stable

partner.     On the other, the experience of having been married before should have provided useful

knowledge on how to get along in a marriage which would make any subsequent marriage more secure.

We find that second and third marriages are less stable than first, suggesting that former effect dominates

in our sample. Finally, we find strong evidence of duration dependence in marital stability: the longer

people have been married, the smaller their divorce hazard. This result makes good theoretical sense.

The longer people have been married, the more time they have had to familiarize themselves with their

partners’ flaws, and the more time they have had to evolve strategies for dealing with them.

           With respect to the controls for observable match, we find that sharing the same religion has a

particularly strong effect on marital stability. Being of the same race does not affect the divorce hazard

in a statistically significant way when the race of the husband is controlled for. We control for the

different possible types of husband/wife education outcomes with the HS/HS category as the excluded

variable.     The results suggest that the effect of education on marriage stability is less a matter of the

similarity in schooling between husbands and wives, as much as whether the couple is highly educated or

not, and whether it is the husband or wife with the higher level of schooling.      When the husband has

only a high school education then, whatever his wife’s education, the probability that their marriage ends

in divorce is about the same. When the husband is a college graduate, then regardless of his wife’s

education, the likelihood that the marriage ends in divorce is significantly reduced relative to that for the

HS/HS type of family. In support of the match idea, it is true that the reduction in the hazard relative to

HS/HS is smallest when the education is most dissimilar among these marriages where the husband is a

college graduate – the CO+/HS category.

           The last set of control variables measure family structure. We find that family structure is an

important determinant of divorce probability in all of the regressions. In particular, children help to



                                                      18
stabilize marriages. People are more likely to divorce the older their youngest child, and are less likely to

have their marriages dissolve the more children they have. It should be noted that it is difficult to be

certain about the direction of causality here, as it may be their confidence in the stability of their

marriages which make people have more children in the first place.

        We turn now to a discussion of the results for the first earnings shocks – our main interest. We

present the results of three sets of regressions, one set with the first displacements only; another with the

effects of first disabilities only, and a third set of results with both first disabilities and first displacement

controlled for. We find that the first job loss suffered by a husband raises the hazard of divorce in the

first three years immediately after the shock, while the first job loss suffered by a wife raises divorce

probability marginally in the first three post-onset years, and by a statistically significant amount in the

interval four years after onset.

        By contrast, in the second regression which controls for whether the husband and wife suffered a

disabling illness, there is no statistically significant effect on the divorce hazard either immediately after

or many years after the event.      The third regression in the table includes controls for both job loss and

disability. The same pattern is found as when these shocks are controlled for singly: disability to both

husbands and wives appears to have no effect of marital dissolution hazard, whereas job loss suffered by

either spouse raises the hazard by a statistically significant amount.14

        In sum, the regressions in this table weakly support the idea first described by Becker et al (1977)

that earnings shocks should matter in the decision to remain married. The support is weak insofar as we

find it only for one type of shock (job loss), and not for another which is likely just as serious (disability).

Nonetheless, we do find a significant effect using explicit indicators for the source of the shock.

        While consistent with the theory of marital dissolution, the results raise two important questions.

The first is: Why is it that when we find that shocks affect marital dissolution, there is evidence that the


14
  We estimated regressions in which the time since the occurrence of the shock is measured in single years rather
than the three summary measures shown. Not surprisingly, the results from these regressions show the same basic
patterns as with the summary measure. They are available upon request.


                                                        19
effect is larger in the period immediately after the shock?   Our guess is that any new information that an

earnings shock brings to a couple is most likely to affect those couples whose assessed gains are not large

to begin with. Once they know that their future gains from being married are likely to be smaller in the

future as a result of the shock, they do not benefit by lingering in the marriage until well-being actually

falls.   Note, the results show that the effect of wives’ job loss is felt a bit further out in time after the

shocks occur.

         The second question raised by the results is more difficult to answer. Why do we find that a job

loss affects divorce probability but that disability does not, even though both events are negative shocks

which might be presumed to adversely affect earnings?         One possible answer may be that, contrary to

our presumption, disability and job loss affect earnings very differently. Maybe disability does not affect

earnings and work capacity very severely. Or, maybe a disability suffered in one period is not as

indicative about future episodes of disability as is a job loss about subsequent job loss. If either of these

is true, spouses should be less willing to divorce when disability occurs than when there is a job loss.

Table 4 explores whether these explanations can account for the results.

         Table 4 summarizes annual earnings and the incidence of shocks before and after the date of the

first observed shock for husbands and wives, and for the two different types of shocks.       Notice that the

sample is unbalanced, as spouses join and attrite from the sample at different times, relative to their date

of onset. Recall that people are required to be in the PSID for at least one period prior to their first

observed disability to be included in the sample. The third column of numbers in the table show annual

earnings in the years before and after the shock at date t / . The fourth column represents the absolute

change in average annual earnings in each year after the shock, relative to the average annual earnings

over the three years directly preceding the shock. The fifth column shows the percentage change in

annual earnings from the pre-shock mean.       The sixth column presents the percentage of spouses who,

after experiencing the shock in year t / , experience a second shock in the various years indicated onset.

The last column shows the proportion of spouses who, having suffered a shock in year t / experience a


                                                      20
second shock by the year indicated. This last column is a cumulative indicator of shock experience over

time. The table is split into two panels, showing the results separately for husbands and for wives.

         The table shows that husbands’ job losses imposes a serious economic loss on families. In the

year of job displacement, husbands’ annual earnings fall by 17%, and they fall by 22% in the year

immediately following job loss. Gradually, the size of these earnings losses are abated. By the 5 years

after job loss they are only 7% of pre-shock earnings. With respect to subsequent episodes of job loss

after the initial shock, husbands face a risk of being displaced again in a future year which reaches 20%
                                                15
only in the year immediately after onset.            Afterwards, this annual risk never rises to as high as 15%.

These risk levels translate into 39% and 44% of men having experienced a second bout of job loss by

four and five years after a first job loss, respectively.

         The second set of numbers in the table reveals that the earnings losses from disability are

certainly not dramatically smaller than those following a disability; if anything there is evidence of a

larger long term disability-related earnings loss. While men experiencing a disability only earn 90% of

pre-disability earnings in the year of onset, and 87% of pre-disability levels two years after onset, the

earnings loss four years after disability are 16% and 24% respectively. With respect to the subsequent

trajectory of their disabled status, disabled men have an annual risk of a new disability (or a re-

occurrence of an old one) which is never smaller than 34% in the five years after onset, and which shows

no evidence of decreasing over time. By three years after onset, fully 58% of men have had a second

disability report, and two-thirds have had a second disability report by five years after onset.

         The second panel of the table presents the results for wives’ shocks. Despite a large difference in

the level of pre-shock earnings for wives and husbands, this second panel tells essentially the same story

as that evident for husbands.       For wives, the short-run earnings losses from the two types of shocks are


15
  This high incidence of a new job loss in the year immediately after an initial job displacement is likely the result of
the fact that workers may attach themselves to jobs for which they are poorly matched right after they have lost one.
The risk of this sort of poor match fades over time.




                                                           21
about the same, and the longer run earnings losses from disability are much larger.16                   Wives who

experience a job loss face a future job-loss risk which averages about 7% per year. And, as late as five

years after the loss of a job about 39% of wives had had another such episode. The trajectory of

disabilities after the initial episode of illness much more serious. Wives face an annual risk of another

disability in the years after onset which averages 32% in the years after onset, and which shows no

downward trend. Cumulatively, by five years after onset sixty-five percent of wives have had another

disability – almost double the re-occurrence rate for another job loss, and very similar to the comparable

rate for men.

         Appendix Table 2 shows that almost identical results are apparent if the focus is on hours of

work rather than annual earnings. This table clearly shows that, for both husbands and wives, it is highly

unlikely that the different divorce effects we have estimated for disability as opposed to job losses are

due to a smaller negative earnings effect of disability, or to a smaller likelihood of recurrence.

         Another possible explanation for the different effect of the two types of shocks may have to do

with the different points in the life cycle when disabilities and job displacements occur. The summary

statistics shown in Table 1 indicate that disabilities affect married couples when they have been together

for a relatively long time, on average. Job losses, on the other hand, occur throughout a couple married

life. Could it be that no divorce effects are found for disabilities because they occur to spouses whom,

because of the longer time they have been together and their relatively older ages at onset, are at a point

in the life cycle when divorces simply do not occur?

         Table 5 explores this question. The table presents the results of a regressions identical to those

presented in Table 3, except that shocks are distinguished by when in a couple’s marital history they

occur. We separate shocks by whether they occur in the first six years of a marriage or later.17 As before,


16
   This table presents simple means, with no controls for changes in employment behavior over time. This means
that if a trend increase in labor force participation among married women could explain the slight upwards trend in
hours after the occurrence of shocks.
17
   We chose six years since this was the median marriage duration at the time of the shock. The results are
unchanged if we chose 7 or 8 years as the break points.


                                                         22
we then create dummy variables which measure the estimated effects of shocks 1-3, 4-5, and 5 or more

years since the shock. But now, there are two such sets of dummies for each shock – one set for shocks

which occur in the first six years of a couple’s marriage, and another for shocks which occur when the

couple have been together for more than six years.            The table presents the coefficients and standard

errors of the various dummy variables; the estimated effects of the various controls are virtually identical

to the effects already discussed in Table 3.

        Notice that, overall, the divorce effects are less precisely estimated than in the regression

presented in Table 3. This is not surprising, as the regression in Table 5 splits the sample of all shocks

into much smaller cells than did the earlier regression. The key point in the table is that the results

indicate that the no estimated disability effect is significantly different from zero. Yet, four distinct

effects are statistically significant for job displacement.      As a check on these results, we also estimated

regressions in which a variable denoting the type of shocks was interacted with a marital duration

variable. The estimated effects from these models say the same thing as the numbers in Table 5: there is

no effect of disability on divorce, irrespective of when in a marriage the divorce occurs. Thus, the fact

that there is no estimated effect for disability on divorce does not appear to be due to the fact that

disability occurs relatively later in a couple’s married life.

        What other explanations account for our results of the small role of disability on divorce? We

briefly discuss two possible explanations before offering one for which we believe it is possible to shed

some light with the data at hand. One explanation for the different estimated effects of disability and job

displacement may have to do with the costs of marital dissolution. Here, we speak not of financial costs

associated with divorce, but about particular societal costs which a spouse may face if he or she leaves a

partner suffering from a given shock. In particular, there may be stigma attached to divorces which occur




                                                       23
because of a spouse becoming disabled, and none associated with divorces which occur because of job

loss. The possible differential role of is an intriguing possibility which we cannot directly test. 18

         Another explanation which is beyond the scope of this paper to test is the idea that disability and

job loss may affect the affected spouses outside alternatives very differently. Recall from the discussion

in the theoretical overview, that even if the only effect of a shock suffered by a family were pecuniary, it

was theoretically ambiguous how a shock would affect marital stability. Theory shows that the divorce

probability rises in the aftermath of an earnings shock only if the reduction in the couple’s options

outside of marriage was smaller than the reduction of utility within the marriage.              If not, and if there is

transferable utility, there would be a change of the distribution of rents within the marriage which could

make divorce less likely Weiss (1997).              This suggests that the different effects we document for

disability and displacement may be due to the different relative effects of these two types of earnings

shocks on within and outside marriage utility. Again, while this possibility is consistent with the

standard framework, testing it is beyond the scope of this paper.

            One final explanation for the different results estimated for the two types of shocks, is that the

shocks may provide different information not about a spouse’s current and future earnings prospects, but

about future realizations of important non-financial variables which affect marital well-being.                     For

example, if a wife can conclude that a husband lost his job because of his repeated irresponsibility or bad

temper, she should conclude both that he is likely to face employment troubles in the future, and that he

may not be a good person with whom to raise children. Both of these are good reasons for her to wish to

get out of a marriage, and both can be said to have been “caused” by the earnings shock. Disability may

simply be viewed as “bad luck” and be an event devoid of much additional information content.

Alternatively, a job loss may reveal important things about a partner’s personality, discipline, and


18
   A final explanation which we do not consider in the paper is that the onset of disabling illness is not a “shock” at
all, whereas job loss is. Maybe spouses can predict the full trajectory of their partners health, but not of job loss. If
so, they would have fully incorporated future bouts of poor health into their decision-making at the time of marriage
and should not divorce when disability occurs in the future.



                                                           24
temperament which spouses must also consider when deciding whether to remain with a partner. We

might think of these traits, collectively, as “non-economic marital fitness” – traits which make a partner

desirable, irrespective of purely economic considerations. An event which reveals that someone may in

fact lack this fitness may be a greater determinant of divorce than one which lowers earnings by a larger

amount, if no such negative inference about fitness could be attached to that second event.            The fact that

the paper finds essentially the same results for husbands and wives, even though the earnings losses for

the latter are so much smaller for wives, is supportive of the idea that the two types of shocks

communicate different things about non-pecuniary variables.

         Is there other evidence in support of the idea that job loss may communicate information about

poor “fitness”? To answer this question, we use the fact that the P.S.I.D. has information on the reason

for job loss; people either lose a job because they are laid off or because their plant closed. Our

hypothesis is simple.       Since a plant closing affects everyone who worked at a plant, it is quite

unreasonable to ascribe negative inferences about laziness, tardiness, discipline or motivation to any

individual who has lost his job this way. By contrast, a layoff is personal; presumably the employer

learned something which made it necessary to end its relationship with this individual. If there is a

correlation between things an employer might learn that would motivate him to terminate his relationship

with an individual and that person’s fitness as a marriage partner, then a husband or wife trying to learn

about the non-economic marital fitness of their mate should be more affected by a layoff than they should

be from a plant closing.19

         Table 6 explores this issue. The table presents results from a divorce probit regression identical

to that presented in the last column of Table 3, except that we now control for the reason that the job loss

occurs. The estimated coefficients and standard errors for the control variables are not presented in the

table as they are very similar those presented earlier. For neither husbands nor wives is a job loss which


19
  The idea that the information conveyed about an individual by his being laid off versus having his plant close as
been used by economists in other contexts. See Gibbons and Katz (1990) for an example.



                                                         25
occurs because of a plant closing ever have a statistically significant effect on divorce probability.

However, for both husbands and wives, losing a job because of a layoff raises the probability of divorce.

         The results suggest that nearly all of the greater divorce risk we have identified for couples in

which a partner lost their job comes from the greater divorce risk of people suffering layoffs. The results

are strongly consistent with the idea that it is information which partners receive about aspects of a

spouses’ non-economic fitness as a result of the shock they suffer that drives the relationship between job

loss and divorce. Purely pecuniary considerations simply do not appear to matter greatly in the divorce

decision. The estimated effect of a plant closing could be thought as the role which purely economic

considerations which follow an job loss affect the probability of divorce, and it is never significant either

for husbands or wives. Nor is there any effect of disability – an outcome whose negative effect on a

family’s potential earnings we have earlier documented.

         We have spoken of a job layoff’s effect on marital dissolution as being causal: the fact that the

person is fired makes the likelihood of divorced higher. However, it might simply be that case that

people who are likely to be laid off are also likely to get divorced, with no directly causal relationship

between the two things. Consider someone who is easily bored. He or she would probably be easily

bored at work, resulting in missed assignments, daydreaming and other activities which would all make

him or her more likely to be fired. Such a person would be easily bored in a marriage as well, and would

be anxious to get divorced at the slightest provocation. Correlation between these two things would be

caused by the fact that the spouse is easily bored and would not indicate a causal effect of a layoff. We

believe that the temporal patterns we find in increased probability of divorce severely circumscribes the

extent to which this effect could be true in our data. Presumably people whose divorce probability is

higher because of the effect of a factor such as boredom which also affects layoff probability, should

exhibit a greater likelihood of divorce in every period, not only those which immediately follow the

shock.




                                                     26
                                               5. Conclusion

In this paper, we have examined the effect of two different earnings shocks – disability and job loss –on

the probability of marital dissolution. We find that disability experienced by either a husband or a wife

does not affect the divorce hazard in any statistically significant fashion. However, we find that a job

loss, whether experienced by a husband or a wife, raises the risk of divorce by a large and statistically

significant degree. These results are weakly supportive of the idea that the new information conveyed to

partners in the event of earnings shocks affect marital durability. However, there is evidence that it is not

information about the couple’s economic well-being after a shock that makes divorce more likely.

Rather, it appears that the important new information used in the divorce decision may have to do with

what the job loss suggests about the partner’s fitness as a mate.

        There are two reasons we reach this conclusion. First, despite the fact that disability affects

earnings more severely and for a longer interval than is true of a job loss, we find that disability has no

effect on divorce probability. Also, an episode of disability is nearly certain to be followed by another

one within five years. This is not true for a job loss. If purely economic considerations were all that

mattered in divorce, we would expect to find that disability had more of an effect on the probability of

divorce than a job loss. Also, the fact that we find very similar results for husbands’ and wives’ shocks,

despite the fact that the latter impose smaller earnings losses on families, suggest that it is something

other than the information which a couple gets about pecuniary factors which are the source of the

differences we document.

        Second, we speculate that if economic considerations are all that matter, then the reason that a

person lost their job should not matter in whether a divorce occurs or not. We split job losses into those

which occurred because of plant closing and those due to a layoff. Our hypothesis is that a spouse may

more reasonably draw an negative inference about a partner’s discipline and temperament (factors which

affect both the person’s ability to keep a job, and their fitness as a mate in purely non-economic terms)



                                                     27
from the fact that he was personally fired than from the fact that his plant ceased operating. Divorce

should be therefore be more likely in the case of the layoff. We find strong support for this in the data.




                                                     28
                                            References

Becker, Gary.A. (1991) A Treatise on the Family, Enlarged ed. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press

Becker, Gary . A, (1973) “A Theory of Marriage: Part I,” Journal of Political Economy; 81(4), July-
Aug. 813-46.

Becker, Gary.A, (1974) “A Theory of Marriage: Part II,” Journal-of-Political-Economy; 82(2), Part II,
March-April, S11-S26.

Becker, Gary S, Landes, Elizabeth M. and Michael, Robert (1977) “An Economic Analysis of Marital
Instability,” Journal of Political Economy. 85 (December), 1141-1187.

Bergstrom, Theodore C. and Bagnoli, Mark (1993) “Courtship as a Waiting Game,” Journal of Political
Economy. 101 (February), 185-202.

Bound, John. (1991) “ Self-Reported versus Objective Measures of Health in Retirement Models,”
Journal of Human Resources, (26), 106-138.

Bound, John, Schoenbaum , Michael, Stinebrickner, Todd R. and Waidmann, Timothy (1998 ) “The
Dynamic Effects of Health on the Labor Force Transitions of Older Workers” NBER Working Paper: #
6777.

Chamberlain, Gary, (1984 ) “Panel Data.” In Handbook of Econometrics, vol. 2. Zvi Grilliches and
Michael D. Intrilligator eds. 1247-1318. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science,.

Charles, Kerwin K. (1997) “The Longitudinal Structure of Earnings Losses Among Disabled Workers,”
unpublished manuscript, University of Michigan,.
Charles, Kerwin K. (1999) “Sickness in the Family: Health Shocks and Spousal Labor Supply”
unpublished manuscript, University of Michigan,.

Gibbons, Robert, and Katz, Lawrence F. (1991) ”Layoffs and Lemons,” Journal of Labor Economics,
9(4), October, 351-80.

Cullen, Julie Berry and Gruber, Jonathan. (2000) “Does Unemployment Insurance Crowd Out Spousal
Labor Supply?,” Journal of Labor Economics, 18(3), July, 546-72.

Johnson, William R., and Skinner, Jonathan (1986) “Labor Supply and Marital Separation,” American
Economic Review.76. (June), 455-469.

Kenkel, Donald S, (1991) “Health Behavior, Health Knowledge, and Schooling,” Journal of Political
Economy, 99(2), April, 287-305.

Lillard, Lee A, and Waite, Linda (1990). “Determinants of Divorce,” Social Security Bulletin, 53(2),
February 53(2), 29-31.

Lillard, Lee A, and Waite, Linda (1993). “A Joint Model of Marital Childbearing and Marital
Disruption,” Demography 30 (November), 653-81.
Maddala, G. S. Limited-dependent and qualitative variables in econometrics, Econometric Society
Monographs series, no. 3. Cambridge; New York and Sydney: Cambridge University Press,
1986.

Peters, Elizabeth H. (1993) “The Importance of Financial Considerations in Divorce Decisions,”
Economic Inquiry, January, 31(1), 71-86.

Seeborg, M.C., (1996), “ The Effects of Marriage and Divorce on the Poverty States of
Young Adults,” Journal of Economics, 22(2), 89-96.

Stephens, Melvin Jr., (2001) “The Long-Run Consumption Effects of Earnings Shocks,” The Review of
Economics and Statistics, 83(1), 28-36.
Stephens, Melvin Jr., (Forthcoming) “Worker Displacement and the Added Worker Effect,” Journal of
Labor Economics.

Stern, Steven (1989) “Measuring the Effect of Disability on Labor Force Participation,” Journal of
Human Resources; 24(3), 361-95.
Stevens, Ann Huff (1997) “The Persistent Effects of Job Displacement: The Importance of Multiple Job
Losses,” Journal of Labor Economics; 15(1), Part 1, pages 165-88.
Weiss, Yoram , (1997 ) “The Formation and Dissolution of Families: Why Marry? Who Marries Whom?
and What Happens upon Divorce,” in Rosenzweig,-Mark-R.; Stark,-Oded, eds. Handbook of Population
and Family Economics, Volume 1A. Handbooks in Economics, vol. 14. Amsterdam; New York and
Oxford: Elsevier Science, North-Holland, , 81-123.

Weiss, Yoram and Willis, Robert (1993) “Divorce Settlements: Evidence and Interpretation.” Journal of
Labor Economics 11. , 629-79.

Weiss, Yoram and Willis, Robert (1997) “Match Quality, New Information and Marital Dissolution,”
Journal of Labor Economics, Vol 15. No. 1 pt 2. pp 629-79.
Table 1a. Means of Selected Variables for Married Couples, By Husbands Experience of Earnings
Shocks . (Standard Errors in Parentheses)
                                                              Husband Neither
Variable                                                       Disabled Nor                      Husband
                                                                Displaced     Husband Disabled   Displaced
                                                              During Marriage During Marriage During Marriage

Husband White?                                                         0.93                0.95                 0.93
                                                                     (0.25)               (0.22)               (0.26)
Husband’s Years of Schooling                                         13.67                12.29                12.59
                                                                     (2.16)               (2.76)               (2.11)
Wife’s Years of Schooling                                             13.41               12.53                12.58
                                                                     (1.98)               (2.06)               (1.89)
Husband’s Age at Marriage                                            26.22                 26.92               24.88
                                                                    ( 7.63)               (9.84)               (6.76)
Wife’s Age at Marriage                                               24.03                23.91                22.58
                                                                    ( 7.01)               (8.71)               (6.26)
Husband’s First Marriage?                                             0.80                 0.78                 0.81
                                                                      (0.4)               (0.41)               (0.39)
Wife’s First Marriage?                                                0.81                 0.81                 0.82
                                                                     (0.39)                (0.4)               (0.38)
Husband’s Second Marriage?                                            0.18                 0.18                 0.15
                                                                     (0.38)               (0.39)               (0.35)
Wife’s Second Marriage?                                               0.16                 0.17                 0.15
                                                                     (0.37)               (0.37)               (0.36)
Husband’s Third or later Marriage                                     0.02                 0.04                 0.04
                                                                     (0.15)               (0.18)                (0.2)
Wife’s Third or later Marriage                                        0.03                 0.03                 0.03
                                                                     (0.16)               (0.14)               (0.16)
Divorced Observed for Couple?                                          0.17                0.08                 0.14
                                                                     (0.38)               (0.28)               (0.35)
Years Couple Observed in PSID                                         12.16               19.46                16.08
                                                                    ( 8.13)               (6.98)               (7.64)
Years Couple Have Been Married                                       14.13                25.08                17.44
Over Years Observed in PSID                                         (11.15)              (15.38)              (11.96)

Husband Displaced From Job During Marriage                             0                 0.41                     1
                                                                      (0)               (0.49)                   (0)
Husband Disabled During Marriage                                       0                   1                    0.33
                                                                      (0)                 (0)                  (0.47)
Number of Couples                                                    1108                651                    796
The data are drawn from several waves of the PSID and are drawn solely from the SRC subsample. See text for further
explanations.
Table 1b. Means of Selected Variables for Married Couples, By Wives' Experience of Earnings
Shocks . (Standard Errors in Parentheses)
                                                     Wife Neither
Variable                                             Disabled Nor
                                                      Displaced      Wife Disabled Wife Displaced
                                                    During Marriage During Marriage During Marriage

Husband’s Age at Marriage                                26.29             26.18              25.4
                                                          (8.1)            (8.83)            (7.04)
Husband’s First Marriage?                                 0.79               0.8               0.8
                                                         (0.41)            (0.39)             (0.4)
Husband’s Second Marriage?                                0.19              0.16              0.15
                                                         (0.39)            (0.37)            (0.37)
Husband’s Third or later Marriage                         0.02              0.04              0.05
                                                         (0.15)            (0.19)            (0.21)
Wife’s Age at Marriage                                    23.9             23.66              22.92
                                                         (7.29)            (8.18)             (6.2)
Wife’s First Marriage?                                    0.82              0.80               0.79
                                                         (0.38)            (0.40)             (0.4)
Wife’s Second Marriage?                                   0.16              0.17               0.16
                                                         (0.36)            (0.37)            (0.37)
Wife’s Third or later Marriage                            0.02              0.03              0.04
                                                         (0.15)            (0.17)            (0.20)
Husband’s Years of Schooling                             13.33             12.67             12.74
                                                         (2.27)            (2.55)             (2.3)
Wife’s Years of Schooling                                13.26             12.62             12.58
                                                         (2.02)            (1.99)             (1.8)
Husband White?                                            0.94              0.93              0.93
                                                         (0.24)            (0.25)            (0.25)
Divorced Observed for Couple?                             0.16              0.09              0.16
                                                         (0.37)            (0.29)            (0.36)
Years Couple Observed in PSID                            13.17             18.05             15.49
                                                         (8.44)            (7.45)            (7.58)
Years Couple Have Been Married                           16.04              22.1             16.26
Over Years Observed in PSID                              (12.4)            (15.3)           (11.23)

Wife Displaced From Job During Marriage                     0               0.28             1
                                                           (0)             (0.45)           (0)
Wife Disabled During Marriage                               0                 1             0.31
                                                           (0)               (0)          (0.46)
Number of Couples                                         1262              637             572
The data are drawn from several waves of the PSID and are drawn solely from the SRC subsample. See text for further
explanations.
Table 2. Similarity Between Husbands and Wives in Race, Religion and Education*, By Nature of
Husband's Earning Shock
                            Same Race      Same Religion        Same Education Level           Different Education Levels
                                                                       (Hubands Education/Wife's Education)

                                                                HS/HS SC/SC C+/C+               HS/SC HS/C+ SC/HS SC/C+ C+/HS C+/SC

All                             0.97            0.64             0.42 0.07        0.15           0.07 0.03 0.09 0.04 0.06 0.07
                               (0.16)          (0.48)           (0.49) (0.26)    (0.36)         (0.26) (0.16) (0.29) (0.19) (0.24) (0.25)

Head Never Disabled or          0.97            0.63             0.32 0.09        0.21           0.07 0.03 0.09 0.05 0.07 0.08
Displaced During Marriage      (0.18)          (0.48)           (0.47) (0.28)    (0.41)         (0.25) (0.16) (0.28) (0.21) (0.26) (0.28)

Head Disabled                   0.99             0.7             0.54 0.05        0.01           0.06 0.03 0.09 0.02 0.06 0.05
During Marriage                 (0.1)          (0.46)           (0.49) (0.22)    (0.31)         (0.23) (0.17) (0.29) (0.15) (0.23) (0.22)

Head Displaced                    0.98           0.62             0.52 0.07         0.08            0.09 0.02 0.11 0.03 0.04 0.04
During Marriage                  (0.15)         (0.48)            (0.5) (0.25) (0.28)              (0.29) (0.15) (0.31) (0.16) (0.19) (0.21)
This tables resports the propotion of marriead couples who share observed characteristics. Data are from several waves of P.S.I.D and
are drawn solely from the SRC subsample.
* The education categoies which correspond to the labels in the table are: HS - high school or less; SC - college but no 4 yr degree ; and
C+ - at least a 4 year college degree.
Table 3. Probit Estimates of Effect of Earnings Shock on Probability of Marriage Ending in
Divorce By Next Year. (Standard Errors Are Robust and Corrected for Clustering).
                                                Displacements               Disability              Displacement and
                                                                                                        Disability

                                                          Std.                       Std.                         Std.
Variable                                         Est.    Error             Est.     Error              Est.      Error

Displacement
 Husband Displaced From Job:
   1-3 Years Ago                                 0.181    0.082                                      0.181       0.082
   4-5 Years Ago                                -0.053    0.120                                      -0.053      0.120
   More than 5 Years Ago                        -0.156    0.073                                      -0.158      0.073
 Wife Displaced From Job:
   1-3 Years Ago                                0.131     0.088                                       0.130      0.088
   4-5 Years Ago                                0.001     0.114                                       0.002      0.115
   More than 5 Years Ago                        0.165     0.084                                       0.167      0.084
Disability
 Husband Disabled:
   1-3 Years Ago                                                         0.083       0.101           0.085       0.102
   4-5 Years Ago                                                         -0.112      0.170           -0.111      0.169
   More than 5 Years Ago                                                 0.041       0.093           0.050       0.094
 Wife Disabled:
   1-3 Years Ago                                                         -0.003      0.084           -0.007      0.085
   4-5 Years Ago                                                         -0.001      0.118           0.011       0.119
   More than 5 Years Ago                                                 -0.081      0.123           -0.084      0.125


Controls for Spouses' Marital Histories          Yes                       Yes                         Yes
Controls Observable Match
Characteristics                                  Yes                       Yes                         Yes
Controls for Family Structure                    Yes                       Yes                         Yes
Year Effects                                     Yes                       Yes                         Yes

Log Likelihood                                      -1411                   -1418.46                  -1410.56
Pseudo R-Squared                                    0.10                      0.10                       0.10
# of Observations                                  14083                     14083                      14083
The data in this table are drawn from several waves of the PSID and come solely from the SRC subsample.
Esimated values for the various control variables can be found in Appendix Table 1.
Table 4. Earnings, Displacement and Disability Status for Spouses Experiencing Shocks at Date t*
in Years Before and After Occurrence of Shock
                                                                                   % Earnings Change
                                                                                   =(Average Earnings
                                                               Absolute Earnings From (t*-4) to (t*-1) - Probability That Probability that
                                                               Change =Average Earnings at t) / Average Another Shock Another Shock
                              N     Time        Earnings     Earnings From (t*-4) Earnings From (t*-4) to Occurs at Date t Occurs by Date t
                                                              to (t*-1) - Earnings        (t*-1)
Husband's Job Loss
                             393    t* - 4      33814.4
                             455    t* - 3      33980.8
                             553    t* - 2      32886.2
                             678    t* - 1      30486.5
                             819      t*        27164.2            -5627.8                  -17.2
                             783    t* + 1      25463.7            -7328.3                  -22.3                 0.21           0.21
                             725    t* + 2      27781.2            -5010.8                  -15.3                 0.13           0.29
                             666    t* + 3      28546.4            -4245.6                  -12.9                 0.10           0.34
                             617    t* + 4      29459.6            -3332.4                  -10.2                 0.09           0.39
                             581    t* + 5      30484.6            -2307.4                   -7.0                 0.10           0.44
Husband's Disability
                             475    t* - 4      33057.0
                             527    t* - 3      32164.1
                             583    t* - 2      31293.1
                             662    t* - 1      30467.2
                             662      t*        28391.7            -3353.6                  -10.6
                             622    t* + 1      27598.4            -4147.0                  -13.1                 0.39           0.39
                             571    t* + 2      27756.0            -3989.3                  -12.6                 0.40           0.53
                             527    t* + 3      27807.4            -3938.0                  -12.4                 0.39           0.58
                             472    t* + 4      26770.2            -4975.1                  -15.7                 0.35           0.62
                             433    t* + 5      24122.2            -7623.1                  -24.0                 0.34           0.66

Wife's Job Loss
                             381    t* - 4      9722.9
                             415    t* - 3      10358.0
                             457    t* - 2      10542.2
                             508    t* - 1      10743.8
                             581      t*        10245.6             -96.104                  -0.9
                             547    t* + 1       9026.9           -1314.859                 -12.7                 0.23           0.23
                             497    t* + 2      10293.3             -48.366                  -0.5                 0.08           0.27
                             439    t* + 3      10131.2            -210.486                  -2.0                 0.07           0.32
                             411    t* + 4      10456.5            114.824                   1.1                  0.07           0.35
                             368    t* + 5      10508.3            166.590                   1.6                  0.07           0.39

Wife's Disability
                             527    t* - 4       8904.1
                             557    t* - 3       8792.6
                             598    t* - 2       9539.1
                             641    t* - 1       9806.2
                             641      t*         9159.1             -101.4                   -1.1
                             596    t* + 1       8439.6             -820.9                   -8.9                 0.35           0.35
                             549    t* + 2       8992.6             -267.9                   -2.9                 0.32           0.46
                             490    t* + 3       8614.7             -645.8                   -7.0                 0.31           0.53
                             436    t* + 4       8657.7             -602.8                   -6.5                 0.31           0.59
                             370    t* + 5       8582.1             -678.4                   -7.3                 0.32           0.64
Data are from multiple waves of the PSID, and are drawn solely from the SRC subsample. See text for further explanations.
Table 5. Probit Estimates of Effect of Earnings Shock on Probability of Marriage Ending in
Divorce By Next Year. Shocks Disaggregated by Whether Shock in First 6 Years of Marriage or Later.
(Standard Errors Are Robust and Corrected for Clustering).
                                                              Estimate        Robust Standard
                                                                                  Errror
Husband's Shock in First 6 Yrs. Of Marriage
   Displacement
     Husband Displaced From Job:
      1-3 Years Ago                                            0.224                0.098
      4-5 Years Ago                                            -0.071               0.143
      More than 5 Years Ago                                    -0.266               0.087
   Disability
     Husband Disabled:
      1-3 Years Ago                                             0.185               0.150
      4-5 Years Ago                                             0.116               0.231
      More than 5 Years Ago                                     0.131               0.130

Wife's Shock in First 6 Yrs. Of Marriage
     Wife Displaced From Job:
      1-3 Years Ago                                             0.021               0.116
      4-5 Years Ago                                             0.032               0.145
      More than 5 Years Ago                                     0.073               0.123
   Disability
     Wife Disabled:
      1-3 Years Ago                                             0.029               0.121
      4-5 Years Ago                                            -0.077               0.212
      More than 5 Years Ago                                     0.154               0.192


Husband's Shock After First 6 Yrs. Of Marriage
   Displacement
     Husband Displaced From Job:
      1-3 Years Ago                                             0.055               0.151
      4-5 Years Ago                                            -0.070               0.212
      More than 5 Years Ago                                     0.096               0.112
   Disability
     Husband Disabled:
      1-3 Years Ago                                            -0.003               0.143
      4-5 Years Ago                                            -0.289               0.271
      More than 5 Years Ago                                    -0.101               0.122

Wife's Shock After First 6 Yrs. Of Marriage
     Wife Displaced From Job:
      1-3 Years Ago                                             0.263               0.127
      4-5 Years Ago                                            -0.030               0.188
      More than 5 Years Ago                                     0.277               0.107
   Disability
     Wife Disabled:
      1-3 Years Ago                                            -0.046               0.118
      4-5 Years Ago                                             0.042               0.141
      More than 5 Years Ago                                    -0.216               0.168

Log Likelihood                                                    -1401.00
Pseudo R-Squared                                                    0.11
# of Observations                                                  14083
The data in this table are drawn from several waves of the PSID and come solely from the SRC subsample.
Controls for this regression are identical to those for models presented in Table 3.
Table 6. Probit Estimates of Effect of Spouse's Job Loss on Probability of Marriage Ending
in Divorce By Next Year, by Reason for Job Loss. Robust Standard Errors Corrected for
Clustering are In Parentheses.

                                                                    Robust
                                                     Estimate      Std. Error
Reason for Husband's Job
 Plant Closed:
   1-3 Years Ago
                                                       -0.149         0.165
    4-5 Years Ago
                                                       -0.086         0.201
    More than 5 Years Ago
                                                       0.002          0.101
 Layoff:
   1-3 Years Ago
                                                       0.309          0.095
    4-5 Years Ago
                                                       -0.034         0.146
    More than 5 Years Ago
                                                       -0.253         0.089

Reason for Wife Job Loss:
 Plant Closed:
   1-3 Years Ago
                                                       0.020          0.150
    4-5 Years Ago
                                                       0.128          0.166
    More than 5 Years Ago
                                                       0.101          0.135
 Layoff:
   1-3 Years Ago
                                                        0.194         0.107
    4-5 Years Ago
                                                       -0.100         0.154
    More than 5 Years Ago
                                                        0.207         0.099
Disability
 Husband Disabled:
   1-3 Years Ago                                       0.073          0.104
   4-5 Years Ago                                       -0.130         0.170
   More than 5 Years Ago                               0.061          0.095
 Wife Disabled:
   1-3 Years Ago                                       -0.014         0.086
   4-5 Years Ago                                        0.006         0.119
   More than 5 Years Ago                               -0.095         0.126

Controls for Spouses' Marital
Histories                                               Yes
Controls Observable Match
Characteristics                                         Yes
Controls for Family Structure                           Yes
Year Effects                                            Yes


Log Likelihood                                         -1403.6
Pseudo R_Squared                                         0.11
# of Observations                                       14083
The data in this table are drawn from several waves of the PSID and are drawn solely from the SRC subsample .
The controls for the six regressions presented in the Table are identical to those in the various regressions
presented in Tables 3 and 4.
Appendix 1. Estimated Effects of Control Variables of Models in Table 3
(Standard Errors Corrected for Clustering).
                                               Robust                  Robust                     Robust
                                                Std.                    Std.                       Std.
Variable                               Est.    Error           Est.    Error           Est.       Error

Marital History
 Husband's Age at Marriage            -0.014    0.007         -0.014    0.007         -0.014       0.007

 Husband’s Second Marriage?           0.220     0.083         0.219     0.082          0.220       0.082
 Husband’s Third+ Marriage            0.200     0.157         0.206     0.153          0.200       0.156
 Wife's Age at Marriage               -0.038    0.009         -0.037    0.008         -0.038       0.009
 Wife’s Second Marriage?              0.252     0.083         0.250     0.083          0.253       0.083
 Wife's Third+ Marriage               0.561     0.163         0.569     0.162          0.562       0.164
 Duration of Marriage                 -0.038    0.009         -0.042    0.009         -0.038       0.010
Observable Match
Characteristics
 Husband's/Wife's Education
    HS/SC                             -0.071    0.089         -0.063    0.087         -0.071       0.089
    HS/C+                             -0.058    0.148         -0.069    0.149         -0.061       0.149
    SC/HS                             -0.132    0.088         -0.117    0.086         -0.131       0.088
    SC/SC                             -0.064    0.092         -0.053    0.090         -0.063       0.092
    SC/CO+                            -0.285    0.161         -0.291    0.161         -0.283       0.161
    CO+/HS                            -0.252    0.129         -0.229    0.129         -0.246       0.129
    CO+/SC                            -0.343    0.126         -0.327    0.127         -0.343       0.126
    CO+/CO+                           -0.319    0.097         -0.318    0.096         -0.319       0.096
 Husband/Wife Same
Religion?                             -0.223    0.051         -0.225    0.050         -0.222       0.051
 Husband/Wife Same Race?              0.024     0.146         0.025     0.144          0.022       0.146
 White?                               -0.358    0.088         -0.360    0.087         -0.357       0.088
Family Structure
 Age of Youngest Child                0.021     0.009         0.022     0.009          0.021       0.009
 Number of Children                   -0.065    0.037         -0.073    0.037         -0.065       0.037
 Number of Young Children             0.042     0.056         0.056     0.056          0.044       0.056

Year Effects                           Yes                     Yes
Constant                              -0.020 0.246            -0.001 0.242               -0.027         0.246
Log Likelihood                         -1411                   -1418                      -1411
Pseudo R-Squared                       0.10                    0.10                        0.10
# of Observations                     14083                   14083                      14083
The data in this table are drawn from several waves of the PSID and come solely from the SRC subsample.
See text for further explanations.
Appendix 2. Hours, Displacement and Disability Status for Spouses Experiencing Shocks at Date t*
in Years Before and After Occurrence of Shock

                                                                                                                            % Hours Change
                                                                                            Absolute Hours              =(Average Hours From
                                                                                           Change =Average             (t*-4) to (t*-1) - Hours at
                                 N           Time              Hours Worked               Hours From (t*-4) to         t) / Average Hours From
                                                                                             (t*-1) - Hours                  (t*-4) to (t*-1)
Husband's Job Loss
                               393           t* - 4                2218.1
                               455           t* - 3                2240.8
                               553           t* - 2                2192.1
                               678           t* - 1                2127.5
                               819             t*                  1901.9                        -292.7                          -13.3
                               783           t* + 1                1911.6                        -283.0                          -12.9
                               725           t* + 2                2010.3                        -184.3                           -8.4
                               666           t* + 3                2054.2                        -140.4                           -6.4
                               617           t* + 4                2060.5                        -134.1                           -6.1
                               581           t* + 5                2089.4                        -105.2                           -4.8
Husband's Disability
                               475           t* - 4                2092.9
                               527           t* - 3                2076.9
                               583           t* - 2                1989.7
                               662           t* - 1                1936.2
                               662             t*                  1787.9                        -236.0                          -11.7
                               622           t* + 1                1743.4                        -280.5                          -13.9
                               571           t* + 2                1754.3                        -269.7                          -13.3
                               527           t* + 3                1715.5                        -308.5                          -15.2
                               472           t* + 4                1653.2                        -370.7                          -18.3
                               433           t* + 5                1613.1                        -410.9                          -20.3

Wife's Job Loss
                               381           t* - 4                1056.5
                               415           t* - 3                1132.2
                               457           t* - 2                1144.9
                               508           t* - 1                1231.6
                               581             t*                  1199.6                       58.307                               5.1
                               547           t* + 1                1036.3                      -105.013                              -9.2
                               497           t* + 2                1163.8                       22.458                               2.0
                               439           t* + 3                1164.4                       23.088                               2.0
                               411           t* + 4                1156.3                       15.027                               1.3
                               368           t* + 5                1147.4                        6.057                               0.5

Wife's Disability
                               527           t* - 4                 915.8
                               557           t* - 3                 903.0
                               598           t* - 2                 994.7
                               641           t* - 1                1010.1
                               641             t*                   963.0                          7.1                            0.7
                               596           t* + 1                 865.5                         -90.4                           -9.5
                               549           t* + 2                 885.8                         -70.1                           -7.3
                               490           t* + 3                 883.9                         -72.0                           -7.5
                               436           t* + 4                 813.1                        -142.8                          -14.9
                               370           t* + 5                 810.5                        -145.4                          -15.2
Data are from multiple waves of the PSID, and are drawn solely from the SRC subsample. See text for further explanations.
The hours of work numbers in this table refer to the hours that the person spent employed in the year preceding the date they were
surveyed.
