NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LOVE AND MONEY: A THEORETICAL AND EMPIRICAL
ANALYSIS OF HOUSEHOLD SORTING AND INEQUALITY
Raquel Fernández
Nezih Guner
John Knowles
Working Paper 8580
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8580
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2001
We thank Michael Kremer and Torsten Persson for stimulating discussions of our paper in the NBER
Economic Fluctuations and Growth Research Meeting and in the CEPR Public Policy Conference,
respectively. We also wish to thank Daron Acemoglu, Orazio Attanasio, Oriana Bandiera, Jere Behrman, Jess
Benhabib, Alberto Bisin, Jason Cummins, Paolo Dudine, Bill Easterly, Luca Flabbi, Chris Flinn, Mark
Gertler, Sydney Ludvigson, Jonathan Portes, David Weil and participants in numerous seminars for helpful
comments. We thank Miguel Szekely and Alejandro Gaviria at the IDB for assistance with the LatinAmerican data and the LIS and the statistical agencies of the Latin American countries in our sample for
access to the surveys. The first and third authors acknowledge financial support from their respective NSF
grants and the first author from the CV Starr Center as well. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2001 by Raquel Fernández, Nezih Guner and John Knowles. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Love and Money: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis of
Household Sorting and Inequality
Raquel Fernández, Nezih Guner and John Knowles
NBER Working Paper No. 8580
November 2001
JEL No. D31, I21, J12, J31

ABSTRACT
This paper examines the interactions between household matching, inequality, and per capita
income. We develop a model in which agents decide whether to become skilled or unskilled, form
households, consume and have children. We show that the equilibrium sorting of spouses by skill type
(their correlation in education) is increasing as a function of the skill premium. In the absence of perfect
capital markets, the economy can converge to different steady states, depending upon initial conditions.
The degree of marital sorting, wage inequality, and fertility differentials are positively correlated across
steady states and negatively correlated with per capita income. We use household surveys from 34
countries to construct several measures of the skill premium and of the degree of correlation of spouses’
education (marital sorting). For all our measures, we find a positive and significant relationship between
the two variables.

Raquel Fernández
Department of Economics
New York University
269 Mercer Street
New York, NY 10003
and NBER

Nezih Guner
Department of Economics
Pennsylvania State University
619 Kern Graduate Building
University Park, PA 16802

John Knowles
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
160 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297

1. Introduction
With a few notable exceptions, the analysis of household formation has played a
relatively minor role in our understanding of macroeconomics. The vast majority
of macroeconomic models tend to assume the existence of infinitely lived agents
(with no oﬀspring) or a dynastic formulation of a parent with children.1 While
this may be a useful simplification for understanding a large range of phenomena,
it can also lead to the neglect of potentially important interactions between the
family and the macroeconomy. This is especially likely to be the case in those
areas in which intergenerational transmission plays a critical role, such as human
capital accumulation, income distribution, and growth.
The objective of this paper is to examine some of the interactions between
household matching (“marriage”), inequality (as measured by the skill premium),
fertility diﬀerentials and per capita output. The main idea that we wish to
explore, theoretically and empirically, is the potentially reinforcing relationship
between the strength of assortative matching by skill level and the degree of inequality. In particular, we wish to examine the notion that a greater skill premium
may tend to make matches between diﬀerent classes (skilled and unskilled workers
in our model) of individuals less likely, as the cost of “marrying down” increases.
In an economy in which borrowing constraints can limit the ability of individuals
to acquire optimal levels of education, this private decision of whom to marry may
have important social consequences. In particular, it can lead to ineﬃciently low
aggregate levels of human capital accumulation and thus higher wage inequality
between skilled and unskilled workers, larger fertility diﬀerentials across types of
households, and lower per capita income. Thus, inequality and marital sorting
are two endogenously determined variables that reinforce one another.
To explore the ideas sketched above, we develop a model in which individuals
are either skilled or unskilled (according to education decisions made when young)
and have a given number of opportunities in which to form a household with
another agent. Once agents form households, they decide how much to consume
and how many children to have. These children in turn decide whether to become
skilled or unskilled workers. A decision to become skilled (synonymous here
for acquiring a given level of education) is costly. To finance education, young
individuals borrow in an imperfect capital market in which parental income plays
the role of collateral. Thus parental income and the net return to being a skilled
1

Even Becker and Tomes’ (1979, 1986) pioneering work on intergenerational transmission of
inequality assumes a one-parent household.

1

versus unskilled worker, including the expected utility from one’s future match,
determine the proportion of children that in aggregate become skilled. These
individuals then also meet and form households, have children, and so on.
We show that the steady state to which this economy converges will in general
depend upon initial conditions. In particular, it is possible to have steady states
with a high degree of sorting (skilled agents form households predominantly with
others who are skilled; unskilled form households predominantly with unskilled),
high inequality, and large fertility diﬀerentials. Alternatively, there can be steady
states with a low degree of sorting, low inequality and low fertility diﬀerentials.
Our empirical analysis examines the main implication of our model: a positive
correlation between the skill premium and marital sorting. To do this, we assemble a total of 34 country household surveys from the Luxembourg Income Study
(LIS) and the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) and use them to construct a sample of households for each country. From these samples we construct
several measures of the skill premium as well as a measure of marital sorting—the
correlation of spouses’ years of education. In every country that we examine, we
find a positive correlation between the education levels of spouses. For all our
measures of the skill premium, we find a positive and significant relationship with
marital sorting, even after controlling for other possible sources for this correlation. As implied by our model, we also find that marital sorting and per capita
income are negatively correlated across countries.
Our work is related to several literatures. There is a rapidly growing literature on the intergenerational transmission of inequality in models with borrowing constraints. These models, though, either assume a dynastic formulation
(e.g., Becker and Tomes (1986), Loury (1981), Ljungqvist (1993), Galor and Zeira
(1993), Fernández and Rogerson (1998), Benabou (1996), Dahan and Tsiddon
(1998), Durlauf (1995), Owen and Weil (1998), Knowles(1999) and Kremer and
Chen (1999)) or consider a two-parent household in which the degree of sorting is
exogenously specified (e.g. Kremer (1997) and Fernández and Rogerson (2001)).
The last two papers are particularly relevant as they are concerned with whether
an (exogenous) increase in marital sorting can lead to a quantitatively significant
increase in inequality. In our model, on the other hand, sorting and inequality are
endogenously determined. There is also a theoretical literature that focuses on
the determinants of who matches with whom, but that basically abstracts from
the endogeneity of the income distribution in the economy (the seminal paper
in this literature is Becker (1973). See also, for example, Cole, Mailath, and

2

Postlewaite (1992), and Burdett and Coles (1997, 1999)).2 Our paper, therefore,
is related to the two literatures, and can be seen as trying to integrate both concerns into a simple, analytical framework. Some recent work that also shares our
concerns, but that is more focused on fertility, marriage and divorce, are Aiyagari,
Greenwood, Guner (2000), Greenwood, Guner, and Knowles (2000), and Regalia
and Rios-Rull (1999). The models, not surprisingly, are more complicated and
rely on computation to obtain solutions for particular parameter values.
There is also a small, mostly descriptive, empirical literature that is related to
our work. As reviewed by Lam (1988), the general finding in the literature is the
existence of positive assortative matching across spouses. Mare (1991) documents
the correlation between spouses’ schooling in the US since 1930s. Using a large
cross section of countries, Smith, Ultee, and Lammers (1998) find that the relation
between marital sorting and some indicators for development (such as per capita
energy consumption and the proportion of the labor force not in agriculture)
has an inverted-U shape. Dahan and Gaviria (1999) report a positive relation
between inequality and marital sorting for Latin American countries. Boulier
and Rosenzweig (1984) document assortative matching with respect to schooling
and sensitivity to marriage market variables using data from the Philippines.

2. The Model
In this section we present a model of matching, fertility and inequality. Each
component of the model is kept relatively simple in the interest of highlighting
the interactions among all three variables, both at a given moment in time and
over the longer run.
2.1. Timing
The economy is populated by overlapping generations that live for three periods.
At the beginning of the first period, young agents make their education decisions
by deciding whether to become skilled or unskilled. This decision made, they
then meet in what we call a “household matching market”. Here they find
another agent with whom to form a household, observing both the agent’s skill
2

Laitner (1979), on the other hand, endogenzes bequests (but not labor earnings) and hence
the income distribution. He assumes, however, that matches are randomly determined. See
Bergstrom (1997) and Weiss (1997) for a survey of the literature on theories of the family and
household formation.

3

type (and hence able to infer that agent’s future income) and a match specific
quality. In the second period, the now adult agents work in the labor market,
pay their education debt (if any) and have children. In the last period, households
consume their income net of debt repayment (and of the resources absorbed by
children).
We now describe in more detail each aspect of an agent’s decision problem.
We begin with the decision problem at the beginning of the second period, when
agents have already formed a household of some given quality.
2.2. The Household’s Problem
In this model we abstract from bargaining problems among agents within a household and instead assume that spouses share a common joint utility function.3 We
also abstract away from any diﬀerences between women and men, either exogenous
(e.g., childbearing costs) or cultural/institutional (e.g., the degree of wage discrimination or the expected role of woman in the home relative to the workplace).4
Having matched in the first period of life and attained a match quality q, at
the beginning of period 2 each household decides how many children, n, to have
(and hence how much to consume, c, in period 3). Raising children is costly; each
child consumes a fraction t of parental income, I.5
The utility of a household with match quality q and income I is given by
solving:
max [c + β log n + γ + q]

c,n≥0

(2.1)

subject to
3

c ≤ I(1 − tn)

For models that focus on intrafamily bargaining problems, see, for example, Bergstrom
(1997) and Weiss (1997).
4
This assumption considerably simplifies our analysis. See the conclusion for a brief discussion of alternative modelling assumptions.
5
Traditionally the cost of having children is thought of as the opportunity cost of time. While
in our model this interpretation is possible at the level of the individual budget constraint, we
choose not to view it this way since, at the aggegate production function level, it is simpler if
we do not have to take into account how hours of work vary across individuals (on account of
diﬀerent incomes implying diﬀerent numbers of children). Instead we model the cost of children
directly as a proportional consumption cost (perhaps as a result of bargaining in the household).
An alternative route would have been to model a quality-quantity tradeoﬀ in the production of
children. We also allow the number of children to be a continuous rather than discrete variable
to simplify the analysis.

4

where β, t > 0, and γ is a constant. Note that the way we have modelled match
quality renders the solution to the optimization problem independent of q.
The household utility function implies that for household income below β,
households will dedicate all their income to children and have n = 1t of them,
yielding utility β log n + γ + q. An interior solution to (2.1) is given by:
n=

β
tI

(2.2)

and
c=I −β

(2.3)

Without loss of generality, by setting γ = β log t + β − β log β we can write the
indirect utility function for a couple with match quality q and household income
I > β as:
V (I, q) = I − β log I + q, for I > β

(2.4)

Note the comparative statics of the solution to the household’s optimization
problem. For values of household income below β, couples have a constant number
of children and their utility is unaﬀected by increases in income within this range.
For household income above β, increases in income increase consumption and
reduce the number of children in the household. Thus, for I > β, wealthier
households have fewer children and the fertility diﬀerential across income groups
is increasing with income inequality.6
We next turn to the determination of household income.
2.3. The Labor Market
Agents are employed as workers in the second period of their lives. Workers are
either skilled (s) or unskilled (u). We assume that technology is constant returns
to scale and that wages are the outcome of a competitive labor market in which
6

Fertility declining with income is consistent both with the cross-country evidence on fertility
and per capita income (e.g., Perotti (1996)) and with cross-sectional evidence from US data (see
Knowles (1999) and Fernández and Rogerson (2001)). Furthermore, Kremer and Chen (1999)
find that the fertility diﬀerential between low and high income families is increasing in the degree
of inequality which is also implied by our model.

5

skilled and unskilled workers are employed to produce an aggregate consumption
good.
Given a composition of the labor force L into skilled or unskilled workers (L =
Ls + Lu ), and denoting by λ the proportion of skilled workers in the population,
full employment and constant returns to scale imply that output is given by:
F (Ls , Lu ) ≡ LF (λ, 1 − λ) ≡ Lu F (
where k ≡

λ
.
1−λ

λ
, 1) ≡ Lu f (k)
1−λ

Hence wages depend only on λ:
ws = f 0 (k) and wu = f − f 0 k

(2.5)

We will often find it more convenient to work with the net return to being
skilled which we denote by wes ≡ ws − d, where d is the (constant) monetary
cost of becoming skilled. Note that wes is decreasing in λ, wu is increasing in λ,
and thus that the skill premium is a decreasing function of the fraction of skilled
workers.
Household income Iij is simply the sum of each partner’s (i and j) wages. To
simplify our analysis, we will assume that household income is always greater than
β as this ensures an interior solution to the household maximization problem (as
discussed in the previous section). We can do this either by imposing conditions
on the production function such that the unskilled wage has a given positive
lower bound of β2 or by assuming that individuals are endowed with e > β2 units
of income. Thus, we assume:
2wu > β

(A1)

where wu can be interpreted as the market wage (as in the first explanation) or
as the market wage plus the endowment (as in the second explanation).
2.4. Household Matching
The choice of whom to match with is of course driven by many factors: tastes, one’s
environment (e.g., who one gets to know and the distribution of characteristics of
individuals), and the prospects for one’s material and emotional wellbeing. We
provide a simple model in which we allow all these factors to interact to produce
a household match.
6

Households can be categorized by the skill types of its two partners. Let Iij
denote the household income for a couple composed by skill types i, j ∈ {s, u}.
Thus,

Iij


es ,

 2w
= wes + wu ,



2wu ,

if ij = ss
if ij = su
if ij = uu

(2.6)

We assume that in the first period, once their education decisions have been
made, agents have two opportunities to match and form a household. In the first
round, all agents meet randomly and draw a random match-specific quality q.
This match can be accepted by both agents resulting in a “marriage” or rejected
by at least one of the agents whereupon both agents enter the second round of
matching. In the second round, agents are matched non-randomly with their own
skill group and draw a new random match quality. We assume that qualities are
match-specific i.i.d draws from the same cumulative distribution function Q (with
its pdf denoted by Q0 ), and with expected value µ and support [0, q].7
The two rounds of matching–one at random and the second exclusively with
one’s own skill type–are meant to reflect the fact that as time progresses people
tend to be more likely to interact more with others who are similar in skill/education
level (e.g., individuals who go on to college meet other people also in college,
whereas individuals who work in low-skill jobs tend to have more contact with
other individuals of the same skill level).8 Note that a skilled agent (with a high
wage) that encounters an unskilled agent (with a low wage) in the first round and
draws a high q will face a tradeoﬀ between forming a lower-income household with
a high quality match and a higher-income household (by matching for sure with
a skilled agent in the second round) but of an unknown quality (i.e., there is a
tradeoﬀ of “love versus money”).
7

The assumption of q ≥ 0 ensures that all agents will form a household in the second round.
Although unrealistic, this allows us to abstract from the issue of how inequality aﬀects the
decision to remain single, which is not the focus of the analysis here. In our comparative static
analysis, we will assume that q is suﬃciently large so that in equilibrium some matches occur
between skilled and unskilled individuals. This is for simplicity only.
8
Alternative modelling assumptions (e.g., more periods, search or waiting costs, and assuming
individuals always meet others at random) are also possible and can give rise to similar properties
as this one. This formulation is simple and avoids problems of multiple equilibria that can arise
when the fraction of types an individual meets evolves endogenously over time. See Fernández
and Pissarides (2001) for an infinite horizon search model for household partners.

7

Let Vij (q) denote the utility of a couple with income Iij and match quality
q (as expressed in (2.4)) where i, j ∈ {s, u}. As a skilled agent’s second-round
option dominates that of an unskilled agent (given wes ≥ wu , which is a necessary
condition in order for any individual to choose to become a skilled worker), it
is the skilled agent who determines whether a match between a skilled and an
unskilled agent is accepted.
A skilled agent is indiﬀerent between accepting a first-round match with an
unskilled agent and proceeding to the second round if Vsu (q) = Vss (µ). Solving
for the level of q at which this occurs, q∗ , yields a threshold quality of:
µ

¶

Iss
q = Iss − Isu − β log
+µ
Isu
∗

(2.7)

which, after substituting for wages, yields:
Ã

!

2wes (λ)
q (λ) = wes (λ) − wu (λ) − β log
+µ
wes (λ) + wu (λ)
∗

(2.8)

The intuition underlying (2.8) is clear. A skilled individual who matches with
an unskilled one in the first round knows that by foregoing that match she will
meet a skilled individual in the second round with an expected match quality of
µ. Thus, the match quality of the unskilled individual must exceed µ by the
amount required to compensate for the decreased utility arising from the fall in
household income. Of course, the threshold quality for two agents of the same
type to match in the first round is µ as this is the expected value of next round’s
match quality and there is no diﬀerence in household income.
Given a distribution of individuals into skilled and unskilled, we can find the
fraction of households that will be composed of two skilled individuals, two unskilled individuals, and one skilled and one unskilled. The fraction of households
of each type depends only on the probability of types meeting in the first round
and on q ∗ . Both of these are only a function of λt since this variable determines
both household incomes and first round matching probabilities. Denoting by ρij
the fraction of households formed between agents of skill type i and j, i, j ∈ {s, u}
(with ρsu = ρus ), these are given by:
ρij (λt ) =

 2
∗

 λt + λt (1 − λt )Q(q (λt )),



∗

2λt (1 − λt )(1 − Q(q (λt )),
(1 − λt )2 + λt (1 − λt )Q(q∗ (λt )),
8

if ij = ss
if ij = su
if ij = uu

(2.9)

Note that Q(q ∗ ) is a measure of the degree of sorting that occurs. If individuals
were not picky and simply matched with whomever they met in the first round,
then q ∗ would equal zero and ρsu would equal the probability of a skilled and an
unskilled individual meeting, i.e., 2λt (1 − λt ). If individuals simply cared about
quality and not about income, then q∗ would equal µ. Lastly, if individuals cared
only about income and not about match quality, then Q(q ∗ ) would equal one and
there would be no matches between skilled and unskilled agents.
Remark 1. Q(q ∗ ) is the correlation coeﬃcient between diﬀerent skill types in
households.9
The observation above will be very useful when we examine the data as although the fractions of couples of each type that form may have ambiguous comparative statics with respect to λ (as we discuss below), this is not true for the
degree of sorting (i.e., for the correlation coeﬃcient). This is stated in the theorem
and corollary below.
Theorem 2.1. An increase in the skill premium
the degree of sorting.

ws
,
wu

ceteris paribus, will increase

Proof: Recall that the degree of sorting is given by Q(q ∗ ). It follows immediately from (2.8) that

and hence

dQ(q ∗ )
ws
dw
u

> 0. ||

∂q ∗
> 0,
∂ wes

∂q ∗
<0
∂wu

(2.10)

The theorem above implies that an exogenous increase in inequality (say, from
a skill-biased technology shock) will increase sorting by making skilled workers
less willing to form households with unskilled workers.
Corollary 2.2. A decrease in λ will increase the degree of sorting.10
9

This is most easily seen by setting Q equal to zero in 2.9 and noting that in that case the
fractions of each marital type would be those predicted purely by random matching (and hence
would have a zero correlation).
10
A feature of our matching model is that λ only aﬀects the degree of sorting through its
eﬀect on the skill premium (since that is what determines q ∗ ). A more general model of
matching would have the proportion of individuals of diﬀerent types in the matching market
evolve endogenously as a result of matches made in previous rounds. This would then produce
a dependence of the correlation on the initial fraction of skilled individuals, independently of
the latter’s eﬀect on the skill premium. In our empirical work, we control for this possible
independent channel.

9

w
es = f 00 dk < 0, dw
eu = −f 00 k dk > 0, where dk =
1
Proof: Note that ddλ
.
dλ
dλ
dλ
dλ
(1−λ)2
Hence, the conclusion follows immediately from the theorem above.||
The intuition for the corollary above is that a decrease in λ increases the
skill premium and thus makes skilled workers less willing to form matches with
unskilled workers. One might ask, however, how does a change in proportion of
skilled workers in the population aﬀect the fraction of households of each type? An
increase in the λ will unambiguously decrease the fraction of couples that are uu as,
for any given q ∗ they are less likely to end up in uu households. Furthermore, q ∗
will decrease, thereby increasing the probability that a first round match between
a high and low skilled worker will result in a household. The eﬀect on us and
ss households, on the other hand, is ambiguous (although the aggregate fraction
of the population that is in one of these two types of households must of course
increase). For any given q ∗ , the fraction of ss households increases, but as a
skilled individual is now more willing to match with an unskilled one, this will
work to decrease the fraction of ss households. The eﬀect on us households is
positive if λ ≤ 1/2 (as both the likelihood of s and u individuals meeting in the
first round increases as does the probability that the match will be accepted) and
ambiguous otherwise.
The main focus of our empirical work will be in establishing the positive correlation implied above between the skill premium and the degree of sorting in
households across countries. Why should diﬀerent countries have diﬀerent degrees of inequality, however? This is the question that the model next turns to
by examining the determinants of a young agent’s decision to become a skilled
relative to an unskilled worker.

2.5. Education Decisions and Capital Markets
A young agent’s desire to become skilled depends on the return to being a skilled
relative to an unskilled worker. Note that this depends not only on net wages
next period, but also on the expected return to matching at the household level.
The expected value of being a skilled worker given that a fraction λt+1 of the
population also becomes skilled is given by:
V s (λt+1 ) = λt+1

Z

0

q

max [Vss (x; λt+1 ), Vss (µ; λt+1 )] dQ(x)

+(1 − λt+1 )

Z

0

q

max [Vsu (x; λt+1 ), Vss (µ; λt+1 )] dQ(x)

10

whereas the expected value of being an unskilled worker is:
Z

V u (λt+1 ) = λt+1 [

0

q∗

Vuu (µ; λt+1 )dQ(x) +

+(1 − λt+1 )

Z

0

q

Z

q

q∗

Vsu (x; λt+1 )dQ(x)]

(2.12)

max [Vuu (x; λt+1 ), Vuu (µ; λt+1 )] dQ(x)

We assume that in addition to a monetary cost of d, becoming a skilled worker
entails an additive non-pecuniary cost of δ ∈ [0, ∞]. This cost can be thought of
as eﬀort and it is assumed to be identically and independently distributed across
all young agents with cumulative distribution function Φ. Thus, an agent with
idiosyncratic cost δi will desire to become skilled if V s − V u ≥ δi .
We define by δ ∗ (λ) the skilled-unskilled payoﬀ diﬀerence generated when a
fraction λ of the population is skilled, i.e.,
δ ∗ (λt+1 ) ≡ V s (λt+1 ) − V u (λt+1 )

(2.13)

Note that given δ ∗ , all agents with δi ≤ δ ∗ would want to become skilled. If
young agents were able to borrow freely, children from all household types would
make identical education decisions contingent only on their value of δi . Hence in
equilibrium a fraction Φ( δ ∗ ) of each family would become skilled yielding λt+1 =
Φ( δ ∗ ) and
δ ∗ (Φ(δ ∗ )) ≡ V s (Φ(δ ∗ )) − V u (Φ(δ∗ ))

(2.14)

If, however, parental income is a factor that influences a child’s access to capital
markets (either in terms of the interest rate faced or in determining whether they
are rationed in the amount they are able to borrow), then children of diﬀerent
household types may make diﬀerent education decisions although they have the
same δi . In this case, the fraction of children of diﬀerent household types that
become skilled will depend on the parental household income distribution, and
thus on λt .11
11

It is important to note that this constraint should not be interpreted literally as the inability
to borrow freely to attend college. It could also reflect parental inability to borrow against their
children’s future human capital so as to live in a neighborhood in which the quality of primary
and secondary public education is high or to opt out of public education for a high-quality private
education. It is the quality of this earlier education that then determines the probability of an
individual attending college even if the latter is free.

11

In particular, we assume that children within a family with household income
I can borrow on aggregate up to Z(I), Z 0 > 0. One way to think about this
constraint is that parents can act as monitoring devices for their children in an
incentive compatible fashion by putting their own income up for collateral (in
period 2 of their lives). This ensures that the children will use the funds to become
educated rather than for consumption and allows up to Z(I) to be borrowed by
the family’s children. Hence, a family with income I and n(I) children can at
b
most aﬀord to educate at a cost d per child a fraction Φ(δ(I))
implicitly defined
12
by:
Z(I)
=d
b
n(I)Φ(δ)

(2.15)

Note that as indicated in (2.15), children from families with low household income
are hampered in their ability to become skilled both because of the lower aggregate
amount that can be borrowed by the family and because of the larger number of
children (recall that n is decreasing in I) that want to become skilled and hence
must share these funds.
Thus, given λt (and hence family income and number of children by family
type), in equilibrium a fraction
b
πij (λt , λt+1 ) ≡ min[Φ(δ ∗ (λt+1 )), Φ(δ(I
ij (λt )))]

(2.16)

of each family type will become skilled.13
2.6. Equilibrium

Given a division of the young population into skilled and unskilled in period
t, i.e., λt , an equilibrium for that period is a skilled and unskilled wage pair
(ws (λt ), wu (λt )) given by (2.5), a threshold match quality (between skilled and
unskilled agents) of q ∗ (λt ) given by (2.8), which generates a division of families
into types ρij (λt ) as given by (2.9). It also includes a decision by the children
of these individuals to become skilled or unskilled next period such that given
that the expected value of λ in the next period is λt+1 and hence the diﬀerential
12

We are implicitly normalizing the gross interest rate to equal one. Note that as we are not
endogenizing the supply of funds for loans, it is best to think of loans being provided on a world
market (in which this country is small).
13
We are assuming that the decision regarding which children should obtain the funding to
become skilled is eﬃcient, i.e., those who have the lowest δ are the first to become skilled.

12

between the expected value of being a skilled or unskilled worker is δ ∗ (λt+1 ), a
fraction πij (λt , λt+1 ) given by (2.16) of each family type becomes skilled, and in
aggregate these constitute a proportion λt+1 of next period’s population.
Figure 1 depicts the equilibrium λt+1 generated by a given λt . The upward
sloping line, δ = Ψ(λt+1 ; λt ), is derived in the following fashion. For a given
λt , it shows what δ would have to be such that the fraction of young individuals
with δi ≤ δ that would be able to aﬀord to enter the following period as skilled
equals λt+1 . Note that the domain of this function can in general be smaller
than 1 since for some initial conditions not all individuals will be able to aﬀord to
become skilled even if δ → ∞. In the absence of borrowing constraints, the inverse
of this function would coincide with Φ(δ) and the unconstrained Ψ(·) curve is the
lower envelope of the family of curves parameterized by diﬀerent values of λt . The
downward sloping curve shows δ ∗ (λt+1 ) ≡ V s (λt+1 ) − V u (λt+1 ) as a function of
λt+1 . Note that this curve does not depend on λt . The intersection of these two
curves gives the equilibrium values of (δ ∗∗ , λ∗∗
t+1 ) given λt .
Existence of an interior equilibrium (for any initial λt ) is guaranteed if we
assume that wes (λ) < wu (λ) for some λ ∈ (0, 1) (i.e., such that no one finds it in
their interest to become skilled) and that for some other λ ∈ (0, 1) the inequality
is reversed.14 Note that the Ψ curve is continuous, upward sloping, starts at zero,
and becomes vertical once all family groups are constrained. Thus, this and
the fact the δ ∗ (λt+1 ) is a continuous function defined over the entire range of
[0, 1] and goes from strictly positive to strictly negative numbers, guarantees the
existence of an interior equilibrium. Uniqueness of equilibrium (for any given λt )
is guaranteed if δ ∗ is monotonically decreasing in λ. This may, however, not be
the case as discussed in the next section.
2.7. Inequality
In order to investigate the eﬀects of inequality on household sorting and education
decisions, we first examine how exogenous changes in inequality aﬀect education
choices in any given period (i.e., we examine the eﬀect of changes in wages taking
λ as given).
An increase in wes makes becoming a skilled worker more attractive as it increases the direct return to being skilled. It also increases the return to matching with another skilled worker, making skilled agents pickier in their household
matching, i.e., it increases q ∗ . On the other hand, an increase in wes has ambiguous
14

This is guaranteed, for example, by assuming Inada conditions on the production function.

13

eﬀects on an unskilled agent’s payoﬀ since although it increases the value of being
in a household with a skilled worker, it also makes these matches more unlikely.
It is easy to show that an increase in wes increases the relative desirability of being
a skilled relative to an unskilled worker, i.e.,
dδ ∗
d[V s − V u ]
=
dwes
dwes

= [λ + (1 − λ)Q(q ∗ )]
−

∂Vss
∂Vsu
+ [(1 − Q(q ∗ ))(1 − 2λ)]
∂ wes
∂ wes

dq ∗
λ[Vuu (µ) − Vsu (q ∗ )]Q0 (q ∗ )
dwes

β
ss
su
which is strictly positive as ∂V
= 2 − wβs > ∂V
= 1 − ws +w
, λ + (1 − λ)Q(q ∗ ) >
∂ws
∂ws
u
∗
dq
(1 − Q(q ∗ ))(1 − 2λ), dw
> 0 and Vuu (µ) − Vsu (q ∗ ) < 0 (with the latter following
s
from the fact that skilled workers choose a higher cutoﬀ quality level in their
matches with unskilled individuals than what the latter find optimal).15
An increase in wu , on the other hand, has ambiguous eﬀects on the relative
desirability of being a skilled worker relative to an unskilled worker, as

∂Vsu
∂Vuu
dδ ∗
= [(1 − Q(q ∗ ))(1 − 2λ)]
− [1 − λ + λQ(q ∗ )]
dwu
∂wu
∂wu
dq ∗
+
λ[Vsu (q ∗ ) − Vuu (µ)]Q0 (q ∗ ),
dwu

(2.17)

The expression on the second line is negative but the expression on the first line,
which can be written as −1 − Q(q ∗ ) + wu (wβu +ws ) [ws (λQ(q ∗ ) + 1 − λ) + wu (Q(q ∗ ) +
λ(1 − Q(q∗ ))] is ambiguous.16
We next turn to an analysis of the eﬀect of an increase in λ on the relative
attractiveness of becoming skilled. Note that a change in the fraction of the
population that plans to become skilled will have two eﬀects (i) it will change
wages and hence household incomes by changing the ratio of skilled to unskilled
workers in aggregate production; (ii) it will change the probability with which
15

For notational convenience, we have supressed everywhere the dependence of Vij on λ.
This ambiguity is due to the fact that an increase in wu also makes a skilled worker better
oﬀ (as the return to matching with an unskilled individual increase) and, as our indirect utility
function is convex in income, this eﬀect could in theory outswamp the direct eﬀect of the increase
in wu on V u .
16

14

individuals encounter skilled relative to unskilled workers in the first round of
matching, (i.e., λ). So, the total eﬀect on the payoﬀ diﬀerential δ ∗ between
skilled and unskilled agents is given by:
dδ ∗
∂[V s − V u ] dwes ∂[V s − V u ] dwu ∂δ ∗ (λ)
=
+
+
dλ
∂ wes
dλ
∂wu
dλ
∂λ

Note that we can rewrite δ ∗ as:

δ

∗

"

= λ Vss (µ)Q(µ) +
"

Z

q

µ

Vss (x)dQ(x) −
∗

+(1 − λ) Vss (µ)Q(q ) +

Z

Z

q

q∗

∗

Vsu (x)dQ(x) − Vuu (µ)Q(q )

q

q∗

#

Vsu (x)dQ(x) − Vuu (µ)Q(µ) −

Z

q

µ

Vuu (x)dQ(x)

which after substituting in (2.4) and (2.6) yields:

δ ∗ = (wes − wu )(1 + Q(q ∗ )) + (2λ − 1)

Z

q∗

µ

(x − µ)dQ(x)

+(2λ − 1)(1 − Q(q∗ ))β log(wes + wu )
−(λ + (1 − λ)Q(q ∗ ))β log 2wes + (1 − λ + λQ(q ∗ ))β log 2wu .

Taking the derivative of δ ∗ with respect to λ yields (after some manipulation):
dδ ∗
= R{(1 + 2kQ(q ∗ ) + k 2 )(wes + wu − β) + (2k + Q(q ∗ )k 2 + Q(q ∗ ))(wes + wu )
dλ
wu
wes
− (k + k 2 Q(q ∗ ))β } +
(2.18)
−(k + Q(q ∗ ))β
wes
wu
¸
Z q∗
∗ ·
wes
0 ∗ ∂q
e
Q (q )
λ 2(ws − wu ) − β log
+ {2
(x − µ)dQ(x)
∂λ
wu
µ
+β [2 log(wes + wu ) − log(2wes ) − log(2wu )] [1 − Q(q ∗ )]}.
00

1 dk
where R = (wesf+wu ) (1+k)
< 0.
dλ
dδ ∗
In order to sign dλ , note that all expressions other than the last one in curly
brackets are negative. To see this, note that, as shown in Appendix A, the sign of
the expression in the first curly parenthesis (the first two lines) of (2.18) is positive
(which, as multiplied by R < 0 implies that the first two lines are negative) and

15

#

∗

that ∂q
< 0 (and the expression multiplying it is positive). Unfortunately, we
∂λ
are not unambiguously able to sign the equation as the eﬀect
of a change in λ on
R q∗
the matching component is strictly positive (i.e., dλ
>
0,
µ (x − µ)dQ(x) > 0,
dk
and the expression on the fourth line is positive since log x is a concave function).
The ambiguity in (2.18) above is due to the fact that although an increase in
λ decreases skilled wages and increases unskilled wages, thereby making it less
attractive to become skilled than previously, it also increases the probability of
matching with a skilled agent in the first round. As the indirect utility function
is convex in income, then for a given cutoﬀ level of q ∗ , the increased probability of
meeting a skilled individual on the margin yields greater utility to another skilled
individual.
Thus, we cannot rule out the existence of multiple equilibria, though simulation
of the model for various functional forms and parameter values always resulted
in a unique equilibrium. The rest of our discussion, in any case, will ignore this
possibility and simply assume
dδ ∗ (λ)
<0
dλ

(A2)

as this type of multiplicity is not the focus of our analysis.
2.8. Steady States and Dynamics
The state variable for this economy is the fraction of skilled workers, λ.
evolution of this variable is given by:

λt+1 (λt , Eλt+1 ) =

Ls,t+1 (λt , Eλt+1 )
Lt+1 (λt )

The

(2.19)

We discuss each component of this equation in turn.
The population at time t + 1 is simply the sum over all the children born to
households in period t. Hence,
Lt+1 (λt ) = [nss (λt )ρss (λt ) + nsu (λt )ρsu (λt ) + nuu (λt )ρuu (λt )]Lt
(2.20)
where nij (λ) is the utility maximizing number of children for a household with
income Iij (λ) as indicated in equation (2.2).
16

The skilled population at time t + 1 is simply the sum over all children born to
households in period t who decide to become skilled. Recall that some household
types may be constrained and hence that the decision to become skilled depends
(potentially) both on parental income in period t and hence on λt as well as on
payoﬀs expected for t + 1 (and hence on Et λt+1 , where E is the expectations
operator).17 Thus,
Ls,t+1 (λt , λt+1 ) = [πss (λt , λt+1 ) nss (λt )ρss (λt ) + πsu (λt , λt+1 ) nsu (λt )ρsu (λt )
+πuu (λt , λt+1 ) nuu (λt )ρuu (λt )]Lt
(2.21)
A steady state is defined as a λt = λ∗ such that λt+1 (λ∗ , λt+1 ) = λ∗ . Note that
if λ is constant, so are wages, and so is the cutoﬀ quality for a skilled agent to
match with an unskilled agent and the education decisions of children.
If the economy had perfect capital markets, then independently of the initial
e = Φ(δ)
e
value of λ, the ability of individuals to borrow implies that a fraction λ
³ ´
e ∀ij, ∀λ such that δ ∗ λ
e = δ.
e
of them will choose to become skilled, i.e. πij = λ,
t
Thus the economy would converge immediately to the unique steady state.
In the absence of perfect capital markets, the initial distribution of individuals into skilled and unskilled determines the dynamic evolution of the economy.
With borrowing constraints, for those family types who are constrained, a fraction
smaller than Φ(δ ∗ ) will be able to become skilled, and thus in aggregate a fraction
that is smaller than Φ(δ ∗ ) will become skilled next period. Obviously, the first
family type to be constrained will be the uu type, followed by the us type and
lastly by the ss type, as lower family income implies both more binding borrowing
constraints and a larger number of children who wish to borrow.
As shown in Figure 2 for a particular CES production function, this economy
can easily give rise to multiple steady states, here given by all the intersections
of λt+1 with the 45 degree line.18 As depicted in the figure, the steady states A
and B are locally stable.19 The steady state in A is characterized by a low fraction of skilled individuals, high inequality between skilled and unskilled workers,
17

Rational expectations implies that in equilibrium Et λt+1 = λt+1 , so we have suppressed the
expectations operator in what follows.
18
The functional forms used to generate this figure are a production function given by
F (Ls , Lu ) = (αLγs + (1 − α)Lγu )1/γ , and a limit on aggregate borrowing by children within
a family of a fraction θ of household income, i.e., Z(I) = θI. Lastly, we assume that δ is distributed uniformly and that q is distributed with a triangular density function. The parameter
values used are: α = 0.2, γ = 0.5, θ = 0.1 δ = 0.2, q = 8, β = 0.05, t = 0.05, and d = 0.1.
19
Note that the number of locally stable steady states can be greater than two since this

17

a high degree of sorting in household formation (i.e., skilled individuals predominantly marry other skilled ones; unskilled individuals predominantly marry other
ss
unskilled), and large fertility diﬀerentials (i.e., nnuu
= IIuu
is big). In the steady
ss
state B, the opposite is the case: there is a large fraction of skilled individuals,
low inequality, low sorting and low fertility diﬀerentials.
Across steady states and indeed across any equilibrium at a point in time,
higher inequality is associated with higher sorting. This follows simply from the
static analysis in which we showed that greater wage diﬀerentials imply greater
sorting (Theorem 2.1). We would also have liked to show that (out of steady state)
economies that start out with greater inequality end up in a steady state with at
least as much inequality, sorting, and fertility diﬀerentials than an economy that
starts out with lower inequality. This we have confirmed for a large number of
simulations but are unable to prove analytically given the endogenous fertility.
This does not aﬀect, however, the prediction which we will examine in the data:
the existence of a positive correlation between sorting and the skill premium. We
now turn to our empirical analysis.

3. Empirical Analysis
Our model predicts that countries with higher skill premia should have higher
degrees of household sorting. This relationship should hold independently of
whether countries have the same technology or whether they are converging to
the same or diﬀerent steady states, since it follows from the static part of our theoretical analysis, in which greater inequality in the incomes of skilled relative to
unskilled individuals causes the former to reject a higher proportion of potential
matches with unskilled individuals. Furthermore, across steady states, the relationship between sorting and inequality is mutually reinforcing. That is, higher
degrees of household sorting should be associated with higher skill premia and
vice versa.20
The purpose of this section is to establish that there is indeed a positive relationship between marital sorting and the skill premium across countries, and
that this relationship is robust with regards to the main concerns that arise with
depends on the change in the fraction of children of diﬀerent families types that are constrained
at diﬀerent values of λ.
20
The second direction of causality though need not hold along the transition path to a steady
state. That is, as discussed previously, greater sorting in a given period need not necessarily
lead to greater inequality the following period.

18

regards to the data or the possible influence of other variables. Although we make
a few attempts to establish the direction of causality, our data set does not allow
us to identify exogenous variations in either of our two variables of interest and so
the main thrust of our empirical analysis is the establishment of a robust correlation between marital sorting and the skill premium. To our knowledge, this is
the first paper that has attempted to do so in a systematic fashion for a relatively
heterogeneous set of countries.21
We examine the main implications of our model using household surveys from
34 countries in various regions of the world. For each country we assemble a sample
of households with measures of the education and earnings of both spouses. We
then construct several measures of the skill premium for high-skill workers and a
measure of the degree of marital sorting by education for each country. We use
these measures to examine the correlation between the skill premium and sorting
across countries.
We find a positive and significant relation between the skill premium and
marital sorting, and show that this finding is robust to controlling for several
other variables that can potentially aﬀect the correlation between sorting and the
skill premium. If countries have the same technology, our model also predicts
that countries with a high degree of sorting should also have a relatively low
level of GDP per capita. We find evidence in favor of this negative relationship.
Altogether we take these findings to suggest agreement of our basic hypotheses
with the data.
3.1. Sample
The data consists of a collection of household surveys assembled from the Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) and a collection of Latin-American household surveys
held by the Inter-America Development Bank (IDB). From the LIS we obtain wage
and education data at the household level for 20 countries, largely European, but
also including Australia, Canada, Israel, Taiwan and the U.S.22 The years of these
surveys ranges from 1990 to 1995. We also include Britain for which we use the
British Household Panel Study (1997) rather than the data from the LIS, since
in the latter the education variable is reported as the age at the completion of
21
See Dahan and Gavaria (1999) for descriptive evidence on the positive correlation between
marital sorting and inequality for Latin American countries.
22
Education and earnings data for Russia is also available in the LIS, but we choose not to
include it due to the low quality of the data. Our basic results hold if Russia is included.

19

education, a variable that is hard to map into years of schooling. The 13 IDB
countries are all located in Latin America and the surveys date from 1996-1997.
We provide a more detailed discussion of these household surveys in Appendix B,
where we list the names and sample sizes of the surveys by country.
For each country we construct a sample of couples where the husband is between 36 to 45 years old.23 We do not restrict the definition of a spouse to legally
married couples, but for convenience we refer to them as “wives” and “husbands”.
We use this sample to construct our measure of marital sorting. Several of our
measures of skill premia, on the other hand, incorporate earnings data from a
larger age sample of spouses since presumably what individuals care about is
some measure of the lifetime income of their spouses rather earnings at a particular point of the life cycle. We include households in the analysis if, in addition
to various age requirements, there is a spouse present and education and earnings
variables (including zero) are available for both spouses. To avoid problems of
income attribution across multiple families within a household, the sample is further restricted to couples where the husband is the head of the household in the
Latin-American countries, and to single-family households in the LIS surveys.24
We weigh each observation in our calculations by the household weights provided
by the household survey.
We use labor income as our measure of the return to education. All the surveys
report earnings of each spouse, though the definition of reported income diﬀers by
country. Some LIS countries report gross annual labor earnings, all forms of cash
wage and salary income, and some report these net of taxes (which is the variable
that we would ideally prefer to use). Income in the Latin American countries is
gross monthly labor income from all sources. This definition includes income from
both primary and secondary labor activities; the exact components vary somewhat
across countries, but generally include wages, income from self-employment, and
proprietor’s income, as well as adjustment to reflect imputation of non-monetary
income. Appendix B provides the details of our income measures. The fact that
some countries report gross income while others report net income could distort
23

We restrict our attention to this age group for our measure of sorting, since younger cohorts
presumably are less stable regarding their marriage patterns. Furthermore, we would ideally
prefer to analyze a population for which we can observe both marital decisions and the expectations of lifetime wage inequality at the time of the marriage decision. The latter consideration
argues for younger rather than older cohorts since presumably the observed wage inequality
corresponds more closely to the expected one than is the case for older individuals.
24
We were not able to reliably identify all multi-household families in the Latin American
surveys, so we cannot explicitly eliminate multi-family households in these countries.

20

our cross-country comparisons, as net income will be more equally distributed
than gross income in those countries with progressive taxation. We discuss our
attempt to deal with this problem later on in the paper.
Education measures also diﬀer across countries. While education in the Latin
American data is reported either as total years of schooling or, in a few cases as the
highest level of education attained, in the LIS countries the education units are
quite idiosyncratic. Some countries report years, while others report attainment
by country-specific levels. We attempt to standardize the LIS education variable
by converting the reported units to years of education. In addition, we create a
skill indicator variable that equals 1 if an individual has years of schooling that
exceed high-school completion level and equals zero otherwise. This requires us
to determine how many years of schooling an individual needs to be able to go
beyond high school in each country. The Latin American data also required some
standardization because the number of years required for high-school completion
varies across countries. For countries that report attainment together with years
of schooling, our skill indicator equals 1 if some post-secondary education was
reported for an individual. For countries that do not report attainment level,
our skill-indicator equals 1 if the years of schooling exceeded the standard time
required to complete high school in that country. Our mapping of reported education measures into years of schooling and into an indicator for high school
completion is summarized in Table B2 of Appendix B.
3.2. Variables
We construct four measures of the skill (education) premium for each country.
The first is the ratio of earnings for skilled male workers to unskilled ones in our
sorting sample, i.e. husbands between ages 36 and 45.25 This measure is very
simple and intuitive, and has a direct counterpart in our model. A potential
drawback of using the wage ratio as described above is that it reflects income at
a particular stage in the life-cycle, and the mapping from this variable to lifetime
income is likely to diﬀer across skill groups. It also ignores information other than
education that could also aﬀect earnings, such as age or labor market experience.
We control for such eﬀects by constructing another measure of the skill premium;
this is the coeﬃcient on an indicator for being skilled (i.e., having at least some
25

We focus primarily on the male skill premium as women’s labor supply decision is more
likely to depend on her spouse’s earnings. This is discussed more at length further on in the
paper.

21

post high-school education) in the following regression:
log(ei ) = a0 + a1 Ii + a2 (age − si − 6) + a3 (age − si − 6)2 + εi ,
where ei is earnings, Ii is an indicator for being skilled, si is years of schooling,
and (age − si − 6) is potential experience for individual-i. This regression is
estimated for each country by OLS for all husbands aged 30-60 who have positive
earnings rather than solely for those aged 36-45. Given that we have controlled
for experience, this measure may be able to better capture potential lifetime labor
earnings inequality than the simple ratio of earnings for our smaller sample.26 We
will refer to this measure as the skill indicator measure of inequality and to the
previous one as the wage ratio measure of inequality. These two measures will
diﬀer as the skill indicator uses a larger sample, omits zero-earnings and controls
for experience.
Although these two measures of the skill premium have clear counterparts in
our model and hence are easy to interpret, both of these measures depend on our
definition of being skilled. Since this definition, i.e. going beyond high school,
can be considered rather arbitrary we would like to come up with a measure that
does not depend on our particular cutoﬀ. As a widely used measure of returns
to schooling, we use the Mincer coeﬃcient as an alternative measure of the skill
premium to avoid this problem. The Mincer coeﬃcient is the coeﬃcient on years
of schooling in the following regression:27
log(ei ) = b0 + b1 si + b2 (age − si − 6) + b3 (age − si − 6)2 + εi .
We estimate these regression for all husbands aged 30-60 in our samples, as we
did with our skill indicator measure.
Finally, note that our analysis so far has been based on inequality in annual
incomes. A better measure, were it available, would be that in expected lifetime
incomes, as presumably that is what an individual is thinking about in making
a tradeoﬀ between quality and income across matches. In the absence of panel
data, we cannot observe lifetime labor incomes. We can, however, create crude
26

How good this measure is of lifetime labor earnings inequality depends on how well the
earnings of diﬀerent cohorts at a point in time represents the lifecycle earnings of an individual
(i.e., on the stability of the earnings profile).
27
These measures will diﬀer from standard Mincer coeﬃcients because we do not control for
self-selection bias, and because we estimate the equation on husbands, rather than all workingage males. The correlation of our measures with those tabulated in Bils and Klenow (2000) is
0.57.

22

estimates based on the standard ’synthetic cohort’ method (Ghez and Becker,
1975). We create projections of lifetime income using observations on older cohorts
to predict the future income of the young.28 Our simplest measure does this by
dividing the life-cycle into 5-year intervals, from 25-30 up to 60-65, then computing
average labor income over 5-year intervals for skilled and unskilled individuals
separately. We take the present value of the predicted income profiles as the
measure of lifetime labor income assuming an annual discount factor of 0.95.29
The ratio of these lifetime income measures for skilled relative to unskilled workers
constitutes our fourth measure of the skill premium, which we call the lifetime
income measure.30
Our measure of sorting is the Pearson correlation coeﬃcient between husband’s
and wife’s years of education across couples in our sample. Note that we use education rather than income, although in our model marital sorting occurs in both
dimensions (since income is assumed to be a function only of education). We do
this because in reality a female’s labor force participation decision is often dependent on her spouse’s earnings. One might ask, if this is the case, why men would
want to marry women with higher education? If the cost of educating children
is a function of the mother’s education and as long as parents care about having
higher-quality children (in the traditional Beckerian fashion), then men will want
to match with higher education women because of child quality and women (independently of whether men’s education is itself an input into children’s quality)
will wish to match with more educated men because of the positive relationship
between income and education. In our model we have chosen to ignore the greater
endogeneity of women’s labor force participation decision since it complicates the
model and we do not have any particular insights to contribute here as to why
these vary across countries.
28

This measure of lifetime income diﬀers from the true measure in so far as the age-income
profile varies over time.
29
We exclude higher ages because some of the age-country-skill cells are empty for particular
countries.
30
As a further robustness check, we also compute an analogous measure of lifetime income
that controls for age variation within cohorts. We estimate the following equation:
yit = β0 + β1 ait + β2 a2it + β3 a3it + γ0 Si + γ1 Si ait + γ2 Si a2it + γ3 Si a3it ,
where Si is the indicator for being skilled and a is age. We then compute predicted income for
each year for each educational class, and as before, take the ratio of the present value of the
predicted income profiles as the measure of lifetime labor income inequality. This measure is
highly correlated with the first measure.

23

Table 1 reports the measures of the skill premium and sorting for each country.
The first column reports the means and standard deviation of the fraction of
skilled husbands in our 36-45 years old husbands sample for each country. The
column labelled “Skilled Share” gives the percent of the sample with more than
high-school education. The mean level of the share of skilled husbands across
countries in our sample is 24.3% with a standard deviation of around 12.5%. The
next four columns show diﬀerent measures of the skill premium. The average
levels of both the wage ratio and of the lifetime income ratio is around 2 with a
standard deviation close to 0.8 for the wage ratio and 0.7 for the lifetime income
ratio. The means and standard deviations for the skill indicator measure and the
Mincer coeﬃcient are 0.67 (0.34) and 0.095 (0.035), respectively. The last column
reports the sample correlation measure of marital sorting. On average across
countries, the sample correlation between spouses’ years of schooling is about
0.61 with a standard deviation of 0.11. The countries with the lowest skill premia
are Australia and Denmark (wage ratio) and Poland (Mincer coeﬃcient), while
Colombia and Brazil (wage ratio) and Bolivia and Paraguay (Mincer coeﬃcient)
have the highest. The correlation of the years of schooling across spouses is lowest
for Australia, and highest for Colombia and Ecuador. As shown in Table 2, our
four measures of the skill premium are highly correlated with each other (over
0.8). All of the correlations are significant at the 1% level.
3.3. Results
This section reports the main results of our empirical analysis. Note first from
Table 2 that marital sorting is positively and significantly correlated with all
our measures of the skill premium (around 0.6 in each case). Table 3 shows
the results from a regression of marital sorting on the skill premium, using our
four diﬀerent measures of the skill premium. The standard errors of the OLS
regression are based on the Eicker-White robust covariance matrix in order to
correct for heteroskedasticity. For each measure of the skill premium we have
included two specifications of the regression. Specification 1 in Table 3 simply
regresses sorting on the skill premium. We find that this relationship is positive
and significant at the 1% level for all our measures. Thus, our first empirical test
agrees with the basic prediction of our theory of a positive correlation between
these two variables.
Figures 3 and 4 show the data used in the regressions of Tables 3 for the wage
ratio and the Mincer coeﬃcient measures of the skill premium (the skill indica-

24

tor and lifetime income ratio estimates look similar to these). As is clear from
these figures, Latin American countries tend to have a greater degree of inequality
than the rest of our sample. One possible interpretation of this finding is that
the Latin American countries are in a steady state with high inequality and high
sorting whereas the rest of our sample (predominantly European countries) are in
a low inequality-low sorting steady state with the variation within these subsamples being explained by country-specific factors (e.g., labor-market institutions,
education and tax policy, credit markets, etc.). To make sure that our results are
not driven by some factor other than sorting that is common to Latin American
countries, specification 2 in Table 3 introduces a Latin American dummy variable
into the regressions. As can be seen, sorting is still significant, although now at
the 5% level.31
We also examined the correlation between marital sorting and the skill premium within our Latin American (LA) and LIS subsamples. For the LIS subsample, the results, as shown in Table 3a, are similar to those of Table 3. .For the LA
subsample, the relation although positive is usually not significant, which is not
surprising, given the small size of the subsample.
We next examine whether the way variables are reported and how we assign
years of education might aﬀect our results. As we have noted previously, some LIS
countries report years of education whereas some report only the highest formal
level attained, such as high-school diploma or undergraduate degree. As a result,
for some countries the years of education or skilled category includes only those
who have completed college or the appropriate degree and excludes those who have
not obtained the pertinent degree but may have progressed beyond high school. In
order to check whether this feature of our data aﬀects our results, the regressions
in Table 4 include a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for countries which
report the finer classifications of education and zero otherwise. As Table 4 shows,
inclusion of this variable does not aﬀect the sign of the sorting eﬀect (although
the significance drops). Furthermore, when the Latin American dummy variable
is included, the education-reporting variable has no additional explanatory power
and the adjusted R-squared is slightly lower. Again, this is to be expected, as
all Latin American countries report years of schooling, which makes the dummy
variables very highly correlated.
Another potential concern is that although we have examined each country’s
education system to understand how it progresses, the actual number of years of
31

We also checked for outliers that shifted the estimated coeﬃcient on the skill premium by
more than one standard deviation; there were no outliers.

25

schooling that we assign to each attainment level may aﬀect our measure of marital
sorting. A possible check is to use the Spearman rank correlation between years
of schooling of husbands and wives as an alternative measure of sorting. The
rank correlation measure of sorting and sample correlation measure are highly
correlated (0.98). Our results also go through with this measure, although when
a Latin American dummy is introduced the coeﬃcient becomes insignificant for
two of our skill premium measures.
As noted previously, some countries report earnings net of taxes and some
report gross earnings. Since, due to progressive taxation, gross earnings will in
general tend to be more unequal than the net ones, this can create diﬀerences in
the measured skill premium and aﬀect our results. In order to control for the way
income is reported, we introduce a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if the
a country reports net earnings and 0 otherwise. The results are reported in Table
5. The eﬀect of this dummy variable is positive but not significant. As in Table
3, all four measures of the skill premium still have a positive and significant eﬀect
on sorting, indicating that our results were not driven by this particular feature
of the data.
3.4. Other Issues
In our model the eﬀect of the skill premium on marital sorting is independent of
the fraction of the population that is skilled (other than endogenously through the
eﬀect of λ on the skill premium). This, however, would not be the case in a large
set of models in which individuals meet others at random.32 Thus, one might
expect that a population with a higher λ, for a given skill premium, would have
a greater degree of sorting as skilled individuals (or more educated individuals)
know that they have a higher chance of meeting another skilled individual in the
future. This would tend to make them less willing to match with an unskilled
individual. In Table 6 we examine this issue by controlling for the fraction of
skilled individuals in each country in our OLS regression. In all specifications the
eﬀect of the skill premium on sorting is positive and significant, at the 1% level
without a Latin American dummy, and at 5 or 10% with it.33 Furthermore, the
32

Even if individuals would for sure be given the opportunity to meet only others from their
own skill group in the last period, a model with more than two rounds of matching and discounting would also produce dependence of the cutoﬀ quality level for a mixed match on the
fraction of skilled people.
33
We also controlled for a quadratic relationship in λ with similar results.

26

eﬀect of the population skill level is negative, an issue that we investigate in more
detail below.
Although our results in Table 3 indicate a positive and significant correlation
between marital sorting and the skill premium, a natural concern is that the
correlation is driven by some third factor that is positively correlated with our
variables. We next turn to an examination of various possible candidate variables
that could be driving our results.
A possible (presumably exogenous) variable that could aﬀect both sorting and
the skill premium, it could be argued, is the country’s degree of ethnic fractionalization. Note though that the argument must be stronger than the fact that
individuals tend to marry others from the same ethnic origin and that for various
political economy arguments (e.g. Alesina, Beqir, and Easterly (1999)), countries
with greater degrees of ethnic fractionalization have greater degrees of inequality.
It must also argue that ethnic groups diﬀer in their human capital so that sorting
along ethnic lines translates into sorting along the education dimension. Why
this should be so is not clear. One possibility, however, might be the reluctance of
an ethnically dominant group to invest in public services (such as schooling) for
other ethnic groups (e.g. Easterly (2001)). We examine this issue by introducing
a variable that captures the degree of ethno-linguistic fractionalization within the
country. This variable, which take values between 0 and 100 with higher values indicating more fractionalization, is taken from World Bank Growth Network
(WBGN) data set.34 For our set of countries (excluding the Czech Republic,
Hungary, Poland and Slovakia for which data was not available) the degree of
ethno-linguistic fractionalization ranges from a minimum of 3 (Germany) to a
maximum of 75 (Canada) with a mean value of 26.3 and a standard deviation of
20.8.
Next we consider the possibility that a country’s degree of urbanization may be
driving our results. Cities, it can be argued, are places where one may expect to
have greater mixing among diﬀerent types than in the countryside where the skill
acquisition may tend to be more uniform. Thus, if countries whose population
is more concentrated in cities tend to have lower skill premia (perhaps due to
better borrowing opportunities in cities), this might be responsible for our finding
of a positive correlation between sorting and the skill premium. To examine this
hypothesis we introduce an urbanization variable which we take from the WBGN
data set as well. This is the fraction of a country’s population living in urban
areas in 1990 as reported to United Nations by each country. In our sample,
34

This variable is available at http://www.worldbankorg/research/growth/GDNdata.htm

27

the lowest value for urbanization is 47.1 (Costa Rica) and the highest value is
96.5 (Belgium). Overall, the mean value for urbanization is 73.3, with a standard
deviation of 13.2.
Another possible concern is that our results are driven by the fraction of labor
force that is female. The argument here would have to be something along
the lines that in countries in which a greater fraction of woman work, the skill
premium is lower (why women’s labor force participation should have this eﬀect
is rather unclear), and furthermore there is less sorting as men and women from
diverse educational backgrounds have greater opportunities to interact (i.e., the
workplace) than if women only went to school and then stayed out of the labor
force. This would then explain the positive correlation between the skill premium
and sorting. We examine this possibility by including a variable that measures
the fraction of the labor force that is female. We take the 1990 values of this
measure from World Bank (2001). In our sample (Luxemburg and Taiwan are
excluded since the data was not available), the lowest value for the fraction of
labor force that is female was 27.7 (Ecuador) and the highest was 48 (Finland
and Sweden) with a mean of 39.9 and a standard deviation of 6.2.
A last concern is that all our results are driven by the level of GDP per capita.
Although GDP per capita is an endogenous variable in our model and hence
looking at its exogenous eﬀects is problematic (as we are unable to think of a
valid instrument that survives the inclusion of a Latin American dummy), we
nonetheless add it as a control (possibly reflecting aspects of income level that are
not captured in the model). The argument here would be that countries with
low income are more unequal (again, why this follows is not very clear—perhaps a
political instability argument related to per capita GDP) and that when income is
low, not marrying “down” matters more than when it is high.35 Thus, countries
with low levels of GDP should also see higher levels of sorting. To evaluate this
argument we incorporate a measure of real per capita GDP (its 1997 value from the
WBGN) into our regression analysis. The poorest country in our sample has a real
GDP per capita of $1896 (Bolivia) and the richest one has $21974 (Luxembourg),
while the average value for the whole sample is $9897, with a standard deviation
of $5941.36
Table 7 reports the results of introducing each of these variables separately
in a regression of marital sorting on the skill premium (using the wage ratio as
35

This argument more generally depends on the the sign of the third derivative of the utility
function.
36
The data for Germany is from 1992.

28

the measure of the skill premium) as well as introducing them all jointly. As one
might expect from our argument above, ethnic fractionalization has a positive
and significant eﬀect on marital sorting. The eﬀect of urbanization on sorting
is negative but not significant, whereas the faction of labor force that is female
has a negative and significant eﬀect on marital sorting. In each specification
(both with and without the additional control for Latin American) the coeﬃcient
on the skill premium remains positive and significant, although in the cases of
urbanization and GDP per capita, the significance drops to the 10% level when
a Latin American dummy is included. In the regression with all the control
variables, the positive eﬀect of the skill premium is significant at the 5% level.
The results from these regressions indicate that the positive correlation between marital sorting and the skill premium is not an artifact either of the ways
in which the data is reported nor of some obvious third factor. The positive correlation, nonetheless, does not allow us to determine whether the eﬀect of the skill
premium on sorting is truly positive or whether instead this relationship is driven
by the potentially positive eﬀect of sorting on the skill premium. We next turn
to the question of causality.
In our model both the skill premium and marital sorting are endogenously
determined variables. The timing of decisions though is that individuals first
sort given the expected skill premium. The eﬀect of current sorting, therefore,
is only on future inequality rather than on the current skill premia since how
individuals sort aﬀects the proportion of individuals who will be able to become
skilled the following generation. Consequently, the skill premium faced by our
35-45 year olds is not simultaneously determined with their sorting patterns. It
could be argued, however, that technology shocks that aﬀect the skill premium
tend to be serially correlated. If technology shocks are neutral and the production
function is constant returns to scale, however, then a measure such as the wage
ratio will not be aﬀected by these shocks. On the other hand, if shocks are
not neutral then this concern is valid since there will be a bias in the coeﬃcient
estimate resulting from the correlation of the explanatory variable with the error
term. To correct for this endogeneity bias, we would like to find a variable that
is highly correlated with the explanatory variable but not with the error term in
the regression equation.
Ex ante, an excellent candidate as an instrument for the skill premium would
appear to be the amount of capital per worker, since presumably it would be
positively correlated with the skill premium (if we think that capital and skilled
labor are more complementary than capital and unskilled labor), and there is no
29

reason to believe that it would have an independent eﬀect on the degree of sorting.
The problem, however, with this instrument is that it does not capture enough
variation across countries beyond those between countries from Latin American
and the LIS sample.
As an alternative, we also explored using a variable that measured the strength
of labor unions is a potential instrument since it could aﬀect the skill premium but
should not have any direct eﬀect on marital sorting. As an instrument, however,
it has the same problem as capital per worker. While the strength of labor unions
is negatively and significantly correlated with the skill premium, the significant
relation disappears once we control for being a LA country.37
Another possible instrument for the skill premium is the average years of
schooling in a country, since one might expect countries with a higher skilled
share of the population (and hence a lower skill premium according to our model)
to have higher average years of schooling. Furthermore, this is a variable that
evolves slowly over time. According to our model, this variable would not have
an eﬀect on sorting other than through its eﬀect on the skill premium. As we
discussed above, however, one could easily modify the search portion of our sorting model such that the skilled share of the population (and hence presumably
average years of schooling) has an independent eﬀect on marital sorting. As a
result, when we use the years of schooling as an instrument, we also include the
fraction of skilled population as an additional control.
Table 8 shows our two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimates of the correlation
between our diﬀerent measures of the skill premium and marital sorting. We use
the measures of average years of schooling for the population aged 25 and above
given in Barro and Lee (2000). Overall, in the first stage regressions without an
additional Latin American dummy, both years of schooling and the skilled share of
the population are negatively and significantly correlated with diﬀerent measures
of the skill premium (except for with the Mincer coeﬃcient, for which the skilled
share has no significant eﬀect). Once we add an additional LA dummy into the
first stage regressions, the eﬀect of the skilled share diminishes, possibly reflecting
the fact that LA countries in general have a lower skilled share.
In the second stage regressions, the eﬀect of the skill premium on marital
sorting is positive and highly significant. Furthermore, as expected, the eﬀect
of the skilled share of the population on marital sorting is positive. Indeed, the
37

We used total trade union membership as a percentage of the total labor force and workers
covered by collective bargaining as a percentage of total salaried workers as two diﬀerent
measures of the strength of unions (data from Rama and Arcetona (2000))

30

estimates of the eﬀect of the skill premium on marital sorting are significantly
larger than the ones we obtained from OLS. The estimate of 0.15 on the wage
ratio, for example, implies that going from a more equal country like Sweden to
an unequal one like Chile results in an increase in the correlation coeﬃcient for
spouses education of about 0.31 points. The fact that the eﬀect of being a Latin
American country on marital sorting is negative indicates that once we account for
the skill premium, Latin American countries tend to have lower marital sorting, a
result that is rather hard to interpret in light of our previous finding of a positive
coeﬃcient on this dummy variable. Finally, the finding of larger estimates on our
various measures of the skill premium in the IV regressions above might suggest
that downward bias due to measurement error in the skill premium might be larger
than the potential reverse causality problem.
A potential problem with our instrument, however, is that one could imagine
that years of schooling might have an independent (presumably negative) eﬀect
on sorting by allowing people to mix for a greater amount of time before finally
separating across skill lines. This consideration suggests that our IV results
should be approached with some caution.38
3.5. Per Capita Income, Skilled Population and Sorting
We now turn to an examination of another prediction of our model: the existence of a negative relation between marital sorting and per capita income across
countries. Note that our model implies that across steady states, economies (with
the same technology) are characterized by a positive relationship between sorting and the skill premium and a negative relationship of these with the fraction
of skilled individuals. Consequently, ceteris paribus, we expect economies with
similar technologies but with greater sorting to have lower per capita income as
their level of human capital will be further below the eﬃcient level. We turn to
an examination of this relationship in the data.
Figure 6 shows the relation between marital sorting and per capita income
where per capita income is real GDP per capita in 1997. Note that although
per capita output is an endogenous variable in our model, the timing is such
that sorting will aﬀect future output (rather than being aﬀected by it). Table
9 shows the regression results for a specification in which the dependent variable
is our measure of per capita income and the explanatory variable is the sample
correlation measure of marital sorting with and without a Latin American dummy.
38

We thank Torsten Persson for bringing this point to our attention.

31

The relation is significant and negative for both specifications as predicted by our
model.

4. Conclusion
This paper has examined the relationship between marital or household sorting
and income inequality. Using a general equilibrium model in which individuals
make decisions over whether to become skilled or unskilled, about with whom to
match, how much to consume, and the number of children to have, we find that
there is a positive relationship between sorting and inequality (between skilled and
unskilled workers). In particular, whether at a point in time, or across steady
states, economies with greater skill premia should also display a greater degree of
sorting. Our model also predicts that economies with greater skill premia should
have greater fertility diﬀerentials, and (given identical technologies) economies
with greater sorting should have lower per capita income and smaller fractions of
skilled workers.
Our empirical work is based on household surveys for 34 countries. From these
surveys we create our main sample for each country, a measure of marital sorting,
and various measures of the skill premium. Our regression analysis supports our
central prediction of a positive relationship between sorting and inequality across
countries even after controlling for other possible sources of this correlation. We
also find evidence in favor of a negative relationship between sorting and per capita
income as predicted by our model as well.
It should be noted that our story of greater pickiness with respect to household
partners in the face of an increased skill premium is of course not the only one
compatible with a positive correlation between these two variables. An alternative story, with similar mechanics, would be of greater sorting into communities or
schools in response to greater inequality (say, in response to fear of more crime).
This could then lead to fewer opportunities to interact between individuals of
diﬀerent skill groups and consequently to a greater correlation of spouses in education. We do not see this mechanism as being very diﬀerent. Once again,
private decisions that are sensitive to the degree of inequality (e.g., where to live,
where to go to school) would feed through to marital decisions, which would then
have important social consequences as a result of borrowing constraints.
There are many directions in which this work could be extended. We have abstracted from several issues, each of which are of interest in their own right. First,
we have ignored diﬀerences between men and women. An alternative formulation
32

of our model would be to have parents care about the quality and quantity of their
children and for parental time and education to be a factor in producing quality
(perhaps by lowering the cost of the children becoming skilled). Thus, a parent
who stayed at home and took care of the children would contribute to household
utility by increasing the quality of their oﬀspring. If, because of childbearing
costs this were predominantly the woman, men would still wish to match with
more educated women either because of their earning potential (as in the model)
or because of the increased quality of the children. Thus, a major topic we wish
to investigate (theoretically and empirically) is the relationship among sorting,
female wage inequality and male wage inequality.39 This would also tie in with
another set of issues that we have chosen to ignore—that of household bargaining,
the option to remain single and the possibility of divorce. Another avenue to explore is the importance of bequests relative to education in the intergenerational
transmission of inequality. Lastly, it would be interesting to examine the role of
public policy (education subsidies and welfare policy) in interacting with sorting
and inequality. We plan to study several of these issues in future work.
39

See Galor and Weil (1996) for a model in which exogenous diﬀerences between women and
men leads to a large gap between the wages of these at low levels of capital, which is then reduced
as capital accumulates. They use this model to help explain the demographic transition.

33

References
[1] Aiyagari, S. Rao, J. Greenwood, and N. Guner. “On the State of the Union.”
Journal of Political Economy, 108 (2000), 213-244.
[2] Alesina, Alberto, R. Baqir, and W. Easterly, “Public Goods and Ethnic Divisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXIV (1999), 1243-1284.
[3] Barro, Robert J. and J. W. Lee, “International Data on Educational Attainments: Updates and Implications,” mimeo, (2000).
[4] Becker, Gary S. “A Theory of Marriage: Part I,” Journal of Political Economy, 81 (1973): 813-846.
[5] Becker, Gary S. and N. Tomes, “An Equilibrium Theory of the Distribution
of Income and Intergenerational Mobility,” Journal of Political Economy, 87
(1979), 1153-1189.
[6]

, “Human Capital and the Rise and Fall of Families,” Journal of
Labor Economics, 4 (1986), S1-S39.

[7] Bénabou, Roland, “Heterogeneity, Stratification and Growth,” American
Economic Review, 86 (1996), 584-609.
[8] Bergstrom, Theodore C., “A Survey of Theories of The Family,” in Handbook
of Population and Family Economics, Edited by M. R. Rosenzweig and O.
Stark, Elsevier Science, 1997.
[9] Bils, Mark and P. J. Klenow, “Does Schooling Cause Growth?” American
Economic Review, 90 (2000), 1160-1183.
[10] Boulier, Bryan L. and M. R. Rosenzweig, “Schooling, Search, and Spouse
Selection: Testing Economic Theories of Marriage and Household Behavior,”
Journal of Political Economy, 92 (1984), 712-732.
[11] Burdett, Kenneth and M. G. Coles, “Marriage and Class,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 112, (1997), 141-168.
[12]

, “Transplants and Implants:
Improvement,” mimeo, (1999).

34

The Economics of Self-

[13] Cole, Harold L., G. Mailath, and A. Postlewaite, “Social Norms, Savings
Behavior and Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 100 (1992), 1092-1125.
[14] Dahan, Momi and D. Tsiddon, “Demographic Transition, Income Distribution and Economic Growth,” Journal of Economic Growth, 3 (1998), 29-52.
[15] Dahan, Momi and A. Gaviria, “Sibling Correlations and Intergenerational
Mobility in Latin America,” mimeo, (1999).
[16] Durlauf, S., “A Theory of Persistent Income Inequality,” Journal of Economic
Growth, 1 (1995), 75-93.
[17] Easterly, William, “The Middle Class Consensus and Economic Development,” mimeo, 2001.
[18] Fernández, Raquel, “Education, Segregation, and Marital Sorting: Theory
and an Application to the UK,” mimeo, (2001).
[19] Fernández, Raquel and C. A. Pissarides, “Searching for a Partner,” mimeo,
(2001).
[20] Fernández, Raquel and R. Rogerson, “Public Education and Income Distribution: A Dynamic Quantitative Evaluation of Education Finance Reform,”
American Economic Review, 88 (1998), 813-833.
[21]

, “Sorting and Long-Run Inequality,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, forthcoming, (2001).

[22] Galor, Oded and J. Zeira, “Income Distribution and Macroeconomics,” Review of Economic Studies, 60 (1993), 35-52.
[23] Galor, Oded and D. Weil, “The Gender Gap, Fertility and Growth,” American Economic Review, 86 (1996), 374-387.
[24] Greenwood, Jeremy, N. Guner and J. Knowles, “More on Marriage, Fertility
and the Distribution of Income,” mimeo, (1999).
[25] Knowles, John, “Can Parental Decisions Explain U.S. Income Inequality?”
PhD Dissertation, University of Rochester, (1999).
[26] Kremer, Michael, “How Much does Sorting Increase Inequality,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 112 (1997), 115-139.
35

[27] Kremer, Michael and D. Chen, “Income Distribution Dynamics with Endogenous Fertility,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 89
(1999), 155-160.
[28] Laitner, John, “Household Bequests, Perfect Expectations, and the National
Distribution of Wealth,” Econometrica, 47 (5), (1979), 1175-1194.
[29] Lam, David, “Marriage Markets and Assortative Mating with Household
Public Goods: Theoretical Results and Empirical Implications,” Journal of
Human Resources, 23 (1988), 462-487.
[30] Ljungqvist, Lars, “Economic Development: The Case of a Missing Market
for Human Capital,” Journal of Development Economics, 40 (1993), 219-239.
[31] Loury, Glenn C. “Intergenerational Transfers and the Distribution of Earnings.” Econometrica, 49 (1981), 843-867.
[32] Mare, Robert D. “Five Decades of Educational Assortative Mating,” American Journal of Sociology, 56, (1991), 15-32.
[33] Owen, Ann and D. Weil, “Intergenerational Earnings Mobility, Inequality
and Growth,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 41 (1998), 71-104.
[34] Perotti, Roberto, “Growth, Income Distribution, and Democracy: What the
Data Say,” Journal of Economic Growth, 1 (1996), 149-187.
[35] Pissarides, Chris, “From School to University: The Demand for PostCompulsory Education in Britain,” Economic Journal, 92 (1982), 654-667.
[36] Rama, Martin and R. Artecona. “A Database of Labor Market Indicators
Across Countries,” The World Bank, mimeo (2000).
[37] Regalia, Ferdinando and J. V. Rios-Rull. “What Accounts for the Increase
in Single Households and the Stability in Fertility?” mimeo (1999).
[38] Smits, Jeroen, W. Ultee, and J. Lammers, “Educational Homogamy in 65
Countries: An Explanation of Diﬀerences in Openness Using Country-Level
Explanatory Variables,” American Sociological Review, 63 (1998), 264-285.

36

[39] Weiss, Yoram. “The Formation and Dissolution of Families: Why Marry?
Who Marries Whom? and What Happens upon Divorce?” in Handbook
of Population and Family Economics, Edited by M. R. Rosenzweig and O.
Stark, Elsevier Science, 1997.
[40] World Bank, World Development Indicators, 2001.

5. Appendix A
We will now show that all terms in the first curly bracket of equation (2.18) Before
∗
doing this, as we have already argued, ∂q
is strictly negative, since
∂λ
∗

00





∂q
f
1


es − wu ) + f 0 (1 + k)(wu + w
es − β)
= 0 0
< 0,
(w
|
{z
} (1 − λ)2
∂λ
f (f (1 − k) + f ) | {z }
(5.1)
|
{z
}
+
+
−

where f 0 (f 0 (1 − k) + f ) = wes (wes + wu ) > 0. Hence, all we want to determine is
the sign of the following expression
A = {[(1 + 2kQ∗ + k 2 )(wes + wu − β) + (2k + Q∗ k 2 + Q∗ )(wes + wu )]wes wu
−β(k + Q∗ )wu2 − β(k + k 2 Q∗ )wes2 },
(5.2)

where Q∗ = Q(q ∗ ).
Note that if wu ≥ β, then we are all set, since then

and

(2k + Q∗ k 2 + Q∗ )wes2 wu − β(k + k 2 Q∗ )wes > 0,
(2k + Q∗ k 2 + Q∗ )wu2 ws − β(k + Q∗ )wu2 > 0.

Therefore, we only need to take care of the case where wu < β.
In order to show that the following expression
A = {[(1 + 2kQ∗ + k 2 )(wes + wu − β) + (2k + Q∗ k 2 + Q∗ )(wes + wu )]wes wu
−β(k + Q∗ )wu2 − β(k + k 2 Q∗ )wes2 },

is positive for wu < β, we will simply show that it is increasing in wu and wes
and when evaluated at wu = wes = β2 , it is non-negative (recall that wu ≥ β2 and
37

wu ≥ β2 ). We start by showing that A is increasing in wu for wu < β. In order to
do this, let take the derivative of A with respect to wu to get
∂A
= (1 + 2kQ∗ + k 2 )(wes2 + 2ws wu − β wes )
∂wu
+(2k + Q∗ k 2 + Q∗ )(2wes wu + wes2 ) − 2β(k + Q∗ )wu .

Note that this expression is increasing in wes (since wes ≥ β2 ), and we can evaluate
it at the limit where wes = β2 to get
¯

∂A ¯¯
¯
= βwu (1 + 2kQ∗ + k 2 + 2k + Q∗ k 2 + Q∗ − 2k − 2Q∗ )
¯
∂wu wes = β
2

+

β2
(2k + Q∗ k 2 + Q∗ − 1 − 2kQ∗ − k 2 ).
4

This expression is also increasing in wu (since 1 ≥ Q), and hence we can also
evaluate it at wu = β2 (recall that wu ≥ β2 ) to get
¯

µ

¶

∂A ¯¯
1 1 ∗ 1 2 1 ∗ 3 ∗ 2 1
¯
= β2
+ kQ + k − Q + Q k + k > 0.
¯
∂wu wes = β ,wu = β
4 2
4
4
4
2
2

2

Therefore, A is indeed increasing in wu .
We next will show that A is increasing in wes . Taking the derivative with respect
to wes we get
∂A
= (1 + 2kQ∗ + k 2 )(2wes wu + weu2 − βwu )
∂ wes
+(2k + Q∗ k 2 + Q∗ )(2wes wu + wu2 ) − 2β(k + k 2 Q∗ )wes .

Since wu ≥ β2 , this expression is increasing in wu , and we can evaluate at the limit
where wu = β2 ,
¯

∂A ¯¯
β2
∗
2
e
¯
= (1 + 2kQ + k )(β ws − )
∂ wes ¯wu = β
4
2

+(2k + Q∗ k 2 + Q∗ )(β wes +
38

β2
) − 2β(k + k 2 Q∗ )wes .
4

Again, this expression is also increasing in wes (note that Q ≤ 1), therefore we can
evaluate it at wes = β2 ,
¯

2
∂A ¯¯
3β 2
∗
2 β
¯
=
(1
+
2kQ
+
k
)
+
(2k + Q∗ k 2 + Q∗ ) − (k + k 2 Q∗ )β 2 > 0.
¯
e
∂ ws wes = β ,wu = β
4
4
2

2

Thus A is increasing in wes and wu . To show that A is positive, we simply evaluate
it at wes = wu = β2 :
A|wes = β ,wu = β = 0 + (2k + Q∗ k 2 + Q∗ )
2

2

β3
β3
β3
− (k + Q∗ ) − (k + k 2 Q∗ ) = 0
4
4
4

Hence, in Equation (2.18) all terms are negative except those with

∂λ
.
∂k

6. Appendix B
The years of households surveys used in our empirical study are given in Table B1. All surveys are nationally representative samples, except for Argentina
and Uruguay for which we have only urban samples (70% of the population for
Argentina and 90% for Uruguay). Table B1 also gives details of the income measures available in each survey. The income in the Latin American countries is gross
monthly labor income from all sources. This definition varies across countries, but
generally includes wages, income from self-employment, proprietor’s income, from
both primary and secondary labor activities. Some LIS countries report gross
annual earnings and income and some report these net of taxes.40 We use gross
labor earnings for LIS countries whenever it is available. The gross earnings measure for LIS countries include all forms of cash wage and salary income, including
employer bonuses, 13th month bonus, etc., (gross of employee social insurance contributions/taxes but net of employer social insurance contributions/taxes). While
most countries report gross earnings, the following countries report only the net
earnings: Belgium, France, Hungary, Italy, Luxemburg, Poland, and Spain. Since
taxation tends to be progressive in the countries we are comparing, inequality of
income is likely to be higher than reported in those countries for which pre-tax
income is not reported. We do not adjust income measures in LIS or IDB for
40

Some LIS countries are excluded because they do not report all of the variables required
for the analysis. Ireland and Austria do not report individual labor income. Ireland also does
not report the education of the spouse in the household sample. Education variables are not
available for Switzerland.

39

hours worked or weeks worked in order to arrive at a measure of total income,
including leisure. This is because few countries collect hours or weeks series, and
some of those that do collect them, such as Slovakia or Spain, use discrete codes
rather then report actual levels.
Education in the Latin American data is reported as total years of schooling.
For the LIS countries the education units are quite idiosyncratic. We attempt to
standardize the LIS education variable by converting the reported units to years of
education. We define as skilled all agents who went beyond high school education.
For some of the Latin-American data, this coincides with indicator variables for
higher education, as a few of these countries report attainment in addition to years
of education. For the other Latin-America countries, this indicator is constructed
using the standard age-grade progression for that country. Thus, skilled workers
in Costa Rica, for example, are those with more than 11 years of education, while
in Mexico, they are those with more than 12 years. For Britain we would have
preferred to define as skilled any individual with at least 2A levels passes (as
in Fernández (2001) or Pissarides (1982)), but as the data did not permit us
to distinguish among individuals with diﬀerent number of A levels, we instead
categorized them all as unskilled. Our results are robust to categorizing them all
as skilled instead. Table B2 reports our mapping of education measures into years
of schooling and into an indicator for high school completions. For most countries,
we were able to compare the percentage of adults with education beyond the highschool level to published sources, and to reconcile our statistics with the previously
published numbers.

40

Figure 1
δ
δ = Ψ(λ t+1; λ t)

δ **
λ t+1

λ **

δ * (λ t+1) = V s(λ t+1)-V u (λ t+1)

Figure 2
0.9

45-degree

B

0.8

lambda-prime

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

A

0.0
0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

lambda

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

Figure 3 --- Inequality and Sorting
5

COL
BRA

4

Wage Ratio

PAR CHI
PAN
MEX

3
PER
COS
URU

BOL

ARG

ECU
VEN

2
FIN

LUX
SWE

NET
NOR
POL
CAN
DEN

AUS

USA

FRA

BRI

HUN
CZE
SPA

TAI

SLO
ITA
GER

BEL

ISR

1
0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

Sample Correlation Measure

Figure 4 --- Inequality and Sorting
0.18
BRA

PAR

0.16
PANH U N

CHI

0.14

BOL

COL

Mincer Coef.

PER
USA

0.12

MEX
URU

COS

ARG

FRA

0.10
CAN
NOR

LUX

CZE
ITA

0.08

GER

BRI

0.06

SWE

FIN
NET

ECU

TAI
VEN

BEL
SPA

DEN
SLO

AUS

ISR

POL

0.04
0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

Sample Correlation Measure

0.7

0.8

Figure 5 --- GDP per capita and Sorting

LUX

22000

USA

20000
NOR

18000

GDP per Capita

16000

CAN
AUS

DEN
SWE

14000

BRI NET
FIN

FRA

GER

BEL

ITA

12000

TAI

ISR

SPA

10000
8000
VEN
URU

6000

POL

SLO

4000

CHI
ARG

MEX

HUN
BRA

COS
CZE
PAN
PER
PAR

2000

COL
ECU
BOL

0
0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

Sample Correlation Measure

0.7

0.8

Table 1: Estimates of skill premium and marital sorting
Country
Statistic
Skilled Share

Husbands
Argentina

std.

(0.366)

mean

0.243
(0.125)

2.050
(0.834)

mean
std.

Australia

mean
std.

Belgium

mean
std.

Bolivia

mean
std.

Brasil

mean
std.

Britain

mean
std.

Canada
Chile
Colombia

0.149
0.356

mean
mean
mean
mean
mean
mean
mean
std.

Germany

mean
std.

Hungary

mean
std.

Israel

mean
std.

Italy

mean
std.

Luxemb

mean
std.

Mexico

mean
std.

Nether

mean
std.

Norway

mean
std.

Panama

mean
std.

Paraguay

mean
std.

Peru

mean
std.

Poland

mean
std.

Slovakia

mean
std.

Spain

mean
std.

Sweden

mean
std.

Taiwan

mean
std.

Uruguay

mean
std.

USA

mean
std.

Venezuela

Sample

0.440
(0.496)

std.

std.
France

0.105
(0.306)

0.490

std.
Finland

0.172
(0.377)

mean

std.
Ecuador

0.295
(0.456)

0.597

std.
Denmark

0.303
(0.459)

std.

std.
Czech

0.189
(0.392)

mean

std.
Costa Rica

Skill Premium

Wage Ratio
2.249
(0.165)
1.277
(0.034)
1.437
(0.031)
2.306
(2.161)
4.050
(1.886)
1.499
(0.002)
1.348
(0.227)
3.538
(0.261)
4.259
(18.337)
2.408
(0.753)
1.803
(0.283)
1.331
(0.024)
2.106
(0.117)
1.666
(0.003)
1.662
(0.048)
1.480
(0.023)
1.921
(0.151)
1.382
(0.053)
1.496
(0.252)
1.622
(0.154)
3.068
(0.576)
1.374
(0.141)
1.371
(0.105)
3.241
(0.913)
3.567
(1.945)
2.661
(0.698)
1.370
(0.011)
1.531
(0.027)
1.652
(0.111)
1.421
(0.141)
1.620
(0.050)
2.283
(0.039)
1.724
(0.204)
1.990
(0.467)

mean

std.

0.150
(0.357)
0.150
(0.358)
0.153
(0.360)
0.302
(0.459)
0.277
(0.447)
0.273
(0.445)
0.271
(0.445)
0.275
(0.447)
0.163
(0.370)
0.426
(0.494)
0.083
(0.276)
0.184
(0.388)
0.175
(0.380)
0.279
(0.448)
0.300
(0.458)
0.194
(0.395)
0.083
(0.277)
0.218
(0.413)
0.101
(0.302)
0.151
(0.358)
0.213
(0.409)
0.318
(0.466)
0.264
(0.441)
0.237
(0.425)
0.604
(0.489)
0.159

Marital Sorting

Skill Indicator
0.872
(0.017)
0.308
(0.035)
1.087
(0.052)
1.472
(0.017)
0.416
(0.026)
0.292
(0.041)
1.215
(0.019)
1.276
(0.023)
0.904
(0.037)
0.310
(0.014)
0.528
(0.014)
0.415
(0.034)
0.730
(0.028)
0.605
(0.049)
0.543
(0.032)
0.376
(0.034)
0.735
(0.060)
0.263
(0.031)
0.486
(0.032)
0.518
(0.041)
1.070
(0.031)
0.344
(0.033)
0.452
(0.040)
1.190
(0.042)
1.311
(0.080)
0.910
(0.062)
0.339
(0.028)
0.427
(0.015)
0.543
(0.019)
0.407
(0.031)
0.507
(0.014)
0.825
(0.020)
0.528
(0.011)
0.649
(0.035)

Mincer Coef.
0.107
(0.002)
0.052
(0.005)
0.138
(0.004)
0.165
(0.001)
0.069
(0.004)
0.072
(0.008)
0.144
(0.002)
0.142
(0.002)
0.107
(0.003)
0.090
(0.003)
0.086
(0.002)
0.064
(0.005)
0.082
(0.002)
0.060
(0.006)
0.100
(0.005)
0.074
(0.006)
0.146
(0.010)
0.056
(0.004)
0.082
(0.003)
0.087
(0.005)
0.117
(0.002)
0.057
(0.005)
0.089
(0.007)
0.146
(0.003)
0.165
(0.006)
0.133
(0.006)
0.045
(0.003)
0.056
(0.002)
0.065
(0.002)
0.057
(0.004)
0.079
(0.002)
0.110
(0.002)
0.123
(0.002)
0.071
(0.003)

Lifetime Ratio
2.090
.
1.298
.
1.390
.
2.440
.
3.810
.
1.319
.
1.328
.
3.226
.
3.617
.
2.379
.
1.652
.
1.460
.
2.206
.
1.724
.
1.708
.
1.332
.
2.078
.
1.311
.
1.565
.
1.626
.
3.548
.
1.294
.
1.572
.
2.071
.
3.040
.
2.462
.
1.387
.
1.491
.
1.732
.
1.375
.
1.610
.
2.169
.
1.753
.
2.154
.

Pearson Correlation

0.672
(0.341)

0.095
(0.035)

1.977
(0.720)

0.610
(0.106)

0.700
.
0.315
.
0.670
.
0.752
.
0.718
.
0.483
.
0.516
.
0.700
.
0.772
.
0.648
.
0.647
.
0.530
.
0.759
.
0.494
.
0.546
.
0.599
.
0.663
.
0.689
.
0.590
.
0.460
.
0.734
.
0.502
.
0.507
.
0.647
.
0.682
.
0.686
.
0.534
.
0.595
.
0.706
.
0.444
.
0.670
.
0.545
.
0.611
.
0.625
.

Table 2: Correlations
Wage Ratio
Skill Premium
Wage Ratio
Skill Indicator
Mincer Coef.
Lifetime Ratio

Sorting
Skill Premium
Skill Indicator Mincer Coef. Lifetime Ratio Pearson
Correlation

1.000
0.959
(0.000)
0.838
(0.000)
0.945
(0.000)

1.000
0.883
(0.000)
0.934
(0.000)

Sorting
Pearson Correlation

0.618
0.640
(0.000)
(0.000)
Significance levels are shown in paranthesis

1.000
0.799
(0.000)

1.000

0.568
(0.000)

0.647
(0.000)

1.000
(0.000)

Table 3: Regression of Marital Sorting on Skill Premium

Explanatory Variable
Constant

Skill Premium

(a) Wage Ratio
1
2
0.449
0.487
(0.038)***
(0.042)***

Skill Premium Measure
(b) Skill Indicator
(c) Mincer Coef.
1
2
1
2
0.476
0.495
0.448
0.493
(0.035)***
(0.043)***
(0.047)***
(0.049)***

(d) Lifetime Ratio
1
2
0.421
0.456
(0.042)***
(0.046)***

0.079
(0.014)***

0.199
(0.039)***

0.095
(0.016)***

LA Dummy

Number of Obs.

0.049
(0.022)**
0.063
(0.045)

34

34

0.147
(0.075)*

1.708
(0.391)***

0.042
(0.052)
34

Adjusted R-squared
0.363
0.372
0.392
Standard errors reflect Eicker-White correction for heteroscedasticity.
* Significant at 10%.
** Significant at 5%.
*** Significant at 1%

0.889
(0.462)*
0.086
(0.032)**

0.069
(0.024)**
0.048
(0.041)

34

34

34

34

34

0.383

0.302

0.371

0.400

0.399

Table 3a: Regression of Marital Sorting on Skill Premium, LIS Subsample

(a) Wage
Ratio
Explanatory Variable
Constant

Skill Premium

Number of Obs.

Skill Premium Measure
(b) Skill
(c) Mincer
Indicator
Coef.

(d) Lifetime
Ratio

0.142
(0.167)

0.433
(0.095)***

0.468
(0.065)***

0.277
(0.150)*

0.275
(0.104)**

0.287
(0.194)

1.215
(0.650)*

0.186
(0.092)*

21

21

21

21

Adjusted R-squared
0.194
0.073
0.045
Standard errors reflect Eicker-White correction for heteroscedasticity.
* Significant at 10%.
** Significant at 5%.

0.110

Table 3b: Regression of Marital Sorting on Skill Premium, LA Subsample

(a) Wage
Ratio
Explanatory Variable
Constant

Skill Premium

Number of Obs.

Skill Premium Measure
(b) Skill
(c) Mincer
Indicator
Coef.

0.604
(0.074)***

0.593
(0.082)***

0.626
(0.082)***

0.030
(0.022)

0.094
(0.069)

0.508
(0.574)

13

13

13

Adjusted R-squared
0.052
0.057
0.056
Standard errors reflect Eicker-White correction for heteroscedasticity.
* Significant at 10%.
** Significant at 5%.
*** Significant at 1%

(d) Lifetime
Ratio
0.558
(0.071)***
0.049
(0.022)**
13
0.185

Table 4: Regression of Marital Sorting on Skill Premium

Explanatory Variable
Constant

1
0.444
(0.038)***

2
0.473
(0.049)***

Skill Premium Measure
(b) Skill Indicator
(c) Mincer Coef.
1
2
1
2
0.468
0.476
0.440
0.481
(0.036)***
(0.051)***
(0.047)***
(0.056)***

Skill Premium

0.068
(0.014)***

0.050
(0.022)**

0.175
(0.041)***

0.156
(0.079)*

0.143
(0.373)***

0.895
(0.473)*

0.084
(0.017)***

0.070
(0.025)***

Educ. Reporting
Dummy

0.040
(0.036)

0.028
(0.041)

0.038
(0.036)

0.034
(0.042)

0.053
(0.034)

0.026
(0.041)

0.038
(0.037)

0.030
(0.049)

(a) Wage Ratio

LA Dummy

Number of Obs.

0.045
(0.052)
34

34

0.017
(0.064)
34

Adjusted R-squared
0.370
0.363
0.398
Standard errors reflect Eicker-White correction for heteroscedasticity.
* Significant at 10%.
** Significant at 5%.
*** Significant at 1%

(d) Lifetime Ratio
1
2
0.419
0.441
(0.041)***
(0.053)***

0.071
(0.041)

0.029
(0.041)

34

34

34

34

34

0.379

0.332

0.360

0.406

0.392

Table 5: Regression of Marital Sorting on Skill Premium

(a) Wage Ratio
1
2
0.434
0.475
(0.044)***
(0.044)***

Skill Premium Measure
(b) Skill Indicator
(c) Mincer Coef.
1
2
1
2
0.467
0.490
0.446
0.487
(0.041)***
(0.044)***
(0.051)***
(0.047)***

(d) Lifetime Ratio
1
2
0.410
0.451
(0.048)***
(0.046)***

Skill Premium

0.083
(0.015)***

0.045
(0.021)**

0.206
(0.043)***

0.128
(0.072)*

1.718
(0.410)***

0.777
(0.439)*

0.099
(0.018)***

0.063
(0.023)**

Income Reporting Dummy

0.029
(0.038)

0.048
(0.041)

0.023
(0.038)

0.040
(0.041)

0.004
(0.041)

0.043
(0.042)

0.024
(0.037)

0.042
(0.041)

Explanatory Variable
Constant

LA Dummy

Number of Obs.

0.083
(0.048)*

34

34

0.066
(0.054)

34

Adjusted R-squared
0.355
0.383
0.380
Standard errors reflect Eicker-White correction for heteroscedasticity.
* Significant at 10%.
** Significant at 5%.
*** Significant at 1%

0.106
(0.036)***

0.069
(0.044)

34

34

34

34

34

0.383

0.279

0.374

0.389

0.403

Table 6: Regression of Marital Sorting on Skill Premium

(a) Wage Ratio
1
2
0.471
0.502
(0.046)***
(0.048)***

Skill Premium Measure
(b) Skill Indicator
(c) Mincer Coef.
1
2
1
2
0.477
0.498
0.505
0.517
(0.043)***
(0.047)***
(0.045)***
(0.047)***

(d) Lifetime Ratio
1
2
0.435
0.465
(0.049)***
(0.049)***

Skill Premium

0.075
(0.014)***

0.046
(0.022)**

0.199
(0.041)***

0.145
(0.072)*

1.534
(0.377)***

0.893
(0.481)*

0.092
(0.017)***

0.067
(0.023)***

Fraction of Skilled Population

-0.058
(0.088)

-0.042
(0.097)

-0.003
(0.080)

-0.008
(0.084)

-0.167
(0.077)**

-0.088
(0.098)

-0.034
(0.081)

-0.023
(0.089)

Explanatory Variable
Constant

LA Dummy

Number of Obs.

0.061
(0.047)
34

34

0.042
(0.053)
34

Adjusted R-squared
0.346
0.353
0.372
Standard errors reflect Eicker-White correction for heteroscedasticity.
* Significant at 10%.
** Significant at 5%.
*** Significant at 1%

0.076
(0.038)*

0.047
(0.042)

34

34

34

34

34

0.362

0.317

0.359

0.382

0.380

Table 7: Regression of Marital Sorting on Skill Premium

Explanatory Variables
Constant

1
0.384
(0.045)***

2
0.424
(0.046)***

3
0.530
(0.085)***

4
0.590
(0.086)***

5
0.621
(0.054)***

6
0.620
(0.055)***

7
0.833
(0.111)***

8
0.866
(0.130)***

9
0.888
(0.151)***

10
0.946
(0.136)***

Skill Premium (Wage Ratio)

0.086
(0.014)***

0.058
(0.019)***

0.077
(0.013)***

0.042
(0.021)*

0.038
(0.015)**

0.039
(0.020)*

0.043
(0.017)**

0.052
(0.021)**

0.036
(0.021)*

0.050
(0.019)**

Ethnic Fractionalization

0.002
(0.000)**

0.002
(0.000)**

Urbanization

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

% of Labor Force Female

-0.008
(0.002)***

-0.009
(0.003)***

GDP per capita

-8.89E-06
(2.56E-06)***

LA Dummy

Number of Obs.

0.058
(0.041)
30

30

0.071
(0.045)
34

Adjusted R-squared
0.451
0.454
0.361
Standard errors reflect Eicker-White correction for heteroscedasticity.
* Significant at 10%.
** Significant at 5%.
*** Significant at 1%

-0.027
(0.050)

28

28

0.379

0.495

0.479

0.494

0.480

0.566

0.572

0.298
(0.061)***

0.376
(0.071)***

0.830
(0.171)***

3.773
(0.720)***

7.064
(1.455)***

0.161
(0.031)***

0.261
(0.054)***

Fraction of Skilled Pop.

0.175
(0.107)

0.170
(0.098)*

0.248
(0.117)**

0.330
(0.119)**

0.004
(0.089)

-0.150
(0.085)*

0.150
(0.104)

0.131
(0.095)

-0.333
(0.086)***
0.476

0.495

(d) Lifetime Ratio
1
2
0.257
(0.085)***

0.131
(0.105)

-0.241
(0.068)***
0.476

0.495

-0.171
(0.055)***
0.476

0.495

First Stage for The Skill Premium
Constant

4.198
(0.573)***

2.522
(0.454)***

1.582
(0.199)***

0.857
(0.141)***

0.170
(0.023)***

0.105
(0.020)***

3.950
(0.460)***

2.619
(0.368)***

Average Years of Schooling

-0.219
(0.068)***

-0.091
(0.048)*

-0.088
(0.027)***

-0.033
(0.015)**

-0.009
(0.003)**

-0.004
(0.002)

-0.206
(0.057)***

-0.104
(0.039)**

Fraction of Skilled Pop.

-1.753
(0.746)**

-0.707
(0.473)

-0.898
(0.335)**

-0.446
(0.236)*

-0.025
(0.048)

0.016
(0.048)

-1.485
(0.625)**

-0.655
(0.408)

LA Dummy

Number of Obs.

1.070
(0.175)***

33

33

0.463
(0.061)***

33

Adjusted R-squared
0.446
0.681
0.505
Standard errors reflect Eicker-White correction for heteroscedasticity.
* Significant at 10%.
** Significant at 5%.
*** Significant at 1%

-0.107
(0.074)

32

0.151
(0.028)***

0.495

-9.86E-06
(7.52E-06)

32

Skill Premium

0.476

-0.008
(0.002)***

34

0.064
(0.118)

Adjusted R-squared

-0.008
(0.002)***

34

0.260
(0.084)***

-0.267
(0.073)***

0.000
(0.001)

34

Constant

LA Dummy

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.005
(0.042)

Skill Premium Measure
(b) Skill Indicator
(c) Mincer Coef.
1
2
1
2
Two Stage Least Square
0.299
0.104
0.254
0.072
(0.077)***
(0.109)
(0.085)***
(0.116)

(a) Wage Ratio
1
2

0.001
(0.000)*

-9.03E-06
-2.73E-06
(2.87E-06)*** (3.34E-06)

Table 8: Regression of Marital Sorting on Skill Premium, IV

Explanatory Variable

0.001
(0.001)

0.041
(0.010)***

0.849
(0.161)***

33

33

33

33

33

0.770

0.259

0.443

0.506

0.703

Table 9: Regression of GDP per capita on Marital Sorting

Explanatory Variable
Constant

1
33423.28
(3999.08)***

2
25431.90
(3530.65)***

Sorting (Pearson Correlation)

-38566.00
(6196.26)***

-21678.04
(6427.10)***

LA Dummy

Number of Obs.

-6042.84
(1499.69)***
34

34

Adjusted R-squared
0.458
0.612
Standard errors reflect Eicker-White correction for heteroscedasticity.
* Significant at 10%.
** Significant at 5%.
*** Significant at 1%

TABLE B1: Survey Information
Country

Year

Name

Agency

Argentina

1996

Encuesta permanente de hogares

Instituto nacional de Estadistica y Censos

Australia

1994

Belgium

1992

Bolivia

1997

Australian Income and Housing Survey
Panel Survey of the Centre for Social Policy
Encuesta Nacional de Empleo

Australian Bureau of Statistics

Number of
Households

Coverage

3369

Greater Buenos Aires

7441

National

Centre for Social Policy

3821

Instituto nacional de Estadistica y Censos

8461

National

84947

National

Fundaçao Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e

National

Brasil

1996

Pequiso Nacional por Amostra de Domicilios

Britain

1997

British Household Panel Study, Wave G

Institute for Social and Economic Research

4384

National

Canada

1994

Survey of Consumer Finances

Statistics Canada

39039

National

Chile

1996

Encuesta Nacional de Empleo

Instituto Nacional de Estadistica

30953

National

31264

National

Direccion General de Estadistica y Censos

9471

National

Microcensus

Czech Statistical Office

16234

National

Income Tax Survey

National Institute of Social Research

12895

National

Instituto nacional de Estadistica y Censos

8153

Urban

Statistics Finland

9262

National

11294

National

Colombia

1997

Costa Rica

1996

Czech

1992

Denmark

1992

Encuesta Nacional de Hogares
Encuesta Permanente de hogares de Propositos
Multiples

Encuesta Periodica de Empleo y Desempleo en el Area

Estatistica

Departamento Administrativo Nacional de
Estadistica

Ecuador

1996

Finland

1995

Income Distribution Survey

France

1994

Enquête Budget des familles

Germany

1994

German Social Economic Panel Study

DIW Berlin

6045

National

Hungary

1994

Hungarian Household Panel

Endre Sik / Istvan Toth

1992

National

Israel

1992

Family Expenditure Survey

Israeli Central Bureau of Statistics

5212

National

Italy

1995

Indagine Campionaria sui Bilanci Delle Famiglie

Ufficio Informazioni Statistiche

8135

National

Luxemb

1994

Liewen zu Letzebuerg

1813

National

Mexico

1996

Encuesta Nacional de Increso Gasto de los Hogares

14042

National

Nether

1994

Socio-Economic Panel

Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek

5187

National

Norway

1995

Income and Property Distribution Survey

Statistics Norway

10127

National

Panama

1997

Encuesta de Hogares

Direccion de Estadistica y Censo

9897

National

Paraguay

1998

Encuesta Integrada de Hogares

4353

National

Peru

1997

Encuesta de Hogares

Instituto Nacional de Estadistica e Informatica

3843

National

Poland

1992

Household Budget Survey

Central Statistical Office

6602

National

17714

National

11294

National

16260

National

14706

National

19322

Urban

66014

National

16323

National

Urbana

INSEE
Division Conditions de vie des Ménages

Centre d'Etudes de Populations, de Pauvreté et
de Politiques Socio-Economiques
Instituto Nacional de Estadistica, Geografia e
Informatica

Direccion General de Estadistica, Encuestas y
Censos

Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic
Slovakia

1992

Slovak Microcensus

Spain

1990

Expenditure and Income Survey

Sweden

1995

Inkomstfördelningsundersokningen

Taiwan

1995

Survey of Personal Income Distribution

Uruguay

1996

Encuesta Continua de Hogares

USA

1994

March Current Population Survey

Venezuela

1996

Encuesta de Hogares por Mustreo

Division of SocialStatistics and Demography
Instituto Nacional de Estadistica
Statistics Sweden
Program for Income and Wealth
Academia Sinica

instituto nacional de Estadistica
Bureau of Labor Statistics

Oficina Central de Estadistica e Informatica

Table B2: Education Thresholds

Name
Australia
Argentina
Belgium
Bolivia
Brazil
Britain
Canada
Chile
Columbia
Costa Rica
Czech
Denmark
Ecuador
Finland*
France
Germany
Hungary
Israel*
Italy
Luxembourg
Mexico
Nether
Norway*
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Poland
Slovakia
Spain
Sweden
Taiwan
Uruguay
USA
Venezuela

Years of Schooling Beyond Which

The LIS Education Level Beyond Which

A Person Qualifies as Skilled

A Person Qualifies as Skilled

12
12
12
12
11
13
12
11
11
11
12
10
12
12
12
10
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
11
12
12
12
12
10,12
11
12
11

* Finland, Israel and Norway report years of education

Basic/Skilled Vocational Qualification
N/A
2nd Level Upper Professional/Technical/
General; Other 2nd Level Upper
N/A
N/A
A Level
Grade 11-13; High School Grad.
N/A
N/A
N/A
Secondary General/Professional
Level 2,2nd Stage
N/A
N/A
Second Stage of Secondary
Secondary
Secondary
N/A
High School
Higher Secondary Education
N/A
Secondary Higher
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Complete Secondary
Secondary/Secondary Special/Skilled
with Leaving Exam
Secondary Education/Basic Tech. Edu.
Secondary School
Senior High/Vocational Graduate
N/A
High School Diploma
N/A

