                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 REDISTRIBUTION THROUGH EDUCATION AND OTHER TRANSFER MECHANISMS


                                            Eric Hanushek
                                         Charles Ka Yui Leung
                                            Kuzey Yilmaz


                                          Working Paper 8588
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8588


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2001




We are grateful to the comments and suggestions of Jeffrey Banks, Mark Bils, Stanley Engerman, Gerhard
Glomm, Per Krusell, Chun Wah Liu, James Poterba, Alan Stockman, Michael Wolkoff and the seminar
participants at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, M.I.T., the Rand Corporation, and several conferences.
This research was funded by grants from the Spencer Foundation and the Packard Humanities Institute
(Hanushek and Yilmaz) and Direct Grant and Summer Research Grant of the Chinese University of Hong
Kong (Leung). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Eric Hanushek, Charles Ka Yui Leung and Kuzey Yilmaz. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Redistribution through Education and Other Transfer Mechanisms
Eric Hanushek, Charles Ka Yui Leung and Kuzey Yilmaz
NBER Working Paper No. 8588
November 2001
JEL No. D6, H2, I2



                                              ABSTRACT


        Educational subsidies are frequently justified as a method of altering the income distribution. It
is thus natural to compare education to other tax-transfer schemes designed to achieve distributional
objectives. While equity-efficiency trade-offs are frequently discussed, they are rarely explicitly treated.
This paper creates a general equilibrium model of school attendance, labor supply, wage determination,
and aggregate production, which is used to compare alternative redistribution devices in terms of both
deadweight loss and distributional outcomes. A wage subidy generally dominates tuition subsidies in ex
ante (or "opportunity") calculations, but this reverses in ex post (or "realized") calculations. Both are
generally superior to a negative income tax. With externalities in production, however, there is an
unambiguous role for governmental subsidy of education, because it both raises GDP and creates a more
equal income distribution.




Eric Hanushek                        Charles Ka Yui Leung                      Kuzey Yilmaz
Hoover Institution                   Department of Economics                   Department of Economics
Stanford University                  Chinese University of Hong Kong           University of Rochester
Stanford, CA 94305                   Shatin, Hong Kong                         Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER                             charles1@cuhk.edu.hk                      yilm@troi.cc.rochester.edu
hanushek@hoover.stanford.edu
1 Introduction
Education occupies a central position in the policies of governments around the world and is almost
always heavily subsidized. The underlying justication for governmental involvement takes a variety
of forms, but increasingly it is suggested that expanded educational investments both strengthen
the national economy and improve the societal distribution of income and welfare. Education,
for example, had a prominent role in the United State's \War on Poverty," begun in the 1960s
and the programs begun then continue through today. And the expansion of public colleges and
universities over the past three decades has rested on distributional underpinnings. This paper takes
seriously the potential for education to play a role in redistribution, and in that vein considers how
well education compares to alternative approaches to redistribution. The ultimate objective is to
compare alternative programs in terms of both aggregate output e ects and redistributive e ects.
      By pointing to the high economic returns to additional education, many people readily accept
a signicant governmental role in the production and nancing of education. But of course the
appropriateness, or even benecial in uence, of governmental involvement requires more than merely
nding high private and social returns to schooling. As a general rule, an active role for government
is justied either by some market imperfection or by an alternative objective of government, such
as redistributional motives, that extends past simple maximization of aggregate output.
      Appeals to externalities such as improving the functioning of democratic government or reducing
crime have provided traditional support for government's ensuring free and universal elementary
and secondary schools. But such arguments are less convincing when considering governmental
investments in higher education. It is di cult to imagine that marginal externalities of this sort are
large, or anywhere near the 40 percent of higher education revenues that come from governmental
appropriations (National Center for Education Statistics, 2000).1
      Instead of relying on externality arguments, providing subsidies to higher education, especially
through free or reduced tuition programs at public colleges and universities, is more frequently
  1 An alternative externality argument could also follow from growth eects as highlighted by endogenous growth
models. To address these issues, our subsequent analysis considers such production externalities { although this
situation clearly stacks the case in favor of educational subsidies because of the potential eciency gains.

                                                       1
justied either on distributional grounds or on capital market imperfections and the inability to
borrow against human capital (e.g., Becker 19931964] or Garratt and Marshall 1994). Access
to higher education is seen as a way of improving the distribution of income { particularly as
related to parental income, race, or socio-economic status. Once put into a distributional context,
however, it is natural to compare educational subsidies with alternative ways of distributing income.2
Education may have unique features, since human capital investments have productive value, but the
governmental interventions involving taxes to support governmental provision of higher education
and price modications through tuition reductions are still distortionary. Therefore, it is plausible
that other redistributional tools could have lower e ciency costs.
       Since the act of redistributing resources and income typically will introduce distortions into
the economy, no consideration of the redistributive impact of a governmental program is complete
without understanding any e ciency costs related to the program. For the most part, analyses
of governmental transfer programs are partial equilibrium analyses that assume little aggregate
distortion and thus concentrate largely on the impact to the recipients.3 Throughout the world,
however, educational subsidies and other transfer programs are large (Smeeding et al., 1993) and
could have a noticeable impact on output and wages in the economy. This paper focuses on just
the interaction of aggregate output and distributional outcomes.
       The simple general equilibrium model of the economy developed here combines both tax and
transfer programs and permits a full comparison of alternative transfer mechanisms. In the basic
model, the only role of government is the redistribution of income. It accomplishes this task
by raising funds with a (distortionary) linear income tax. It then redistributes income through
three canonical transfer programs: lump sum redistribution, a wage subsidy, or a tuition subsidy to
schooling. (When lump sum spending is combined with the income tax, this transfer device becomes
   2An earlier formulation of this problem can be found in Layard (1979, 1981).
   3There are a few exceptions, although each focuses on dierent aspects of the economy than we do. Fair (1971)
considers a model of the economy which incorporates the optimal distribution of income into the analysis. Thurow
(1971) also highlights individual preferences over the distribution of income. Bishop (1979) compares alternative
transfer programs in an aggregate, general equilibrium model. Gramlich and Wolko (1979) provide a methodology
for assessing the utility gains from transfers but do not consider any general equilibrium impacts. And, Browning
(1993) investigates how eciency losses enter into the calculation of the costs of governmental redistribution.


                                                       2
a negative income tax program). Individuals make both schooling and labor supply decisions.
Schooling has productive value, but no externalities are initially considered. In many ways, the
education subsidies considered here look like the provision of higher education in the United States
{ where tuition is heavily subsidized and where there are few supply constraints.
       A central methodological consideration is treatment of the trade-o between equity and e -
ciency. While policy discussions frequently suggest considerations of such a trade-o , it is di cult
to nd examples of analyses that deal explicitly with both equity and e ciency. Most analyses of
public transfer programs discuss only the redistribution without mention of any e ciency losses,
while other analyses of public programs with explicit outcome objectives discuss e ciency, or cost-
benet considerations, without any integrated treatment of distributional consequences. The one
exception to this dichotomy is abstract analyses of maximizing social welfare functions that can
include distributional arguments. But it is generally true that di erent social welfare functions
{ that meet standard preference axioms but that allow very di erent weights for e ciency and
equity interests { provide minimal guidance, since they can suggest very di erent optimal policies
depending on the specic functional form.
       This analysis focuses directly on the equity-e ciency trade-o in a general equilibrium frame-
work that makes e ciency issues central. Our approach describes in a very general way the locus
of feasible results for each redistributional device in output-distribution space. If any device dom-
inates the others in the sense of permitting greater equity for any given level of output, we know
that it will be chosen with any social welfare function (that positively values both output and more
equality). Of course, if such universal dominance is not found, choice of the optimal policy and
redistributional device will revert to a dependence on the precise social welfare function that is
applied.
       In our analysis, the exact denition of distributional aspects of the economy proves to be deci-
sive in identifying the optimal policy. Specically, there are two distinct ways of calculating the
distributional outcomes of policies: in an ex ante or in an ex post sense.4 The former, which is cal-
   Throughout this analysis we concentrate on outcomes measured in terms of utility, although it is possible to
   4
measure outcomes simply in terms of the distribution of income. Where this distinction is important, we note it in

                                                        3
culated before the outcomes of decisions are known, corresponds most closely to an \opportunity"
standard, while the latter, which is calculated on outcomes observed after the results of decisions
are realized, corresponds more closely to conventional distributional discussions based on current
empirical information. In many ways, a criterion based on the ex ante distribution of utility seems
to match most distributional discussions best, but it does not permit the empirical verication that
considerations of the ex post distribution does.
    In our base case, a wage subsidy can obtain any feasible level of aggregate utility along with
more equality in the ex ante distribution of utility than is possible with the alternative subsidy
schemes. This result does not prove to be sensitive to the underlying distribution of abilities in
the economy or to reasonably wide variation in the fundamental parameters of the economy. On
the other hand, depending on the underlying distribution of abilities in the economy, education
subsidies can dominate when distributional calculations are based on ex post outcomes or simply
on income rather than utility. Further, with the introduction of production externalities, the use
of education subsidies becomes an e cient approach over most levels of governmental intervention,
but this result is not particularly surprising because of the e ciency value of counteracting the
externality.

2 The Basic Model
The model focuses on the role of schooling and transfers in an economy where society cares about
both aggregate consumption and the distribution of individual welfare. The basic structure re-
volves around a one-period general equilibrium model of a competitive economy. The government
provides schools and operates transfer programs, all of which must be paid for by either tuition
or proportional taxes on income which are su cient to balance the budget. Individuals make op-
timizing choices about school attendance and the labor-leisure trade-o based upon school costs
and expected wages. The schooling decision involves uncertainty because individuals with di erent
ability have di erent chances of successfully completing schooling. Because taxes can be raised only
the analysis.


                                                   4
through distortionary taxes, the e ects of alternative transfer policies on either the performance of
the economy or the distribution of welfare are not obvious.

2.1 Agent Behavior
The model considers an economy with an uncountably innite number of types of agents with
di ering ability, a. Ability has no direct labor market payo but instead indicates `educational
ability', the chance of succeeding in schooling completing school, however, does have a direct labor
market payo .5 For simplicity, the population of agents is normalized to unity and the index of
                                                                                          R
ability, a is distributed on the interval 0 1] according to the density function f (a), 01 f (a)da = 1.
(More details on this will appear in later sections). An agent of type a faces the fully known
probability Pa = 1 ; a of being successful in school. (Note that higher a means a lower probability
of success). Ex post there are only two skill levels of workers in the economy { educated workers who
successfully completed school and uneducated workers who either did not attend school or did not
successfully complete school. Each agent chooses at the beginning of his or her life whether to go to
school or not, based on school tuition, t, and the expected wages from school attendance. In this one-
period model, schooling is instantaneous, and there is no opportunity cost of attempting schooling,
although there is the uncertainty of school completion. Agents also have perfect knowledge of the
equilibrium wage structure: successfully completing school earns a wage of we and not successfully
completing school earns a wage of wu. Given a proportional income tax rate,  2 0 1], and possible
direct government transfers, m (described below), all agents maximize a utility function:

                                              U (c l) = c ;  (L1 +) 
                                                                  i 1+




subject to a budget constraint:
                                            c  wiLi(1 ;  ) + m ; tI
where c is consumption, Li is labor supply,  and  ( ,  > 0) are parameters related to the disutility
of labor, i = e (educated) or u (uneducated), m is any lump-sum cash transfer from government, 
   Partial completion of schooling has been shown to have labor market returns, e.g., Kane and Rouse (1995). We
   5
employ this simplication for computational reasons, although it can clearly be relaxed within the spirit of the model.

                                                          5
is the tax rate, t is the tuition fee, and I is an indicator function that takes on the value 1 if the
agent attends school and 0 otherwise.6 Since the utility function is semi-linear, it allows us to focus
on the e ects of redistribution without the presence of any insurance incentives on the part of the
agent.7
       The optimal labor supply choice of the individual, Li, is simply a function of the wage rate as:
                                                            !1
                                          L=
                                           i     (1 ;  ) w i 
                                                                :
                                                     
Labor supply is increasing in wages, and backward bending behavior of the supply function is ruled
out. With  < 1, the labor supply function is convex with  > 1, the labor supply function is
concave. The marginal utility of leisure is independent of the lump sum transfer m, that is, direct
transfers do not a ect the supply of labor.
       The schooling decision can be understood by comparing the expected utility obtained from
enrolling in school with the utility from not attending school but instead entering the labor market.
Individuals attending school either successfully nish and become educated labor (e) or fail and are
relegated to being uneducated labor (u), the same status as not attending school at all. The utility
of an agent who is successful in school (U e) is,
                                                                      
                                  U = w (1 ;  )]          ; 1    1+ +m;t
                                                      1+
                                    e      e           



while the utility of an agent who goes to school but fails (U f ) is,
                                                              
                              U f = wu(1 ;  )]  ; 1 1 +  + m ; t
                                                1+




                                                                                > 1, but it is linear
The indirect utility of agents will be convex in (after-tax) wages as long as 1+
in transfers. This implies that agents will not have any incentive to buy insurance against school
failure. The expected utility of an agent of ability type a who attends school (EU s ) is just the
appropriately weighted average of these utilities:

                                           EU s = PaU e + (1 ; Pa )U f
   6 Among others, Greenwood et. al. (1988) and Gomes, Greenwood, and Rebelo (1997) use this utility function
in real business cycle applications. In international context, it can generate realistic cross country correlations in
consumption. See Devereaux, Gregory and Smith (1992) and Leung (1995).
   7 The model can be easily extended to the case with concave utility function.



                                                            6
which gives
                                            h                           1+ i
                EU       = m ; t + ;           (1 ; a )( w  )  + a(w u )     (1 ;  )
                     s                1                      e 1+                        1+
                                                                                           
                                           1+
        The expected utility of uneducated agent who never attend school is
                                                         
                             EU = w (1 ;  )]  1 +  + m:
                                                   ;
                                               1+   1
                                 u    u             




Note that the lowest ex post utility in the economy is obtained by failures, since failure leaves an
agent with the skills of an uneducated person but with having paid tuition in order to attempt
schooling. Thus, those choosing not to attend school have certain utility of U n = U f + t. (Agents
attending school are not allowed to default on tuition).
   The agent goes to school if EU s  EU u . Thus, from the previous comparisons,

                              EU s  EU u , Pa U e + (1 ; Pa)U f  U f + t
                                          , (1 ; a)  U e ;t U f

which yields a unique ability cuto , which is also equivalent to the enrollment ratio,

                            a = 1 ;                               th                            i:   (1)
                                       ; 1
                                              
                                              1+       (1 ;  )   1+
                                                                        (we) 1+  ; (wu) 1+ 
   Since there is a continuum of agents, the measure of the population who choose not to go to
                  R                                                            R 
school will be 1 ; 0a f (a)da. The measure who go to school and succeed is N e = 0a (1 ; a)f (a)da
where (1 ; a) is again the probability of success. The uneducated population, N u , is the sum of the
measure who go to school and fail, N f , and those who do not go to school at all, N d , N u = 1 ; N e .
These are the key measures of the labor force. Given this basic structure, a rst-best approach
would be to tax ability, a. Because ability is exogenously set for each individual, taxing it would
not distort education or labor supply decisions. Thus, any redistribution could be accomplished
without the e ciency loss that accompanies the income tax considered here. At the same time,
it is reasonable to presume that the social planner cannot observe an individual's true ability and
therefore cannot use ability taxes.

                                                              7
2.2 Wage Determination
The economy has only two types of workers in the economy: those who have successfully completed
school and those who have not. In order to determine wages, it is assumed that all agents have
access to an aggregate CES production function:

                                        Y = A  (E e) + (1 ;  )(E u) ] 
                                                                           1




where E e = LeN ew is the e ective units of educated labor, where N ew is the amount of successfully
educated agents who also participate in goods production and E u = LuN u is the e ective units of
uneducated labor taking into account labor supply of each type of worker.8 With an underlying
competitive economy, wages are simply the marginal product for each type of worker:
                                         "            E u  # 1; 
                                we = A  + (1 ;  ) E e
                                             "  e               # 1; 
                                                 E
                             wu = A(1 ;  )  E u + (1 ;  )
The degree of substitution between factors is dened by the parameter . When = 0, this is the
Cobb-Douglas case. When = 1, E e and E u are perfect substitutes, and when ! ;1 factors
are perfect complements and the production function is Leontief. The elasticity of substitution is
  = 1=(1 ; ):

2.3 Government Transfers and Budget
This model abstracts from how the composition of government expenditures is determined and
ignores any role of government other than the redistribution of income and welfare. The government
must maintain a balanced budget and is restricted to the use of a proportional income tax to raise
revenues. The level and form of this budget is determined by the type of redistribution. Three
redistribution schemes are considered: tuition subsidies for education, a negative income tax, and
a wage subsidy.
  8   As discussed below, N ew recognizes that educated workers are also needed to teach.



                                                          8
2.3.1 Education Subsidies
A signicant portion of the discussion of higher education nance has concentrated on intergener-
ational equity and access. For example, Hansen and Weisbrod (1969) suggested that the implicit
subsidies in the California public higher education system were skewed toward the wealthy McPher-
son and Schapiro (1991), in their broad evaluation of higher education nance, focus on how public
tuition subsidies interact with parental incomes. We on the other hand do not consider any inter-
generational e ects but instead ask the more fundamental question, 'What are the redistributive
e ects of education subsidies compared to no governmental intervention or to alternative redistri-
butional programs?'
   With education subsidies, the government taxes income at rate  and o ers education at a
subsidized tuition t which is set by policy to be less than the cost of education per student, g
(determined below). Since the population in the economy is normalized to 1, the budget constraint
facing the government simply equates total expenditure on schools to tuition and tax payments:

                               N r g = N r t +  weN eLe + wuN u Lu]                           (2)
              R a
where N r =    0  f (a)da is the equilibrium enrollment. For individual agents in this economy, the
government provides no cash transfers, so m = 0 but the tuition faced by anybody attending school
is less than its production costs.
2.3.2 Negative Income Tax (NIT)
Reacting in part to the then-existent high marginal tax rates on welfare and transfers, Friedman
(1962) and others have proposed transfers to the low income population through a negative income
tax. With redistribution through a negative income tax (NIT), all individuals in society receive
a lump sum transfer m which acts as the guaranteed income of an agent with no other income.
Labor income is then taxed (or the transfer is reduced by some portion of labor income), but
at a rate below 100 percent. This vision of fundamentally di erent transfer mechanisms than
existing programs led, among other things, to a series of random-assignment experiments designed

                                                 9
to evaluate programmatic e ects, although the clear focus was on changes in labor supply behavior
(see Munnell 1986).
   The combination of a linear income tax and lump-sum transfers m assumed here is a special
case of the NIT. Again, with the normalization of the population to 1, the government budget
constraint is
                                       m =  weN eLe + wuN u Lu]                                     (3)
While some NIT schemes propose di erent tax rates above and below break-even level for receiving
positive net subsidies, our analysis considers a single marginal tax rate,  . Since all workers pay
a proportional income tax, individual income is subsidized when m > wiLi and taxed otherwise.
Because of the special nature of this economy with just two di erent wage rates, the more educated
cannot receive a net subsidy. In this case, education is not subsidized (i.e., g = t), which is equivalent
to schools being provided privately.
2.3.3 Wage Subsidy
A nal alternative is direct subsidization of the wages of the uneducated. Wage subsidies have been
advocated by economists because of the ability to target them on identied populations. Various
temporary and permanent forms of wage subsidies have been employed in the United States and
in OECD countries, but their e ectiveness is not fully understood (see Katz 1998). Much of the
attention and discussion of currently available subsidies focuses on the employment e ects, but here
we focus entirely on the income redistributions aspects.
   In our implementation, a tax  e is levied on educated agents who earn we, while the uneducated
receive a proportional wage subsidy of  u on their wages of wu. In other words transfers in terms of
wage supplements go directly to those who fail and those who do not go to school. The government
budget constraint is thus:
                                         e weN eLe =  uwuN uLu :                                    (4)
   Note that the budget constraint facing the individual agents is also altered to re ect the di erent
tax (subsidy) rates on income for the educated and uneducated workers. The labor supply of the

                                                   10
educated and uneducated agents become:
                                                           !1
                                      L =   e (1 ;  e
                                                       ) w e 

                                                   
                                                           !1
                                     Lu =     (1 +  u
                                                       ) w u 

                                                   
The modied school selection constraint is:

                   a = 1 ;          h            t                                    i       (5)
                              ; 1+ (1 ;  e)  (we) 1+  ; (1 +  u) 1+  (wu) 1+ 
                                1
                                            1+ 



In addition, it must be true in equilibrium that educated agents earn more than uneducated agents,
i.e.,
                                     weLe(1 ;  e) > wuLu(1 +  u)                               (6)
Government expenditures, thus, consist entirely of work subsidies.
    The alternative transfer schemes considered here operate in very di erent ways. The wage
subsidy is in some sense the most targeted of the three, because only those succeeding in school
pay taxes and only those failing in school or never attending receive the transfer. For the other
two subsidies, taxes are proportionate to the realized wages and the chosen labor supply, but the
transfers are more di use. With the education subsidy, all people attending school (regardless of
success) receive the transfer. For the NIT, transfers benet everyone equally.

2.4 School Costs (g)
The social cost of education has been treated as a xed material cost with no direct consideration
of the opportunity cost of human capital employed by the education sector and unavailable for
direct production. Clearly, however, the largest element of the production cost of schools is skilled
labor, making it appropriate to consider how school costs vary with the wage rates and demands
for schooling that are central to this analysis.
    The simplest approach to dening school costs assumes that it takes b teaching hours to educate
a student, whether he or she will graduate or not. Further, it is assumed that a teacher can
only teach nb students simultaneously (i.e., that schooling is produced by a simple xed coe cient
                                                     11
technology). Underlying this development is an implicit perspective that there is no choice over
quality of schooling and that all educated workers are equally productive in teaching or in goods
production. In equilibrium, all skilled workers must receive the same utility from teaching or from
goods production. Thus, the teacher is only willing to work the same amount of time as any skilled
worker is willing to work Le and they also face the same tax rate as other educated workers:
       For the model economy with a population equal to unity and with an equilibrium enrollment
ratio of N e, the number of teachers demanded is N t  (N e b) = (nb Le)  which is the total teaching
hours needed divided by the number of student classroom hours each teacher can provide.9 Hence,
the teacher-student ratio in this model is N t =N e = b= (nb Le )  which is endogenous because Le
is endogenous. It is also obvious that we only need to consider the ratio of the parameters b=nb ,
rather than their levels separately.
       Because some educated citizens are needed to teach, we have to modify the consideration of
workers in the economy. Specically, we have N e = N ew + N t rather than N e in (2), (3) and
(4). The total \number," or measure, of educated workers for goods production N ew is equal to
the total number of successful students N e, net of the number of teachers N t , or N ew = N e ; N t .
We consider only cases where N ew is positive. Since only workers directly contribute to goods
production, the social cost of education (g) is measured by the working hours of the teachers times
the wage rate of educated workers.10
   9  Notice this formulation implicitly assumes that the teachers themselves need to be students rst. This calculation
is somewhat awkward in a static model but understandable if the static model is perceived as being a steady state
of a dynamic economy.
   10 The formulation with endogenous schooling costs yields some sharply dierent conclusions than a formulation
with xed schooling costs. For example, with general productivity improvements, wages of all types of workers will
increase proportionally. If the (social) cost of education is exogenous, the school enrollment ratio (a ) unambiguously
increases, because the enrollment ratio will depend on the relative level of the exogenous cost of education to the level
of productivity. However, if the social cost of education is endogenous, an increase in the skilled/educated worker's
wage also increases the opportunity cost of being a teacher. In fact, under the particular formulation employed here,
the level of productivity will have no eect on the equilibrium enrollment ratio. With endogenous school costs, the
model also generates the prediction that, as the working hours of skilled workers decrease, the teacher-student ratio
will increase. This seems consistent with the historical experience internationally, although similar results could be
generated by other models of schooling demand.
   Formally, g = (Total wage bill for teachers)=(Total number of students) = (N t  Le  we ) =a = (b=nb)  we :




                                                           12
3 Measuring Performance
Our criteria for performance of the economy consider both the aggregate output and utility of
individuals and the distribution of individual welfare. Most other analyses of transfers concentrate
on one or the other dimension of outcomes without focusing on their interaction.
   Aggregate distributional issues are seldom explicitly considered, but there are several consistent
ways to formulate the problem to incorporate such distribution. For example, if distributional el-
ements enter each individual's utility function, distribution would automatically be taken care of
when social utility is calculated as the aggregation of individual welfare. Alternatively, society's
concerns about distributional issues could be introduced directly at the level of the social wel-
fare function { by explicitly identifying weights on distributional outcomes. We follow a di erent
approach. For each tax rate and distributional mechanism we trace out the feasible surface for
combinations of aggregate outcomes and the distribution of welfare. This equity-e ciency locus
then permits a social planner to maximize overall welfare by selecting both a transfer mechanism
and a size of government. Even within this analytical framework, however, a variety of natural
alternatives exist. Here we describe the computations for education subsidies or a negative income
tax. The straightforward modication for the multiple tax rates in the wage subsidy case is not
explicitly described but is easy to derive.

3.1 Aggregate Expected Utility (AEU)
We consider a social planner who maximizes the sum of the expect utility levels of all agents, S ( t).
This simple utilitarian welfare function, which aggregates the utility of agents who are successful
in school, who fail and become uneducated, and who do not go to school at all, is simply:
                                Z a h                i       Z1
                     S ( t) =        (1 ; a)U + aU f (a)da +  U u f (a)da
                                               e    f
                                   0                                 a

                              = U eN e + U f N f + U uN u

where a is the ability of the marginal student enrolled in college, U e is the utility of successful
agents, U f is the expected utility of those who fail, and U u is that for agents who do not go to
                                                  13
school at all.11
       In an economy with education subsidies, the planner maximizes this function subject to equations
(1) and (2), while in the economy with a negative income tax (lump-sum cash transfers), the planner
maximizes S ( t) subject to (1) and (3) since agents bear all the costs of education. In the case of
wage subsidy, the planner maximizes social welfare subject to (5) and (4)

3.2 Measurement of Inequality
The e ects of the redistribution schemes can be viewed in two separate ways { ex ante and ex post
{ with resulting di erences in interpretation. The ex ante calculations can be directly interpreted as
the degree of equality of opportunity faced by the population. The ex post calculation on the other
hand indicates the degree of contemporaneous inequality and is, in a political economy sense, likely
to be very relevant for policy decisions about redistribution. In our simplied economy, alternative
ways of aggregating the utility distribution make little di erence, and therefore the Gini coe cient
is selected as the summary measure.12 Gini coe cients are computed based on income as well as
utility. The virtue of calculations based on utility is that they capture the gains in leisure of the
agents in the economy, and we emphasize these.
       The computation with either after-tax income or utility levels is particularly straightforward in
the ex post problem. There are three income classes in the economy. The highest wage earners are
those who are successful in schooling with a net income of (1 ;  )weLe ; t + m. The second highest
wage earners are those who do not go to school and who have a net income of (1 ;  )wuLu + m,
while the poorest are those who fail in school and have a net income lower by the amount of tuition
paid, (1 ;  )wuLu ; t + m. The discrete nature of the underlying incomes and utilities implies
that the Lorenz curve (relating the cumulative population distribution to the cumulative income
distribution) has three linear segments whose length re ects the proportions of the population in
each group. The Gini coe cient is easily calculated from the area between the Lorenz curve and
  11 Note that at this point there is no need to distinguish between teachers and educated workers involved in
production, since they must have the same utility. The weights in S reect the total number of agents successfully
completing school.
  12 See Lambert (1990) and Cowell (2000) for more details.




                                                       14
the 45 degree line representing an equal income (or utility) distribution. The larger the area, the
more inequality that exists, and the larger the value of the Gini coe cient.
       The nature of the ex post distribution also points out the conceptual superiority of the ex ante
calculations. The people who try school but fail clearly have a higher expected utility at the time
of the decision { otherwise they would not have attended school. While the realized outcome may
di er, they are better o than those not attending in the sense that they have better opportunities.13
       The ex ante calculations, however, vary directly with ability level. For low ability people (who
do not attempt further schooling), ex ante and ex post utility are the same. People with higher
ability (who attempt schooling) will always have ex ante at least as high as these low income people.
In fact, even among those who enroll in colleges, ex ante utility rises with ability as the probability
of successfully completing schooling rises with ability. In the computations, the Lorenz curve for ex
ante utility is approximated through discretization.

4 Base Case Outcomes
The intuition behind the mechanics of the model is as follows: Wages between educated and une-
ducated workers are unequal due to a skill premium arising from successfully completing schooling.
Wages are determined by the marginal products derived from an aggregate production function.
Governments's only function is redistributing income, which is accomplished by rst raising revenues
with a distortionary tax that directly a ects labor-leisure choices. The form of subsidy employed
has direct implications for the amount of schooling attempted and completed and thus for wages
in the economy. The feedback through distorted decisions has implications for both aggregate
outcomes and the distribution of welfare.
       Comparisons among the alternative policy regimes requires xing a number of key parameters
and underlying distributions. Unfortunately, the key parameters have not been estimated very
precisely. We begin with a base case benchmarked to prevailing estimates of the central elasticity
  13 Part of the dierence in ex post caculations comes from the fact that there is no labor market return to either
ability or partial schooling. If either of these existed, it could close if not overcome the gap introduced by the
"wasted" tuition payments.


                                                        15
parameters. Subsequent sections investigate the sensitivity of the results both to parameter choices
and to more fundamental specication issues including the underlying ability distribution and the
presence of growth externalities.

4.1 Fundamental parameter values
The decision of parameter values begins with the preference side. The key elements a ecting
individual choice are the underlying elasticity of labor supply (1= ) and the elasticity of substitution
between educated and uneducated labor ( = 1=(1 ; )). Despite considerable empirical analysis
employing both experimental and econometric approaches, a surprisingly wide range of estimates
for labor supply elasticities exists (Pencavel 1986 Killingsworth and Heckman 1986 Blundell and
MaCurdy 1999). As a base case, we use an uncompensated wage elasticity of 1=3, which falls
between the (generally lower) elasticity estimates for males and the (generally higher) estimates for
married females (Blundell and MaCurdy 1999).
       The substitution between di erent classes of labor has received less attention. An early estimate
by Johnson (1972) places the elasticity of substitution between college and high school workers at
1:3, although sensitivity analysis yields a very broad range. Katz and Murphy (1992) provide a
series of alternative estimates that depend on the time series of relative demand shifts, but their
point estimate in direct estimation is 1:41. Katz and Autor (1999) review and evaluate alternative
estimation approaches and results and show a considerably larger range of estimates. Our base
case estimates use = 1:3.
       Finally, in terms of key assumptions, we begin with a symmetric distribution of abilities (sym-
metric around 0:5). (The details can be found in the appendix). While it is common to nd
estimates of IQ or other measures of ability to be normally distributed, we know of no analysis that
addresses the functional form for scholastic ability { the ability to complete schooling { as used
here. As with the other key parameters, however, we subsequently investigate the sensitivity of the
results to this distributional specication.14
  14   The details of the distribution can be found in the appendix. The rest of the base calibration is as follows. We set
 to be 0:5 so that the wage ratio between skilled and unskilled worker is around 1.4, i.e., we =wu  1:4: Notice also

                                                             16
4.2 Base results
With the balanced governmental budget, the tax rate simply indexes the size of each program. Table
1 shows how the di erent subsidy schemes promote very di erent patterns of attendance in school.
With no taxes or transfers (i.e., the no government case), 41 percent of the population attends
school and successfully completes, another 21 percent attends school but fail, and the remaining 38
percent never attends. Given the structure of the economy, all of the people attending school have
higher ability than the most able person not attending school, but the failed and successful groups
will each have people of overlapping ability. As the tax rate and subsidy increase, the programs
have very di erent attendance patterns.15 With greater education subsidies, the net tuition to
the student falls, and a larger proportion of students attends school. The largest impact of this,
however, is on the failure rate. While successful completers go from 41 percent of the population
in the no subsidy case to 50 percent in the case of a 12 percent tax to support education, the
proportion attending but failing school rises from 21 percent to 45 percent. This response re ects
the high levels of tuition subsidy. At a 6 percent tax rate, tuition to students is only 45 percent
of school costs at a 12 percent tax rate, tuition is just 10 percent of school costs.16 The school
attendance behavior is always individually optimal given the tuition costs and wage structure that
results, but many more now fall into the lowest utility group (the failed students).
    The pattern is very di erent for the two other subsidy schemes. For each, increasing levels
of subsidy lead to lower school attendance and a smaller educated work force, with the declines
that under the current formulation, the tuition-skilled worker wage ratio is related to the zero-tax teacher-student
ratio, t=we = g=we = b=nb: We set b=nb equals to 0:05, which is close to the empirical calculation of t=we . Lastly, we
set the productivity parameter A in the production function to be 0:4 so that the equilibrium enrollment ratio with
zero
  n ;tax and zero subsidy ishabout 60%. To seeio     this, notice that in the symmetric distribution case, a = 1 ; (t=we )
                                                       ;1
  1=  (1 +  );1 (we )     1 ; (we =wu )(1+ )=       : It is clear that the ratios t=we and we =wu will be invariant
                           1=

to the productivity parameter A. Thus, the enrollment ratio a depends on the wage for skilled worker we , which
in turns depends on the productivity parameter. The cases for other distributions are similar. To our knowledge,
there does not exist a reliable estimate for the scale parameter in the labor supply function, , although this is not
a key parameter for our analysis. In the benchmark case,  is set to 3 so that the working hours for both educated
and uneducated workers are in between 30 to 40 percent of their total time endowment.
  15 Our simulations have tax rates for schooling going from 0 to 12 percent (the point where virtually everybody
attends). The upper bound is obviously far beyond current expenditures on college.
  16 The cost of schooling does decline slightly with higher subsidies for tuition because the wages of educated workers
and thus teachers are driven down, making schooling cheaper given the linear cost function. But the cost decline is
not signicant for the results.

                                                            17
        Tax rate      School successes          Nonattendees            School Failures
          ( )        E      W      N          E    W      N            E     W      N
             .00      .41     .41     .41     .38    .38    .38     .21    .21    .21
             .03      .44     .39     .40     .31    .42    .39     .25    .19    .20
             .06      .46     .38     .40     .23    .46    .40     .31    .17    .20
             .09      .48     .36     .40     .14    .49    .41     .37    .15    .19
             .12      .50     .34     .39     .05    .52    .42     .45    .13    .19
Table 1: Distribution of School Attendance and Success by Subsidy Scheme and Tax Rate for Base-
line Equilibrium (proportions of population): E=education subsidy W=wage subsidy N=negative
income tax
                                     Education         Wage           Negative
                 Tax Rate ( )        Subsidy         Subsidy        Income Tax
                       .00           1.42          1.42           1.42
                       .03           1.33          1.49           1.43
                       .06           1.26          1.57           1.45
                       .09           1.21          1.65           1.46
                       .12           1.19          1.75           1.48
Table 2: Relative Wages of Educated and Uneducated Workers by Subsidy Scheme and Tax Rate
for Baseline Equilibrium
being most dramatic for the direct wage subsidy. Because the earnings disadvantage of not being
educated are leveled out, high wage subsidies work against investment in schooling and lead to
substantial changes in attendance.
   The distortions in the economy introduced by the taxes and subsidies have direct implications
for wage distributions in the economy. Table 2 shows the relative wages of educated to uneducated
workers. In the competitive economy with no government ( = 0), educated workers have gross
wage rates the are forty-two percent above those of uneducated workers. Education subsidies induce
more people to go to school, and the increased proportion of educated workers squeezes their relative
wages. The other two subsidy schemes, however, work in just the opposite direction, with the most
dramatic impact coming for the wage subsidy where the relative earnings of the educated grow to
1:75 with a 12 percent tax rate.
   These outcomes, nonetheless, do not show the complete picture of the e ects on the economy.
First, they neglect any consideration of how the distortions in uence aggregate production and

                                                 18
welfare. Second, they must be combined with the transfer programs in order to understand the
full impact on individual welfare, since the pre-tax wages and outcomes ignore the direct transfers.
Third, at any tax rate, the di erent subsidy schemes introduce di erent amounts of distortion into
the economy, implying that better comparisons would involve subsidy schemes at levels of equal
aggregate distortion.
   Figure 1 provides a direct comparison of each of the subsidy schemes in terms of their e ects
on aggregate expected utility and on the ex ante distribution of welfare. This gure highlights the
trade-o of e ciency { measured by losses in AEU { and of equity { measured by 1-Gini dened in
terms of ex ante utility. Figure 1 plots each of the subsidies for tax rates between zero to 12 percent.
The competitive economy with a zero tax rate yields the largest aggregate utility, and increases in
the tax rate decrease aggregate utility in each of the subsidy schemes. But, with higher taxes more
redistribution occurs, and the distribution of utility becomes more equal (as seen by increasing
values of 1-Gini). Thus, if society values both aggregate output and more equality, movement up
and to the right represents improvement in overall societal welfare.
   Figure 1, providing the locus of feasible aggregate output (in utility terms) and opportunity
distributions under each scheme, indicates that a wage subsidy is a superior subsidy scheme to
education tuition subsidies, which in turn are superior to negative income tax. Under any social
welfare function, the wage subsidy can provide higher welfare, because it can achieve any feasible
level of aggregate expected utility with more equality than either of other two subsidy schemes.
   As noted, however, other measures of equity are possible, and Figure 2 displays the same trade-
o s for the ex post calculations of the utility distribution. The most obvious comparison of these
distributions is that the ordering of subsidy schemes actually changes with ex post inequality mea-
sures. The distribution of utility now depends on the realizations of school success. Those who
fail school have lower incomes and utilities than those who did not attempt more schooling, and
the ex post calculations focus not on opportunities but on realized outcomes.
   In an ex ante comparison, people of higher ability always are better o than those with lower
abilities, because they have increased probabilities of successfully completing schooling and thereby

                                                  19
                     Figure 1: AEU and 1-Gini (ex-ante utility)

         0.968
         0.966
         0.964
         0.962
          0.96                                                    Edu subsidy
1-GINI




         0.958                                                    NIT
         0.956                                                    Wage Subsidy
         0.954
         0.952
          0.95
         0.948
              0.95     0.96   0.97   0.98   0.99       1   1.01
                          Aggregate Expected Utility
                    Figure 2: AEU and 1-Gini (ex-post utility)

         0.95

         0.94

         0.93

         0.92                                                    Edu Subsidy
1-GINI




                                                                 NIT
         0.91                                                    Wage subsidy
          0.9

         0.89

         0.88
             0.95     0.96   0.97   0.98   0.99       1   1.01
                         Aggregate Expected Utility
obtaining higher wages. In an ex post sense, however, this is not the case because all failures
begin with higher ability than the group that did not attempt schooling. Thus, not only does the
amount of redistribution change but the character of the subsidies also changes. We return to a
more detailed comparison of the distributional aspects in the next section.
   The gures vividly illustrate one additional important feature: the tax rate is a very imperfect
index of the impact of governmental interventions. Importantly, the varying distributional schemes
have very di erent distortionary e ects at any given tax rate, so the typical practice of comparing
the redistribution from alternative transfer mechanisms by choosing a common tax rate will yield
very misleading comparisons. At a 12 percent tax rate, the economy employing a negative income
tax loses only 0:3 percent of aggregate expected utility, compared to losses of 0:8 percent for the
wage subsidy, and 3:2 percent for the education subsidy. Put the other way, an education subsidy
program with a 3 percent tax rate, a wage subsidy program with a 6 percent tax rate, and an NIT
program with a 10 percent tax rate each has an equivalent deadweight loss (but they will have very
di erent implications on inequality). The combined general equilibrium e ects of tax and subsidy
programs illustrate the importance of programmatic detail in determining the welfare implications
of governmental interventions, although most conventional program analyses miss this.

4.3 Ex ante v. ex post
By focusing on why wage subsidies and education tuition subsidies change place in the orderings,
it is possible to understand better how these subsidies work. The results here may seem counter-
intuitive at rst sight. It is often asserted that education subsidy will improve the \equalization of
opportunities" and thus would seem to be a good policy from the ex ante point of view. On the
other side, a wage subsidy seems to target on those who have not attended or could not nish the
college and thus would be a good policy from the ex post point of view. The results in this paper
reverse these assertions and therefore deserve more discussion. While the stated assertions contain
some truth, they miss a general equilibrium perspective and a framework for \fair" comparison
across regimes. For instance, while an education subsidy indeed induces more agents to receive

                                                 20
college education (Table 1), it also change the composition of the labor force and hence changes the
relative wage ratio (Table 2). In addition, the marginal failure rate increases as the subsidy rate
increases, so that the expected impact for each tax dollar will decrease as the scale of education
subsidies is enlarged and the e ciency of the system thus decreases. Thus, while an education
subsidy might be able to generate a higher level of equality, the adverse e ect on the e ciency
cannot be ignored.
       The full comparison, however, of the di erences between the ex ante and ex post results requires
going behind the summary outcomes depicted in Figures 1 and 2. Each point on the outcome loci
of each regime represents a full underlying distribution of utilities, and it is instructive to compare
the underlying distribution across the wage subsidy and tuition subsidy regimes. (Because the
negative income tax is always dominated, we drop consideration of it in these comparisons). Our
criteria of \dominance of regimes" is that, at a given level of e ciency, a higher level of equality can
be reached. And, since as noted di erent regimes carry di erent implications to the distribution of
utility even at the same tax rate, a natural candidate is to compare a point on one regime's loci
to another point on the other regime's loci with both higher e ciency (as measured by AEU) and
higher equality (as measured by 1-Gini).
       To illustrate, we compare the distribution of ex ante utility of four percent tax rate under the
education subsidy regime with the ve percent tax rate under the wage subsidy in the benchmark
case. The latter achieves both higher level of e ciency and equality than the former. Figure 3
displays the distribution of ex ante utilities and the corresponding density of agents. Expected ex
ante utility of individual agents increases along the horizontal axis while the height of the curves
indicates the density of agents at each utility level.17 The shape of the two distributions is similar.
In fact, for people receiving the middle range of utility (between 0:05 and 0:06), the density of agents
under the two regimes is similar. The distinctive di erence appears at the ends of the distribution.
The bottom group under both regimes is comprised of low ability individuals for whom attending
school is not optimal. This population expects to receive a direct subsidy under the wage subsidy
  17The underlying continuous distribution of agents is discretized for these calculations and the density represents
the "size" of each group.

                                                         21
                    Figure 3: Ex-ante Utility Distribution

          0.45
           0.4
          0.35
           0.3
Density




          0.25                                         Edu. subsidy (4%)
           0.2                                         Wage subsidy (5%)
          0.15
           0.1
          0.05
            0
            0.045    0.05    0.055      0.06   0.065
                            Utilities
regime, whereas it expects only indirect e ects (through relative wage improvement) under tuition
subsidies, i.e., the lowest ability people see none of the tuition subsidy since they do not attempt
further schooling. Interestingly, the top ability group also achieves a higher level of utility under the
wage regime than under the education subsidy regime. Because the group of agents who successfully
complete schooling is relatively small under the wage subsidy regime, the relative wage e ects more
than compensate for the higher tuitions (compared to the education subsidy case). Summing up
these illustrative comparisons, the expected utility improvements to the lowest ability people under
the wage subsidy are the dominant force leading to compression of the ex ante distribution of utility
(for an overall level of aggregate utility).
   Now consider the ex post case. We compare the distribution of ex post utility of a three percent
tax rate under the education subsidy regime with the six percent tax rate under the wage subsidy
regime. The former achieves both higher e ciency and higher ex post equality than the former.
Figure 4 displays the distribution of the ex post utility under both regimes. Again, the main
points are transparent from the gure. After schooling decisions are made and success in school is
considered, there are only three groups of people in terms of utility outcomes. The bottom group
in terms of realized utility is compromised entirely of school failures, and their utility is improved
under the education subsidy regime because the wasted tuition is less than that under the wage
subsidy. The top group, made up of school completers, has slightly higher realized utility under the
wage subsidy but its representation in the population (38 percent) is signicantly less than under
the education regime (about 44 percent of the population see Table 1).
   In sum, the wage subsidy scheme has its most concentrated impact on those who face the
worst opportunities { those with low ability for whom there is not su cient expectation of gaining
from further schooling. It proves superior in equalizing ex ante utilities (for any given level of
governmentally induced ine ciency). The tuition subsidy proves better after schooling outcomes
are realized, because it subsidizes school failures and brings up their ex post utility (even though
these people have higher ability and higher ex ante utility than individuals who do not attempt
schooling). In other words, behind the observed opportunity loci for the di erent subsidy schemes

                                                   22
                     Figure 4: Ex-Post Utility Distribution

           0.5

          0.45

           0.4

          0.35
Density




                                                        Edu Subsidy (3%)
           0.3
                                                        Wage Subsidy (6%)
          0.25

           0.2

          0.15

           0.1
              0.03    0.04     0.05     0.06    0.07
                              Utility
            Ability                Elasticity of Substitution for Education
            Distribution          = 0:8        = 1:0         = 1:3        = 2:0
                                 Labor supply elasticity ( 1= ) = 1/3
            Uniform          W      E N W       E N W E N W N E
            Symmetric        W      E N W       E N W E N W E N
            Skewed           W      N E W       N E W N E W N E
                              Labor supply elasticity ( 1= ) =1/6
            Uniform        W E N W E N W E N W N E
            Symmetric      W E N W E N W E N W E N
            Skewed         W E N W E N W E N W N E
Table 3: Social Welfare Comparisons of Subsidy Regimes with Ex Ante Utility Calculations under
Alternative Model Parameters: W=wage subsidy N=negative income tax E=education subsidy
lie very di erent patterns of subsidy.

5 Sensitivity Analysis
As mentioned, the key parameters for our simplied economy have not been estimated with much
precision. We therefore consider the e ects of di erent subsidies assuming di erent labor elasticities,
di erent substitution across education classes, and di erent distributions of individual abilities. For
labor elasticities (1= ), we employ values of 1=3 and of 1=6, values which appear to bound the
bulk of existing estimates for men and women in the United States economy. For the elasticity of
substitution between educated and uneducated labor, we consider = 0:8 1:0 1:3and 2:0, although
estimates below one do not appear consistent with the time series evidence on wage changes (Katz
and Autor 1999). An elasticity of 1:0 corresponds to the Cobb-Douglas production function case.
Finally, in addition to the symmetric ability distribution, we consider two linearized distributions
for a 2 0 1]. The rst is uniform over the interval 0 1], while the second is skewed toward low
ability people with the peak at a = 0:75.
   Table 3 (ex ante utility distributions) and table 4 (ex post utility distributions) provide a sym-
bolic summary of the loci of aggregate utility and 1-Gini under the di erent subsidy schemes
(comparable to Figures 1 and 2). For this, X        Y signies that the plot for subsidy scheme X
at di erent tax rates always lies above that for subsidy scheme Y . X Y means that neither
dominates over the entire distribution. In such a situation, the X and Y plots generally lie close to

                                                  23
               Ability                  Elasticity of Substitution for Education
               Distribution            = 0:8        = 1:0         = 1:3        = 2:0
                                     Labor supply elasticity ( 1= ) = 1/3
               Uniform           E W N E W N W E N W N E
               Symmetric         E W N E W N E W N E W N
               Skewed            E W N W E N W E N W E N
                              Labor supply elasticity ( 1= ) =1/6
            Uniform        E W N E W N E W N W E N
            Symmetric      E W N E W N E W N E W N
            Skewed         E W N E W N W E N W E N
Table 4: Social Welfare Comparisons of Subsidy Regimes with Ex Post Utility Calculations under
Alternative Model Parameters: W=wage subsidy N=negative income tax E=education subsidy
each other and intersect one or more times at di erent tax rates.18 The bold elements of the tables
corresponds to the base case described above.
       The most important aspect of these sensitivity analyses is that the prior results are not a ected
much by considering a broad range of parameters for the economy. When evaluated on an ex ante
basis, the wage subsidy regime proves superior. On an ex post basis, however, we nd ambiguity
about whether tuition subsidies are superior.
       The distribution of abilities clearly in uences the ex post results. The tuition subsidies have
their strongest in uence when abilities follow a symmetric distribution that peaks in the middle.
Since the cuto enrollment rate in the no tax case is reasonably close to the center of the distribution
(62 percent), changes in incentives for school attendance have large e ects on the population induced
to continue schooling. With the uniform and skewed distributions, the impact on enrollment is
less, and tuition subsidies cannot have the same in uence on the distribution of outcomes. In fact,
negative income taxes are uniformly ranked at the bottom except when the ability distribution is
skewed toward low ability, at which point they tend to dominate tuition subsidies in an ex ante
sense. Additionally, not surprisingly, tuition subsidies look better when there are lower elasticities
of substitution and thus when the relative importance of education increases. Nonetheless, the
overall conclusions are remarkably insensitive to the specic parameters used.
  18In some cases, tax rates greater than 0.12 for the wage subsidy are required to compare the dierent regimes.
Specically, the tuition subsidy with a 12 percent tax rate often yields very large relative ineciency but more
equality than a wage subsidy at 12 percent tax rates, even though a wage subsidy still dominates by going to a larger
governmental intervention.

                                                         24
6 Production Externalities of Education
A strong motivation for educational investments by society has traditionally been the presump-
tion that there are signicant externalities associated with education. The usual arguments about
externalities, however, apply best to elementary and secondary education and less well to higher
education (Hanushek 1996 Poterba 1996). This view is also supported by Acemoglu and Angrist
(1999). The one exception is consideration of how human capital might a ect national growth
rates { through, say, the development of ideas or the di usion of technologies. In such a case, while
competitive labor markets might exist, they will not be Pareto optimal, and government action
might be called for on pure e ciency grounds. Here we consider such a case in a simple extension
of the basic model similar to that of Romer (1986). This particular form is not only simple but also
incorporates an externality that is compatible with perfectly competitive markets.
   While all other aspects of our model of the economy remain the same, we now assume that all
agents have access to an aggregate production function which of the CES form:
                                                                     
                               Y = A  (E e) + (1 ;  )(E u)]  E e
                                                                1




where E e is the \average e ective units of educated labor", the externality part, and ( > 0) is a
parameter indexing the strength of the externality. Since individuals take the E e part as given, this
economy is compatible with perfectly competitive markets but individual schooling decisions will
tend to yield less than optimal education in the economy. Wages are simply the marginal products:
                                       "             E u  # 1;   
                               w = A  + (1 ;  ) E e
                                e
                                                                       Ee 
                                          "  e                 # 1;   
                             u                E
                           w = A(1 ;  )  E u + (1 ;  )
                                                                              
                                                                           Ee :
In equilibrium, E e = E e:
   The presence of the production externality changes the situation, because a subsidy to education
now acts like a Pigouvian tax that enhances aggregate performance of the economy. At low levels
of taxes and education subsidies, both aggregate expected utility and equality (1-Gini) improve,

                                                  25
                   Ability      Elasticity of Substitution for Education
                   Distribution = 0:8 = 1:0 = 1:3               = 2:0
                               Labor supply elasticity ( 1= ) = 1/3
                 Uniform           > :08  > :08  > :08             > :09
                 Symmetric           E          E          E            E
                 Skewed            > :06  > :06  > :06             > :07
                               Labor supply elasticity ( 1= ) =1/6
                 Uniform             E          E          E            E
                 Symmetric           E          E          E            E
                 Skewed            > :06       E          E            E
Table 5: Education Tax Rate above which Wage Subsidies Dominate Education Subsidies based on
Ex Ante Utility Calculations (E implies education subsidies always dominate)
making education subsidies the clearly superior transfer mechanism. At higher levels of education
subsidies, however, the ine ciency from tax distortions sometimes overcomes the e ciency gains
from correcting the externality. The typical situation can be readily seen from considering the base
case employed previously with the addition of the externality where = :1. Figures 5 (ex ante) and
6 (ex post) illustrate the output and distributional patterns from the subsidy schemes operated at
di ering tax rates (for the base case dened previously except for the externalities). For   0:04,
AEU and (1-Gini) increase under the tuition subsidy. For :04    :085 applied to education
subsidies, aggregate utility (AEU) is decreasing, but it still remains above that obtainable without
governmental intervention or with the other transfer devices.
   Table 5 displays the array of sensitivity results corresponding to those provided before. The
general picture is that, under the education subsidy regime, only very high tax rates (above 7:5
percent) ever yield an alternative program that dominates educational subsidies. If we think of
this as a model of higher education, however, total spending on institutions of higher education in
1999 was just 2:8 percent of GDP (National Center for Education Statistics, 2000). The education
and wage subsidies always dominate the negative income tax in meeting societal output and dis-
tributional goals, i.e., the locus of feasible pairs is always lowest for an NIT. For ex post utility
calculations, educational subsidies always dominate the others across all parameter values and dis-
tributions considered. Therefore, the externalities considered here could fully justify redistribution
through education subsidies, although the driving force is its ability to correct an existing distortion

                                                  26
                 Figure 5: AEU and 1-Gini with Externality
                             (ex-ante utility)

         0.966
         0.964
         0.962
          0.96
         0.958                                            Edu subsidy
1-GINI




         0.956                                            NIT
         0.954                                            Wage Subsidy
         0.952
          0.95
         0.948
         0.946
              0.96   0.97   0.98     0.99     1    1.01
                      Aggregate Expected Utility
                    Figure 6: AEU and 1-Gini with Externality
                                (ex-post utility)

         0.94

         0.93

         0.92

         0.91                                                Edu Subsidy
1-GINI




                                                             NIT
          0.9                                                Wage subsidy
         0.89

         0.88

         0.87
             0.96      0.97    0.98     0.99      1   1.01
                         Aggregate Expected Utility
from the externality.

7 Conclusions
This paper develops a methodology for evaluating transfer mechanisms that might be expected
to have both output and distributional e ects. The specic focus is the potential redistributive
aspects of education tuition subsidies and how they compare with those of cash transfers through
either a negative income tax or a wage subsidy to low wage workers. The comparisons incorporate
both deadweight losses and redistribution within a one-period general equilibrium model of the
economy. Workers di er by ability, where ability indexes the probability of successfully completing
schooling. Individuals decide whether or not to pursue more schooling, and, based on the outcomes
of that, choose labor supply levels. The government's only role is redistributing income. It provides
transfers to individuals that are nanced by a (distorting) linear income tax, and it must maintain
a balanced budget.
   The overall results of the comparison of transfer mechanisms are very illuminating. In the simple
world considered here, if where there were no interest in distributional outcomes, the social optimum
would be no governmental taxation or spending. With no externalities, individual schooling and
labor supply choices will lead to maximum social welfare, dened by aggregate expected utility for
individuals. With distributional motives which are supported by levying a distortionary income
tax, however, the consideration of best governmental programs becomes more interesting.
   Without externalities, the results are somewhat ambiguous. For our base case that relies on
the best estimates of key parameters, wage subsidies dominate the alternative transfer mechanisms
in the sense that any level of aggregate expected utility achieved by a negative income tax or an
education subsidy can be achieved by a program of wage subsidies that also ensures more ex ante
utility. This result breaks down, however, when utility is calculated on an ex post basis. With this
metric, alternative descriptions of the production relationships, behavioral parameters, and ability
distribution can yield superiority of tuition subsidies.
   If there are production externalities related to the aggregate education level in the economy,

                                                  27
however, the education subsidies serve a dual purpose { redistributing income while potentially
moving the economy toward Pareto superior outcomes. Thus, a rationalization for the heavy sub-
sidies for higher education can be generally derived when externalities are involved. While the
benecial e ects of education subsidies on aggregate output are not surprising when externalities of
the growth variety are considered, educational subsidies also dominate in terms of the distribution
of income and utility.
   In order to focus on the key comparisons among alternative governmental transfer programs,
this paper does not consider a series of issues that might also be important in evaluating govern-
mental policies toward education and redistribution. Many have argued (e.g., Becker 19931964]
Garratt and Marshall 1994) that capital market imperfections inhibit individual ability to invest
in human capital. The inability to use human capital as collateral for loans is a central element
of such considerations. Moving from the one period model to a dynamic model of the economy
could capture better the investment nature of education and the role of families. A multiperiod
model would also permit direct investigation of the intergenerational transmission of income and
its distributional implications.From a di erent direction, others question the potential ine ciency
from governmental supply, particularly when it tends to be monopolistic (Hanushek 1986). Thus,
they tend to concentrate on the cost and quality of schooling. Here we abstract from such supply
issues and assume homogeneous and e cient provision of schools (and other governmental redistri-
bution), although potential governmental failure could in uence the results. Yet another obvious
extension is to incorporate political economy features of the choice of mechanisms. For example,
as the analysis of the details of distributional outcomes in gures 3 and 4 demonstrated, di erent
private interests may well lead individuals to have di ering views about the appropriate transfer
mechanism. These views may support collective choice for nonoptimal transfer devices.
   Finally, we believe that this paper provides important methodological improvements over prior
analyses of transfer programs. The magnitude of both educational programs and direct transfer
programs indicate their potential for signicant general equilibrium e ects. This paper provides a
framework for considering both the redistributional and e ciency e ects of alternative programs

                                                28
and for evaluating the full impacts of governmental activities.

8 Bibliography
  1. Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua Angrist (1999) \How Large are the Social Returns to Education?
     Evidence from Compulsory Schooling Laws," In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, edited
     by B. S. Bernanke and K. Rogo . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press..
  2. Becker, Gary S. 1993 1964]. Human capital: A theoretical and empirical analysis,
     with special reference to education. 3rd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
  3. Bishop, John H. (1979), \The general equilibrium impact of alternative antipoverty strate-
     gies." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 32 (2), 205-23.
  4. Blundell, Richard, MaCurdy, Thomas (1999), \Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative Ap-
     proaches," in Ashenfelter, Orley and Card, David ed., Handbook of Labor Economics,
     Vol. 3A, North Holland, Amsterdam, 1559-1695.
  5. Browning, Edgar K. (1993), \The marginal cost of redistribution." Public Finance Quarterly,
     21 (1), 3-32.
  6. Cowell, F.A. (2000), \Measurement of Inequality," in Atkinson, Anthony B. and Bourguignon,
     Francois ed., Handbook of Income Distribution, North Holland: Amsterdam, 89-166.
  7. Devereaux, Michael, Gregory, Allan, and Smith, Gregor (1992), \Realistic Cross Country
     Consumption Correlations in A Two Country Equilibrium Business Cycle Model," Journal of
     International Money and Finance, 11, 3-16.
  8. Fair, Ray C. (1971). "The optimal distribution of income." Quarterly Journal of Economics
     85,no.4 (November):551-579
  9. Friedman, Milton (1962), Capitalism and Freedom, University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
     IL.
 10. Garratt, Rod and Marshall, John (1994), \Public Finance of Private Goods: The Case of
     College Education," Journal of Political Economy, 102(3), 566-582.
 11. Gomes, Joao Jeremy Greenwood and Sergio Rebelo (1997), \Equilibrium Unemployment,"
     NBER Working Paper 5922 forthcoming in Journal of Monetary Economics.
 12. Gramlich, Edward M., and Michael J. Wolko (1979), \A procedure for evaluating income
     distribution policies." Journal of Human Resources, 14(3), 319-50.
 13. Greenwood, Jeremy Zvi Hercovitz Gregory Hu man (1988), \Investment, Capacity Utiliza-
     tion, and Real Business Cycles," American Economic Review, 78(3), 402-417.
 14. Hansen, W. Lee, and Burton A. Weisbrod. (1969). "The distribution of costs and direct
     benets of public higher education: The case of California." Journal of Human Resources
     (Spring):176-191.
 15. Hanushek, Eric A. (1986). "The economics of schooling: Production and e ciency in public
     schools." Journal of Economic Literature 24,no.3 (September):1141-1177

                                                 29
16. Hanushek, Eric (1996), \Rationalizing school spending: e ciency, externalities and equity,
    and their connection to rising costs," in Victor Fuchs ed., Individual and Social Respon-
    sibility: Child care, Education, Medical Care, and Long-term Care in America,
    Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 59-91.
17. Johnson, George E. (1970). "The demand for labor by educational category." Southern
    Economic Journal 37,no.2 (October):190-204.
18. Kane, Thomas J., and Cecilia Elena Rouse. 1995. "Labor Market Returns to Two and Four
    Year College." American Economic Review 85,no.3 (June):600-614
19. Katz, Lawrence F. (1998). "Wage subsidies for the disadvantaged." In Generating jobs:
    How to increase demand for less-skilled workers, edited by R. Freeman and P.
    Gottschalk. New York: Russell Sage.
20. Katz, Lawrence F., Autor, David H. (1999), \Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings
    Inequality," in Ashenfelter, Orley and Card, David ed., Handbook of Labor Economics,
    Vol. 3A, North Holland, Amsterdam, 1463-1555.
21. Katz, Lawrence F., and Kevin M. Murphy. 1992. \Changes in relative wages, 1963-1987:
    Supply and demand factors." Quarterly Journal of Economics 107,no.1 (February):35-78.
22. Killingsworth, Mark and Heckman, James (1986), \Labor Supply of Women: A Survey"
    in Ashenfelter, Orley and Layard, Richard ed., Handbook of Labor Economics, North
    Holland, Amsterdam.
23. Lambert Peter (1990), The Distribution and Redistribution of Income, Manchester
    University Press: New York.
24. Layard, Richard. 1979. "Education versus cash redistribution: The lifetime context." Journal
    of Public Economics 12:377-385.
25. |. 1981. "Reply to John Creedy's comment." Journal of Public Economics 15:273.
26. Leung, Charles Ka Yui (1995), \Does Non-traded Input Necessarily Deepen the International
    Non-Diversication Puzzle I: One Good Case," Economics Letters, 49, 281-285.
27. National Center for Education Statistics. (2000). Digest of education statistics, 2000.
    Washington, DC: NCES
28. McPherson, Michael S., and Morton Owen Schapiro. (1991). Keeping college a ordable:
    Government and educational opportunity. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
29. Munnell, Alicia H. (1986). Lessons from the income maintenance experiments. Federal
    Reserve Bank of Boston: Boston, MA
30. Pencavel, John (1986), \Labor Supply of Men: A Survey" in Ashenfelter, Orley and Layard,
    Richard (1986), Handbook of Labor Economics, North Holland, NY.
31. Poterba, James M. (1996), \Government Intervention in the Markets for Education and Health
    Care: How and Why?," in Victor Fuchs ed., Individual and Social Responsibility: Child
    care, Education, Medical Care, and Long-term Care in America, Chicago: University
    of Chicago Press, 277-307.

                                              30
32. Rebelo, Sergio and Vegh Carlos (1995), \Real E ects of Exchange Rate-Based Stabilization:
    An Analysis of Competing Theories," NBER Working Paper No. 5197.
33. Romer, Paul, (1986), \Increasing returns and long-run growth," Journal of Political Economy,
    94, 1002-1037.
34. Smeeding, Timothy, et. al. (1993), \Poverty, Inequality, and Family Living Standards Impacts
    Across Seven Nations: The E ect of Noncash Subsidies for Health, Education, and Housing,"
    Review of Income and Wealth, Series 39(3), 229-256.
35. Thurow, Lester (1971), \Income Distribution as A Pure Public Good," Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 85(2), 327-336.




                                              31
A Details of di erent distribution of ability
In this section, we will provide all the details about the di erent distribution of ability used in the
text. To start with, the density function for symmetric distribution used in this paper is
                                            (
                                     f (a) = 20::55 ;
                                                    + 2a a < 0:5 
                                                      2a a  0:5
8a 2 0 1]: Notice that the density function is continuous at Revery point. Recall that
                                                                                      R athe formula for
enrollment and total number of successful agents are N = 0 f (a)da and N = 0 (1 ; a)f (a)da:
                                                          r      a              e

In the case of symmetric distribution, it is easy to check that
                                   (            2             0:5
                            N = 0;:50a:5 ++ 2(:a5a) ; (a)2 aa <
                               r
                                                                  0:5 
                                (
                        N = ;2 a5 ++ 35(aa ;) 9;(a3 ()a2 +) 2 (a )3 aa <
                                1   4     2 2 3                        0:5
                                                                            0:5 :
                            e

                                  12  2        4              3
   The other cases are analogous. The density function for uniform distribution is
                                                  f (a) = 1
8a 2 0 1]: The density function is continuous atRevery point. Recall that
                                                                         R athe formula for enrollment
and total number of successful agents are N = 0 f (a)da and N = 0 (1 ; a)f (a)da: In the case
                                              r     a              e

of uniform distribution, it is easy to check that
                                            N r = a 
                                                       2
                                        N e = a ; (a2) :
   The density function for skewed distribution used in this paper is
                                              (
                                    f (a) =
                                                  1
                                                  2   + 43 a a < 0:75 
                                                  9
                                                  2   ; 4a a  0:75
8a 2 0 1]: Notice that the density function is continuous at Revery point. Recall that
                                                                                      R athe formula for
enrollment and total number of successful agents are N = 0 f (a)da and N = 0 (1 ; a)f (a)da:
                                                          r      a              e

In the case of skewed distribution, it is easy to check that
                                    (1  2 2                  0:75
                             N = ;2 a3 ++ 93a(a;) 2 (a )2 aa <
                                r
                                                                 0:75 
                                          2   2
                                (
                         N = ;2 a9 ++ 912a(a;)17;(a9)(2a+) 4 (a)3 aa <
                              1        5     2 4 3                   0:75
                                                                          0:75 :
                           e

                                 8    2        4             3




                                                       32
B Calculation of Gini coe cients
The measure of agents who are successful is simply p1 = a ; a22 while those who go to school and
fail is p2 = a22 . Those who do not go to school consists of 1 ; p1 ; p2. This gives mean (after-tax)
income y! as
                         p1 ((1 ;  )weLe ; t + m)] + p2((1 ;  )wuLu ; t + m)]
                                     +(1 ; p1 ; p2)((1 ;  )wuLu + m)]
The area underneath the Lorenz curve is computed by summing the integral of the density of the
three after-tax income classes, where the Lorenz curve is represented by the following piece-wise
continuous function:
                               Z1(p) = (1 ;  )w Ly! ; t + m] p for p 2 0 p2]
                                                 u u




          Z2(p) = (1 ;  )w L ; t + m]p2 +y!(p ; p2 )(1 ;  )w L + m] for p 2 p2  p1 + p2]
                               u u                                 u u



and
                        Z3(p) = (1 ;  )w L ; t + m]py2! + (1 ;  )w L + m]p1
                                            u u                         u u




                    + ( p ; p 1 ; p2 )(1 ;  )w L ; t + m]
                                                e e
                                                            for p 2 p1 + p2 1]
                                          y!
   The sum of the integral of the piecewise continuous function gives the area underneath the
Lorenz curve. The Gini coe cient is simply 1;(2 area under Lorenz curve).19




  19Again, straightforward modications of the formulae are required for the wage subsidy case. In the case where
the Gini is based on utility, the welfare of the economy measured by S ( t) is used as a normalization.

                                                       33
