                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             LABOR MARKET SEARCH AND OPTIMAL RETIREMENT POLICY


                                         Joydeep Bhattacharya
                                          Casey B. Mulligan
                                           Robert R. Reed III


                                          Working Paper 8591
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8591


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2001




We thank participants of the Macro Lunch group at Chicago for comments and discussion. Mulligan thanks
the Alfred P. Sloan foundation for financial support under its faculty fellowship program. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.


© 2001 by Joydeep Bhattacharya, Casey B. Mulligan and Robert R. Reed III. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Labor Market Search and Optimal Retirement Policy
Joydeep Bhattacharya, Casey B. Mulligan and Robert R. Reed III
NBER Working Paper No. 8591
November 2001
JEL No. H21, J64



                                              ABSTRACT


        A popular view about social security, dating back to its early days of inception, is that it is a
means for young, unemployed workers to “purchase” jobs from older, employed workers. The question
we ask is: Can social security, by encouraging retirement and hence creating job vacancies for the young,
improve the allocation of workers to jobs in the labor market? Using a standard model of labor market
search, we establish that the equilibrium with no policy-induced retirement can be efficient. Even under
worst-case parameterizations of our model, we find that public retirement programs pay the elderly
substantially more than labor market search theory implies that their jobs are worth. An important effect,
ignored by the popular view, is that the creation of a vacant job by a retirement reduces the value of other
vacant jobs.




Joydeep Bhattacharya           Casey B. Mulligan                Robert R. Reed III
Department of Economics        Department of Economics          Department of Economics
Iowa State University          University of Chicago            Gatton College of Business and Economics
Ames, IA 50011-1070            1126 East 59th Street            University of Kentucky
joydeep@iastate.edu            Chicago, IL 60637                Lexington, KY 40506
                               and NBER                         rrreed@uky.edu
                               c-mulligan@uchicago.edu
       The objective of this paper is to formalize a popular argument about the economic rationale
for Social Security and public pension programs in other countries. We construct a model in which
there can be significant frictions slowing the process of matching workers with firms, and social
security is a labor market policy designed to remove old workers from the labor market. In this
sense, it can be said that social security is a means for young, unemployed workers to “purchase”
jobs from older, employed workers. President Franklin D. Roosevelt, in particular, in one of his
“fireside chats” suggested that this would be an important goal for social security:


       “The program for social security now pending before the Congress is a necessary part of the future
       unemployment policy of the Government...It proposes, by means of old-age pensions, to help those
       who have reached the age of retirement to give up their jobs and thus give to the younger generation
       greater opportunities for work and to give all a feeling of security as they look toward their old
       age...” (Roosevelt, p. 134-135.)


This position on Social Security continues to receive some support, at least enough to receive serious
consideration in recent social security debates. In recent discussion about the retirement earnings
test in Congress, many agreed with the following perspective:


       “Social Security, when it was created in 1935, sought to achieve two goals–moving older workers
       out of the workforce to make way for younger workers, and to partially replace lost income due to
       retirement.”
       (Testimony of Honorable John J. Rhodes III in Social Security Retirement Test)


       Can discouraging work among the elderly be understood as a way of creating job vacancies
for the young, and improving the allocation of workers to jobs in the labor market? This paper
explores a model of labor market search in order to answer this question. We re-interpret the Hosios
(1990) environment to include retirement decisions and show how the answer depends on the
model's parameter values, some of which imply that the social value of retirement exceeds the
private value while other parameter values imply that the private value exceeds the social value. We
then consider the parameter values implying the largest wedge between private and social retirement

                                                    1
values and show that, even in this extreme case, optimal retirement policy does much less to
encourage retirement than do the policies used by governments around the world. To put it simply,
labor market search theory provides at best only a partial justification for publicly induced
retirement; public retirement programs pay the elderly substantially more than labor market search
theory implies that their jobs are worth. In this regard, our results might be interpreted as either a
critique of public retirement policy or as a puzzle to be explained by positive theories of the public
sector.
          Section I begins with an overview of retirement-inducing policies used around the world.
Section II presents the Hosios (1990) model of search, simplified, amended and reinterpreted to
allow for a retirement decision. Section III considers an extreme parameterization of the model in
order to show that, even if it is the case that the social value of retirement exceeds the private value,
an optimal retirement program does much less to induce retirement than do observed programs.
Section IV concludes.


I. An Overview of Retirement-Inducing Policies Around the World
          There is a growing literature comparing public pension systems and their retirement
incentives across countries and over time. We report some of the main results from that literature.
The purpose of our report is not to conduct a detailed statistical analysis, but merely to highlight the
empirical regularities relevant to a theoretical study of publicly induced retirement. The most
conspicuous, and theoretically most relevant, regularity is that implicit earnings tax rates are highest
for the elderly.


I.A Public Policies Encourage Retirement
          As of 1995, over 100 countries had public pension programs.2 Among the 88 of those
countries reporting to the U.S. Social Security Administration sufficient detail of their public pension
benefit formulas, 75% pay pension benefits in such a way as to discourage work by its elderly
citizens. The most typical means by which benefit formulas induced retirement is remarkably


          2
        Data in this paragraph are reported and described in more detail by Mulligan and Sala-i-
Martin (1999a,b) and Sala-i-Martin (1996).

                                                   2
transparent: retirement is a necessary condition for receiving public pension benefits, and no credit
is given to those who decide to retire later and collect benefits for fewer years. Other countries had
more complicated benefit formulas extending some less-than-actuarially fair credits to those who
delay retirement, or allowing employed elderly to collect partial benefits, or both (the case, until this
year, for U.S. Social Security for elderly aged 65-69). But the more complicated formulas have
much the same effect as the simple one: elderly labor income is implicitly taxed.
        At least in higher income countries, the rates of implicit taxation are enormous. Although
an exact calculation of marginal tax rates is complicated due to nonlinearities and other details of
benefit formulas, the reason for the high rates is simple: the elderly must retire to obtain full benefits
and full benefits are typically a very large fraction of the earnings enjoyed if one does not retire.
Gruber and Wise (1999, Table 1, based on even more detailed computations of their coauthors)
attempt to quantify the rates of implicit taxation for 11 countries. According to their calculations
for the early 1990's, the “typical” implicit tax rate for “someone of retirement age” ranges from
roughly 20% for Japan, U.S., and Canada, to more than 80% for Belgium and the Netherlands.3
        Another way to appreciate the quantitative significance of the implicit taxation of elderly
labor income by public pension programs is to notice the prevalence of 100%(!) marginal tax rates.
Mulligan (1998) discusses in some detail a number of examples, including U.S. Social Security
benefit formulas between 1939 and 1971, under which retirees lost all of their Social Security benefit
if their earnings exceeded a rather low earnings limit by even one dollar. Other American examples
of 100% marginal tax rates can be found prior to the Social Security Act in U.S. state administered
Old Age Assistance programs, which typically implicitly taxed earnings at a 100 percent rate (Joint
Committee 1966, pp. 26-27). Spain has one of several international examples, where their elderly


        3
         Gruber and Wise point out that, in any one country, marginal implicit rates vary with
earnings, age, calendar year, and other variables. For a person of age t in the early 1990's, where
t is between the early retirement age (age 60 in 9 of the 11 countries they study) and 69, they
compute for a worker of median earnings the present value of public pension benefits foregone
by delaying retirement one year, and express it as a fraction of earnings (after income and payroll
taxes) for that year, a fraction τt which can be interpreted as an implicit tax rate. They sum τt
between the early retirement age and t = 69, and I divide their sum by the number of years in the
sum (10 years are in the sum for 9 of the 11 countries they study) to arrive at the “typical”
implicit tax rate for “someone of retirement age” reported in the text.

                                                    3
are not allowed to collect a government pension if they earn any labor income at all (Boldrin et al
1997 p. 16, SSA 1997 p. 330) and those benefits are typically close to or more than what the
pensioner would have earned after taxes if working (Boldrin et al 1997).
       Perhaps these implicit taxes are not distortionary, because they are not enforced or because
other government regulations prohibit people from changing their behavior in response to them?
There are two reasons to be skeptical of such a claim. First, Gruber and Wise (1999) show that
retirement behavior is highly correlated across countries and across age groups with the measured
incentives. Second, the stated purpose of the implicit tax provision is often to encourage retirement
(Sala-i-Martin 1996; Gruber and Wise 1999, p. 31).
       Pensions are not the only public programs encouraging retirement. “Disability insurance”
and “unemployment insurance” programs “essentially provide early retirement benefits before the
official social security early retirement age” (Gruber and Wise 1999, p. 9) in many countries. Tax-
favoring company pensions, mandatory defined benefit company pensions, and public health
insurance are some other government policies that may substantially induce retirement.


I.B Marginal (Implicit + Explicit) Tax Rates are Highest for the Old
       Perhaps it is unsurprising that public policies discourage work, since governments need to
raise revenue, or may want to assist the poor. But another feature of public pension programs, and
government policy in general, is that elderly work is discouraged more than young work. Hence,
while payroll tax rates are paid by young and old workers and can be large in many countries – more
than 10% in the U.S. and nearly 50% in Egypt, Italy, and the Netherlands – public pension benefit
formulas in many countries substantially reduce the incentive to work beyond its reduction due to
payroll and income taxation.
       Income taxes, payroll taxes, and public pension benefits are not the only public policies
discouraging work. Minimum wages, unemployment compensation, welfare payments, workweek
restrictions, and other policies have the effect of discouraging work, and a full analysis of public
policy and work incentives would include detailed calculations of the effects of these programs.
However, two observations strongly suggest that, taken together, the various public policies tax
elderly labor income at much higher marginal rates. First of all, a number of these programs – such


                                                 4
as unemployment and welfare – affect work incentives for both elderly and young people. Often
unemployment and welfare payments are most generous for the elderly, and implicitly tax elderly
labor earnings at higher rates. Indeed, the unemployment insurance programs in Belgium, Finland,
and other countries are hard to distinguish from public pension programs in terms of their
intergenerational incidence and their age profile of marginal tax rates.4 Second, it seems that,
because of public pension programs, the prevalence of 100% and near-100% marginal tax rates is
much higher among the elderly than among the young (as a consequence of tax and other policies)
and, as a result, work is so much more prevalent among the young.


I.C Pensions Designed this Way Have Existed for Many Decades
       For decades, Social Security benefit formulas have implicitly taxed labor income of the
elderly. To prove this, Mulligan (2000) constructs a data set for the years 1958, 1975, and 1995
based on SSA reports (SSA, various issues). It was somewhat more common internationally in 1958
and 1975 for benefit formulas to induce retirement with the simpler formula making retirement a
necessary condition for receiving public pension benefits (eg., the U.S. did so in 1958, but not in
1995). Delayed retirement credits and gradual phaseout of benefits with earnings were more
common in 1995, so it might be said that retirement was induced more dramatically in 1958 and
1975. However, the size of the benefit foregone by the elderly worker has grown over time relative
to what a retiree would have earned, so in this sense benefit formulas induce retirement more in
recent years. More research is required to determine exactly how the incentive to retire has changed
over the years in various countries, but it is clear that public pension benefits have for decades
provided an important incentive to retire.


II. The Basic Model


II.A. Tastes and Technology



       4
        For international examples, see SSA (1995) and Gruber and Wise (1999). Leimer (1998,
pp. 16-17) reports results for the American DI program.

                                                 5
        With these observations of public policies in mind, we ask whether publicly-induced
retirement can alleviate labor market frictions. We consider a simple one-period extension of the
standard Mortensen (1982) - Pissarides (2000) model. As in the standard search model of the labor
market, there are two groups of agents: workers and firms. Workers are heterogeneous in exactly
two dimensions. First, some workers are matched with an employer and some are unmatched. We
refer to workers that begin the period matched with employers as “old” workers and the initially
unemployed as “young” workers, and their population shares as λ and (1- λ), respectively. 5 Second,
workers also differ in their nonpecuniary costs of working.6 To be specific, we let γi represent the
cost of working for worker i. One may interpret this cost as the opportunity cost of working in terms
of lost leisure time. These costs of working may vary across cohorts. The cost of working for old
workers is described by the cumulative distribution function, F1(γ), while the cost for young workers
is described by F0 (γ). Both distributions have a lower support of 0. One interesting case has old
workers having a higher value of leisure time than young workers, so that F0 (γ) # F1(γ). We let the
productivity of each match be given by p. When worker i is matched with a firm, and work occurs,
the total surplus created is p - γi .
        Worker-firm matches are made in one of two ways. First, matches are part of the initial
conditions for so-called “old” workers. Second, a young worker can be matched with a firm, or a
unmatched firm with a young worker, by “search.” Job search costs s for each worker and, for


        5
       In Shimer (2001), all workers are infinitely-lived, but in each period a new generation of
workers are born."Young" workers are those who were born in the recent past. Since young
workers have had less time to participate in the labor market, they are more likely to be
unemployed than "older" workers.
        6
          Technically, this is a departure from the standard Mortensen-Pissarides model which
provides a straightforward calculation of a “retirement rate.” In the standard Mortensen-
Pissarides model, workers are heterogeneous only in their employment status. All workers
obtain the same utility from working and all the unemployed have the same value of leisure. Our
model also adds heterogeneity within and across the initially employed and unemployed groups
according to the way they value work (or leisure time). The across-group difference provides a
rationale for retirement – the utility cost of work for the initially unemployed (“young” workers)
is less than the utility cost of continued work for the initially employed group (“old” workers).
The within-group differences provide a rationale for retirement of some (but not all) of the old,
and thereby permiting calculation of a retirement rate in the interval (0,1).

                                                 6
simplicity, worker search costs nothing for firms. Jobs searchers and firms with vacancies are
brought together according to a matching technology M. The matching technology, M(U,V), denotes
the aggregate number of matches as a function of the aggregate number of searchers U and aggregate
number of vacancies V. The matching technology is stochastic and undiscriminating – namely, all
searchers enjoy the same ex ante probability of a match m = M/U and all employers posting a
vacancy enjoy the same ex- ante probability of a match M/V. Since the matching technology exhibits
constant returns to scale, we let m = m(θ) = M(1,V/U) where θ = V/U is the number of vacancies per
worker and therefore may be viewed as the degree of labor market tightness.
          Initial worker-firm matches can be dissolved, in which case there is no surplus associated
with the initial worker. We interpret this situation as “retirement,” with the retiree consuming leisure
and his former employer participating in the aforementioned matching process by posting his
vacancy. There are two possibilities in which young workers may consume leisure. The first, which
might be called “unemployment,” occurs when a worker searches for a job but does not find one.
The second, which might be called “out of the labor force” occurs when a worker does not search
at all.


II.B. Efficient Allocations
          An efficient allocation is the aggregate surplus-maximizing list of retirees, job searchers, and
firms posting vacancies, given the economy’s matching technology and the costs of searching. An
efficient allocation involves: (a) all unmatched employers posting their vacancies, (b) retirement for
the initially matched workers with high nonpecuniary costs of work (relative to the others initially
matched), and (c) job search among the initially unmatched workers with low nonpecuniary costs
of work (relative to the others initially unmatched).
               (      (
         Let γ and γ represent the planner’s choices for the critical values of the costs of working
               1      0
                                                           (         (         (        (
for the initially matched and unmatched respectively. Let Φ ' F1(γ ) and Φ ' F1(γ ) represent
                                                           1         1         0        0

the planner’s choices for the fractions of the initially matched and unmatched who retire and do not
search, respectively. The social surplus W in the economy is, as functions of the number of old
workers Φ1 and young searchers Φ0, given by:


                                                     7
                                      &1                           &1
                                     F1 (Φ1)                      F1 (Φ1)


                                       m                               m
                           W ' λ[              p dF1(γ) &                      γ dF1(γ) ] %
                                       0                               0

                                                     &1
                                                F0 (Φ0)


                                                      m
                                                              γ dF0 (γ)                       &1
                                                                                                                  (1)
                                                                                             F0 (Φ0)


                                                                                               m
                                                      0
             M((1 & λ) Φ0 , λ (1 & Φ1)) [ p &     &1
                                                                               ] & (1 & λ)             s dF0(γ)
                                                 F0 (Φ0)
                                                                                               0

                                                          m
                                                              dF0 (γ)
                                                          0




The first term is the aggregate surplus of the old, calculated by adding p - γ for each old person who
                              &1
works (i.e., who has γ < F1 (Φ1) ). The second term is the average surplus of successful young

searchers, whose quantity are M and whose average surplus is in square brackets. The final term is
the aggregate surplus of the unsuccessful young searchers, which is necessarily negative because they
end up paying the search cost without producing anything.
       From the above description of aggregate surplus, we can derive conditions for the efficient
amount of retirement and job search. Efficient retirement is described by:


                                                                       &1 (
                                                                   F      (Φ )
                                                 )                      0   0
                             &1 (    m     (
                                                                           m
                        p ' F (Φ ) %     [Φ p &                                  γ dF0(γ)]                        (2)
                              1 1     ( 0
                                     Φ                                     0
                                       0


The left-hand side represents the marginal social surplus of less retirement while the right-hand side
is the social marginal cost of less retirement. Of particular importance for our analysis is the last
term, which is the effect of retirement by the marginal worker on the surplus of inframarginal
workers because, as we show below, it will be ignored by a person choosing retirement solely to
maximize the joint surplus of he and his employer.
       The efficient amount of labor market participation by the young is given by:


                                                              8
                                                                           (
                                 &1  (                           λ (1 & Φ1 )
                         [p &   F0 (Φ0 )] m   ' [p & E0 γ]                      m) % s
                                                                            (
                                                                 (1 &   λ) Φ0
                                                  &1    (
                                                 F0 (Φ0 )                                         (3)
                                                   m
                                                            γ dF0(γ)
                                                    0
                                       E0 γ /
                                                             (
                                                            Φ0


The efficient choice of job search recognizes that the marginal searcher has probability m of finding
                                                                                (
a job and hence probability m of enhancing surplus by p minus γ0 . But there are two social costs

of search: the search cost s and the marginal searcher’s effect on the surplus of others. This second
cost is the product of the inframarginal searchers’ potential surplus (p-E0γ) and the effect θmN of
additional search on job finding by the inframarginal searchers.


II.C. Equilibrium Retirement, with Public Policy
       In this section, we seek to determine the equilibrium allocations of workers to jobs and the
unemployment rate, and model some simple public policies that might affect these decisions. We
suppose that the government can observe whether a worker is matched and producing, and levies a
tax T1 on (or, if T1 < 0, pays a subsidy to) each old person, regardless of his retirement status, and
a tax T0 on each young person. The government pays B1 to (or, if B1 < 0, taxes) old nonworkers (aka,
retirees) and B0 to young nonworkers.
       We follow those in the literature and suppose that the postfisc surplus derived from work is
split between workers and firms with shares β and (1- β), respectively. Each initially matched old
worker is assumed to decide jointly with his employer whether or not to retire. Each young agent,
initially unemployed, is assumed to decide on his own whether or not to search, based only on his
expected costs and benefits. In other words, the search decision is not made jointly by the young,
old, and the young’s ultimate employer, because the essence of the search friction is that searchers
and employers do not know who are their ultimate match partners. As we shall show, distortionary
public policy can in principle help coordinate some of these decisions.
       Given matching probabilities, the cost of searching, distributions of working costs,

                                                        9
government policy (B1, T1, B0, T0), and a sharing parameter β, an equilibrium allocation is a list of
retirees, job searchers, and firms posting vacancies, so that (i) the government budget balances, (ii)
a job searcher’s match probability is M(U,V)/U and an employee searcher’s match probability is
M(U,V)/V, where U and V are the population measure of job searchers and employee searchers,
respectively, (iii) a young person cannot improve his expected surplus by changing his decision to
search or not, and (iv) an old person and his employer cannot improve their joint expected surplus
by changing the old person’s retirement status.
                                                                                 (       (
       An equilibrium can be characterized algebraically as a pair of scalars Φ1 and Φ0 satisfying:

                                                  (
       (i)      λ T1 % (1 & λ) T0 ' λ ( 1 & Φ1 ) B1 % [1 & λ & M(U,V)] B0

                               (                      (
       (ii)     U ' (1 & λ) Φ0 , V ' λ (1 & Φ1 )

                      &1   (                M(U,V)
       (iii)    p & F1 (Φ1 ) ' B1 %                (1 & β) (p & E0 γ)
                                              V

                                   &1   (
       (iv)     B0 ' m β [p & F0 (Φ0 )] % (1 & m) B0 & s



where E0γ is the average cost of work among those young people searching for a job.
(i) is the government budget constraint, where taxes are collected from all persons and benefits are
paid to retirees and young nonworkers. (ii) accounts for U and V, the number of job searchers and
of job vacancies. (iii) defines the marginal retiree who, together with his original employer, is
indifferent between remaining employed and retiring (in which case benefit B1 is collected and a
vacancy is created). Notice that T0 and T1 do not enter (iii) because those particular taxes are
collected (subsidies paid) regardless of labor market status, while B1 is viewed as benefit of
retirement from the point of view of a potential retiree and his employer because it is a outside
source of income that, unlike T1, is paid only conditional on retirement. Potential retiree and
employer are maximizing joint surplus, so β enters (iii) only to the extent that it determines the
employer’s surplus after retirement. (iv) defines the marginal job searcher, who is indifferent
between the employment benefit and the expected proceeds from search.



                                                          10
This algebraic characterization (i)-(iv) of an equilibrium permits easy proofs of our two main
propositions.


Proposition 1 For any β, λ, s $ 0, any distribution functions F0(@) and F1(@), and any homogeneous
function M(@) defined on [0,1]2, there exists a government policy (T0,T1,B0,B1) consistent with an
efficient equilibrium.
Proof           We prove Proposition 1 by constructing a government policy that makes the efficient

Φ1 and Φ0 consistent with equilibrium. First, pick B1 ' [m ) & (1 & β) m U ] (p & E0 γ) , calculating
  (       (
                                                                              V


U, V, and E0γ from an efficient allocation. Plugging this into equilibrium condition (iii), we have
that    the     equilibrium      retirement      margin      is    efficie n t .     Second,      pick
         θm )                     s
B0 ' β        (p & E0 γ) & (1 & β) . Plugging this into equilibrium condition (iv), we have that the
          m                       m

equilibrium search margin is efficient. Third, pick any (T0,T1) satisfying the government budget
constraint for the (B0,B1) calculated above.


Proposition 2 If the elasticity of m(θ) is constant and equal to 1- β, then a government policy
consistent with an efficient equilibrium has B1 = 0, and B0 $ 0.


Proof           Use Proposition 1's formula for efficient B1 to show that it is zero when the elasticity
of m(θ) is constant and equal to 1- β. Use Proposition 1's formula for efficient B0, and the
equilibrium condition (iv), to show it is > (=) zero as the work cost of the marginal searcher is > (=)
the work cost of the average searcher.


Proposition 1 says that efficient allocations are consistent with equilibrium with the right government
policy. Proposition 2 explores a special case explored by Hosios (1990), where the sharing
parameter β is related to the elasticity of the matching function. Hosios finds that the supply of job
vacancies is efficient without taxes or transfers; we find that the supply of vacancies (aka, amount
of retirement) is efficient without any government distortion of the retirement margin. Efficient


                                                  11
search is induced by subsidizing young nonworkers, except in the special case (considered by
Hosios) where the average and marginal searcher have the same surplus from work.
        Propositions 1 and 2 are important for understanding the quantitative relationships between
search and retirement, so we explore them further. Notice that, from the social point of view, there
are three distortions of the equilibrium retirement decision. The first is the retirement subsidy (or
tax, if B1 < 0) seen on the right-hand-side of (iii). Second, the potential retiree and his employer put
some value on creating a vacancy according to the average match rate M/V. When M is
homogeneous, and the number of matches are at least somewhat elastic to the number unemployed,
the average match rate exceeds the marginal match rate MM/MV that is relevant from the social point
of view. This second distortion tends to cause employers (in agreement with their potential retirees)
to excessively encourage retirement. Third, equilibrium retirement decisions do not consider the
creation of surplus for the unemployed group, which is the product of the marginal match rate and
the average surplus β (p & E0 γ) for those matched. By itself, this third distortion means that an

equilibrium has too little retirement. The second distortion can overwhelm the third, as is the case
when β is small and/or the gap between marginal and average match rates is large, or vice versa. The
optimal retirement subsidy is positive when the third distortion dominates, and negative when the
second dominates.
        In order to isolate and quantitatively evaluate the third distortion, consider the limiting case
of a linear matching function M(U,V) = V. Search is very efficient in this limiting case, because all
vacancies costlessly find a match with probability one,7 although inefficient in an important sense
which we demonstrate below. Now equilibrium condition (iii) becomes (iii)N:
                              &1   (
                (iii)N   p & F1 (Φ1 ) ' B1 % (1 & β) (p & E0 γ)

(iii)N allows us to compute the efficient retirement subsidy (namely, that for which equilibrium and
planned retirement coincide) in this case: B1 ' β (p & E0 γ) . In words, the efficient retirement

subsidy is that surplus received by the employee who takes over the job of the retiree because that
future employee is not at the table when employer and potential retiree make the retirement decision.

        7
        For the sake of simplicity, we do not consider the case V > U, in which case the more
reasonable linear matching function would be M(U,V) = U.

                                                  12
Or, using the optimal retirement condition for the planner facing a linear matching function, we see
                                                                                                &1   (
that the optimal retirement subsidy equates the disutility of work of the marginal retiree ( F1 (Φ1 ) )

with the average disutility of work among the unemployed (E0γ).
       Although these formulas overstate the size of the optimal retirement subsidy that would be
optimal with other matching functions (see the second distortion above), we explore some of its
quantitative implications and use the results to clarify the more realistic calculation in Section III.
Namely, is the retirement subsidy optimal under linear matching of similar magnitude to observed
retirement subsidies? A precise answer requires precise estimates of the sharing parameter β and the
average disutility of work among the unemployed (E0γ), but notice how B1 ' β (p & E0 γ) implies

that an average young worker with a job who suffered a reduction in his after-tax earnings8 in the
amount B1 would still have a nonnegative surplus from working. Since it is likely that, in reality,
50-80% reductions in earnings would eliminate the surplus – and then some – from working for a
great many young workers (e.g., practically all women workers, if it is indeed the case that their labor
supply is wage elastic), it seems the retirement subsidies of 50% and above seen in several European
countries are excessive. Perhaps implicit elderly earnings tax rates on the order of 25-50% might
be optimal when the matching function is linear, since we might expect (and often observe) a lot of
young people to continue working even when wages are reduced by 25-50%.


III. Limits on the Optimal Retirement Incentive
       As long as the matching function is nonlinear, the formula B1 ' β (p & E0 γ) overstates the

optimal retirement subsidy because it ignores the negative effect of a retirement on the matching
success of other owners of vacant jobs. The optimal retirement subsidy for nonlinear matching
functions is shown above in the proof of Proposition 1, which we rewrite below:




       8
       Remember that a worker’s surplus is less than his earnings; earnings are computed in our
model by subtracting the employer surplus from worker productivity (ie, p - (1-β)(p-E0γ)).

                                                  13
                                    B1 ' ( β & α ) M (p & E0 γ)
                                                   V
                                                                                                   (4)
                                                   MM V
                                         α / 1&
                                                    MV M



The first two terms show exactly how the optimal retirement subsidy is less in the nonlinear case.
First, subtracted from β in parentheses is the elasticity of M with respect to U, which is proportional
to the gap between the average and marginal match rates (M/V and MM/MV). This first reduction can
be substantial, since α has been estimated in the range of 0.4 to 0.7.9 In other words, the worker’s
share β has to exceed 0.4 if the optimal retirement subsidy were even to be positive! With β = 0.5,
and the lower estimate of α = 0.4, the (β-α) alone is 80% smaller than β ((0.5-0.4)/0.5 = 0.2). In
other words, even if M/V were arbitrarily close to one, and E0γ were zero (so that β (p & E0 γ) were

as large as employee earnings), the optimal implicit tax on elderly earnings is only 20%. Most of
the countries studied by Gruber and Wise have implicit taxes in excess of this amount.
       The second term is M/V, which of course is less than one with the nonlinear matching
function, and reflects the fact that some retirements will create vacancies that go unmatched. To
quantify this term, we need to further parameterize our model, and carefully distinguish stocks from
flows. In particular, “additional” matches in our single period model are more realistically
interpreted as matches that occur more rapidly in the presence of an additional vacancy than they
would otherwise. In other words, all vacancies find a worker with very high probability if they wait
long enough. M/V < 1 is a way to capture, in our static model, the fact that a new vacancy can expect
to go unused for some period of time. If we let r denote the interest rate, t time, and δ the
instantaneous hazard at which a vacancy finds a match, a continuous-time expression for M/V is:




       9
       Blanchard and Diamond (1989) find α to be 0.4 for the U.S. and Layard, Nickell, and
Jackman (1991) find it to be 0.7 for the U.K.

                                                  14
                                  4                  4

                                  m                  m
                                           &δt
                                      δe              e & r s ds   dt
                                  0                  t                       δ
                                                                        '
                                             4                              r%δ
                                             m
                                              e & r t dt
                                                 0




For a vacancy with productive capacity one, the numerator is the expected present value of
production, accounting for the fact that a match may take some time to occur. The denominator is
the present value of production if the match were instantaneous. Since the expected duration of a
vacancy (1/δ) is measured in months,10 δ is much larger than r and, for quantitative purposes, we can
treat M/V as one.
       Table 1 presents calculations of the optimal retirement subsidy using the formula (4), and
various values for the parameters α, β, and E0γ. In order to facilitate comparisons with quantitative
studies of taxes and labor supply, we express the optimal subsidy, and work disutility, as fractions
of worker earnings. Worker earnings are computed in our model by subtracting the employer surplus
from worker productivity (ie, earnings are p - (1-β)(p-E0γ)).




       10
         Ours and G. Ridder’s (1992) calibration implies an average vacancy duration of about
45 days, while Blanchard and Diamond’s (1989) implies one month.

                                                          15
                          Table 1: The Optimal Tax Rate on Elderly Earnings
                               (B1/[p - (1-β)(p-E0γ)], assuming M/V . 1)


                                            young work disutility as a fraction of earnings,
                                                       E0γ/[p - (1-β)(p-E0γ)]
 alpha             beta                      0               0.2              0.4              0.6
 0.4               0.5                       0.20            0.16             0.12             0.08
 0.5               0.5                       0               0                0                0
 0.6               0.5                      -0.20            -0.16           -0.12             -0.08
 0.7               0.5                      -0.40            -0.32           -0.24             -0.16
 0.5               0.6                       0.17            0.13             0.10             0.07
 0.5               0.7                       0.29            0.23             0.17             0.11
 0.5               0.8                       0.38            0.30             0.22             0.15
 0.5               0.9                       0.44            0.36             0.27             0.18
 0.5               1.0                       0.50            0.40             0.30             0.20


         The upper left cell reports the calculation discussed above: the optimal implicit tax rate is
20% when α = 0.4, β = 0.5, and E0γ = 0. The top half of the table shows how the optimal rate falls
with α and E0γ. The bottom half fixes α = 0.5, and varies the employee’s share β. Optimal tax rates
are small unless we use β well in excess of 0.5. Even β = 1 cannot justify elderly implicit tax rates
in excess of 50%, as observed in a number of European countries.


IV. Conclusions
         Many countries around the world use public policy, especially social security programs, to
induce their elder citizens to retire. An important motive behind such policy is to create job
vacancies that can be occupied by the young. In this paper, we seek to evaluate the strength of the
foundations underlying this rhetoric. To that end, we produce a relatively-standard search model
with young and old workers and firms. That model allows for the possibility of significant frictions
in the process of matching workers with firms. We ask whether policy-induced retirement can be


                                                    16
part of an efficient labor market search and matching equilibrium. In other words, is there really any
reason for governments to intervene in elderly labor markets on behalf of the young and the
unemployed? Even when the model exhibits significant frictions, and inefficient labor market
allocations without government intervention, it may be the case that there is too much retirement,
in which case the optimal policy discourages retirement rather than encourage it. Other versions of
the model imply that efficient equilibria are supported with no government subsidies (social security)
to the elderly. Still other cases imply that an efficient equilibrium can be supported with a positive
subsidy to the old, but that its size is much smaller than what real-world governments routinely
provide. This is primarily because the planner takes into account the negative effect on aggregate
matching possibilities of an additional vacancy, an effect the empirical literature suggests to be
strong. The social security rhetoric, on the other hand, ignores this effect, over-emphasizing the
beneficial effects of an additional vacancy on those searching for jobs. In short, many societies
excessively induce retirement by the elderly, at least from the standpoint of efficiency as understood
in standard search models.




                                                 17
V. References


Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Peter Diamond. “The Beveridge Curve.” Brookings Papers on
       Economic Activity. I, 1989: 1-60.
Broersma, Lourens and Jan C. Van Ours. “Job Searchers, Job Matches, and the Elasticity of
       Matching.” Labour Economics. 6, 1999: 77-93.
DeWitt, Larry. “The History and Development of the Social Security Retirement Earnings Test.”
       Mimeo, Social Security Administration, August 1999.
Gruber, Jonathan and David Wise, eds. Social Security Programs and Retirement Around the
       World. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER, forthcoming, 1999.
Hosios, Arthur J.     “On the Efficiency of Matching and Related Models of Search and
       Unemployment.” Review of Economic Studies. 57(2), April 1990: 279-98.
Layard, Richard, Stephen Nickell, and Richard Jackman.          Unemployment: Macroeconomic
       Performance and the Labour Market. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991.
Leimer, Dean R. “Historical Redistribution Under the Social Security Disability Insurance
       Program.” SSA ORES working paper series no. 77, July 1998.
Mortensen, Dale T. “Property Rights and Efficiency in Mating, Racing, and Related Games.”
       American Economic Review 72: 968-79, 1982.
Mulligan, Casey B. “The 100% Tax in Theory and Practice.” Working paper, University of
       Chicago, November 1998.
Mulligan, Casey B. “Can Monopoly Unionism Explain Publicly Induced Retirement.” NBER
       Working Paper #7680, April 2000.
Mulligan, Casey B. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. “Gerontocracy, Retirement, and Social Security.”
       NBER Working Paper #7117, May 1999a.
Mulligan, Casey B. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. “Social Security in Theory and Practice I: Facts and
       Political Theories.” NBER Working Paper #7118, May 1999b.
Mulligan, Casey B. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. “Social Security in Theory and Practice II: Efficiency
       Theories and Implications for Reform.” NBER Working Paper #7119, May 1999c.
Pissarides, Christopher A Equilibrium Unemployment Theory, MIT Press 2nd ed, 2000.


                                                18
Roosevelt, Franklin D. The Public Papers and Addresses of Franklin Roosevelt, Vol.4 (1935). New
       York: Random House Press, 1938.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier X. “A Positive Theory of Social Security.” Journal of Economic Growth.
       (1)2, June 1996: 277-304.
Social Security Retirement Test, Hearing Before the Subcommittee on Social Security of the
       Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives. Serial 102-28. May 23,
       1991. Government Printing Office. 1991.
Van Ours, Jan and Geert Ridder. “Vacancies and the Recruitment of New Employees.” Journal of
       Labor Economics. 10(2), April 1992: 138-55




                                              19
