NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

POLLUTION CONTROL INNOVATIONS AND THE CLEAN AIR ACT OF 1990
David Popp
Working Paper 8593
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8593
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2001

The author thanks Jay Coggins for a helpful discussion that inspired this paper, Adam Jaffe, Stuart
Bretschneider, Jan Ondrich, John Yinger, David Driesen, and participants at the January 2001 AEA-AERE
joint session on Technological Change and the Environment for helpful comments, and Brant Brown for
dutiful research assistance. As usual, all errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2001 by David Popp. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990
David Popp
NBER Working Paper No. 8593
November 2001
JEL No. O33, Q00, Q25, Q28, Q48

ABSTRACT
Although economists cite potential gains from induced innovation as an advantage of using
market-based mechanisms to protect the environment, counts of patents related to flue gas desulfurization
units (“scrubbers”) peaked before trading of sulfur dioxide (SO2) permits began. This paper uses plant
level data to study the effect of these patents on pollution control. I find that requiring plants constructed
before 1990 to install scrubbers created incentives for innovation that would lower the costs of operating
scrubbers. There is little evidence that the new patents created before 1990 improved the ability of
scrubbers to more effectively control pollution. However, patents granted during the 1990s, when
market-based mechanisms were in place, do serve to improve the removal efficiency of scrubbers.

David Popp
Department of Public Administration
Center for Environmental Policy Administration
Center for Technology and Information Policy
The Maxwell School
Syracuse University
400 Eggers Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244-1090
and NBER
Tel: 315-443-2482
Fax: 315-443-1075
Email: dcpopp@maxwell.syr.edu
Home page: http://faculty.maxwell.syr.edu/dcpopp/index.html

Economists cite potential gains from induced innovation as one of the advantages of
using market-based mechanisms over command and control (CAC) policies to protect the
environment. Several theoretical papers, such as Milliman and Prince (1989, 1992) and Magat
(1978) have demonstrated the advantages of market-based mechanisms for inducing
technological innovation. Recent empirical work, such as Popp (2001), Newell et al. (1999),
Jaffe and Palmer (1997), and Lanjouw and Mody (1996), demonstrates that environmental
innovation does indeed respond to incentives such as prices or regulation. However, there is no
empirical work containing a direct comparison of innovation between a command and control
and market-based policy regime. Using data on coal-fired electric utilities from before and after
passage of the 1990 Clean Air Act, this paper attempts to fill that gap.
One of the most prominent examples of a market-based environmental policy is the
trading of sulfur dioxide (SO2) allowances created by the 1990 Clean Air Act (CAA). In this
paper, I combine data on steam-electric power plants provided by the Energy Information
Administration (EIA) with data on patents granted in the United States to look at innovations in
pollution control for power plants before and after the 1990 CAA. Contrary to theoretical
predictions, patent counts related to SO2 pollution control technologies, such as smokestack
scrubbers, are higher before the 1990 CAA. In this paper, I argue that this empirical fact is not
inconsistent with the theoretical prediction that market-based environmental regulations induce
more innovation. Rather, I show that the change to a market-based policy in 1990 did not
necessarily lead to more innovation, as measured by patent counts, but did lead to more
environmentally-friendly innovation, as measured by the effect of the new innovations on air
quality.

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

2

Before the CAA of 1990, plants were required to use the best available technology for
pollution control, which was often a scrubber. As a result, there were incentives for innovation
that would lower the costs of installing and operating scrubbers. However, there would be little
incentive for innovations to improve the efficiency of the scrubbers’ ability to actually remove
pollutants. Theoretical models of induced innovation and environmental policy typically do not
distinguish between these two types of innovation. Matching patent data with data from the EIA
on installation costs, operating costs, and removal efficiencies of the scrubbers, this paper looks
for changes in the types of innovation that were taking place before and after the Clean Air Act
of 1990. I show that patents granted before 1990 had no effect on removal efficiency, but did
lower the operating cost of scrubbers. In contrast, patents granted during the 1990s not only
lowered operating costs, but also increased the removal efficiency of scrubbers. Thus, although
the level of innovation did not change upon the introduction of the market-based permit trading
policy, the nature of innovation did.
Previous empirical work on pollution control technologies for coal-fired electric utilities
includes Bellas (1998) and Carlson et al. (2000). Looking at scrubbers installed by 1992, Bellas
finds no significant evidence of technological change in abatement technology. In contrast,
Carlson et al. find that about 20%, or $50, of the change in marginal abatement costs that have
occurred from 1985 to 1995 can be attributed to technological change. Since Bellas sample
includes few scrubbers installed after passage of the 1990 CAA, and none installed after trading
in SO2 permits began, the results of these two papers are consistent with economic theory, which
predicts that market based policies induce more technological change. However, the results are
inconsistent with the observation that pollution control patents and R&D activity is highest
during the early 1980s. One possible explanation for this discrepancy is that both papers simply

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

3

use a time trend to represent technological change. The use of a time trend may not accurately
reflect changes in technology, as there are variations in patenting and R&D efforts over time. By
using patent data, I can more accurately model the progress of innovation that may have occurred
in scrubber technology. In particular, I use the patents to observe changes in the types of
research done in each policy era. Furthermore, by using data through 1997, I am able to compare
changes in technological progress before and after passage of the 1990 Clean Air Act.

I. History of Environmental Regulations Facing Utilities1
Before the 1990 Clean Air Act established the sulfur dioxide permit market, electric
utilities faced command and control regulations that focused on pollution control technology.
Regulation of sulfur dioxide emissions began with the 1970 Clean Air Act, which listed SO2 as
one of six criteria pollutants. The 1970 Clean Air Act required the EPA to establish “national
ambient air quality standards” (NAAQS) for such pollutants at levels that would ensure the
public health and welfare. Once the NAAQS were set by the EPA, states were to develop a plan,
known as a “state implementation plan” (SIP) for attaining the required standards. Although the
EPA has the authority to review a state’s SIP, each state was given freedom to choose how it
would attain the emissions goals required by the NAAQS (Martineau et al, 1997).
The criteria used by the EPA to evaluate SIPs were technology-based. Because Congress
was concerned that retrofitting older sources of pollution would be costly, they instead instructed
the EPA to require that new sources meet more stringent pollution control standards. The EPA
listed 61 sources that contribute significantly to air pollution, and required these sources to
satisfy “new source performance standards” (NSPS). Among these sources were fossil fuel fired

1

Table 1 provides a summary of the key regulations facing coal-fired steam-electric power plants.

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

4

steam boilers for which construction began after August 17, 1971, which were covered under
NSPS Subpart D (NSPSD). NSPSD required that newly constructed utilities, or existing units
undergoing modification or reconstruction, meet minimum emission standards. The standards
were to be set based on the best technology that had been “adequately demonstrated.” Since
NSPSD was set at the national level, it was an exception to the rule that states were given
freedom to implement individual SIPs.

However, regulations in the SIPs that were more

stringent than NSPSD took precedent, so that the national NSPSD standards can be seen as
minimum standards to be met (Ellerman et al. 1997). The Act required NSPS standards to be
reviewed every four years (Brownell & Zeugin 1991).
NSPS Subpart Da (NSPSDa) of the 1977 Clean Air Act, which covers boilers for which
construction commenced after September 18, 1978, clarified the national standards for sulfur
dioxide and added an additional technology requirement for electric utilities. Most importantly,
the 1977 amendments required that most new coal-burning plants use flue gas desulfurization
units (FGD units, or “scrubbers”) to remove 90% of SO2 emissions from their exhaust.2 The
intent of the requirement was to protect the jobs of miners in states with high-sulfur coal by
making it less likely that utilities would meet the Clean Air Act’s emission requirements by
switching to low-sulfur coal. (Brownell and Zeugin 1991).
The 1977 amendments also added new technology-based standards. First, major new
sources of pollution required “prevention of significant deterioration” (PSD) permits. The list of
major new sources includes fossil-fueled fired steam electric plants or boilers totaling more than
250 million BTU/HR heat (Brownell & Zeugin 1991). To receive a PSD permit, the applicant

2

Specifically, plants needed to either achieve emission rates less than 1.2 lbs SO2/million Btu heat input and reduce
90 percent of their pre-treated emissions (a 90% removal efficiency) or achieve emission rates less than 0.6 lbs
SO2/million Btu heat input and achieve 70% removal efficiency.

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

5

must show that the “best available control technology” (BACT) will be used for each pollutant
emitted. Finally, the EPA set more stringent guidelines for air quality control regions that were
not in attainment of the NAAQS. SIPs for nonattainment areas required permits for new or
modified pollution sources. At a minimum, the permit program must require that these sources
install pollution control equipment designed to achieve the “lowest achievable emission rate”
(LAER). Furthermore, existing sources in nonattainment areas could be required to install
“reasonably available control technology” (RACT) (Brownell & Zeugin 1991).
Unfortunately, the concept of best available control technology was not well-defined by
the EPA. The 1977 CAA stated that BACT limits would be determined on a case-by-case basis.
Determination of the BACT should consider energy, environmental, and economic impacts.
However, the relative weight assigned to each factor was to be determined by individual states.
The burden of the BACT analysis was placed on the permit applicant. To demonstrate that the
chosen technology was the BACT, the applicant had to show that alternative technologies with
more stringent pollution control would cause “unreasonable adverse energy, environmental, or
economic impacts.” (U.S. EPA 1978) For example, a slightly more stringent control technology
could be ruled out if the economic or energy costs of the technology are significantly greater.
Economic impacts considered could include investment costs, operations and maintenance costs,
and annualized costs of operations and maintenance plus depreciation. In addition, applicants
could consider impacts on the local economy. For example, if a region suffered from high
unemployment, a more stringent control technology could be ruled out if it would lead to a loss
of jobs (U.S. EPA 1978).
In 1987, EPA guidelines on BACT changed to focus on the most stringent control
available. The 1987 guidelines, known as “the Potter memorandum,” instituted a top-down

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

6

approach to BACT analysis. Applicants must begin by determining the most stringent control
technology available.

That technology could only be ruled out if it can be shown to be

technically or economically infeasible. If it was ruled out, the applicant was to proceed to the
next most stringent control technology, and so on, until a technology that could not be ruled out
is found (Brownell & Zeugin 1991). The top-down approach made the BACT requirement
similar to the “lowest achievable emission rate” (LAER) requirements for new sources in nonattainment areas. A LAER technology must be at least as stringent as any technology in use in
any state. The costs of such technology could be considered, but only if the costs were so high
that they would prohibit the new source from operating at all (Brownell & Zeugin, 19991).
The 1990 amendments to the Clean Air Act (1990 CAA) changed the regulation of
electric utilities’ SO2 emissions from a command and control approach to a market-based
approach. It also changed the focus from state-based implementation plans to one aggregate
national emissions limit to be met. The 1990 amendments repealed the requirement that 90% of
SO2 emissions at coal-burning plants be scrubbed. Instead, Title IV of the 1990 CAA introduced
tradable SO2 emissions allowances. Starting in 1995, Phase I utilities3 were required to have
permits for each ton of SO2 emitted. In Phase I, allowances were allocated to allow each
affected utility to emit 2.5 lbs/mmBtu per year.

Firms that were not able to meet this

requirement could emit more if they purchased additional permits from a plant that was able to
reduce emissions by more than the required amount. Total allowances equaled 8.7 million tons.
For comparison, these plants emitted 9.3 tons of SO2 in 1985 (Ellerman et al., 1997). Firms
could receive additional allowances if they installed “qualifying control technologies” that
reduce a plant’s SO2 emissions by at least 90 percent. (Martineau & Novello 1997)

3

Phase I utilities include the 263 dirtiest utilities, based on 1985 emissions levels.

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

7

Because plants were no longer required to install scrubbers, they could choose the most
cost effective methods to reduce emissions. Ellerman et al. (1997) estimate that 45.1% of
reductions in 1995 came from SO2 scrubbing, with the remaining 54.9% coming from switching
to other fuels, such as low sulfur coal.
Phase II of Title IV begins in the year 2000. Phase II expands the permit trading program
by including most existing or new plants. Over 2000 plants are now included. Aggregate annual
emissions are limited to 8.95 million tons – roughly 50% of 1980 emissions levels (Ellerman et
al. 1997).

II. Innovation levels before and after the 1990 CAA
A large body of environmental economic literature has demonstrated the benefits that
market-based mechanisms have for inducing research and development (R&D) on
environmentally friendly technologies.

These models universally predict that market based

environmental policies will induce more innovation than command and control policies.
However, each of these papers focuses only on the overall level of innovation.
In this paper, I use patent data to look for changes in the nature of the R&D performed.
Even though the best available control technology policy of NSPSD and NSPSDa provides no
incentives for firms to develop scrubbers that exceed the removal efficiency requirements, there
were incentives to perform research designed to reduce the costs of these scrubbers.4 Since firms
were required to install scrubbers, such research would reduce the costs of compliance with the
BACT regulations.

4

Not only is there no reward for exceeding the standard, if regulators respond to technological advances by
increasing the standard (the ratchet effect), there may actually be a disincentive to develop new technologies. The
ratchet effect hypothesis is not explored in this paper.

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

8

Cost-reducing innovations would still be beneficial in a permit trading market. Permit
markets work by taking advantage of differences in marginal abatement costs across firms.
Thus, firms that could lower their marginal abatement costs would benefit by being able to sell
pollution allowances to firms with higher marginal abatement costs. However, firms could also
have additional permits to sell if they used pollution abatement technology that removed more
pollution.

Thus, there are incentives for innovation to increase the removal efficiency of

scrubbers in the market-based policy regime. This additional incentive suggests the following
two hypotheses to be tested in the empirical work that follows:
1) Innovation under the command and control regime should have focused on lowering
costs, rather than increasing efficiency.
2) Innovation after passage of the 1990 CAA may focus on either lowering operating
costs or increasing removal efficiency.
I begin by looking at the level of innovative activity in sulfur dioxide pollution control.
To measure the level of innovative activity, I use U.S. patents related to sulfur dioxide pollution
control. To identify such patents, I use the classification and subclassification assigned to each
patent by the U.S. Patent Office. These classifications describe the type of invention represented
by the patent. I began by identifying classifications that were related to SO2 pollution control.
These are shown in Table 2. Then, using data available on Lexis/Nexis, I identified all patents in
these classifications from 1900 to 1997.

In addition, using data from a set of CD-ROMs

produced by MicroPatent, I obtained additional details on pollution control patents granted since
1975, including the application date and country of origin.
The use of patent data to measure innovative activity offers several advantages. The
biggest advantage of patent data is that, unlike other data on inventive activity, such as R&D

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990
expenditures, patent data is available in highly disaggregated forms.

9
General data on air

pollution expenditures in the U.S. are available since 1972. However, it is not possible to tell
how much of this R&D effort went towards SO2 pollution control. Furthermore, using patent
data allows me to construct a longer time series, as historical patent data is available since 1793.
Nonetheless, when working with patent data, it is important to be aware of its limitations.
The existing literature on the benefits and drawbacks of using patent data is quite large.5 An
important concern is that the quality of individual patents varies widely. Some inventions are
extremely valuable, whereas others are of almost no commercial value. This is partly a result of
the random nature of the inventive process. Accordingly, the results of this paper are best
interpreted as the effect of an “average” patent, rather than any specific invention.
Another potential pitfall is that the propensity to patent new inventions may have
changed over time. If this is the case, using patents rather than R&D to measure innovative
activity misstates the returns to R&D. Historically, the ratio of patents to R&D expenditures has
fallen in the United States (as well as in other industrialized nations). Some researchers, most
notably Evenson (1991), consider the falling ratio to be evidence of diminishing returns to
R&D.6 The intuition is that, as researchers continue to search for new ideas, it gets harder and
harder to find something yet to be discovered. Similarly, Kortum and Lerner (1998) argue that a
recent upswing in patenting activity in the United States is due to the increasing fertility of new
research opportunities. Other researchers, most notably Griliches (1989), claim that research
opportunities have not declined. Griliches argues that the fall in the patent-to-R&D ratio is due to
changes in the willingness of inventors to patent new inventions. An exogenous fall in the
5

Griliches (1990) provides a useful survey.
Here, diminishing returns to research refers to the expected return on the inputs to the research process, not the
returns to the output. The notion that there are increasing returns to the output of knowledge, usually attributed to the
public good nature of knowledge, is by no means compromised by claiming that the inputs to research experience
6

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

10

willingness to patent – caused, for example by changes in patent laws that affect the benefits of
holding a patent – would result in a falling patent-to-R&D ratio even if the productivity of
research spending remained the same.
Acknowledging these concerns, a first look at the data suggests that the 1990 CAA had
little effect on innovative activity. Figure 1 shows an index of the percentage of successful
patent applications related to SO2 control per year, as well as an index of air pollution R&D
expenditures, taken from the U.S Department of Commerce (1994). Only patents granted to U.S.
applicants are considered, as these would be the inventors most influenced by changes in
American environmental regulations. Application data is available for patents granted since
1975. Patents are sorted by their year of application because several researchers have found that
patent applications are highly correlated with levels of R&D expenditures. Thus, the year of the
patent application is a good proxy for when the R&D occurred (Griliches 1990). Since a patent
application is only made public when a patent is granted, the data have been scaled up to account
for patents applied for but not yet granted.7 I use a percentage of successful applications, rather
than a raw count, to adjust for changes in patenting activity due to growth in the economy and
changes in the propensity of inventors to file for patent protection.8 Note that both general air
pollution R&D expenditures and SO2 pollution control patents fall over time. In addition, there
is no upswing in innovative activity after passage of the Clean Air Act in 1990.9
diminishing returns. Diminishing returns to research simply implies that it becomes more and more difficult to
develop new inventions as time progresses.
7
To scale the data, I first find the distribution of the lag between application and grant for all patents granted in the
U.S. Using this distribution, the percentage of patents remaining to be granted after 1997 was calculated for each
application year and added to the data.
8
That is, if the propensity to patent has fallen because of exogenous changes to patent law, both the numerator and
the denominator of the percentage will be equally affected.
9
One additional concern is that, if there are diminishing returns to R&D, patenting activity could be falling even
though inventors perceive other incentives to perform R&D, such as environmental policy, to be greater. To check
this, I used regression analysis on policy variables and a time trend to account for diminishing returns. The results
showed no significant increase to inventive activity after passage of the Clean Air Act, although the fit of the
regressions is poor. Results of these regressions are available from the author on request.

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

11

III. Did Pollution Control Innovations Control Pollution?
The patent data presents a puzzle. Although economic theory predicts that market-based
environmental policies should induce innovation, there is less innovation on scrubbers after the
1990 CAA. It is possible that there are other mitigating factors that discouraged R&D. For
example, permit prices were lower than initially predicted. Early predictions were that permits
would sell for $250-$350 per ton during Phase I, and over $500 per ton during Phase II.
However, actual prices fell quickly, approaching, and sometimes even falling below, $100 per
ton (Joskow et al. 1998). Since one of the benefits of developing a more efficient pollution
control technology is that it enables plants to sell permits to other plants with less effective
technology, decreases in the price of pollution permits would lower the incentive to do R&D.
More importantly, the 1990 CAA allowed utilities more flexibility to control SO2
emissions. Other researchers have noted that, as a result of falling prices, many utilities shifted
to low sulfur coal during the early 1990’s.10 Prices for low-sulfur coal fell dramatically during
the late 1980s and early 1990s due to deregulation of railroads, which lowered the shipping costs
of low-sulfur coal.11 Thus, these utilities would be able to meet their emissions reduction targets
without needing to invest in new technologies. In contrast, before the 1990 CAA, new utilities
were required to install a scrubber with a minimum 90% removal efficiency. Although there was
no reward for improving the removal efficiency of the scrubber (that is, the percentage of sulfur
dioxide that the scrubber removes from smokestack emissions), there was incentive for
innovations that lowered costs of scrubbers, as such innovations lowered the cost of complying
with the regulation.
10

See, for example, Ellerman et al.(1997) or Carlson et al. (2000).

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

12

In this section, I test the hypothesis that incentives for the type of innovation changed
after passage of the 1990 CAA.

I ask whether the innovations that occurred in scrubber

technology had an effect on the removal efficiency of the scrubbers – that is, did the innovations
actually help to improve pollution control. I also check to see whether this effect is constant over
time, or whether effect of new innovations changed after passage of the 1990 CAA.
Data on the plants included in this section comes from the Steam-Electric Plant Operation
and Design Report (FORM EIA-767). This report contains data from an annual survey of all
U.S. power plants with a total existing or planned steam-electric generator nameplate rating of at
least 10 megawatts (MW). Results of these surveys are available from the Energy Information
Administration for the years 1985 to l997. The survey includes comprehensive data on electric
power plants, including the fuels burned, their operating and capital expenditures, environmental
regulations that they are under, and their pollution control activities. Of particular interest for
this paper is data on the flue gas desulfurization unit (FGD unit, or scrubber) used by coalburning plants.
The data set includes 193 plants that use coal as their primary fuel and have an FGD unit.
For each of these units, the data set contains, among other things, the year the scrubber went on
line, the removal efficiency of the scrubber, the operating and maintenance costs of the scrubber,
and the costs of installing the scrubber. Of these, scrubbers with efficiency ratings less than or
equal to 50 percent were removed from the data set, as such scrubbers, which were still being
installed as late as 1994, do not represent the latest in technological advances. Also, to insure
that the data on pollution control regulations from Form 767 is consistent with the regulations
faced by the plants when the scrubber was installed, I delete observations for which the current

11

Most low-sulfur coal comes from the remote areas of the western U.S., and is thus not located near many power
plants.

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

13

regulations took affect more than three years after the scrubber went online.12 This leaves 180
FGD units for analysis.
Table 3 lists the variables used in this section and their descriptive statistics.13 The
variables in the last section of the table represent regulations faced by the plants when the
scrubber went on-line. Note that each type of regulation is faced by only a subset of the plants,
as the regulations may be imposed by federal, state, or local authorities.14 NSPSD and NSPSDa
are dummy variables equal to one if the plant is covered by each of these federal regulatory
regimes. CAA90 is a dummy variable equal to one for plants that went on-line in the 1990s.
The no policy dummy covers those plants for which construction commenced before August 17,
1971, and are thus not affected by any of these three federal clean air policy regimes.
In addition, Figure 2 plots the average removal efficiency of new scrubbers per year, as
well as a three-year moving average.

The figure is divided into three policy regimes,

corresponding with the 1970 CAA, the 1977 CAA, and the 1990 CAA. Note that the average
removal efficiency rises during the NSPSD period before leveling off during NSPSDa. This is
the period in which newly constructed coal-fired plants were required to install FGD units with
90% removal efficiency ratings.15 During the NSPSDa period, there was little incentive to install
a scrubber with a removal efficiency rating exceeding 90%. However, the average once again
increases after passage of the 1990 CAA. Particularly striking is that the moving average in the
NSPSDa era is nearly flat. One the desired removal efficiency is met, there is little incentive for
12

I assume that plants that brought scrubbers online within three years of when the regulations took affect could
have been anticipating the regulatory changes that took place.
13
Data on the price of low-sulfur coal is an average of the delivered price of low-sulfur coal per year, taken from
the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission’s Form 423, Monthly Cost and Quality of Fuels for Electric Plants.
Prices are in 1982 dollars, and are deflated using the producer price index for electric power.
14
In the data sample, states imposed 63% of regulations, the federal government imposed 32%, and local
governments imposed 5%.

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

14

plants to exceed the standard. In contrast, the moving average steadily increases after passage of
the 1990 CAA, suggesting that technological innovation plays an important role in this era.
Table 4 provides additional data on the scrubbers installed in each policy regime. The
top table shows the number of scrubbers of varying removal efficiencies installed under each
policy regime, and the second shows the percentage of scrubbers of varying removal efficiencies
installed under each regime. No policy represents scrubbers for which construction commenced
before August 17, 1971, and CAA90 represents plants that went online in 1990 or later, and were
not subject to either NSPSD or NSPSDa regulations. Note that 44% of FGD units installed under
NSPSDa exactly met the 90% removal efficiency standard. Only 17% exceeded the standard.
Of the 16 plants that installed scrubbers with removal efficiency ratings below 90%, 14 had SO2
emission rates less than 0.6 lbs per million Btu heat input, and thus only required to install
scrubbers with 70% removal efficiency ratings. Only 2 plants appear to be in violation of the
NSPSDa requirements.

Converesely, during the CAA90 era, 73% of scrubbers installed

achieved removal efficiencies of at least 95%.
My goal is to see how the knowledge embodied in SO2 pollution control patents affected
the removal efficiency of scrubbers. For this, I first construct a stock of pollution control
knowledge. I begin with a count of all patents related to SO2 pollution control from 1900 to
1997. To construct the stock of knowledge, I use a rate of decay, represented by β1, to capture
the obsolescence of older patents. Over time, the knowledge embodied in a patent becomes
obsolete, as new and better inventions take its place. In addition, it takes time for the knowledge
embodied in a new patent to spread throughout the economy. A new patent represents invention,
the first step in technological change. Before it can have an effect on the economy, the new
15

Because some plants received exceptions for having SO2 emissions rates below 0.6 lbs/million Btus of heat input,
and because construction on some plants going online during this period commenced before the NSPSDa starting

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990
invention represented by a patent must be developed for commercial use.
development is known as innovation.

15
This stage of

By measuring the effect of knowledge on removal

efficiency, I am measuring the results of this commercialization, rather than simply the benefits
of discovery of the new invention. Thus, the stock of knowledge also includes a rate of diffusion,

β2, to capture delays in the flow of knowledge. Defining s as the number of years before the
current year, the stock of knowledge at time t is written as:
∞

K t = ∑ e − β1 ( s ) (1 − e − β 2 ( s +1) ) PATt − s .

(1)

s =0

The rate of diffusion is multiplied by s+1 so that diffusion is not constrained to be zero in the
current period. To test whether there is a change in the type of research done after passage of the
1990 CAA, I also create a second knowledge stock that includes only patents granted in or after
1990:
∞

K t90 = ∑ e − β1 ( s ) (1 − e − β 2 ( s +1) ) PATt − s * dum90 t − s ,

(2)

s =0

where dum90 is a dummy variable equal to one if year t-s ≥ 1990. Thus, Kt90 picks up any
additional effect that patents granted since 1990 have compared to patents granted prior to 1990.
To illustrate the effect of various rates of decay and diffusion, Figure 3 shows the weight
placed on each patent x years after its grant date. The decay rate is constant across each row, and
the rate of diffusion is constant down each column. Note that patents have a more immediate
impact when the rates of decay and diffusion are high. Figure 4 shows the actual stocks over
time for various rates of decay and diffusion. Panel A varies the rate of decay, and panel B
varies the rate of diffusion.

date, the average is slightly below 90%.

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

16

Because in any given year, units going online are affected by different policy regimes, I
use regression analysis to control for other factors influencing the decision to install a scrubber
with a given removal efficiency rating. I include the stock of knowledge as an explanatory
variable in a regression of the removal efficiency of FGD units. In addition, I include dummy
variables for the federal SO2 policy regime affecting the unit,16 and variables representing any
emissions limits in place at the time the unit went on line, such as the maximum rate of SO2
emissions allowed, and on the price of low sulfur coal.17 Because the knowledge stock is likely
correlated with policies in place at the time the scrubber went online, I use a two-stage
estimation strategy.

First, for any year t in which a scrubber was installed, I regress the

knowledge stock on policy and price variables that influence the evolution of technology.18
These results give me predicted values for the knowledge stocks, KiP and KiP90, for each year
from 1972-1997.
I use the predicted values of the knowledge stock in the following regression. Defining
REMEFF as the removal efficiency of the FGD unit, POLICY as a vector of policy variables, D
is a vector of dummy variable equal to one when a specific policy affects plant i, PLSC as the
price of low sulfur coal in the year the scrubber went on line, and d as a dummy variable equal to
one for years greater than or equal to 1990, I estimate the following equation:
(3)

REMEFFi = α + βKiP + γ.KiP90 + χPLSC + ηPOLICYi ϕD.POLICYi+ εi,t

For each observation, I use the predicted value of knowledge for the year in which the scrubber
was installed.
16

The dummy variables represent the four regimes in Table 3, plus an additional dummy for plants covered by
NSPSDa that only need to install a scrubber with 70% removal efficiency. The excluded dummy variable in the
regressions is CAA90.
17
Because each type of limit is only in force for a subset of the plants, for each regulation type I also include for
dummy variables equal to one when a plant is affected by the regulation.

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

17

To estimate the model, I first create a predicted knowledge stock for a given value of β1
and β2. Once the knowledge stock has been created, equation (3) is linear in parameters.19 The
results are corrected for autocorrelation.20
Table 5 presents results of the regression for a decay rate of 0.1 and a rate of diffusion of
0.25.21 As expected, variables affecting low sulfur coal, which can serve as a substitute for
scrubbing, have positive effects. More efficient scrubbers are installed when the price of low
sulfur coal is high, or when the design specifications of the scrubber call for greater sulfur
content in the coal. Plants facing regulations on the sulfur content of coal also install more
efficient scrubbers.22 In addition, the presence of additional SO2 emissions limits leads to the
installation of more efficient scrubbers, but efficiency does not increase as the magnitude of the
regulation increases. Similarly, minimum efficiency standards for scrubbers also lead to less
efficient removal efficiencies, suggesting that these regulations do not keep up with changing
technology – even though more efficient scrubbers are available, utilities choose not to install

18

I regress the knowledge stock on a constant, two dummy variables stating whether NSPSD or NSPSDa are in
effect, the real price of low sulfur coal, current and lagged prices of SO2 permits, and a time trend. For the post-90
knowledge stock, the NSPSD and NSPSDa dummy variables are omitted.
19
It is possible to estimate the rates of decay and diffusion by performing this estimation for a range of β 1 and β 2
and minimizing a generalized method of moments (GMM) criterion. For this example, the optimal decay rate is
0.49, and the optimal rate of diffusion is 0.32. Unfortunately, this estimation strategy suffers from two drawbacks.
First, the minimization assumes that the effect of knowledge is accurately captured by changes in removal
efficiency, rather than by other variables. As the following results show, this is not the case. Second, the resulting
standard errors are unreliable. Computing the standard errors from the GMM estimation requires a derivative of the
error term with respect to each of the parameters of the model. If β 1 and β 2 are treated as endogenous parameters to
be estimated, the matrix needed to compute the covariance matrix is highly collinear and cannot be inverted. As a
result, the standard errors presented in the paper do not account for the randomness of the rates of decay and
diffusion, and thus should be treated as upper bounds.
20
Correcting for autocorrelation should help to address changes that occur in the propensity to patent over time. For
example, if the falling patent-R&D ratio is due to a decrease in the propensity to patent, newer patents should be
more valuable, as they represent more R&D effort. Thus, the error associated with knowledge should increase over
time. In fact, the results suggest that this is not a concern, as the Durbin-Watson statistic for the regression is 1.90.
21
These rates are consistent with others used in the R&D literature. For example, discussing the literature on an
appropriate lag structure for R&D capital, Griliches (1995) notes that previous studies suggest a structure peaking
between three and five years. The rates of decay and diffusion used in this paper provide a lag peaking after four
years.
22
To evaluate the effects of the policy variables, it is necessary to look at both the dummy variables and slope
coefficients. I evaluate the slope coefficients at the mean levels for the variables.

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

18

more efficient scrubbers because such scrubbers are not necessary to comply with the regulations
they face. Also, note that each of the pre-CAA90 policy regimes led to the installation of less
efficient scrubbers. For example, controlling for other factors, scrubbers installed by plants
under NSPSDa were 2.8% less efficient than scrubbers installed in the CAA90 era, and plants
that only faced the 70% removal efficiency requirement installed scrubbers that were an
additional 1.8% less efficient. In each case, the effect is statistically significant.
My particular interest is to observe the effect of the knowledge stock on removal
efficiency. As expected, before the CAA90 policy era, knowledge had no effect on removal
efficiency. The coefficient is just 0.001, and is statistically insignificant. However, patents
granted in or after 1990 do have a significant effect on removal efficiency. Also, as Table 6
shows, this result does not change much as the rates of decay and diffusion are allowed to vary.
For any given decay rate, higher rates of diffusion lower the magnitudes of the coefficients. For
any given rate of diffusion, the coefficients, as well as the impact of each patent, increase as the
decay rate increases. However, as we will see below, the magnitude of the effect depends not
just on the coefficients on knowledge, but also on the rates of decay and diffusion assumed.
To more clearly illustrate the magnitude of the effect of new knowledge, Table 7 shows
the effect of a new patent on removal efficiency, using the ten percent decay rate and 25 percent
rate of diffusion. The marginal effect of a new patent is simply the knowledge coefficient from
equation (3), multiplied by the appropriate rate of decay and diffusion. The table shows the
impact of a patent four years after it is granted, since, for the rates of decay and diffusion used,
that is the year in which a patent has its maximum impact. The table is divided into three

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

19

periods, representing the three Clean Air Acts.23 As noted before, a new patent granted from the
two command and control eras has almost no effect on removal efficiency, increasing it by just
0.0003% after four years. However, the effect of patents granted in the 1990s is significant. A
new patent from the SO2 permit trading era increases removal efficiency by 0.024% after four
years. To understand the full magnitude of the knowledge created in each era, the last column of
Table 7 multiplies the gain per patent by the average number of patents granted per year in each
era. During the CCAA90 regime, the knowledge created each year increased removal efficiency
by 1.58%.
Although choosing rates of decay and diffusion so that the value of a patent peaks after
four years is consistent with other findings in the R&D literature, a potential concern is that such
rates are inappropriate here. Since there were little policy incentives to install higher efficiency
scrubbers during the NSPSD and NSPSDa eras, it is possible that the inventions completed
during that time would have increased removal efficiency, but simply weren’t installed because
they weren’t needed – that is, these new innovations simply hadn’t diffused yet. To check this,
Table 8 repeats the results of Table 7 for a decay rate of 0.05 and a rate of diffusion of 0.01. By
using slower rates of decay and diffusion, a new patent would have its greatest impact 17 years
after its initial grant. Thus, patents from the late 1970s, when scrubber patenting activity peaked,
would have a maximum effect in the mid 1990s, when permit trading began. Even when the
knowledge stock weights are changed so that patents from the 1970s have their greatest impact
in the 1990s, these patents have almost no effect on removal efficiency. In addition, the patents
from the 1990s still do have a significant effect, even though, using the lower rates of decay and
diffusion, they have not yet had the chance to diffuse completely.
23

Because the patent data is sorted by year of grant, and it takes, on average, two years for a patent application to be
granted, the starting date for patents from each era is two years after passage of the respective Clean Air Act, so that

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

20

Finally, Table 9 shows how the value of a post-1990 patent varies as the rates of decay
and diffusion vary. To allow for variations in the diffusion of knowledge, panel A presents
efficiency gains one year after a patent is granted, and panel B presents efficiency gains that
occur four years after the patent is granted.24

Although the estimated coefficients fall as

diffusion rates increase, the increases in removal efficiency, while still small, are higher with
larger rates of diffusion, as the knowledge embodied in each patent is transmitted more quickly.

IV.

Did Pollution Control Innovations Lower Costs?
Although regulations requiring the installation of scrubbers do not provide incentives to

increase the removal efficiency of scrubbers, they do provide incentives for innovation that
lowers costs. By lowering the cost of utilizing the best available control technology, such
innovation would lower the cost of compliance with BACT regulations without adversely
affecting future regulatory burdens placed on the firm.
To test the hypothesis that scrubber innovations before 1990 lowered the costs of
operating scrubbers, I once again use data from the Steam-Electric Plant Operation and Design
Report (FORM EIA-767). In addition to the variables used in the previous section, this report
contains detailed information on the operating costs of FGD units, as well as characteristics of
the units that may affect the costs of operation.25 Table 10 presents the variables chosen for
analysis in this section, along with descriptive statistics.26

it includes patents induced by changes in the relevant regulations.
This table only presents results for the pre-1990 era. Changing the assumed rates affects the level of the effect,
but does not change the relative results between eras.
25
Operating and maintenance costs are in 1982 dollars, and deflated using the producer price index for electric
utilities.
26
The choice of variables concerning scrubber characteristics follows Bellas (1998).
24

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

21

Constructing the stocks of knowledge in the same way as in section IV, I regress the real
operating and maintenance (O&M) costs of scrubber units on characteristics of the scrubbers.27
Because knowledge will be correlated with the various characteristics of the scrubbers, I once
again use an instrumental variables approach, regressing the knowledge stock on policy and price
variables that influence the evolution of technology.28 These results give me predicted values for
the knowledge stock for each year from 1972-1997, which I use as an independent variable in the
O&M cost regressions. Proceeding as before, I first present results using a decay rate (β1) of 0.1,
and a rate of diffusion (β2) equal to 0.25.29
Define OMi,t as the operating and maintenance cost of scrubber i in year t, KiP as the
predicted knowledge in the year that the scrubber was installed, d as a dummy variable equal to
one if the scrubber was installed since 1990, Zi as a vector of scrubber characteristics that do not
vary across time, such as plant location, and Xi,t as a vector of scrubber characteristics that do
vary over time. The model estimated is:
(4)

OMi.t = α + βKiP + γ.KiP90 + χΖi + ηXi,t + wi,t

Because the key variables of interest do not vary over time, I use a random effects specification
of the error term, so that wi,t = εi,t + ui.
Table 11 presents the regression results. Note that the knowledge stock has a significant
negative effect on operating costs in all eras, and the effect is somewhat larger during the 1990s.

27

Similar results are obtained using the capital cost of scrubbers, except that the magnitude of the savings before
CAA90 is smaller, suggesting that plants were willing to accept larger upfront capital costs in exchange for lower
O&M costs. However, the capital expenditure data is not available for every unit, and is less reliable due to
reporting differences across plants. Thus, I only report the results for O&M costs in the paper.
28
I regress the knowledge stock on a constant, two dummy variables stating whether NSPSD or NSPSDa are in
effect, the real price of low sulfur coal, current and lagged prices of SO2 permits, and a time trend.
29
Autocorrelation does not appear to be a problem, as the Durbin-Watson statistic is 1.9.

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

22

The signs of other variables are as expected.30 Table 12 presents sensitivity analysis of the
knowledge coefficients to the rates of decay and diffusion. For any given decay rate, the
coefficients fall as diffusion increases, and for any given rate of diffusion, the coefficients rise as
the decay rate rises.

Also, for low decay rates, knowledge has less impact on operating costs

after passage of the 1990 Clean Air Act.
Table 13 presents the average operating cost savings resulting from a new pre-1990
patent. As before, panel A presents savings after one year, and panel B presents savings after
four years. For the ten percent decay rate and 25 percent diffusion rate, the average patent saves
a firm $4,077 after four years. This figure rises to $6,445 for patents granted in the 1990s. For
comparison, average O&M costs throughout the sample period are $3.05 million per year. In
general, the savings occurring after one year increase as the rate of diffusion increases.
However, for the highest rates of diffusion, the impact of knowledge is almost immediate, so the
highest savings after four years are for patents with mid-range rates of decay and diffusion.
To put these numbers into perspective, it is interesting to consider the social value of a
new patent, in terms of O&M cost savings. If we assume a 30 year lifespan for a new FGD unit
and a 7% discount rate, the present value of cost savings from a new pre-1990 patent over the
life of the unit is $34,883. There are 174 firms included in the regression sample. If each firm,
on average, experiences these savings, the present value of total savings for the industry are
$6.07 million. For comparison, about $1.5 million of R&D are spent for each patent granted in

30

I interact the age of the unit and the percent of time the FGD is in service because I assume these two variables are
related, as older units are more likely to break down. Without this interaction, the effect of age on operating costs is
positive, which would imply that individual units become cheaper to run as they age.

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

23

the United States.31 Thus, as would be expected, given the positive externalities that result from
research and development, the social returns to these patents are quite high.

V. Conclusions
This paper began with a puzzle: despite theoretical evidence that market-based
environmental policies should increase innovation, the number of patents related to sulfur
dioxide pollution control fell after passage of the 1990 Clean Air Act, which instituted a market
for tradable SO2 permits. By combining data on flue gas desulfurization units with this patent
data, I find that, although the level of innovative activity fell after passage of the 1990 Clean Air
Act, the nature of innovative activity changed. Prior to 1990, most new plants were required to
install a scrubber with a 90% removal efficiency rating. As a result, there were no incentives for
R&D that would increase the ability of scrubbers to control pollution. However, there were
incentives to perform R&D to lower the costs of operating these scrubbers, and thus lower the
costs of complying with the regulation. In contrast, the SO2 permit market established by the
1990 Clean Air Act provided incentives to install scrubbers with higher removal efficiencies, and
thus led to more R&D designed to improve the removal efficiency of scrubbers.
Analysis of the results suggests a couple of key points. First, it is important to note that
command and control regulations do provide incentives for R&D. However, the nature of the
R&D changes. In particular, the research preformed under the command and control regime did
not result in a cleaner environment, but just in lower compliance costs for utilities. Although
these lower costs are clearly valuable, unless the cost savings are passed on to consumers in the

31

This figure represents $121,015 million of R&D spending from non-government sources in 1996, divided by
79,276 patents granted to U.S. non-government entities in 1998. The two-year lag allows time for the patents from
the R&D to go through the patenting process.

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

24

form of lower rates for electricity, these are rents captured by the firms.32 In comparison, the
benefits of cleaner air resulting from more efficient scrubbers affect society as a whole. Second,
the results raise the question of whether the resources devoted to such R&D could have been put
to more productive uses. That is, do command and control policies not only not encourage
productive R&D, but also lead to wasteful R&D spending to avoid the costs of regulation?
Finally, the results show that trends in patent or R&D data are not sufficient to monitor microlevel trends in innovative activity. Information on the uses of new innovations is also important.
In particular, although the level of innovative activity related to scrubbers did not increase after
passage of the 1990 Clean Air Act, the types of innovative activity did change, so that innovation
after institution of market-based policies was more beneficial to the environment.

32

Whether the rents are captured by the utilities themselves or the firms that produce the scrubbers depends on how
much market power the producers of new scrubbers have.

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

25

References
Bellas, Allen S. (1998), “Empirical evidence of advances in scrubber technology,” Resource and
Energy Economics, 20(4), pp. 327-343.
Brownell, F. William & Lee B. Zeugin (1991), Clean Air Handbook, Government Institutes,
Inc., Rockville, MD.
Carlson, Curtis, Dallas Burtraw, Maureen Cropper, and Karen Palmer (2000), “Sulfur Dioxide
Control by Electric Utilities: What Are the Gains from Trade?” Journal of Political
Economy, 108(6), pp. 1292-1326.
Ellerman, A. Denny, Richard Schmalensee, Paul L. Joskow, Juan Pablo Montero, and Elizabeth
M. Bailey (1997), Emissions Trading Under the U.S. Acid Rain Program: Evaluation of
the Compliace Costs and Allowance Market Performance, MIT Center for Energy and
Environmental Policy Research, Cambridge, MA.
Griliches, Zvi (1995), “R&D and Productivity: Econometric Results and Measurement Issues,”
in Handbook of the Economics of Innovation and Technological Change, Paul Stoneman,
ed., Blackwell Publishers, Cambridge, MA.
Griliches, Zvi (1990), “Patent statistics as economic indicators: a survey,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 28, 1661-1707.
Jaffe, Adam B. and Karen Palmer (1997), “Environmental Regulation and Innovation: A Panel
Data Study,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 79, 610-619.
Joskow, Paul L, Richard Scmalensee, and Elizabeth M. Bailey (1998), “The Market for Sulfur
Dioxide Emissions,” The American Economic Review 88(4), pp. 669-685.
Lanjouw, Jean O. and Ashoka Mody (1996), “Innovation and the International Diffusion of
Environmentally Responsive Technology,” Research Policy, 25, pp. 549-571.
Magat, Wesley A. (1978), “Pollution Control and Technological Advance: A Dynamic Model of
the Firm,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 5, pp. 1-25.
Martineau, Robert J. Jr. and David P. Novello eds., The Clean Air Act Handbook, Section of
Natural Resources, Energy, and Environmental Law, American Bar Association,
Chicago, IL.
Milliman, Scott R. and Raymond Prince (1989), “Firm Incentives to Promote Technological
Change in Pollution Control,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
17, pp. 247-265.
Milliman, Scott R. and Raymond Prince (1992), “Firm Incentives to Promote Technological
Change in Pollution Control: Reply,” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, 22, pp. 292-296.

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

26

Newell, Richard G., Adam B. Jaffe, and Robert N. Stavins (1999), “The Induced Innovation
Hypothesis and Energy-Saving Technological Change,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
114, 941-975.
Popp, David (2001), “Induced Innovation and Energy Prices,” NBER Working Paper #8284,
forthcoming in American Economic Review.
United States Department of Commerce (1996), “Pollution Abatement and Control Expenditures,
1972-94,” Survey of Current Business, 76:9, pp. 48-67.
United States Environmental Protection Agency (1978), Guidelines for Determining Best
Available Control Technology (BACT), Washington, DC.

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

27

Year

1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994

% SO2 Patents

Pollution Control R&D Expenditures

Figure 1 – Air Pollution R&D Expenditures and SO2 patents

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

82

83

84

85
year FGD unit intsalled

81

86

87

88

90

28

91

92

94

95

96

97

The figure shows the average removal efficiency for newly installed FGD units, presented as a three year moving average. The
vertical lines delimitate the three policy eras – NSPSD, NSPSDa, and the 1990 CAA.

70

75

80

85

90

95

100

Figure 2 – FGD Removal Efficiencies by Year

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

removal efficiency -- 3 year moving average

5

15

20

years since grant

10

5

15

20

years since grant

10

25

25

0

5

15

20

years since grant

10

25

decay = 0.25, diffusion = 0.05

0

decay = 0.1, diffusion = 0.05

0

decay = 0.05, diffusion = 0.05

30

30

30
5

15

20

years since grant

10

0

5

15

20

years since grant

10

decay = 0.1, diffusion = 0.25

0

25

25

decay = 0.05, diffusion = 0.25

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0

5

10

15

20

years since grant

25

decay = 0.25, diffusion = 0.25

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

30

30

30

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

5

10

15

20

years since grant

5

10

15

20

years since grant

0

5

10

15

20

years since grant

decay = 0.25, diffusion = 0.5

0

decay = 0.1, diffusion = 0.5

0

decay = 0.05, diffusion = 0.5

29

25

25

25

30

30

30

The Figure shows how the weights assigned to a patent vary as time passes. The x axis measures years since the patent was
granted. The weights are calculated as e-β1s(1-e-β2(s+1)), where s is the number of years since the patent was granted.

0.02
0

0.06
0.04

0.1
0.08

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

Figure 3 – Patent Weights x Years After Grant

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

weight

weight

weight

weight
weight
weight

weight

weight
weight

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

30

Figure 4 – Knowledge Stocks
Panel A – Decay Rate Varies

1000
900
800
700

stock

600
500
400
300
200
100
0
72

77

82

87

92

97

year
decay = 0.05

decay = 0.1

decay = 0.25

Panel B – Rate of Diffusion Varies

1000
900
800
700

stock

600
500
400
300
200
100
0
72

77

82

87

92

97

year
diffusion = 0.05

diffusion = 0.25

diffusion = 0.5

The Figure shows how the actual knowledge stocks vary as the rates of decay and diffusion
change. For Panel A, the rate of diffusion is constant at 0.25. For Panel B, the rate of decay is
constant at 0.1.

Plants Affected
Construction began
after August 17,
1971
Construction began Scrubber with 90% removal efficiency
after September 18,
1978
Phase I (1995): 263 SO2 permit trading;
dirtiest plants; Phase 90% scrub requirement repealed for all
plants
II (2000):most
existing and new
coal-burning plants

New Source Performance Standards Subpart Da (NSPSDa)

1990 Clean Air Act

Key Requirements
Best Available Control Technology (BACT)

31

Regulation
New Source Performance Standards Subpart D (NSPSD)

Table 1 -- Summary of Key Environmental Regulations

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

32

Table 2 -- Patent Classifications Related to Sulfur Dioxide Pollution Control
423/242-244 Chemistry of Inorganic Compounds/Modifying or Removing Component of
Normally Gaseous Mixture/Sulfur or sulfur containing component
423/569-570 Chemistry of Inorganic Compounds/Sulfur or Compound Thereof/Elemental
sulfur/Reducing sulfur dioxide by carbon containing material

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

33

Table 3 – Descriptive Statistics for Removal Efficiency Regression

Variable
Year
Year FGD unit went online
Real price of low sulfur coal
Removal efficiency of FGD unit
Regulations:
SO2 emissions limits (lbs. SO2/mm Btu fuel)*
Minimum removal efficiency required*
% sulfur content of coal allowed*
Design specifications for sulfur content of coal
Federal Clean Air policy:
no policy
NSPSD
NSPSDA
CAA90

N
180
180
180
180

Mean
87.10
83.77
152.50
86.73

Std Dev
3.82
5.99
26.39
8.47

Min
85
73
97.98
58.8

Max
97
97
189.76
99

N>0
180
180
180
180

180
180
180
180

1.33
81.68
1.9
2.74

1.47
29.90
1.25
1.94

0.01
70
1.0
0

7.41
94
3.5
9

168
28
5
179

180
180
180
180

0.18
0.44
0.23
0.14

0.39
0.50
0.42
0.35

0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1

33
80
41
26

* -- averages of these variables are for positive observations only

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

34

Table 4 – Distribution of Removal Efficiencies by Regulatory Regime

Panel A: Frequency of removal efficiency by policy regime
regime
removal efficiency
no policy NSPSD NSPSDa
< 70
70
71-79
80-89
90
91-95
95+
Total

0
4
2
14
2
9
2
33

7
1
5
31
23
7
6
80

0
3
1
12
18
0
7
41

CAA90
0
0
0
1
3
3
19
26

Panel B: Percentage of scrubbers with each removal efficiency by regime
regime
removal efficiency
no policy NSPSD NSPSDa CAA90
<70
70
71-79
80-89
90
91-95
95+
Total

0.0%
12.1%
6.1%
42.4%
6.1%
27.3%
6.1%
100%

8.8%
1.3%
6.3%
38.8%
28.8%
8.8%
7.5%
100%

0.0%
7.3%
2.4%
29.3%
43.9%
0.0%
17.1%
100%

0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
3.9%
11.5%
11.5%
73.1%
100%

Total
7
8
8
58
46
19
34
180

Total
3.9%
4.4%
4.4%
32.2%
25.6%
10.6%
18.9%
100%

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

35

Table 5 –The Effect of Technology on the Removal Efficiency of Scrubbers
Dependent Variable: SO2 removal efficiency of new FGD units 1972-1997
Variable
Constant
Knowledge stock

Estimate
79.342
0.001

T-statistics
87.749
0.730

Knowledge stock * dummyCAA90
Real price of low sulfur coal
FGD design specifications for sulfur content of coal

0.049
0.059
0.448

34.038
14.084
15.397

SO2 emissions limit dummy

0.680

3.404

-0.107
-40.099
0.4850
10.8458
-3.689
-6.157
-6.407
-2.792
-1.774
0.100
0.250

-4.094
-50.452
51.618
41.479
-50.770
-26.646
-31.555
-18.989
-11.414

SO2 emissions limit
Minimum efficiency requirement dummy
Minimum efficiency requirement
% sulfur content regulations dummy
% sulfur content regulations
NOPOLICY dummy
NSPSD dummy
NSPSDa dummy
NSPSDa with 70% requirement dummy
gamma
lambda

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

36

Table 6 –Sensitivity Analysis of Removal Efficiency Regression Results

Rate of decay

Dependent Variable: SO2 removal efficiency of new FGD units 1972-1997
Rate of diffusion
0.15
0.25
0.001
0.001
(2.179)
(1.855)

0.5
0.001
(1.559)

0.75
0.001
(1.481)

0.9
0.001
(1.464)

0.034
(31.473)
0.001
(1.265)

0.026
(31.936)
0.001
(1.040)

0.024
(31.834)
0.001
(0.988)

0.023
(31.738)
0.001
(0.978)

0.055
(33.332)
0.001
(0.916)

0.041
(33.640)
0.001
(0.730)

0.031
(33.568)
0.001
(0.560)

0.028
(33.309)
0.000
(0.526)

0.027
(33.157)
0.000
(0.523)

0.163
(33.932)
0.003
(0.747)

0.068
(34.098)
0.001
(0.473)

0.049
(34.038)
0.001
(0.326)

0.037
(33.692)
0.000
(0.193)

0.033
(33.311)
0.000
(0.177)

0.031
(33.107)
0.000
(0.182)

0.901
(34.130)
0.011
(0.479)

0.198
(34.114)
0.002
(0.347)

0.082
(33.993)
0.000
(0.130)

0.059
(33.826)
0.000
(0.012)

0.043
(33.312)
0.000
(-0.085)

0.038
(32.819)
0.000
(-0.078)

0.036
(32.565)
0.000
(-0.059)

1.086
(34.017)
0.004
(0.138)

0.237
(33.942)
0.000
(0.034)

0.097
(33.731)
-0.001
(-0.139)

0.069
(33.477)
-0.001
(-0.230)

0.049
(32.781)
-0.001
(-0.282)

0.043
(32.166)
-0.001
(-0.240)

0.041
(31.860)
0.000
(-0.203)

1.291
(33.791)
-0.006
(-0.131)

0.281
(33.682)
-0.002
(-0.213)

0.113
(33.366)
-0.002
(-0.344)

0.080
(33.007)
-0.001
(-0.405)

0.056
(32.114)
-0.001
(-0.400)

0.049
(31.375)
-0.001
(-0.311)

0.046
(31.014)
-0.001
(-0.248)

1.517
(33.467)
-0.081
(-0.608)

0.328
(33.307)
-0.018
(-0.600)

0.131
(32.861)
-0.007
(-0.532)

0.092
(32.390)
-0.004
(-0.419)

0.064
(31.304)
0.000
(-0.033)

0.054
(30.444)
0.003
(0.392)

0.051
(30.030)
0.004
(0.637)

2.570
0.547
(30.727) (30.361)
T-statistics in parenthesis

0.210
(29.485)

0.142
(28.680)

0.092
(26.994)

0.074
(25.702)

0.069
(25.075)

K

0.01
0.011
(3.165)

0.05
0.003
(2.821)

0.467
(24.467)
0.015
(2.364)

0.106
(26.872)
0.003
(2.026)

0.046
(30.367)
0.001
(1.516)

0.582
(30.098)
0.015
(1.511)

0.130
(31.818)
0.003
(1.277)

0.735
(33.586)
0.014
(0.917)

0.01
90

K

K
0.05
90

K

K
0.1
90

K

K
0.15
90

K

K
0.2
90

K

K
0.25
90

K

K
0.3
90

K

K
0.5
90

K

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

37

Table 7 – Effect of New Patents on Removal Efficiency – By Era

Era
1972-1978
1979-1991
1992-1997

Effect of a New
Patent*
0.0003
0.0003
0.0240

Ave Pats/Yr
74.9
71.0
66.0

Total Effect
0.03
0.02
1.58

* -- The effect of a new patent is the increase in removal efficiency generated by a new
SO2 pollution control patent. To allow for diffusion of the innovation, this effect is
calculated four years after the grant of the patent.

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

38

Table 8 – Effect of New Patents on Removal Efficiency With Slow Diffusion – By
Era

Era
1972-1978
1979-1991
1992-1997

Effect of a New
Patent*
0.0011
0.0011
0.0420

Ave Pats/Yr
74.9
71.0
66.0

Total Effect
0.08
0.08
2.77

* -- The effect of a new patent is the increase in removal efficiency generated by a new
SO2 pollution control patent. To allow for diffusion of the innovation, this effect is
calculated seventeen years after the grant of the patent.

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

39

Table 9 – Effect of New Patents on Removal Efficiency – Sensitivity Analysis

Panel A: Savings after one year:

decay rate

decay rate

0.01
0.05
0.01
0.0094%
0.0102%
0.05
0.0112%
0.0121%
0.1
0.0134%
0.0143%
0.15
0.0156%
0.0164%
0.2
0.0178%
0.0186%
0.25
0.0200%
0.0208%
0.3
0.0222%
0.0230%
0.5
0.0299%
0.0305%
Panel B: Savings after four years:

0.01
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.5

0.01
0.0224%
0.0238%
0.0245%
0.0245%
0.0240%
0.0232%
0.0222%
0.0164%

0.05
0.0231%
0.0242%
0.0246%
0.0244%
0.0238%
0.0229%
0.0217%
0.0158%

Rate of diffusion
0.15
0.25
0.0121% 0.0137%
0.0140% 0.0156%
0.0162% 0.0179%
0.0184% 0.0201%
0.0206% 0.0223%
0.0228% 0.0244%
0.0249% 0.0264%
0.0319% 0.0330%

0.5
0.0168%
0.0188%
0.0211%
0.0234%
0.0255%
0.0274%
0.0292%
0.0350%

0.75
0.0189%
0.0209%
0.0232%
0.0254%
0.0274%
0.0291%
0.0307%
0.0363%

0.9
0.0197%
0.0217%
0.0241%
0.0262%
0.0281%
0.0297%
0.0312%
0.0369%

Rate of diffusion
0.15
0.25
0.0239% 0.0241%
0.0245% 0.0243%
0.0244% 0.0240%
0.0238% 0.0232%
0.0230% 0.0222%
0.0219% 0.0209%
0.0206% 0.0195%
0.0145% 0.0133%

0.5
0.0237%
0.0235%
0.0227%
0.0216%
0.0203%
0.0188%
0.0172%
0.0113%

0.75
0.0230%
0.0226%
0.0216%
0.0203%
0.0189%
0.0173%
0.0157%
0.0102%

0.9
0.0226%
0.0222%
0.0211%
0.0198%
0.0182%
0.0166%
0.0150%
0.0098%

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

40

Table 10 – Descriptive Statistics for O&M Cost Regression

Variable
Mean Std Dev
Year scrubber went online
81.76
4.52
Percent of time boiler was online & FGD unit was in service
0.95
0.16
Age of FGD unit
9.56
5.14
Dummy = 1 if unit produces saleable by-product
0.20
0.40
Number of hours the FGD unit in service
6953.12 1621.02
Percent of flue gasses that pass through the unit
92.57
15.57
Flue gas exit rate (cu. Ft./min)
1604356.27 843824.90
Removal efficiency of the FGD unit
84.91
8.99
Total coal burned in the associated boiler(s) (1000 short tons)
14572.99 9782.79
Dummy = 1 if unit is in the Northeast
0.08
0.26
Dummy = 1 if unit is in the West
0.32
0.47
Real operating and maintenance costs
3049.73 3440.34

Min
72
0
0
0
0
0
13447
50.70
0
0
0
0

Max
97
1
25
1
8784
100
4900000
99.9
49752
1
1
36371.1

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

41

Table 11 –The Effect of Technology on the Costs of Scrubbers
Dependent Variable: operating and maintenance costs of FGD units 1972-1997
Variable
Constant
Knowledge stock

Estimate
-4,876.363
-8.523

T-statistic
-4.394
-7.687

Knowledge stock * dummyCAA90
Percent of time boiler was online & FGD unit was in service
Age of FGD unit
Age * % time online
Dummy = 1 if unit produces saleable by-product
Number of hours the FGD unit in service
Percent of flue gasses that pass through the unit
Flue gas exit rate (cu. Ft./min)
Removal efficiency of the FGD unit
Total coal burned in the associated boiler(s) (1000 short tons)
Dummy = 1 if unit is in the northeast
Dummy = 1 if unit is in the west

-4.952
2,975.965
59.578
-135.875
-533.830
0.093
4.390
0.001
65.715
0.007
4,997.768
-1,829.680

-2.118
3.597
0.853
-1.893
-2.761
1.565
0.904
10.661
7.453
0.604
16.494
-10.142

gamma
lambda

0.100
0.250

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

42

Table 12 –Sensitivity Analysis of Cost of Scrubber Regression Results

Rate of decay

Dependent Variable: operating and maintenance costs of FGD units 1972-1997
Rate of diffusion
0.15
0.25
0.5
-3.383
-3.089
-2.988
(-6.620) (-6.914) (-7.206)

0.01
-18.567
(-5.930)

0.05
-5.473
(-6.128)

0.75
-2.993
(-7.301)

0.9
-3.001
(-7.331)

90

56.566

10.676

3.011

1.679

1.005

0.920

0.915

K

-39.702
(-6.449)

-10.517
(-6.737)

-5.965
(-7.217)

-5.227
(-7.437)

-4.816
(-7.579)

-4.732
(-7.596)

-4.713
(-7.596)

90

38.863
(0.935)
-77.268
(-7.217)

5.371
(0.627)
-19.526
(-7.427)

-0.053
(-0.017)
-10.234
(-7.659)

-0.899
(-0.410)
-8.524
(-7.687)

-1.182
(-0.778)
-7.385
(-7.593)

-1.132
(-0.855)
-7.077
(-7.511)

-1.095
(-0.865)
-6.991
(-7.477)

-7.959
(-0.188)
-132.510
(-7.667)

-6.050
(-0.687)
-32.145
(-7.718)

-5.393
(-1.602)
-15.632
(-7.668)

-4.952
(-2.118)
-12.433
(-7.543)

-4.244
(-2.613)
-10.177
(-7.280)

-3.876
(-2.748)
-9.519
(-7.126)

-3.738
(-2.780)
-9.324
(-7.066)

90

-76.848

-21.406

-11.625

-9.313

-7.228

-6.434

-6.162

K

-203.603
(-7.693)

-47.656
(-7.622)

-21.764
(-7.395)

-16.652
(-7.180)

-12.965
(-6.808)

-11.847
(-6.601)

-11.504
(-6.519)

90

-158.101
(-3.156)
-285.380
(-7.438)

-38.482
(-3.581)
-64.930
(-7.302)

-17.931
(-4.219)
-28.214
(-6.979)

-13.481
(-4.520)
-20.919
(-6.713)

-9.862
(-4.769)
-15.597
(-6.275)

-8.595
(-4.821)
-13.942
(-6.031)

-8.176
(-4.829)
-13.422
(-5.933)

-241.613
(-4.223)
-372.496
(-7.036)

-55.427
(-4.499)
-82.941
(-6.868)

-23.829
(-4.882)
-34.682
(-6.500)

-17.229
(-5.041)
-25.073
(-6.211)

-12.081
(-5.135)
-18.009
(-5.739)

-10.344
(-5.128)
-15.764
(-5.468)

-9.776
(-5.116)
-15.047
(-5.359)

-321.002
(-4.878)
-711.668
(-5.156)

-71.225
(-5.028)
-151.244
(-4.992)

-29.144
(-5.212)
-57.773
(-4.645)

-20.522
(-5.266)
-39.033
(-4.369)

-13.936
(-5.246)
-24.904
(-3.885)

-11.749
(-5.191)
-20.153
(-3.579)

-11.037
(-5.162)
-18.568
(-3.446)

-572.203
(-5.267)

-120.745
(-5.226)

-45.413
(-5.118)

-30.318
(-5.015)

-19.013
(-4.804)

-15.295
(-4.655)

-14.082
(-4.588)

K
0.01
K

0.05
K

K
0.1
90

K

K
0.15
K

0.2
K

K
0.25
90

K

K
0.3
90

K

K
0.5
90

K

Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990

43

Table 13 – Effect of New Patents on Scrubber Costs – Sensitivity Analysis

Panel A: Savings after one year:

0.01
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.5

0.01
364
748
1,384
2,258
3,301
4,401
5,464
8,547

0.05
516
952
1,681
2,633
3,713
4,812
5,847
8,730

Rate of diffusion
0.25
0.5
1,203
1,870
1,956
2,896
3,035
4,224
4,210
5,537
5,365
6,710
6,410
7,678
7,309
8,433
9,315
9,548

0.75
2,302
3,497
4,975
6,365
7,535
8,435
9,073
9,496

0.9
2,480
3,742
5,280
6,698
7,862
8,725
9,304
9,401

Rate of diffusion
0.15
0.25
0.5
1,715
2,117
2,635
2,577
3,053
3,619
3,619
4,077
4,544
4,527
4,868
5,127
5,160
5,339
5,347
5,477
5,491
5,267
5,512
5,388
4,979
4,125
3,769
3,094

0.75
2,808
3,783
4,633
5,102
5,198
5,008
4,636
2,663

0.9
2,851
3,816
4,634
5,060
5,112
4,883
4,482
2,485

0.15
868
1,471
2,400
3,487
4,618
5,695
6,659
9,082

decay rate

Panel B: Savings after four years:

0.01
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.5

0.01
870
1,585
2,526
3,547
4,462
5,120
5,472
4,697

0.05
1,163
1,905
2,895
3,902
4,737
5,284
5,526
4,528

