                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      EVENT-STUDY EVIDENCE OF THE VALUE OF RELAXING LONGSTANDING
               REGULATORY RESTRAINTS ON BANKS, 1970-2000


                                           Kenneth A. Carow
                                            Edward J. Kane


                                          Working Paper 8594
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8594


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2001




The authors are respectively Assistant Professor of Finance at Indiana University, Kelley School of Business
Indianapolis and James F. Cleary Professor in Finance at Boston College. They wish to thank David Ely and
Philip Strahan for helpful comments on an earlier draft. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Kenneth A. Carow and Edward J. Kane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Event-Study Evidence of the Value of Relaxing Longstanding
Regulatory Restraints on Banks, 1970-2000
Kenneth A. Carow and Edward J. Kane
NBER Working Paper No. 8594
November 2001
JEL No. G28, D78, L51



                                              ABSTRACT




        In a partial-equilibrium model, removing a binding constraint creates value. However, in general
equilibrium, the stakes of other parties in maintaining the constraint must be examined. In financial
deregulation, the fear is that expanding the scope and geographic reach of very large institutions might
unblock opportunities to build market power from informational advantages and size-related safety-net
subsidies.
        This paper reviews and extends event-study evidence about the distribution of the benefits and
costs of relaxing longstanding geographic and product-line restrictions on U.S. financial institutions. The
evidence indicates that the new financial freedoms may have redistributed rather than created value.
Event returns are positive for some sectors of the financial industry and negative for others. Perhaps
surprisingly, where customer event returns have been investigated, they prove negative.




Kenneth A. Carow                                                  Edward J. Kane
Kelley School of Business                                         Department of Finance
Indiana University                                                Boston College
                                                                  330A Fulton Hall
                                                                  and NBER
                                                                  edward.kane@bc.edu
                                                                             October 1, 2001

EVENT-STUDY EVIDENCE OF THE VALUE OF RELAXING LONGSTANDING
         REGULATORY RESTRAINTS ON BANKS, 1970-2000*

                                    Kenneth A. Carow
                                     Edward J. Kane


       Thirty years ago, opportunities for U.S. banks to expand their geographic reach
and product line were tightly constrained by charter limitations and by state and federal
laws governing branch banking and holding-company affiliation. The idea that, within a
single generation, large U.S. banks could become nation-spanning, superpowered financial
conglomerates seemed an academic pipe dream.
       In 1970, commercial banks could be distinguished from other kinds of financial
institutions by two unique capacities: their right to offer demand deposits and their ability
to make commercial loans. Restrictions on thrift, securities, insurance, and sales-finance
companies made it hard for these and other kinds of nonbank institutions to offer close
substitutes for banking's signature products.
       This paper seeks to clarify how and why technological change undermined and
finally demolished geographic and product-line constraints on U.S. financial institutions
and to review event-study evidence about the intersectoral distribution of the benefits and
costs of relaxing particular restrictions. The evidence indicates that the demolition of
these restraints intensifies public-policy concerns about the extent to which market power
may be generated by large-bank mergers and safety-net subsidies that increase as an
institution reaches megasize and megacomplexity.


I. Financial-Institution Value Creation
       During the same 30-year interval, the conceptual foundations of financial
intermediation theory similarly dissolved and reformed. The longstanding premise that
banks are profitable because society assigns them a series of "special" rights and duties
(cf. Tussing, 1967 and Corrigan, 1983) was displaced by the view that, even if it is not
subsidized by special privileges, every financial institution can hope for special
advantages from its access to scale1, scope2. and network economies (see Katz and
Shapiro, 1994; Economides, 1993) and to private information about its customers
(Diamond, 1984; Fama, 1985). This access generates implicit returns that competitive
pressure allocates between each institution and its counterparties (Kane and Malkiel,
1965). The stronger the competition for clients, the larger is the proportion of the rents
generated by informational and network advantages that an institution is likely to share
with customers.
        Diamond (1984) explains how private information and monitoring costs influence
a firm's choice between commercial loans and other public and private debt placements. If
the firm is new or potentially very risky, high monitoring and policing costs can render
public debt infeasible. Such firms can enhance their credit standing and transparency by
submitting to monitoring and disclosure protocols devised by a high-quality bank. Only
when changes in its degree of riskiness may be readily discerned by outside investors, can
a new or risky firm economically issue marketable debt. For borrowers whose affairs are
vulnerable to financial distress, maintaining a relationship with a bank that has developed
a respected loan-workout capacity may also generate low-cost options for renegotiating
credit terms. Evidence compiled by Chemmanur and Fulgheri (1994) supports this
contention by indicating that firms that confront a high probability of financial distress are
likely to choose bank credit over public debt.
        Stock price reactions provide evidence of the value of informational assets to
banks and their borrowers. James (1987) tests whether booking a bank loan conveys

*
  The authors are respectively Assistant Professor of Finance at Indiana University, Kelley School of
Business Indianapolis and James F. Cleary Professor in Finance at Boston College. They wish to thank
David Ely and Philip Strahan for helpful comments on an earlier draft.
1
  Evidence of economies of scale exists for many sectors of the financial industry: banking [Wheelock and
Wilson, 2001, Hughes, Lang, Mester, and Moon, 1996]; savings banks [Chang and Lynge, 1994]; finance
companies [Durkin and Elliehausen, 1998]; mortgage banking [Rossi, 1998]; property/casualty insurance
[Hanweck and Hogan, 1996, Cummins and Weiss, 1993]; life insurance [Grace and Timme, 1992];
securities [Goldberge, Hanweck, Keenan, and Young, 1991]; and real estate [Zumpano, Elder, and
Anderson, 2000].




                                                     2
favorable information to the marketplace. He finds that borrower stock prices rise in
response to the announcement of a bank loan agreement and fall in response to a private
placement. Preece and Mullineaux (1994) confirm that borrowing firms also experience
positive event-window returns from successfully negotiating loan agreements with
nonbanks. Lummer and McConnell (1989) challenge the view that new loan agreements
always convey benefits and establish that favorable revisions in an existing bank credit
agreement definitely raise borrower stock prices. Best and Zhang (1993) show that new
loan announcements do convey positive information when extensive monitoring is
entailed.
        Slovin, Johnson, and Glascock (1992) reinforce these findings about the value of
private information by showing that small firms tend to benefit from maintaining a
relationship with a bank. Berger and Udell (1995) study the implicit and explicit prices
small firms pay for bank lines of credit. These authors find that borrowers with longer-
standing relationships receive lower interest rates and are less likely to pledge collateral.
When a bank refuses to pass on a fair share of a customer's informational rents, Houston
and James (1996) confirm that switching to a new bank can allow a relationship customer
to advantageously restructure its claim to informational rents.
        By offering pre-issue certification and post-issue monitoring services that alleviate
informational gaps, banks (Slovin and Young, 1990) and investment bankers (Smith,
1986; Booth and Smith, 1986; and Hansen and Torregrosa, 1992) smoothe a borrower's
transition from private to public securities. The quality of an investment bank's
certification services is bonded both by its desire to protect the reputational capital it has
accumulated and by the liability imposed on it by the Securities Act of 1933 for achieving
a fair offering price (Beatty and Ritter, 1986). Carter and Manaster (1990) and Johnson
and Miller (1988) confirm the value of certification services by showing that an issuer
receives a better price when its initial public offering (IPO) is managed by a prestigious
investment bank.


2
 Evidence of economies of scope have been found by Berger, Hanweck, and Humphrey (1987); Berger,
Hunter and Timme (1993); Berger, Humphrey, and Pulley (1996); Kanatas and Qi (1998); Barth, Caprio,
and Levine (1999); Claessens and Klingebiel (2001).




                                                  3
       Evidence of the value of postloan monitoring by investment banks is of two types.
The first looks for proof of customer satisfaction. Carter (1992) shows that firms whose
IPO used a prestigious underwriter are less likely to employ a different underwriter when
undertaking a secondary offering. The second explores correlations between underwriter
prestige and long-run returns realized by IPO investors. Using investment-bank capital as
a proxy for prestige, Michaly and Shaw (1994) find that IPOs managed by high-prestige
investment bankers show less negative long-run returns than IPOs handled by other
underwriters. Using several alternative measures of prestige, Carter, Dark, and Singh
(1998) and Jain and Kini (1999) confirm the robustness of this finding. They show that
the long-run performance of IPOs improves with the reputation of the underwriter.
       When they are binding, regulatory restrictions on an institution's product line and
geographic span limit its ability to use its private information, contracting skills, and
network economies efficiently. For convenience, we term innovative expansions of an
institution's product line as generating "cross-products." To the extent that scope
economies exist, an institution can leverage its privately held information to design,
market, and price cross-products more economically than at least some monoline firms.
Similarly, to the extent that scale economies exist, large institutions can advantageously
absorb less-efficient small institutions.
       Even when they are successfully circumvented, restrictions on cross-product
activity and interregional expansion generate circumvention costs that reduce the extent to
which scope and scale economies can be realized. To an individual institution, the direct
value of relaxing these restraints is the sum of incremental profits and diversification
benefits generated by new cross-product business and the value of resources released by
no longer having to service pre-existing cross-product business in a circumventive
manner. If hit-and-run entry were possible, indirect effects would consist of reduced
volume and margins for incumbent firms caused by the entry of cross-product suppliers.
       In financial institution regulation, stakeholders include: regulators, taxpayers,
competitors, depositors, debtholders, stockholders, and consumer and corporate loan
customers. Different stakeholders are apt to be affected differently by the direct and




                                               4
indirect effects of any changes in regulatory regime. The difficulty of sorting out these
stakes helps to explain why the political path to regulatory reform was a torturous one.
        In what follows, we draw on evidence assembled in the event-study literature to
explore the extent to which freeing up financial conglomerates to expand in size and scope
may have created, destroyed, or merely redistributed value from other stakeholders to
managers and stockholders of affected financial institutions.


II.     Evidence of Value Generated by Relaxing Geographic Constraints
        During the 19th Century and most of the 20th, federal and state restrictions on the
location of branches and affiliates constrained the geographic span and corporate structure
of U.S. banking organizations (see, e.g., Kane, 1996). Prior to the last 30 years, whenever
large banks opened loopholes in the fabric of interstate restriction, legislators usually
worked to narrow them. Congress' final important effort in this direction took place in
1970 when it amended the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 to restrict the affiliations
and activities of nonbank subsidiaries of corporations owning a single bank. The pre-
existing one-bank holding company (OBHC) loophole allowed OBHCs to own
subsidiaries in any business they wished and to locate them anywhere. Public-policy
concern about this loophole came to the fore in July 1968, when Citigroup put itself into
position to pass its operations through the loophole.
        Statistical evidence of the value of this and other loopholes in banking regulation
comes principally from studying imputed stock-price reactions to important regulatory and
legislative "events." In an era when over 14,000 individual banks and many thousands of
other depository institutions exist, these event studies inevitably focus on relatively small
subsamples of banking and thrift companies whose stocks trade frequently. Although
most researchers make every effort to broaden the range of their samples, it is important to
acknowledge that effects on small and medium-size depository institutions and bank
holding companies (BHCs) are markedly undersampled. We might also observe that the
statistical significance of event returns is exaggerated somewhat by using confidence
intervals rather than fiducial intervals.




                                               5
       Eisenbeis, Harris, and Lakonishok (EHL, 1984) provide the first econometric
measures of the OBHC loophole's value to stockholders. Comparing data for subsamples
of 30 OBHCs, 35 multibank BHCs, and 13 autonomous banks, these authors document
that the stock prices of Citicorp and its peer institutions experienced abnormal returns in
the wake of Citi's announcing its OBHC strategy. While EHL attribute some of the gains
to activity diversification, they also show that OBHCs appeared to derive benefit from the
greater ease with which they could circumvent state branching restrictions. Institutions
located in states that outlawed branch offices experienced higher returns than
organizations residing in jurisdictions that authorized limited or statewide branching.
       EHL also demonstrate that forming an OBHC earned a significantly positive return
before the 1970 Amendments, but not afterwards. This tells us that the OBHC structure
generated value as long as the loophole was open and reinforces the evidence that the
1970 Amendments significantly reduced the value of establishing new OBHCs.
Interestingly, for existing OBHCs, the give-and-take of the legislative process sustained
much of their loophole value by grandfathering important OBHC privileges. Event
studies of the 1970 Amendments by Aharony and Swary (1981) and Martin and Keown
(1981, 1987) establish that existing OBHCs did not experience a negative event return.
       After 1970, bank lobbyists chipped away steadily at state-level restrictions on
intrastate and interstate expansion. The impact of relaxing restrictions on out-of-state
entry from a selection of designated or qualifying states has been studied extensively.
Jayaratne and Strahan (1998) show that operating costs and loan losses decrease in states
that authorize statewide branching and interstate banking because better-run banks expand
at the expense of less-efficient rivals. Black, Fields, and Schweitzer (1990) show that
authorizing out-of-state entry tends to benefit regional banks and to generate borderline-
significant negative event returns for giant money-center banks. Looking at 35 state-level
legislative events, Goldberg, Hanweck, and Sugrue (1992) find that the mean event return
is insignificantly negative for in-state banks and significantly positive for non-money-
center out-of-state institutions. Since potential target institutions figure to benefit from
being exposed to an enriched set of acquirers, these results support the hypothesis that




                                               6
state-level deregulation of entry frequently benefited potential out-of-state acquirers in
designated multistate regions at the expense of in-state acquirers and money-center banks.
       To investigate this issue, Carow and Lee (1997) regress event returns on
characteristics of individual banks and their home-state economic environments. Using a
sample of 271 banking organizations, these authors find that: 1) money-center banks tend
not to benefit from reciprocal arrangements for freer entry (reflecting the frequent
exclusion of their headquarters states from regional banking compacts); 2) banks whose
small size and capital positions are characteristic of acquisition targets show higher returns
than banks with the characteristics of acquirers; 3) banks in states whose economies show
high growth rates and low banking concentration [conditions that favor acquisition or
branching deregulation (see Kroszner and Strahan, 1999)] show higher returns; and 4)
reciprocal agreements that defer the trigger date and authorize de novo entry reduce the
relative bargaining power of in-state target banks.
       Carow and Heron (1998) and Brook, Hendershott, and Lee (1998) study abnormal
returns generated by the Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994
(IBBEA). Carow and Heron study the returns surrounding seven two-day event periods
for a sample of 180 BHCs, half of which had already established interstate operations and
half of which had not. Brook et al. study a 61-day event period for a sample of 290 banks.
Consistent with Carow and Lee, both studies find that IBBEA events generate a positive
abnormal return for BHCs and that abnormal returns prove higher for BHCs with target-
like characteristics. Carow and Heron also observe higher returns for banks headquartered
in states that had previously refused to authorize interstate branching.
       These studies indicate that improving opportunities for geographic expansion
benefited some types of financial institutions. However, none of these studies determines
how these putative benefits would be achieved. Theory suggests that the benefits of
geographic expansion could be realized relatively efficiently by transactions in the market
for corporate control.


III. Sources of Gains to Acquirers and Targets in Combining Previously
    Autonomous Financial Services Firms




                                              7
       Table 1 lists eight possible motives for one bank to acquire another. Economies of
scale exist when the larger size of the post-acquisition enterprise permits it to garner more
business or to produce services at a lower average cost than it could prior to the
combination. Economies of scope exist when the revenues or costs for one or more
particular services are enhanced when they are produced jointly with one or more other
services. (Improved opportunities for diversification may be associated with expansions
in either scope or scale). X-inefficiency exists to the extent that managers of the target
were not operating their firm in a fully value-maximizing way. Market power is enhanced
by any merger that improves the acquirer's ability to collect monopoly rents from the
customer base. Managerial agency costs influence a deal whenever managers of the
acquiring firm expect the acquisition to improve their personal welfare at the expense of
shareholder interests. Safety-net scale and scope economies exist when increased
institution size promises to increase the benefits an acquirer can derive from market
conjectures that the acquirer has grown too big and too complex for regulators to fail and
unwind or even to discipline adequately (TBTFU or TBTDA).
       Event-study evidence on the value of removing state-imposed barriers to out-of-
state entry supports the hypothesis that removing geographic restrictions on bank
expansion benefits potential acquirers by letting them assemble a customer base large
enough to exhaust potential economies of scale and scope. However, conventional studies
of scale and scope economies in banking find that economies are exhausted at an asset size
and product mix well inside the median size and diversity of most of the banks included in
the event-study samples (Berger, Hunter and Timme, 1993; Mitchell and Onvural, 1996).
To reconcile these conflicting bodies of evidence, one must model the scale and scope
economies generated by access to safety-net subsidies, as Hughes, Mester, and Moon,
(2000) demonstrate.
       Making room for larger (and potentially more diverse) competitors implies that the
transition to the post-deregulation equilibrium market structure would require the exit of
many existing competitors. With some firms facing elimination and others looking to
grow and diversify, it is natural for stock markets to expect would-be survivors to explore
opportunities to acquire the customer base of less-viable players. In line with this




                                              8
expectation, deregulation has been accompanied by a wave of mergers and acquisitions
(M&A) in the financial industry. According to the Vice Chairman of the Federal Reserve
Board, a G-10 study found that during the 1990s financial firms consummated roughly
7,500 M&A transactions, over half of them in the U.S. (Ferguson, 2001).
       In nonfinancial combinations, event-study evidence indicates that abnormal returns
generated by M&A announcements tend to average slightly negative for acquirers and
markedly positive for target firms (e.g., Lang, Stulz, and Walkling, 1989). Houston and
Ryngaert (1994) and Houston, James, and Ryngaert (2001) report similar findings for the
banking industry. Although some authorities attribute weakness in acquirer returns to
empire building by managers of acquiring firms (Roll, 1986; Gorton and Rosen, 1995),
such a weakness is also consistent with a model in which targets generally occupy a better
bargaining position than acquirers (cf. Schwert, 2000; Wulf, 2000). Event-study evidence
on reciprocal extensions of interstate entry supports the bargaining model, in that
expanded opportunities for outside acquisition do not always benefit targets and often
benefit potential out-of-state acquirers.
       The applicability of the bargaining model to banking derives additional support
from the event-study evidence compiled by Carow and his coauthors. These studies
demonstrate that the division of abnormal returns between potential targets and acquirers
in state-level events varies significantly with proxies for differences in bargaining power
between different kinds of partners.
             Event Study Evidence on the Motives for Megabank Mergers:
       The patterns of target and acquirer returns observed are consistent with the
hypothesis that M&A activity helps mega-institutions in the U.S. to achieve three kinds of
interacting benefits: scale and scope economies; market power; and safety-net subsidies.
We review six such studies here.
       Benston, Hunter and Wall (1995) calculate event returns for targets of 302 banking
mergers and acquisitions between 1978 and 1986, looking for evidence to discriminate
between the hypothesis that the acquirer is motivated by TBTDA subsidies as against
earnings diversification. Although the authors hypothesize that their finding that a target's
premium rises with its capital ratio favors the diversification motive over the risk-shifting




                                              9
motive, bargaining theory undermines this conjecture. Even if diversification benefits did
not exist, a stronger capital position could be expected to increase a target's relative
bargaining power and therefore its ability to force large acquirers to more fully shift
TBTDA subsidies into the acquisition price.
       Virtually every M&A announcement includes management projections of the
incremental profits the deal is expected to generate. Padgett (1999) reports that, in the
megadeals of recent years, realized operating-cost reductions have averaged much less
than management projections. Nevertheless, in a study of 41 large 1985-1996 banking
combinations in which separate revenue and cost projections were disclosed, Houston,
James and Ryngaert (2001) report that projected cost savings correlate significantly with
consolidated acquirer and target stock returns, even though revenue projections do not.
Houston et al. attribute the significant correlation to postmerger opportunities to cut
operating costs and attribute the insignificance of revenue projections to management's
failure to allow fully for deposit relationships lost in cost-saving branch closings.
However, the post-combination cost savings these authors affirm need not be solely
attributed to increased operating efficiency. They could equally well be due to reductions
in financing costs occasioned by increases in size-related safety-net subsidies.
       Kane (2000) argues that searches for TBTDA and market-power subsidies are apt
to be contaminated by including deals in which the acquirer is not at least potentially a
mega-institution. Focusing on the 15 largest BHC acquisitions in each of the years 1991-
1998, he shows that stockholders of giant BHCs gain value from becoming more gigantic
and gain even more value when the target is an in-state competitor.
       Evidence that announcement of M&A deals also significantly reduce risk-adjusted
and maturity-adjusted yields on the uninsured debt of both acquirers and targets is
compiled by Penas and Unal (2001). Consistent with the hypothesis that TBTFU/TBTDA
benefits help to motivate large-bank mergers, combinations of medium-size banks whose
consolidation pushes combined bank assets beyond a $100 billion threshold produce
particularly high announcement-month returns for their bondholders.
       Researchers have not yet studied effects of large-bank mergers on the stock prices
of corporate customers. However, banks that enhance their market power may be




                                              10
expected to extract monopoly rents. Compared to nonmerging banks, Prager and Hannan
(1998) show that merging banks decrease retail deposit rates. This is consistent with an
expansion either in market power or in size-related safety-net subsidies. Similar evidence
emerges in the personal loan market. Kahn, Pennacchi, and Sopranzetti (2000) document
that personal loan rates are higher in more concentrated markets and that mergers between
large banks result in higher personal loan rates. In the highly contested market for
automobile loans, however, mergers may increase efficiency. For this loan category, the
authors find that consequential mergers lower loan rates.


IV. Pre-GLBA Event-Study Evidence on the Value of Cross-Product Restrictions
       The previous section developed evidence that megabanks frequently benefit from
increased size and geographic extension. This section explores the extent to which
expansion of product lines may unblock latent opportunities to build market power by
intertwining large banks' information advantages and safety-net subsidies. Because these
opportunities are peculiar to large financial firms, their influence on relative bargaining
power would not make itself felt in combinations of nonfinancial firms.
       Kwan and Laderman(1999) survey a large literature on the potential value to
banking organizations of undertaking securities, insurance, and real-estate activities.
Their findings are summarized in Table 2. While the thrust of the evidence varies
somewhat with the time periods studied and how individual researchers measure risk and
return, Kwan and Laderman conclude that opportunities for BHCs to achieve profitable
portfolio diversification are strong in securities and reasonably likely in insurance. The
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA) of 1999 finally opened these fields to BHCs and also
opened banking to securities firms and insurance companies. However, the road leading
up to this legislation exhibits many curves and milestones. Important entrance ramps had
previously been opened de facto by regulatory arbitrage: i.e., from the dialectical
interaction of bank efforts to circumvent Glass-Steagall and BHCA restrictions and
regulatory competition for turf (see, e.g., Kane, 1984). In this dialectical back and forth,
regulatees innovatively adapted their product line and corporate structure to disable the




                                              11
enforcement of statutory prohibitions and lobbied specialized regulators and
Congressional committees to support or acquiesce in their circumventions.
       To illustrate the secular progression in the pressure this dialectic exerted on
Congress, this section distinguishes and examines examples of two kinds of pre-GLBA
milestone events: those initiated by bank efforts to innovate across pre-existing industry
borders ("cross-industry acquisition events") and regulator-initiated efforts to redraw
industry borders ("section 20 events").
 Squeezing Securities Underwriting and Insurance Activity into Bank Product Lines
1. The BankAmerica-Schwab Event. In November 1981, BankAmerica announced its
intention to acquire Charles Schwab and Co. This event promised to make BankAmerica
the first commercial bank to offer securities brokerage. Securities firms challenged this
move by filing a protest with the Fed through their trade association, the Securities
Industry Association. Although the dispute was not settled until the Supreme Court
upheld the permissibility of the deal in June 1984, the Fed approved the takeover in
January 1983. During the 14 months between the deal's announcement and Fed approval,
600 banks either found a way to initiate brokerage services or at least stated their intention
to do so. National banks were assisted in their efforts by an OCC decision in August 1982
to authorize national banks to offer discount brokerage outside the BHC structure through
an operating subsidiary of the bank.
       Saunders and Smirlock (1987) analyze return and risk effects associated with the
deal's announcement and subsequent Fed approval. Although the event presaged new
opportunities for BHCs to realize scope and scale economies, event returns for these
authors' sample of BHCs proved insignificantly different from zero while stocks of
securities firms showed a significant 2 percent decline. Using the perspective supplied by
Baumol's (1982) concept of contestable markets, we may infer that reducing barriers to
BHC entry into brokerage services was seen as reducing the profit margins securities firms
could enjoy without generating much in the way economic rents for BHC stockholders.
2. Section 20 Events. Beginning in 1987, the Fed used its regulatory authority under the
BHC Act to authorize BHC subsidiaries (known popularly as "Section 20 subs") to
underwrite classes of securities that it had previously held to be "bank-ineligible" (BI).




                                              12
The volume of BI business a Section 20 sub could book was limited by a strict cap on the
percentage of the sub's gross revenue attributable to BI activity. The Fed initially set the
revenue cap at 5 percent.
       In April 1987, the Federal Reserve approved requests from Bankers Trust,
Citicorp, and J.P. Morgan to underwrite four kinds of BI securities: commercial paper,
asset-backed securities, mortgage-backed securities, and municipal revenue bonds.
During their first year of operation, these three firms' subs captured over 20 percent of the
asset-backed securities market and approximately 2 percent of the mortgage-backed
securities market. In 1989, the Fed increased the revenue cap to 10% and added corporate
bonds and equities underwriting to the list of now-permissible BI activities.
       Securities law prohibits the use of inside information for financial gain, while
banking regulators are specifically directed to identify and eliminate unsafe and unsound
practices. To insulate the bank and the safety net from risks taken in underwriting
activities, the Fed initially placed stringent firewalls between the bank and its Section 20
affiliate. These barriers tightly restricted flows of information and resources between a
bank and its underwriting arm. However, in August 1996, the Fed proposed to dismantle
some of the firewalls and proceeded subsequently to accomplish this in a gradual manner.
In October, the Fed allowed employees to work simultaneously for the BHC parent and
the brokerage subsidiary. In December, the Fed increased the revenue limit from 10% to
25%. In January 1997, the Fed proposed further firewall reductions. Finally, in August
1997, the Fed adopted its August proposal. Demolishing these firewalls shifted the burden
of devising, monitoring, and enforcing substitute controls on managerial conflicts of
interest from regulators to stockholders and customers.
       Several studies analyze the wealth and risk effects of Section 20 events. Bhargava
and Fraser (BF, 1998) analyze return and risk effects for banks and investment banks at
four Section 20 event dates: (1) April 30, 1987, when the Fed authorized Bankers Trust,
Citicorp, and Morgan to underwrite selected bank-ineligible securities; (2) January 18,
1989, when the Fed added corporate debt and equity securities to its permissible list; (3)
September 13, 1989 when the Federal Reserve raised the revenue cap to 10%; and (4)
August 1, 1996, when the Fed proposed to raise the revenue cap again, this time to 25%.




                                              13
Ely and Robinson (ER, 1998) look at event returns for the last event (which they date at a
day earlier) and also for June 11 and December 20, 1996. On the June date, House
Banking Committee Chairman James Leach urged the board to raise the revenue limit; on
the December date, the Board announced its adoption of the 25% limit.
       ER and BF employ slightly different sampling frames. BF sample the 50 largest
publicly traded commercial-banking organizations and all publicly traded investment
banks. They subdivide their banking subsample into three classes: BHCs with prior
underwriting approval, banks that had an application pending, and other large banking
firms. ER analyze a sample of 24 banking companies with Section 20 subs, 41 other
banking organizations, and 20 investment banks.
       On the initial-authorization date of April 30, 1987, the three BHCs winning
permission and the six BHCs that had already submitted applications showed significant
event gains of 1.23 percent and 0.70 percent, respectively. In contrast, portfolios
constructed for investment banks and other large banking organizations show insignificant
event returns. On the risk dimension, BHCs with applications approved or pending
recorded a statistically significant increase in exposure to undiversifiable risk. Other
commercial banks and investment banks showed no significant changes in risk.
Apparently, the market expected that in pursuing the new opportunities a BHC would take
on more diversifiable risk and benefit from doing so. Looking at different subsamples of
banks on this same event date, Appilado, Gallo, and Lockwood (1993) report that the
population of money-center banks and a sample of regional banks experienced gains of
1.60 percent and 1.46 percent, respectively.
       On the date when corporate debt and equity underwriting became permissible
(January 18, 1989), BF find that organizations with prior approval showed a significantly
negative return and increased total risk. Other BHCs experienced significant gains, while
investment-bank returns were not significantly affected. Apparently, at a time when the
federal safety net was being tested by efforts to resolve the S&L insurance mess, the
power to underwrite corporate debt and equity was perceived as potentially poisonous
fruit, apt to make the BHCs already engaged in cross-product underwriting riskier in ways
that might not generate enough profit to support the increase.




                                               14
       BF report that raising the revenue cap to 10 percent in August 1989 also
significantly reduced returns for approved BHCs and insignificantly reduced them for the
other BHCs. For their rougher partition, ER find no significant returns either on this date
or on June 11. However, the meaning of the August 1989 event is contaminated by the
safety-net implications of the concurrent passage of the Financial Institutions Reform,
Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (FIRREA).
       A related Section 20 event BF analyze is the Fed's August 1, 1996 proposal to raise
the revenue cap to 25%. This event is also contaminated, since the proposal coupled the
cap increase with important firewall reductions. BF report insignificantly negative event
returns for all BHC subsamples and insignificantly positive returns for investment banks.
However, significant evidence of decreased risk emerges as well. Investment banks
showed a decrease in total risk, while approved BHCs with Section 20 subs registered
decreases in both total risk and in idiosyncratic risk.
       The final section 20 event occurred in December 1996 when the Fed announced its
adoption of the 25% limit (rather than the lesser amounts some analysts had conjectured).
ER find that section 20 BHCs experienced a significant event return of 1.25%, while
securities firms and other banks showed an insignificant benefit of about 35 basis points.
However, the signs test is significant, indicating that across individual firms in each
subsample positive event returns predominated. ER also use regression methods to show
that investment-bank returns for this event are explained by size and profitability
characteristics associated with being a takeover target.
       Cyree (2000) and Narayanan, Rangan, and Sundaram (NRS, this issue) cleverly
neutralize the contaminating information in the Fed's August 1, 1996 proposal by adding
an additional datapoint. They treat the cap-increase proposal as having been put in play
when the American Bankers Association (ABA) first recommended it to the Fed. This
assumption moves the revenue-cap proposal event forward --not to the Leach proposal
date-- but to July 15, 1996. Combining this proposal date with the adoption date for the
cap adjustment generates a significantly positive compound-event return for BHC
portfolios and allows them to interpret August 1, 1996 as predominantly a firewalls-
reduction proposal date. Event returns on this date suggest that, whatever positive effect




                                              15
was communicated by the Fed's endorsement of the ABA's proposal on August 1 was
more than offset by the negative effect its firewalls-reduction proposal had on stockholder
protections from managerial conflicts of interest.
       NRS are the first to investigate whether financial-institution customers as well as
investment banks might have been hurt by securities-powers expansion. NRS find that
investment banks were sometimes harmed and sometimes helped by Section 20 events,
but that the economic prospects of relationship customers at lead banks of sample BHCs
were harmed in each event, usually significantly so.
       This raises the question of how much of the harm customer firms experience
reflects a long-run reduction in their ability to negotiate prices for relationship services
and how much reflects an increased exposure as taxpayers to costs of financing safety-net
subsidies. Monopoly power is an issue even though evidence assembled in Ang and
Richardson (1994), Kroszner and Rajan (1997), and Puri (1994, 1996, 1999) indicate that
in the short run bank entry made investment banking markets more competitive and
improved spreads for customers. The danger is that, unless the contestability of securities
markets is preserved for future entrants by controlling the distribution of network-size
benefits and safety-net subsidies to mega-institutions, short-run benefits could be reversed
in the long run. As Saunders (1999) notes, it may well be that "pro-competitive gains,
resulting from Section 20 de novo entry into investment banking, will be rolled back" once
the number of bank-unaffiliated investment bankers has shrunk substantially.
       Contestable-markets theory tells us that entry discipline will be curtailed if
TBTDA safety-net subsidies make it unreasonable for would-be new entrants to expect to
force the exit of economically inefficient affiliates of large banks. This theory clarifies
why and how TBTDA subsidies create market power. By sustaining unprofitable
affiliates, safety-net subsidies discourage new entry by preventing the prompt exit of
incumbent bank-affiliated competitors from lines in which they are earning below-market
risk-adjusted returns. This marriage of market power and safety-net subsidies challenges
authorities to respond promptly and conscientiously to evidence that large institutions
benefit and customers might be harmed by cross-industry consolidation and particular
changes in the regulatory regimes.




                                               16
3. OCC-Initiated Insurance Loopholes. Besides undermining the separation between
banking and security activities, bank regulators authorized limited bank entry into
insurance activities. Using its authority under the incidental-powers clause of the National
Banking Act, the OCC authorized national banks to sell variable annuities and fixed-rate
annuities in 1985 and 1990, respectively. The essence of these rulings was the opinion
that annuity contracts are not insurance. In 1995, The Supreme Court upheld the OCC
interpretation.
       Carow (2001b) studies event returns on these three event dates. A related paper by
Cowan, Howell, and Power (CHP, this issue) looks at event returns for the Supreme Court
ruling and three other dates at which OCC loophole powers were tested or asserted: two
appeals-court decisions preceding the Supreme Court decision and a 1994 OCC ruling that
a national bank could structure an annuity as an insured deposit.
       Carow samples life insurance companies, property/casualty companies, and banks.
CHP sample life insurance companies and banks. Both papers observe negative event
returns for insurance companies, but find different results for banks. In Carow's event
window, banks fail to show an event return. In the events and sample of banks examined
by CHP, returns for banks are significantly positive. Carow shows that only insurance
companies that use an agency sales system were affected significantly; presumably the
market thought brokerage companies could benefit from distributing bank-underwritten
annuities. CHP find that over their event windows large life insurance companies with
less capital recorded higher returns than other life companies.
       One of the events CHP analyze is the OCC's approval of a so-called "retirement
CD" designed by Blackfeet National Bank. The retirement CD sought explicitly to extend
the deposit insurance safety net under an annuity product, potentially transfering wealth
from taxpayers and insurance companies to banks. Lacking parallel guarantees, insurance
companies would be hurt because they could not expect to price competitively an annuity
product offering a comparable level of risk. Consistent with expanding safety-net
guarantees, CHP find event returns highest for large banks with greater risk and event
returns to be lowest for low-rated insurers with large annuity reserves.




                                             17
       The OCC not only expanded bank annuity rights, but also a bank's right to sell a
broad range of other insurance products. In 1986, the OCC expanded a longstanding
small-town exception contained in the National Banking Act to permit any national bank
or branch office located in a town whose population was 5,000 or less to sell insurance to
customers located anywhere. In two separate rulings, the Supreme Court upheld the
OCC's interpretation. Although the banks sampled showed no significant event returns,
across these three dates, Carow (2001b) finds that life insurers and smaller insurance
companies suffered substantial losses.
4. State-Level Extensions of Insurance Powers. State-chartered banks looked to state
legislatures to keep national banks from eroding their franchise. By 1999, 15 states
allowed banks to act as insurance brokers/agents and 5 states authorized underwriting
activity. We found studies of only one state-level event of this type: a proposition ("Prop
103") approved by California voters on November 8, 1988. The proposition, which dealt
principally with insurance pricing, included permission for state-chartered banks to
become vendors of life, health, and property/liability insurance products. Shelor and
Cross (1994) show that state-chartered banks benefited from the passage of Proposition
103, while federally chartered depository institutions showed no significant reaction.
Although many authors find negative event returns from this event for insurance
companies, this development cannot fairly be attributed to potential bank entry due to the
contaminating effects of the pricing restrictions.
5. Other Cross-Industry Acquisition Announcements. Event study evidence on the effect
of bank expansion into securities and insurance activities supports the twin possibilities of
safety-net subsidies and increased market power. Expanding the safety net intensifies the
potential for large institutions to use their increased market power to transfer wealth from
taxpayers, competitors, and customers. Exploring this perspective, this section reviews
event returns generated from cross-industry acquisitions.
       In intensifying pressure to pass the GLBA, the single most important event was the
Citicorp-Travelers combination. Johnston and Madura (2000) and Carow (2001a)
examine announcement returns generated by this deal.




                                              18
       Johnston and Madura (2000) divide their sample into three subsamples: large
brokerage firms, large banks, and medium-sized banks. All subsamples show
significantly positive event returns. Large banks and brokerage firms show the largest
returns. We interpret these results as predicting two things: a near-certain end for Glass-
Steagall and BHCA restrictions on the insurance and securities activity of banking
organizations and that larger institutions would be in a better position to benefit from this
deregulation.
       Carow (2001a) examines a different sample, one that excludes brokerage firms and
focuses on size effects at banks and insurance companies. Although no statistically
significant event return emerges for the average sample bank, a positive size effect is
observed. In particular, event returns for banking institutions with assets greater than $10
billion significantly exceed returns at smaller banks. Here, as elsewhere, the public-policy
issue is the extent to which the apparent benefits trace to efficiency gains, increased
market power, or safety-net expansion.
       Prior to the Citicorp-Travelers event, BHCA restrictions on the ownership of U.S.
banks by nonbank companies meant that most cross-industry acquisitions were initiated by
BHCs as ways to enter the product markets of nonbank financial companies. BHC entry
into nonbank markets tends to squeeze the margin of incumbent nonbank competitors.
The standard pattern of event response was for competing nonbank companies to lose
value and for the value of bank stocks either to be unaffected or to increase slightly.
       Event returns generated by BHC acquisitions of securities firms have been studied
most extensively. Davidson, Hatfield, and Glascock (1994) analyze acquisitions of
brokerage houses, comparing event returns across three classes of acquirer: other
brokerage houses, BHCs, and nonfinancial firms. Positive event returns emerge only for
acquirers that are already in the brokerage business. BHC and nonfinancial acquirers fail
to show significant returns.
       Mergers and acquisitions of European financial firms are studied by Cybo-Ottone
and Murgia (2000). Sampling 1988-1997 deals announced between large European
financial institutions, these authors find the combined event return of acquirers and targets
to be significant. However, when they partition results by country and industry,




                                              19
significant gains emerge only for bank-on-bank combinations within a given country and
for deals that enable a bank to enter insurance. In contrast, unions of European banks with
securities firms or foreign institutions fail to produce significant returns.
        Kryzanowski and Ursel (1993) examine event returns in Canada, looking at the
1986-87 unfolding of provincial and federal permission for banks to become 100% owners
of securities firms ("permission events") and at 1987-89 announcements of bank takeovers
of investment dealers ("takeover announcements"). Across the sample of dealers studied,
only one permission event generates a significantly positive return; no permission event
significantly affects any sample bank. Most bank acquisitions of investment dealers show
insignificant negative returns for the acquiring bank and insignificant positive returns for
the target. However, when cumulated across events, target and acquirer returns become
significant.
                               V. Effects of Enacting GLBA
        The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA) of 1999 endorses cross-sector mergers
within the United States financial industry. Henceforth, financial conglomerates can
compete in a regulatory environment that does not require circuitous methods to bypass
government restrictions on product-line extension. Of course, banks still operate under
important constraints. The GLBA continues the tradition established by the BHCA of
1956 and the 1970 Amendments of restricting acquisitions of a bank or bank holding
company by a commercial firm. The GLBA even extends the reach of this tradition for
the first time to unitary thrift holding companies. Previously, this organizational form
allowed any commercial firm to own a single thrift institution. While no study directly
tests the value of the unitary-thrift loophole, Carow and Heron (this issue) infer that its
demise contributed to the reduction in stock value that thrifts experience from GLBA
events. Whether this decline traces to reduced opportunities to privately diversify
financial-services risk or reduced opportunities to benefit from safety-net subsidies is once
more an open question.
        While the GLBA closed the unitary-thrift loophole, it allows registered financial
holding companies "to engage in commercial activities that the Federal Reserve
determines to be complementary" to financial operations or to encompass the scope of




                                               20
activities necessary to provide merchant banking. Today, banks and bank holding
companies are allowed to hold up to 4.9 percent of the voting shares in any commercial
firm without regulatory approval.
         Carow and Heron show that stockholders of large financial institutions gained
substantially more from the passage of the GLBA than smaller institutions did. In Table
3, we use Narayanan, Rangan, and Sundaram's methods and their list of important 1997
borrowers to conduct a preliminary investigation of how the GLBA may have affected
financial-institution customers3.
         Our investigation focuses on two pivotal events in the GLBA's road to passage: the
October 22, 1999 announcement of the Conference Committee agreement and the
Travelers-Citicorp announcement of April 1998. In each case, we employ a three-day
event window consisting of the event day and the trading days immediately before and
after the event.
         In each window, we edit the NRS sample by deleting individual firms whose
inclusion might obscure the impact of the changing probability of final Congressional
action. We decided that six conditions justified deletion. The deletion conditions we
impose and the concerns they address are as follows:
         1. returns missing during the 200 trading days preceding the event window (to
             more sharply benchmark the normal return);
         2. stock failed to trade during at least 50 percent of the benchmarking period (to
             minimize the influences of nonsynchronous trades);
         3. stock value of firm fell below one dollar during the benchmarking period (to
             eliminate firms in danger of being delisted);
         4. absence of asset, debt, or earnings information on Compustat (relevant only in
             secondary tests);
         5. news about the firms was reported during the three-day event window on either
             the Dow Jones News Retrieval Wireservice, PR Newswire, Business



3
 Readers should recognize the selection and survival bias this entails. Given the significance of our
preliminary findings, we intend to update and extend the list of customers in future research.




                                                     21
             Newswire, or M2 Presswire (to minimize contamination by firm-specific
             events);
         6. daily returns during any event window surpassed 15 percent in absolute value
             (on the grounds that such a strong move might well reflect unreported firm-
             specific news).
         We calculate event returns as deviations from a single-index market model, using
ordinary least squares4 and the CRSP value-weighted index to proxy returns on the market
portfolio. To measure event returns, we employ Brown and Warner's (1980, 1985)
standardized cumulative average event return. We also employ a z-statistic that offers a
binomial test of the predominance of negatively or positively signed event returns and a
test of the difference between two sample proportions (see Mason, Lind, and Marchal
(1999, p. 326-330).
         Table 3 investigates event returns for the GLBA event; Table 4 studies event
returns for the Citicorp-Travelers event. Each table has five sections. Section A compares
results for relationship customers with a control sample of other nonfinancial firms;
Section B partitions the sample according to whether or not a firm is a customer of a
Section 20 banking affiliate; Section C partitions the sample into two groups according to
the size of its market capitalization; and Sections D and E seek to compare results for
firms that might have more and less bargaining power in negotiating a bank loan.
Customer Response to the GLBA Event. Table 3 investigates event returns for the
passage of GLBA. Section A compares the mean event return for the nonfinancial-
customer sample identified by NRS with the mean return for all nonfinancial firms posting
return data on CRSP. The customer sample shows a significant mean loss of 1.47 percent
from the GLBA event and individual event returns are predominantly negative. These
losses support the hypothesis of GLBA wealth redistribution. Expanding bank powers
apparently harmed the prospects of BHC relationship customers more than other firms,
inasmuch as bank customers show a significantly lower mean event return than the control

4
  Karafiath (1994) investigates effects of "event-clustering" by Monte Carlo procedures. He finds that OLS
is well-specified in finite samples that include several industries and that, for sufficiently large cross-
sections, there is no advantage to using several other more complex estimators such as the Multivariate
Regression Model.




                                                     22
sample. The 4,487-firm control sample recorded an insignificant event return of -0.68
percent and was more evenly divided between positive and negative responses than the
customer sample.5 These findings reinforce the evidence of customer damage that NRS
found for Section 20 events.
         Following the lead of NRS, we also separate the sample by whether or not a firm is
a customer of a Section 20 BHC. We find that non-Section 20 customers have lower
returns (-2.05 percent) than Section 20 customers (-1.27 percent), but the difference is not
statistically significant.
         The market power that can be exerted on a relationship customer varies inversely
with the negotiating power of the borrower. To proxy the ability of a firm to negotiate
favorable prices and services, we look first at customer size. We arbitrarily define "large-
cap firms" as those whose outstanding stock exceeds $100 million in market value.
Consistent with the hypothesis that smaller firms have less negotiating power, small-cap
firms show a mean event return of -1.71 percent compared to -1.17 percent for large-cap
firms. However, these returns differ insignificantly from each other.
         Conventional wisdom holds that credit-constrained firms would be most likely to
be harmed by reduced competition. Sections D and E use Compustat data to identify
subsamples of customer firms that might feel credit-constrained. We proxy credit
constraint in two ways: by debt ratings (where these exist) and by debt-to-asset ratio. The
hypothesis being tested is that the formation of financial conglomerates may reduce
competition between public and private debt markets and between large and small
institutions, allowing banks to adjust services or prices at customer expense.
         Section D proxies credit constraint by credit rating. Because debt-rating data are
spotty, incorporating them severely limits the size of the usable sample. Although the
small sample sizes rob the result of significance, mean returns are almost two percentage
points lower for low-rated firms. This suggests that the GLBA might have particularly
harmed credit-constrained firms.

5
  The significance of the difference is not critical, since any firm is potentially a customer of a megabank.
Also, although the market index averages returns on financial and nonfinancial firms, abnormal returns need
not average zero across the market on an event day. Even when financial firms have positive abnormal
returns, the average abnormal return of nonfinancial firms can be positive, too.




                                                     23
           Section E classifies firms by degree of debt usage. Measures of debt usage are
frequent enough on Compustat that we lose only 11 members of the section A sample6.
Firms whose debt-to-asset ratio exceeds the arbitrary limit of 10 percent show lower
returns than firms with a smaller ratio, -1.74 percent as against -1.00 percent. Again, the
difference is not significant.
           These findings reaffirm the evidence of customer damage that NRS found for
Section 20 events. In all but one of the cells examined, relationship customers are affected
adversely. Most importantly, the mean adverse effect of each event is significant for the
full sample. Despite smaller sample sizes, cumulative event returns are significant for
several subsample cells and the signs test proves significant in the majority of cases. Only
33.87 percent of customer firms showed positive event returns during the GLBA passage
event and only 37.34 percent showed positive returns during the Citicorp-Travelers event
window.
Customer Response to the Citicorp-Travelers Event. Using the same sample partitions as
Table 3, Table 4 looks at the event returns generated by the Citicorp-Travelers
announcement. Because the sample screens delete fewer cases, sample sizes are slightly
larger than in the previous table.
           In this event firms that were not classified as "relationship customers" fare
marginally worse than relationship customers do. Among relationship customers, those
with large caps, high debt usage, and a section 20 BHC relationship suffer significant
losses.
           Tables 3 and 4 analyze value-weighted returns. For the GLBA Passage Event, the
same magnitude and pattern of significant results emerge whether we look at equal-
weighted or value-weighted returns. However, in the Citicorp-Travelers event, equal-
weighted event returns are generally smaller in magnitude and never statistically
significant. Achieving greater importance in the value-weighted metric is consistent with
the hypothesis that the Citi-Travelers combination threatened large customers more than
small ones. Giant financial institutions would be able to expand their political clout, build



6
    The 11 firms omitted have almost the same average returns as the original sample.




                                                       24
market share, and price their services less favorably for any corporation too large to expect
smaller financial institutions to handle their needs.
Summary. Carow (2001) and Carow and Heron (2001) show that both events generated
larger positive event returns for very large financial institutions than for smaller ones.
This GLBA event-study evidence suggests: (1) that GLBA events increased the bargaining
power in M&A negotiations that very large bank acquirers enjoy relative to targets and (2)
that financial conglomeration threatens to adversely affect nonfinancial customers. Our
tests cannot distinguish how much nonfinancial corporations were harmed as
counterparties to future bank transactions from how much they were harmed as taxpayers
that might be asked to finance safety-net subsidies. Simply put, results are consistent with
the twin hypothesis that relaxing product-line restraints decreased customer bargaining
power and increased the economic and political clout of giant U.S. institutions.
Megainstitutions' increased clout comes from opportunities to become even larger and
more complex than ever before. Managements may use their clout economically to
discourage new entrants and politically to weaken regulatory discipline and expand their
access to safety-net subsidies.


                              VI. Summary and Implications
       Hypothesis testing is an endless learning process. Evidence produced by studies of
how bank stock returns respond to regulatory, legislative, and M&A events is suggestive
and provisional rather than decisive. Still, most public-policy economists would sleep
better if the value bank stockholders have gained from new regulatory freedoms could be
traced with great likelihood to opportunities for financial firms to jettison redundant staff
and facilities. Unfortunately, the preponderance of the evidence reviewed here favors the
alternative working hypothesis that extending the geographic reach and product lines of
large U.S. banking organizations has at least temporarily diluted the combined impact of
regulatory, creditor, and competitive discipline that mega-institutions confront.
       Event-study evidence shows that, except where new problems of corporate
governance have been created, stockholders of large U.S. banks have usually gained when
restrictions on geographic and product expansion have been relaxed. Relaxing a binding




                                              25
constraint is bound to increase welfare in a partial-equilibrium model. However, in a
general-equilibrium context, the benefits bank stockholders gain from restraint relaxation
may come entirely at the expense of competitors, customers, and the general taxpayer.
       Event studies of rulings that authorized large banks to enter securities and
insurance markets typically show that stockholders of incumbent competitors in these
markets lost value. This could be because bank entry was expected to improve product
prices, which would generate value for customers. However, although effects on
customers have been examined for only a few events, results so far are disturbing.
Narayanan, Nanda, and Sundaram (this issue) show that relationship customers at banks
lost value as BHC securities powers expanded. Tables 3&4 of our paper show that
GLBA-passage and Citicorp-Travelers announcement events hurt corporate customer
stocks as well. Finally, Prager and Hannan (1998) and Kahn, Pennacchi, and Sopranzetti
(2000) offer evidence that consequential bank mergers harm consumers by decreasing
deposit rates and increasing personal loan rates.
       If operating-cost reductions were the predominant source of event gains from
removing regulatory restraints and effecting megabank mergers, one would expect
relationship customers to benefit along with bank stockholders. However, researchers
have found that customers lost value in the few instances in which the customers' stake in
deregulation events has been examined. Future research should investigate how
consistently this result carries over to other deregulation events.
       The theory of contestable markets indicates that the entry barriers that TBTDA
safety-net subsidies create for other entrants generate monopoly power for megabanks in
every market in which they participate. The TBTDA hypothesis also predicts that events
that presage or announce increases (decreases) in FDIC deposit-insurance premiums
would lower (raise) returns on the stock of large and more-leveraged institutions more
than it would affect the stock of other banking firms. Across ten 1990-1991 premium-
increase events and five 1993-1995 premium-decrease events, this is the pattern that
Biswas, Fraser, and Hebb (2000) observe.
       Of course, Fed officials repeatedly deny that any institution is too big to fail. But
what else could they say? If they were to confirm the existence of a universe of TBTFU




                                              26
banks, creditors and depositors would have little reason to monitor and police the risk
exposures of the institutions so designated. By denying the obvious fact that some banks
are too large, too complex, and too well-connected to discipline adequately, officials at
least manage to maintain constructive ambiguity about where individual banks and BHCs
stand along the TBTFU/TBTDA continuum. That the limits of safety-net support are
ambiguous by no means contradicts the hypothesis that TBTDA benefits exist for most
major institutions and that these benefits intensify sharply whenever a mega-institution
becomes notably larger or more diverse.




                                             27
                                     REFERENCES


Aharony, Joseph, and Itzhak Swary, 1981. Effects of the 1970 Bank Holding Company
       Act: Evidence from Capital Markets. The Journal of Finance 36, 841-853.
Ang, James and Terry Richardson, 1994. The Underwriting Experience of Commercial
       Bank Affiliates Prior to the Glass-Steagall Act: A Reexamination of Evidence for
       Passage of the Act. Journal of Banking and Finance 18, 351-396.
Apilado, Vincent P., John G.Gallo, and Larry J. Lockwood, 1993. Expanded Securities
       Underwriting: Implications for Bank Risk and Return. Journal of Economics and
       Business 45, 143-158.
Barth. James R., Gerard Caprio Jr., and Ross Levine, 1999. Banking Systems around the
       Globe: Do Regulation and Ownership Affect Performance and Stability? Policy
       Research Working Paper 2325. World Bank. Development Research Group,
       Washington, D.C. Processed.
Baumol, William J., 1982. Contestable Markets: An Uprising in the Theory of Industry
       Structure. American Economic Review 72, 1-15.
Beatty, Randolph P and Jay R. Ritter, 1986. Investment Banking, Reputation, and the
       Underpricing of Initial Public Offerings. Journal of Financial Economics 15, 213-
       232.
Benston, George J., William C.Hunter, and Larry D. Wall, 1995. Motivations for Bank
       Mergers and Acquisitions: Enhancing the Deposit Insurance Put Option Versus
       Earning Diversification. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 27, 777-788.
Berger, Allen N., G.A. Hanweck, and D.B. Humphrey 1987. Competitive Viability in
       Banking: Scale, Scope, and Product Mix Economies. Journal of Monetary
       Economics 20, 501-520.
Berger, Allen N., William C. Hunter, and Stephen G. Timme. 1993. The Efficiency of
       Financial Institutions: A Review of Research Past, Present, and Future. Journal of
       Banking and Finance 17, 221-249.




                                           28
Berger, Allen N, Humphrey, David B., Pulley, Lawrence B., 1996. Do Consumers Pay for
       One-Stop Banking? Evidence from an Alternative Revenue Friction. Journal of
       Banking & Finance 20, 1601-1621.
Berger, Allen N., William C. Hunter, and Stephen G. Timme, 1993. The Efficiency of
       Financial Institutions: A Review and Preview of Research Past, Present, and
       Future. Journal of Banking and Finance 17, 221-249.
Berger, Allen N., and Gregory F. Udell, 1995. Relationship Lending and Lines of Credit
       in Small Firm Finance. The Journal of Business 68, 351-381.
Best, Ronald, and Hang Zhang, 1993. Alternative Information Sources and the
       Information Content of Bank Loans. The Journal of Finance 48, 1507-1522.
Bhargava, Rahul, and Donald R. Fraser, 1998. On the Wealth and Risk Effects of
       Commercial Bank Expansion into Securities Underwriting: An Analysis of Section
       20 Subsidiaries. Journal of Banking & Finance 22, 447-466.
Biswas, Rita, Donald R. Fraser, and Gregory Hebb, 2000. On the Shareholder Wealth
       Effects of Deposit Insurance Premium Revisions on Large Publicly Traded
       Commercial Banks. Journal of Financial Research 23, 223-241.
Black, Harold A., M. Andrew Fields, and Robert L. Schweitzer. Changes in Interstate
       Banking Laws: The Impact on Shareholder Wealth. The Journal of Finance 45,
       1663-1672.
Booth, James R. and Richard L. Smith, 1986. Capital Raising, Underwriting and the
       Certification Hypothesis. Journal of Financial Economics 15, 261-281.
Brook, Yaron, Robert Hendershott, and Darrell Lee, 1998. The Gains from Takeover
       Deregulation: Evidence from the End of Interstate Banking Restrictions. Journal
       of Finance 53, 2185-2204.
Brown, Stephen and Jerold Warner, 1980. Measuring Stock Price Information. Journal of
       Financial Economics 8, 205-258.
Brown, Stephen and Jerold Warner, 1985. Using Daily Stock Returns: The Case of Event
       Studies. Journal of Financial Economics 14: 3-31.
Carow, Kenneth A., 2001a. The Citicorp – Traveler’s Merger: Challenging Barriers
       Between Banking and Insurance. Journal of Banking and Finance 25, 1553-1571.




                                           29
Carow, Kenneth A., 2001b. The Wealth Effects of Allowing Bank Entry into the
       Insurance Industry. Journal of Risk and Insurance 68, 129-150.
Carow, Kenneth A., and Randall A.Heron, 2001. Capital Market Reactions to the Passage
       of the Financial Services Modernization Act of 1999. Quarterly Review of
       Economics and Finance, this issue.
Carow, Kenneth A., and Randall A. Heron, 1998. The Interstate Banking and Branching
       Efficiency Act of 1994: A Wealth Event for Acquisition Targets. Journal of
       Banking & Finance 22, 175-196.
Carow, Kenneth A., and Winson B. Lee, 1997. State Passage of Interstate Banking
       Legislation: An Analysis of Firm, Legislative, and Economic Characteristics.
       Journal of Banking & Finance 21, 1017-1043.
Carter, Richard B. 1992. Underwriter Reputation and Repetitive Public Offerings. The
       Journal of Financial Research 15, 341-354.
Carter, Richard B., Frederick H. Dark, and Ajai K. Singh, 1998. Underwriter Reputation,
       Initial Returns, and the Long-Run Performance of IPO Stocks. The Journal of
       Finance 53, 285-311.
Carter, Richard, and Steven Manaster, 1990. Initial Public Offerings and Underwriter
       Reputation. The Journal of Finance 45, 1045-1067.
Chang, C. Edward, and Lynge, Morgan J Jr., 1994. An Empirical Examination of Scale
       and Scope Economics of US Savings Banks. American Business Review 12, 100-
       109.
Chemmanur, Thomas, and Paolo Fulghieri, 1994. Investment Bank Reputation,
       Information Production, and Financial Intermediation. The Journal of Finance 49,
       57-79.
Claessens, Stijn, and Daniela Klingebiel, 2001. Competition and Scope of Activities in
       Financial Services. The World Bank Research Observer. 16, 19-40.
Corrigan, Gerald, E., 1983. Banks are Special. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New
       York.




                                            30
Cowan, Arnold, Jann Howell, and Mark Power, 2001. Wealth Effects of Banks’ Rights to
       Market and Originate Annuities. Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance,
       this issue.
Cummins, J., David, and Weiss, Mary A., 1993. Measuring Cost Efficiency in the
       Property-Liability Insurance Industry. Journal of Banking & Finance 17, 463-482.
Cybo-Ottone, Alberto, and Maurizio Murgia, 2000. Mergers and Shareholder Wealth in
       European Banking. Journal of Banking & Finance 24, 831-859.
Cyree, Ken B., 2000. The Erosion of the Glass-Steagall Act: Winners and Loser in the
       Banking Industry. Journal of Economics and Business 52, 343-363.
Davidson, Wallace N. III, Gay Hatfield, and John L. Glascock, 1994. Common Stock
       Returns in Corporate Takeover Bids: The Case of Brokerage House Acquisitions.
       The Financial Review 29, 77-96.
Dermine, Jean, 1999. The Economics of bank Mergers in the European Union: A Review
       of the Public Policy Issues, Report Commissioned by Dutch Ministry of Finance,
       Fontainebleau: INSEAD.
Diamond, Douglas W., 1984. Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring.
       Review of Economic Studies 51, 393-414.
Durkin, Thomas A., Elliehausen, Gregory E., 1998. The Cost Structure of the Consumer
       Finance Industry. Journal of Financial Services Research 13, 71-86.
Economides, Nicholas, 1993. Network Economics with Applications to Finance.
       Financial Markets, Institutions and Instruments 2, 89-97.
Eisenbeis, Robert A., Robert S. Harris, Josef Lakonishok, and Stephen J. Brown, 1984.
       Benefits of Bank Diversification: The Evidence from Shareholder
       Returns/Discussion. The Journal of Finance 39, 881-894.
Ely, David P., and Kenneth J. Robinson, 1998. How Might Financial Institutions React to
       Glass-Steagall Repeal?: Evidence from the Stock Market. Federal Reserve Bank
       of Dallas, Financial Industry Studies (September), 1-11.
Fama, Eugene F., 1985. What’s Different About Banks? Journal of Monetary Economics
       15, 29-39.




                                           31
Ferguson, Roger W., Jr., 2001. Technology and Financial Consolidation. The Ledger,
       Georgetown University Capital Markets Research Center, 1, 8-9.
Goldberg, Lawrence G., Hanweck, Gerald A., Keenan, Michael, and Young, Allan 1991.
       Economies of Scale and Scope In the Securities Industry. Journal of Banking &
       Finance 15, 91-108.
Goldberg, Lawrence G., Gerald A. Hanweck, and Timothy F. Sugrue, 1992. Differential
       Impact on Bank Valuation of Interstate Banking Law Changes. Journal of Banking
       & Finance 16, 1143-1158.
Gorton, Gary, and Richard Rosen, 1995. Corporate Control, Portfolio Choice, and the
       Decline of Banking. Journal of Finance, 50, 1377-1420.
Grace, Martin F., and Timme, Stephen G., 1992. An Examination of Cost Economies in
       the United States Life Insurance Industry. Journal of Risk and Insurance 59, 72-
       104.
Hansen, Robert S. and Paul Torregrosa, 1992. Underwriter Compensation and Corporate
       Monitoring. The Journal of Finance 47, 1537-1555.
Hanweck, Gerald A., and Hogan, Arthur m B., 1996. The Structure of the
       Property/Casualty Industry. Journal of Economics and Business 48, 141-156.
Houston, Joel F., Christopher M. James, and Michael D. Ryngaert, 2001. Where Do
       Merger Gains Come From?: Bank Mergers from the Perspective of Insiders and
       Outsiders. Journal of Financial Economics 60, 285-331.
Houston, Joel, and Christopher James, 1996. Bank Information Monopolies and the Mix
       of Private and Public Debt Claims. The Journal of Finance 51, 1863-1889.
Houston, Joel F., and Michael D. Ryngaert, 1994. The Overall Gains from Large Bank
       Mergers. Journal of Banking & Finance 18, 1155-1176.
Hughes, Joseph p., Lang, William, Mester, Loretta J., and Moon, Choon-Geol 1996.
       Efficient Banking Under Interstate Branching. Journal of Money, Credit, and
       Banking 28, 1045-1071.
Hughes, Joseph P., Loretta J. Mester, and Choon-Geol Moon, 2000. Are Scale Economies
       Elusive or Illusive?: Evidence Obtained by Incorporating Capital Structure and
       Risk-Taking into Models of Bank Production, Rutgers University (unpublished).




                                           32
Jain, Bharat A., and Omesh Kini, 1999. On Investment Banker Monitoring in the New
       Issues Market. Journal of Banking & Finance 23, 49-84.
James, Christopher, 1987. Some Evidence on the Uniqueness of Bank Loans. Journal of
       Financial Economics 19, 217-235.
Jayaratne, Jith, and Philip E. Strahan, 1998. Entry Restrictions, Industry Evolution, and
       Dynamic Efficiency: Evidence from Commercial Banking. Journal of Law and
       Economics 41, 239-273.
Johnston, James and Jeff Madura, 2000. Valuing the Potential Transformation of Banks
       into Financial Service Conglomerates: Evidence from the Citigroup Merger. The
       Financial Review 35, 17-36.
Johnson, James M., and Robert E. Miller, 1988. Investment Banker Prestige and the
       Underpricing of Initial Public Offerings. Financial Management 17, 19-29.
Kahn, Charles, George Pennacchi, and Ben Sopranzetti, 2000. Bank Consolidation and
       Consumer Loan Interest Rates. Working Paper: The Wharton Financial
       Institutions Center.
Kanatas, George, and Jianping Qi, 1998. Underwriting by Commercial Banks: Incentive
       Conflicts, Scope Economies, and Project Quality. Journal of Money, Credit, and
       Banking 30, 119-133.
Kane, Edward J., 2000. Incentives for Banking Megamergers: What Motives Might
       Regulators Infer from Event-Study Evidence? Journal of Money, Credit, and
       Banking 32, 671-701.
Kane, Edward J., 1996. De Jure Interstate Banking: Why Only Now? Journal of Money,
       Credit, and Banking 28, 141-161.
Kane, Edward J., 1984. Technological and Regulatory Forces in the Developing Fusion of
       Financial-Services Competition. Journal of Finance 39, 759-773.
Kane, Edward J., and Burton G. Malkiel, 1965. Deposit Variability, Bank-Portfolio
       Allocation and the Availability Doctrine. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 79,
       113-134.




                                            33
Karafiath, Imre, 1994. On the Efficiency of Least Squares Regression with Security
       Abnormal Returns as the Dependent Variable. Journal of Financial and
       Quantitative Analysis 29, 279-300.
Katz, Michael L., and Carl Shapiro, 1994. Systems Competition and Network Effects,
       Journal of Economic Perspectives 8, 93-95.
Kroszner, Randall S., and Raghuram G. Rajan, 1997. Organization Structure and
       Credibility: Evidence from Commercial Bank Securities Activities before the
       Glass-Steagall Act. Journal of Monetary Economics 39, 475-516.
Kroszner, Randall S., and Philip E. Strahan, 1999. What Drives Deregulation?:
       Economics and Politics of the Relaxation of Bank Branching Restrictions.
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 1437-1461.
Kryzanowski, Lawrence, and Nancy Ursel, 1993. Market Reaction to Announcements of
       Legislative Changes and Canadian Bank Takeovers of Canadian Investment
       Dealers. Journal of Financial Services Research 7, 171-185.
Kwan, Simon H., and Elizabeth S. Laderman, 1999. On the Portfolio Effects of Financial
       Convergence: A Review of the Literature. Economic Review, Federal Reserve
       Bank of San Francisco, 18-31.
Lang, Larry H., Rene M. Stulz, and Ralph A. Walkling, 1989. Mangagerial Performance,
       Tobin’s Q, and the Gains from Successful Tender Offers. Journal of Financial
       Economics 24, 137-154.
Lummer, Scott L., and John J. McConnell, 1989. Further Evidence on the Bank Lending
       Process and the Capital-Market Response to Bank Loan Agreements. Journal of
       Financial Economics 25, 99-122.
Martin, John D., and Arthur J. Keown, 1981. Market Reaction to the Formation of One-
       Bank Holding Companies. Journal of Banking & Finance 5, 383-393.
Martin, John D., and Arthur J. Keown, 1987. One-Bank Holding Company Formation and
       the 1970 Bank Holding Company Act Amendment: An Empirical Examination
       Allowing for Industry Group Effects. Journal of Banking & Finance 11, 213-221.
Mason, Robert D., Douglas A. Lind, and William G. Marchal, 1999. Statistical
       Techniques in Business and Economics, Irwin McGraw-Hill.




                                            34
Michaly, Roni, and Wayne Shaw, 1994. The Pricing of Initial Public Offerings: Tests of
       Adverse Selection and Signaling Theories. The Review of Financial Studies 7,
       279-319.
Mitchell, Karlyn, and Nur M. Onvural, 1996. Economies of Scale and Scope at Large
       Commercial Banks: Evidence from the Fourier Flexible Functional Form. Journal
       of Money, Credit, and Banking 28, 178-199.
Narayanan, Rajesh, Rangan Nanda, and Sridhar Sundaram. 2001. Relaxing Glass-
       Steagall: Welfare Implications of Bank Entry into Securities Underwriting.
       Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance, this issue.
Padgett, Tania, 1999. Big Mergers Yielding Profit Letdowns, Study Finds. American
       Banker 164, (October 12), 1 and 37.
Penas Maria F., and Haluk Unal, 2001. Too-Big-to-Fail Gains in Bank Mergers: Evidence
       from the Bond Markets. Department of Finance, University of Maryland
       (unpublished).
Prager, Robin A. and Timothy H. Hannan, 1998. Do Substantial Horizontal Mergers
       Generate Significant Price Effects? Evidence from the Banking Industry. Journal
       of Industrial Economics 46, 433-52.
Preece, Dianna C., and Donald J. Mullineaux, 1994. Monitoring by Financial
       Intermediaries: Banks vs. Nonbanks. Journal of Financial Services Research 8,
       193-202.
Puri, Manju, 1994. The Long-term Performance of Bank Underwritten Security Issues.
       Journal of Banking and Finance 18, 397-419.
Puri, Manju, 1996. Commercial Banks in Investment Banking: Conflict of Interest or
       Certification Role? Journal of Financial Economics 40, 373-402.
Puri, Manju, 1999. Commercial Banks as Underwriters: Implications for the Going
       Public Process. Journal of Financial Economics 54, 133-163.
Roll, Richard, 1986. The Hubris Hypothesis of Corporate Takeovers, Journal of Business,
       59, 197-216.
Rossi, Clifford V., 1998. Mortgage Banking Cost Structure: Resolving an Enigma.
       Journal of Economics and Business 50, 219-234.




                                             35
Saunders, Anthony, 1999. Consolidation and Universal Banking, Journal of Banking and
       Finance 23, 693-695.
Saunders, Anthony, and Michael Smirlock, 1987. Intra- and Interindustry Effects of Bank
       Securities Market Activities: The Case of Discount Brokerage. Journal of
       Financial and Quantitative Analysis 22, 467-482.
Schwert, G. William, 2000. Hostility in Takeovers: In the Eyes of the Beholder, Journal
       of Finance, 55, 2599-2640.
Shelor, Roger M., and Mark L. Cross, 1990. Insurance Firm Market Response to
       California Proposition 103 and the Effects of Firm Size. Journal of Risk and
       Insurance 57, 682-690.
Slovin, Myron B., Shane A. Johnson, and John L. Glasock, 1992. Firm Size and the
       Information Content of Bank Loan Announcements. Journal of Banking &
       Finance 16, 1057-1071.
Slovin, Myron B., and John E. Young, 1990. Bank Lending and Initial Public Offerings.
       Journal of Banking & Finance 14, 729-740.
Smith, Clifford W., 1986. Investment Banking and the Capital Acquisition Process.
       Journal of Financial Economics 15, 3-29.
Tussing, A. Dale, 1967. The Case for Bank Failure. Journal of Law and Economics, 10,
       129-147.
Wheelock David C., and Wilson, Paul W., 2001. New Evidence on Returns to Scale and
       Product Mix Among US Commercial Banks. Journal of Monetary Economics 47,
       653-674.
Wulf, Julie, 2000. Do CEOs of Target Firms Trade Power for Premiums?: Evidence from
       Mergers of Equals, unpublished draft: the Wharton School, University of
       Pennsylvania (April).
Zumpano, Leonard V., Elder, Harold W., and Anderson, Randy I., 2000. The Residential
       Real Estate Brokerage Industry: An Overview of Past Performance and Future
       Prospects. The Journal of Real Estate Research 19, 189-207.




                                           36
    TABLE 1: POSSIBLE ECONOMIC JUSTIFICATIONS FOR ACQUIRING
                         ANOTHER BANK



             Cost-Based Economies of Scale
             Brand-Based Economies of Scale
             Revenue-Based Economies of Scale
             Safety-Net-Based Economies of Scale
             Revenue-Based Economies of Scope
             X-Efficiency
             Market Power
             Managerial Agency Costs
                 •   Pursuit of size to strengthen managerial entrenchment
                 •   Pursuit of size-based increased in executive salaries




Source: Kane (2000), as adapted from Dermine (1999).




                                           37
               TABLE 2: RISK AND RETURN CHARACTERISTICS OF SELECTED
                                  NONBANK ACTIVITIES
                                       Relative to Banking   Potential Effect on BHC
                                                                Risk of Engaging
                                               2           3
         Activity                 Profitability       Risk    in Nonbank Activity1
                    4
         Securities
          Overall                    Higher           Higher          Varies5
            Primary Dealers          Lower            Higher         Decrease
            Non-primary dealers      Same             Higher         Decrease
          Underwriting6             Varies7           Higher         Decrease
            Primary Dealers          Same             Higher         Decrease
            Non-primary dealers      Lower            Higher         Decrease
         Trading                     Higher           Higher          Varies7
            Primary Dealers          Higher           Higher         Decrease
            Non-primary dealers      Higher           Higher         Increase
         Bank-eligible Securities    Higher           Higher         Decrease

         Insurance
          Agency                                       Higher                 Varies5                      Varies8
          Underwriting
            Property & Casualty                        Higher                 Varies8                      Varies8
            Life                                       Varies8                Varies5                      Varies8

         Real Estate
          Agency                                      Higher                 Higher                         N.A.
          Development                                 Varies9                Varies8                      Increase
          Direct Equity Investment                    Varies10               Higher                       Varies10
          Title Abstract                              Higher                 Varies8                        N.A.
          Operators                                   Varies5                Varies11                       N.A.
          Condominium                                 Lower                  Higher                         N.A.
            Management and Co-op
Source: Kwan and Laderman (1999)
1
  The effect on banking-organization risk of engaging in the nonbank activity. "Decrease" indicates that there exists a nonzero weight on nonbank
assets such that an organization with bank and nonbank assets has lower risk than an organization with only bank assets. However, there may not
be a decrease in risk for all nonbank weights, and the maximum nonbank weight that permits a decrease in risk may be quite small. "Increase"
indicates that all nonzero weights on the nonbank activity would increase banking organization risk.
2
  Some studies use accounting return on equity ROE and some use accounting return on assets ROA to measure profitability.
3
  Variance of ROE or ROA, coefficient of variation (standard deviation of returns divided by mean of returns) of ROE or ROA, or probability of
bankruptcy.
4
  Except in the last item, securities activities involve bank-eligible and bank-ineligible securities.
5
  Depends on profitability or risk measure and, depending on the risk measure, may also depend on methodology of particular study.
6
  Underwriting, dealing, and brokerage. May also include provision of investment advice.
7
  Depends on whether data cover primary dealers or non-primary dealers.
8
  Depends on profitability or risk measure used.
9
  Depends on profitability measure and time period.
10
   Depends on whether REIT data or thrift service corporation data are used, and may also depend on time period and/or methodology.
11
   Depends on time period.




                                                                    38
          TABLE 3: EVENT RETURNS FOR THE GLBA PASSAGE EVENT
                       (OCTOBER 21, 22 AND 25, 1999)
                          (Value-Weighted Returns)
Category of Bank            N            Abnormal          T-Value   % Positive   Z-statistic for
   Customers                              Return                                    signs test
                                                 Section A
Relationship               186          -1.47% ***          -3.00     33.87%        -8.43 ***
Customers
Other Nonfinancial        4487          -0.68% ***         -5.58      43.70%        -8.43 ***
Corporations
Difference in Means                      -0.79% *           1.83       -9.83%         2.65 ***
                                                Section B
Customers of               137          -1.27% **         -2.21       33.58%        -3.85 ***
Section 20 banks
Customers of Non-           49          -2.05% **          -2.16      34.69%         -2.14 **
Section 20 banks
Difference in Means                         0.78%            0.72      -1.11%           0.14
                                                 Section C
Small cap                  106          -1.71% ***         -2.72      33.96%        -3.30 ***
ψ$100 mil equity
Large cap                   80            -1.17%           -1.45      33.75%        2.91 ***
>$100 mil equity
Difference in Means                        -0.54%            0.69       -0.21           0.03
                                                 Section D
Non-Investment              21            -1.59%           -0.97      23.81%          -2.40
Grade Bond Rating
Investment Grade            11            0.30%             0.15      54.55%           0.30
Bond Rating
Difference in Means                        -1.89%            0.69      -30.74%         1.74 *
                                                 Section E
Debt/Assetsζ10%            113          -1.74% **          -2.33      34.51%        -3.29 ***

Debt/Assets<10%             62           -1.00% *          -1.87      32.26%        -2.79 ***
Difference in Means                        -0.74%            0.11       2.25%           0.30

*** Significantly different from zero at 1 percent
** Significantly different from zero at 5 percent
* Significantly different from zero at 10 percent




                                                     39
TABLE 4: EVENT RETURNS FOR CITICORP-TRAVELERS ANNOUNCEMENT
           (APRIL 3, 6, AND 7, 1998) – (Value Weighted Returns)
Category of Bank            N           Abnormal           T-Value        % Positive   Z-statistic for
   Customers                              Return                                         signs test
                                                 Section A
Relationship               233          -1.00% **           -2.22          37.34%        -3.87***
Customers
Other Nonfinancial        4966          -1.29% ***               -16.91    35.38%       -20.60 ***
Corporations

Difference in Means                        0.29%            1.41             1.96%           0.61
                                                Section B
Customers of               176          -1.17% **         -2.31            37.50%        -3.32 ***
Section 20 banks

Customers of Non-           57            -0.45%                 -0.43     36.84%         -1.98 **
Section 20 banks

Difference in Means                         -0.72                  0.77      0.66%           0.09
                                                     Section C
Small cap                  118            -0.67%                 -0.75     43.22%          -1.47
ψ$100 mil equity

Large cap                  115          -1.33% **                -2.40     31.30%        -4.01 ***
>$100 mil equity

Difference in Means                        0.66%           1.18             11.92%          1.88 *
                                                Section D
Non-Investment              17            0.28%           0.14             41.18%           0.73
Grade Bond Rating

Investment Grade            9             -1.63%                 -1.60     33.33%          -1.00
Bond Rating

Difference in Means                         1.91%            1.21            7.84%           0.39
                                                 Section E
Debt/Assetsζ10%            134           -1.08% *          -1.71           38.06%        -2.76 ***

Debt/Assets<10%             86            -0.88%                 1.46      34.88%        -2.80 ***

Difference in Means                        -0.20%                  0.08     -3.18%           0.48

*** Significantly different from zero at 1 percent
** Significantly different from zero at 5 percent
* Significantly different from zero at 10 percent




                                                        40
