                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE CHANGING ROLE OF AMERICA’S VETERANS


                                             Hugh Rockoff


                                         Working Paper 8595
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w8595


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2001




Preliminary. Please do not cite or quote without checking with me first. This essay provides an historical
background for understanding the statistics on veterans that will appear in the millennial edition of the
Historical Statistics of the United States. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Hugh Rockoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Changing Role of America’s Veterans
Hugh Rockoff
NBER Working Paper No. 8595
November 2001
JEL No. N4



                                              ABSTRACT


        This essay provides an historical background for understanding the statistics on veterans that will
appear in the millennial edition of the Historical Statistics of the United States. It describes changes in
the number of veterans, and in the benefits provided by governments to veterans, from colonial times to
the present. It then discusses in broad terms how political and historical forces shaped the form and
amount of benefits provided to veterans, and how the programs created for veterans in turn influenced
the evolution of other government programs.




Hugh Rockoff
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
732-932-7857
Rockoff@economics.rutgers.edu
Introduction

       Veterans have played an important role in the economic and political life of the nation

since colonial times, and during and after the nation’s major wars, the best way of caring for

veterans and of rewarding them for their services became major political issues. This chapter

provides the historical background for understanding the historical statistics concerning

America’s veterans. In general terms, veterans are simply former members of the armed forces,

“those who served.” But in the American context, especially after major wars, there is another

distinction that is important. In the past the United States relied on a small professional force that

was augmented during wars by large numbers of volunteers or draftees. When the war was over,

the programs and facilities designed to care for disabled and retired professional soldiers could

not be expanded easily to take care of the needs of citizen soldiers. Instead, new programs and

facilities run by special veterans agencies were created. Most of the statistics shown here,

although not all, refer to programs originally created for these temporary members of the armed

forces, “citizen soldiers,” rather than the professionals. In recent years, with the introduction of

the all-volunteer system of armed forces, the importance of this distinction has diminished.

       The data on veterans presented here consists of two types: (1) data on the number of

veterans by age and by period of service, (2) data on the benefits that have been awarded to

veterans whether in cash or kind -- medical care, domiciliary care, and so on. The nature and

limitations of the data will emerge from the historical narrative, but a few general remarks on the

quality of the data will be useful to have in mind from the start. As is often the case, the amount

and quality of the data improves as one moves forward in time. Considerable information about

veterans from the colonial and antebellum periods can be found in government documents, but

has rarely been assembled by scholars. Some of the unique problems associated with these


                                                  3
periods – the important role of land grants, for example – will be discussed below. The Civil War

also presents problems for the chronicler of America’s veterans primarily because the incomplete

information about the number of people serving in the Confederate forces, their subsequent

histories, and the scattered records of the southern states concerning aid to confederate veterans.

       Beginning with the Union veterans of the Civil War, however, the records of the

Commissioner of Pensions (founded in 1833 it became the Veterans Administration in 1930 after

consolidations with other agencies) combined with data collected by the military services, and in

more recent decades by the Bureau of the Census and other government agencies, provides an

accurate record of how the national government has rewarded its veterans. Inevitably, many

things remain uncounted. Many laws, for example, gave veterans preferences in hiring, and

many employers have acted on this principle even when not compelled to do so. Comprehensive

estimates of the value of these preferences have not been made. In addition, certain categories of

aid to veterans have been subject to manipulation. Often the amount of benefits received by a

veteran depended on whether a disability suffered by the veteran was found to be service-

connected or non-service connected. So the breakdown in the tables based on this distinction,

although highly accurate with respect to ex-post decisions, do not reflect the division that would

be made by an impartial observer. Nevertheless, the data presented here, especially the broad

totals, provide an accurate record of how the United States has rewarded, or in some cases failed

to reward, its veterans.



From Colonial Times to the Civil War

       The colonial system of veteran’s benefits was derived from the British system.

Legislation passed during the Elizabethan era (the 1592-93 session of parliament) provided


                                                 4
relief for the crown’s soldiers and sailors who had become sick or disabled while serving. In the

English North American colonies legislation passed in Virginia in 1624 would have provided for

medical care and maintenance of disabled soldiers, but this legislation was not ratified in

London. As a result, Plymouth Colony in New England earned the credit for being the first to

pass veteran's legislation that went into effect. This law, passed in 1636 to encourage service in

the Pequot war, provided for the public maintenance of disabled soldiers. Similar legislation was

passed in other colonies throughout the colonial era. A Maryland law of 1678 is notable because

it provided pensions for the widows and dependent children of soldiers killed in military service,

as well as relief for disabled soldiers.


        Given the colonial tradition, it was naturally assumed that the new state governments and

the Continental Congress would provide benefits for soldiers and sailors disabled during the

Revolutionary War and for their widows and orphans. In August 1776, Congress adopted the

first national pension law. It provided half pay for life for soldiers and sailors incapable of

earning a living as a result of wounds suffered War for Independence. After the war,

considerable pressure was brought to bear to increase the pensions and liberalize eligibility. In

1818 a service pension, meaning one that required military service but not a service-connected

disability, was finally signed for Revolutionary officers and men “in need of assistance.” This

law was revised repeatedly. In 1820 concerns about the federal budget led to the striking of many




                                                   5
pensioners from the rolls. But the law of 1823, passed in more prosperous circumstances,

restored many pensioners.


       The demand made by Continental Army officers for annual half pay for life contingent

solely on service until the end of the war, a demand based on the policy in the British army, was

far more contentious than pensions for soldiers suffering from disabling injuries or in need of

financial assistance. George Washington, although dubious at first, became a strong advocate of

half pay when resignations at Valley Forge threatened the very existence of the army. In 1778,

Congress promised seven years’ half pay. And in 1780 this allowance was extended to the

widows and orphans of officers, who died during the war. As the end of the war neared, the

officers became increasingly concerned about the willingness and ability of Congress and the

states to finance their pensions. At Newburgh New York, the site of the so-called “Newburgh

Conspiracy,” Washington himself was forced to address his officers, when the idea that the army

should not be disbanded until Congress addressed its financial needs gained headway. Finally, in

March 1783, Congress passed the Commutation Act. In lieu of half pay for life, the officers were

offered five years’ full pay in government securities bearing six- percent interest. There was

considerable opposition to the act, based partly on fiscal considerations, and partly on the

distinction between the officers and the enlisted men, who were offered only one year’s pay.


       As many of the officers had feared, the Confederation failed to pay even the interest on

the Commutation bonds. The Society of Cincinnati formed in 1783 by ex-officers after the end of


                                                 6
the war and before the army disbanded, was the first of America’s veteran’s organizations. Its

goals were to continue the ties formed during the war and to pressure the government to fulfill

the pledges made to the officers. Although the Society was initially feared as a threat to

democracy, the decrease in the number of surviving officers and the requirement that

membership pass through the eldest son led to a gradual decrease in the influence wielded by the

Society in the postwar era.


       In 1791, under the new federal government, provision was made for paying the

Commutation Bonds as part of the general funding of the debt. In the meantime, many officers

had parted with their bonds at bargain prices, and so began a long campaign for relief. Success

did not come until 1828 when full pay for life was granted to surviving officers,

noncommissioned officers, and soldiers who had served until the end of the war. In 1832

pensions were authorized on the basis of two years service. The eligibility of widows and

orphans continued to be an issue. The Widows Pension Act of 1836 pensioned widows who were

married at the time of the Revolution to men who would have been eligible for a service pension

under the Act of 1832. In subsequent years the requirement that the marriage date from the

Revolution was gradually eased and eventually eliminated.


       In addition to the pensions paid in cash, veterans of the Revolution received warrants for

western public land ranging from 100 acres for a private to 1,100 acres for a major general. This

was a standard policy of British and Colonial governments. During the Revolution the


                                                 7
government had even offered land to Hessian soldiers who deserted from the British forces. In

all, warrants for over 9.5 million acres were awarded to veterans of the Revolution. Warrants

were also issued to veterans of the War of 1812, the Indian Wars, and the Mexican War. During

the Revolution the warrants were for land in certain designated western tracts (perhaps to provide

protection for the frontier), but during the Mexican War transferable warrants to 160 acres of any

part of the public domain were offered to men volunteering for service. These were essentially

cash grants at one remove.


       Warrants for almost 73.5 million acres had been issued by 1860. The value of the land

transferred through veteran warrants has not been determined. Valued at $1.1 per acre (a small

discount from $1.25, the price at which much of the public domain was sold) the total would be

about $81 million, $1.8 billion in today’s money. The settlement of these claims became a major

political issue in a number of states, Tennessee in particular. Close to 40 percent of the arable

land in Iowa (the state with the highest percentage) was transferred on the basis of veteran

warrants. Many of the warrants, once they were made transferable, were sold to speculators. This

led to considerable criticism of the warrant system, and was another reason, along with the

declining amount of suitable land, for its abandonment. Nevertheless, the cash-like system

adopted in the Mexican War provided an important precedent for the use of land grants to

finance the land grant college system and the transcontinental railroads. O’Callaghan (1954) and

Oberly (1990) provide details on the land grants.


                                                  8
       Although land grants were by far the most important form of in-kind aid provided to

veterans, there were also attempts to provide more direct forms of aid. In 1798 a tax was levied

on seamen to provide funds for hospital care, and in the event of a surplus, for the construction of

hospitals. This system was extended to the navy the following year. Eventually, a system of

naval hospitals was constructed including facilities on the East Coast and the Mississippi. In

1834, a home was established for old and disabled naval personnel, and in 1851 with part of the

money won by General Winfield Scott in Mexico, a home for old and disabled soldiers.


       In some important respects the evolution of monetary pensions for veterans of the

Revolution was repeated for veterans of the War of 1812, the Mexican War, and the Indian

Wars. Initially pensions were established only for invalids, or their widows and orphans. Then

pressure gradually mounted for pensions based on service alone. Eventually, service pensions

were granted, but so many years after the conflict, that they were, in effect, old-age pensions.

The service pension for the War of 1812 was established in 1871. The rules were liberalized in

1878: the required service was reduced to 14 days, and the requirement for widows that the

marriage date from the War was eliminated. Service pensions for veterans of the Mexican war

were first granted in 1887. Service pensions for veterans of some of the Indian Wars, as they

were known, such as the Black Hawk War, and the Seminole Wars, were not granted until 1892.

Subsequent legislation liberalized the requirements, increased the benefits, and pensioned

veterans of other campaigns against Native Americans.


                                                  9
From the Civil War to World War I

       The sheer magnitude of the Civil War, along with the growing prosperity in the postwar

North, meant that the veterans of this conflict would play a far different role in postbellum

America than had the veterans of earlier conflicts. About 9.0 percent of Americans (North and

South) participated, and about 1.4 percent died in service. The nearest parallel was the

Revolution, when about 7.4 percent of Americans participated, and .1 percent died in service.

The other wars were even smaller. Comparable figures for the War of 1812 are 3.4 percent, and

.02 percent, and for the Mexican war, .4 percent, and .1 percent.

       Figure 1 shows the number of veterans per 1000 Americans beginning in 1865 and

continuing to the present. The lower line includes only Union veterans of the Civil War. The

upper line includes a makeshift estimate of the number of Confederate veterans. Estimates of the

number of soldiers and sailors who served in the confederate forces are subject to a wide margin

of error, and there are no estimates of the number of surviving Confederate veterans in the

postbellum era. Here I simply took the ratio of Confederate survivors of the war to Union

survivors (.47) and applied it to the number of union veterans in subsequent years to get an

estimate of the number of Confederate veterans. Most likely mortality at younger ages would

have been higher for Confederate veterans than for Union veterans because of lower standards of

living in the South, lower payments to veterans, and a less favorable disease environment. So this

procedure probably over-estimates the number of Confederate veterans. Nevertheless, the main

point, the important political and economic role played by veterans of the Civil War is evident.

The number of veterans per 1000 Americans was close to 80 at the end of the Civil War, a

number not surpassed until World War II.




                                                 10
       In 1862, soon after the outbreak of the Civil War, Congress passed legislation providing

pensions for disabilities caused by the war, and pensions for widows, orphans, and in some cases

– a new feature -- dependent mothers and sisters. This was the basic law in force until 1890. In

addition, in 1865 Congress authorized the establishment of a "National Asylum" for Disabled

Veterans. (The Asylum in Washington D.C. was renamed the National Home for Disabled

Volunteer Soldiers in 1873; colloquially it became known as the "Old Soldiers Home.")

Facilities had been established earlier for soldiers and sailors in the regular armed forces. But

these had been relatively small affairs supported by contributions from the soldiers and sailors

and from naval prizes. The scale of the Civil War recommended a new agency.

       To receive a pension some disability that could be traced to the war had to be

demonstrated. Inevitably, pressure grew to liberalize the rules and their administration. The

Grand Army of the Republic (G.A.R.), an association of union army veterans formed in 1866,

became a formidable lobbying force on behalf of the veterans. Success in increasing benefits,

however, varied with the state of the federal budget (surpluses were good for the veterans), with

the party in power (Republican Congresses and administrations were good for the veterans), and

with the proximity to elections. Lawyers who specialized in winning pensions for their clients, it

must be admitted, also became effective lobbyists for more generous pensions.


       The amount of money transferred to Union veterans is shown in figure 2, which traces the

total amount spent by the Department of Veterans Affairs and its predecessor agencies, and the

amount spent on compensation and pensions, per $1000 of GDP from 1869 to 1998. (The figures

on total spending, and spending on compensation and pensions, were drawn from table SSG.B.6.


                                                 11
A 5-year moving average of GDP was used, except for the beginning and ending observations, in

order to abstract from sharp cyclical fluctuations in GDP.) In the 1870s spending on Union

veterans amounted to about $3.5 per $1000 of GDP, almost all in the form of compensation for

death or disabilities caused by the war.


       The Arrears Act of 1879 was an important victory for advocates of more generous

pensions. Prior to this law a veteran’s pension began when he was added to the roles, no matter

how long after the original disability was incurred. Under the Arrears Act pensioners could have

their cases reopened and be awarded the amount of pension due from the time they incurred their

disability to the time they were placed on the rolls. The law also covered veterans whose

eligibility for a pension would be recognized in the future. Substantial amounts were awarded

under the Arrears Act, and the incentive to apply for a pension was increased substantially. The

effect of the Arrears Act on the level of pension payments can be observed in figure 2.


       As can be seen in figure 2, Civil War pensions and benefits reached a peak relative to a

five-year moving average of GNP in the early 1890s at a figure of over $10.00 per thousand

dollars of GNP. This was nearly 30 years after the end of the fighting, when many of the

surviving veterans were in their 50s. The contrast with World War II, when spending relative to

GDP reached its peak in the immediate aftermath of the war and then trended downward, is

evident.




                                                12
       Despite lobbying by the veterans and their allies, the ultimate goal of many of the

veterans, a service pension, was long in coming, as it was for veterans of earlier wars. In 1887,

while signing legislation granting service pensions for Mexican War veterans, President Grover

Cleveland, a Democrat, vetoed a similar measure for veterans of the Civil War on the grounds

that they were still too young. Three years later, however, Congress passed the Disability

Pension Act of 1890, understandably signed by Republican President Benjamin Harrison. This

Act, although nominally a disability law, came very close to meeting the demand for a pure

service pension. Under the Act of 1890 the mere existence of a disability was sufficient for a

pension, it wasn’t necessary to show that the disability had resulted from military service.

Eligibility was not limited to the poor, and the service requirement was simply 90 days and

honorable discharge. Since the Commissioner of pensions was given some discretion under the

law when it came to fixing individual pensions, the policy of the commissioner became a major

political issue. Pressure for more liberal pension benefits continued, and in 1904 Republican

President Roosevelt issued Executive Order 78, which defined age itself to be a disability,

creating an authentic service pension. Thus the service pension came 39 years after the end of the

Civil War, the same period that veterans of the Mexican war had to wait, and a bit shorter than

the 44 year wait of veterans of the Revolution, and the 56 year wait of veterans of the war of

1812. Between 1865 and 1905 the number of Northern Veterans of the Civil war, to put the




                                                 13
figure in a somewhat different perspective, declined from 1,830,000 to 821,000. (Series

SSG.B.2.4)


       Under the 1904 executive order pensions started at age 62 and the amount awarded

increased at ages 65, 68, and 70. Subsequent legislation broadened and codified the idea behind

Executive Order 78. The law of 1912, for example, included a schedule of pensions ranging from

$13 per month for a man aged 62, who had served only 90 days, to a maximum of $30 per month

for a man aged 75, who had served for three years. The rules with respect to widows were also

gradually eased, so in the end it became possible for a young woman to marry an aged veteran of

the Civil War and thus to secure a pension throughout of her adult life.


       The liberalization of the Pension system in 1890 was the result of a number of factors: the

precedent established by earlier wars (a factor often neglected by historians), lobbying by the

Grand Army of the Republic, lobbying by the pension lawyers, increasing sympathy for the

veterans as they entered middle age, and the bitter political struggles between the Democrats and

the Republicans – the Republicans who controlled both houses and the presidency in 1890 relied

on the overwhelming support of the veterans — were all important. But the state of the federal

budget also played a role. The federal budget had been in surplus for a number of years prior to

1890. Taxes could be cut, but this would have meant cutting the tariff, which would offend

powerful business interests, or cutting the alcohol and tobacco taxes, which would offend anti-

drinking and anti-tobacco activists. The close association between the surplus, the tariff, and


                                                 14
pensions for veterans of the Civil War was a reprise of events in the 1820s involving veterans of

the Revolution. Various schemes for increased spending were floated, but liberalizing the

pension emerged as the plan with the greatest political payoff. [Skocpol (1992, 1993) and

Holcombe (1999)].


        The liberalization of the Civil War Pension system helped to offset the decrease in the

number of veterans and their widows. The dollar amount paid out in Civil War pensions actually

peaked in 1921, 56 years after the end of the war. The Union pension system eventually covered

a substantial fraction of native-born northern men and their survivors. By 1900, according to

Dora L. Costa, (1998, 197), a leading authority on the Civil War Pensions, “21 percent of all

white males over the age of 55, were on the pension roles” and "The average pension paid to

Union Army veterans from 1866 to 1912 replaced about 30 percent of the income of an unskilled

laborer, making the Union army pension program as generous as Social Security retirement

benefits today."


       The Civil War Pension System, as a number of prominent scholars have argued, was

America’s first national welfare system. (Skocpol 1992) At the turn of the century liberal

reformers, such as Isaac Max Rubinow (1913), hoped that as the number of veterans and their

survivors declined, “room” would be created in the Federal budget for a general old-age pension

and other welfare-state benefits. (As a share of the Federal Budget, veterans spending reached its

peak, 43 percent, in 1893. In 1914, on the eve of World War I, payments to veterans accounted


                                                15
for 25 percent of the budget.) Conservatives, on the other hand, hoped that the unsavory

reputation of the Civil War pension would discourage welfare experiments. The pension system

was often perceived, with some justice, as a system rampant with abuses, such as the “pension

marriages” mentioned above, and as a system that debased national political life, as both parties

sought to buy the votes of the pension recipients. A number of states created welfare benefits for

women and children prior to 1929, but it was not until the 1930s that a national social security

system was established. Although the establishment of a national system was mainly a product of

the Great Depression, it also owed a great deal to the Civil War pension. As Baack and Ray

(1988) showed, the Civil War pension educated congressmen about the political benefits of old-

age pensions, and was a focal point for the development of special interests that could lobby

effectively for benefits.


        Civil War veterans were not awarded warrants for land. But their military service was

counted toward the residence requirement of the Homestead Act. Civil War veterans were also

given preference in hiring by the federal civil service, and by many states. Military service,

moreover, was a valuable help, although not a requirement, for those seeking political office. No

estimate of the monetary value of these privileges is available.


        Federal benefits were paid only to veterans of the Union forces. (Except for one: In 1958

Congress pardoned, and provided a pension for the last surviving Confederate veteran.) The

southern states, however, provided pensions and benefits in kind for Confederate veterans --


                                                 16
prosthetic devices were a major item in several state budgets after the war. Like their northern

counterparts the Confederate veterans organized effectively. Local veterans associations formed

soon after the war ended. And in 1889 a national organization, the United Confederate Veterans,

was formed from these separate associations. The relative poverty of the South and the lack of

certain fiscal resources, such as the tariff, meant, however, that the amount of resources that

veterans could expect from Southern legislatures was limited. Exact figures on the amount of

benefits paid to Confederate veterans are not available. But it is clear that these benefits were

meager compared with the benefits paid to Union veterans and their survivors. One estimate

places the total amount spent by the southern states on Confederate pensions at $350 to $400

million, perhaps 4.1 to 4.7 percent of what was spent on Union veterans, perhaps 9 to 10.3

percent on a per capita basis. Veterans of the Confederacy were also accorded preferences in

hiring and political life in the South because of their veteran status.


       The Civil War Pensions left behind an enormous amount of medical records, because a

medical disability attested to by a pension office surgeon was a requirement for a pension.

Modern computers make it possible to encode and manipulate this mass of data. And as a result

scholars have used these records in recent years to analyze the effects of income, wartime stress,

and other factors on the health and economic behavior of the veterans. Robert Fogel, of the

University of Chicago, has been the leader of the effort to make use of this data. Research based

on this data has led to a number of important academic papers and monographs. At the time of


                                                  17
writing, considerable information on the project, and data created by it, was available at the

website of the Center for Population Economics, at the Graduate School of Business, of the

University of Chicago: http://www.cpe.uchicago.edu.


       After the Spanish-American War (1898) and the Philippine Insurrection (1899-1902), as

they are entitled by the U.S. government, as after previous wars, a number of veterans’

organizations were founded to provide mutual support, to affirm the values shared by the

veterans, and to lobby for benefits. In 1913 the merger of two of these organizations (which had

grown through earlier mergers) produced the Veterans of Foreign Wars, a veterans organization

that would continue to play a major role in veterans affairs for the remainder of the century. In

truth, however, the veterans of these two wars had an easier time winning recognition for their

services in part because of the previous work done by the Civil War veterans. Because the total

number of men and women engaged was relatively small, these two wars made a relatively small

impact on the number of veterans in civilian life, and on the overall level of federal spending on

veterans, as can be seen in figures 1 and 2.


The World Wars


       Although America’s relatively brief (1917-1918) involvement in World War I would not

leave as large an imprint on the structure of the nation’s population as the Civil War or World

War II, the impact – as shown in figure 1 – was nonetheless significant. In the immediate




                                                 18
aftermath of the war, close to 50 out of every 1000 Americans was a veteran, a level not seen in

the United States for decades. While the number of veterans was reminiscent of the Civil War

era, however, the structure of benefits created to aid them was very different. It was insurance

and medical care, rather than pensions, that became the immediate priorities.


       The origins of the current programs for insuring members of the armed forces and

veterans can be traced to World War I. Shortly after the war began companies shipping goods to

Europe found it hard to get marine insurance at what seemed like reasonable rates. The risks for

commercial insurers were very great and very difficult to calculate on the basis of past

experience. Under the War Risk Insurance Act (September 2, 1914) the U.S. government

supplied marine insurance. When the United States entered the war in April 1917 the opportunity

to buy insurance was extended to merchant marine personnel. A more comprehensive measure,

the War Insurance Act (Soldiers and Sailor’s Insurance Law), was passed a few months later, in

October 1917. This law provided compulsory pay allotments for the families of service personnel

during the war, compensation for death or disability, medical and rehabilitation services, as well

as subsidized term life insurance. The idea was that a soldier would have the peacetime cost of

the insurance deducted from his pay, but the government would pay the additional costs of

insuring the higher risks caused by the war. The Bureau of War Risk Insurance was created

within the Treasury to administer the new system. Over 4 million policies were issued during the

war.


                                                 19
       The insurance program that emerged from World War I was continued after the war but

modified in response to subsequent wars and changing economic conditions. The National

Service Life Insurance program was established in 1940 in response to World War II. This

legislation was replaced in 1951 by the Servicemen’s Indemnity Insurance program. Another

program, the Veterans' Special Life Insurance was established a short time later to meet the

needs of members of the armed forces serving during the Korean War.


       In the early 1950s, private insurers began to complain that competition from the Veterans

Administration was unfair, and the industry began to lobby Congress for a new approach. The

result was the Servicemembers' Group Life Insurance program (1965) for members of the armed

forces serving during the Vietnam conflict and in subsequent periods, and the Veterans' Group

Life Insurance (1974) for veterans after separation from the armed forces. Under these programs

term life insurance is provided under group plans issued by private insurers, but the government

defrays the costs. As a matter of accounting, and following earlier traditions, the member of the

armed forces is said to pay for the ordinary cost of insurance through deductions from pay, and

the government is said to pay for the extra part of the premium that reflects the additional risks of

service in the armed forces. Over time these popular programs have been expanded. The

maximum amount of insurance per individual has been raised from $10,000 in a series of steps

to $200,000 in 1992, and coverage has been extended to members of the National Guard. A




                                                 20
program was also created, in 1971, to provide mortgage protection life insurance to disabled

veterans who had received grants for the purchase of specially adapted housing.


       A hospital system was also created to provide medical care for World War I veterans.

Insurance and the government provided hospital system were new departures in the

government’s approach to veterans. Previously, veterans had been aided mostly by writing

checks based on disabilities or death resulting from service during a war. There had been some

expenditure for homes for aged veterans, but quantitatively they were of minor importance. Now,

however, more emphasis was placed on in-kind services, and payments earmarked for education.


       Part of the explanation for the emphasis on in-kind aid after World War I was the

widespread perception that the Civil War pension had been abused, and the hope that in-kind

benefits would be harder to exploit. Another factor was the new view about the appropriate role

of the government in the economy that had evolved during the Progressive Era. Historically,

most Americans had been skeptical about the ability of government bureaucracies to perform

efficiently. Now many Americans were convinced that government could provide high quality

services at a reasonable cost. The new view of government was especially relevant in the case of

medical care because it was believed that veterans would face unique medical problems, “shell

shock” for example, that physicians in the private sector would lack the experience to handle

properly.




                                                21
       After World War I, as after earlier wars, pressure began to build to reward veterans more

generously, and to include those who had not suffered disabilities as a result of their service. The

American Legion founded by members of the American Expeditionary Forces in 1919 was

especially effective in lobbying for a “bonus” for veterans. The point was made that the enlisted

men, who had served for a dollar a day during the war, had suffered from wartime inflation and

deserved compensation. Congress finally agreed, and in 1924 a “bonus” was awarded, but one

that was not scheduled for payment until 1945. Although veterans could and did borrow against

the security of their adjusted service compensation certificates many veterans joined a campaign

in the early 1930s for an early payment of the bonus in order to alleviate the distress caused by

the depression. In 1932 thousands of veterans (estimates run from 15 to 40 thousand) converged

on Washington to demand immediate payment of the bonus. Most of the veterans returned home

after the Senate failed to pass a measure providing for immediate payment. A small group,

however, remained and eventually was driven out by federal troops commanded by General

Douglas MacArthur. A second Bonus Army came to Washington in 1933, after Democrat

Franklin Roosevelt replaced Republican Herbert Hoover, but again no legislation was passed. In

1936, however, Congress finally passed legislation, over a presidential veto, providing for

immediate payment. The amount of the bonus finally paid was substantial given the depressed

incomes of the day. The bonus can be seen as the sharp peak in figure 2. From a Keynesian

perspective this is just what the economy needed. In his classic study of fiscal policy in the 1930s



                                                 22
E. Cary Brown (1956, p.863) concluded that there were only two years, 1931 and 1936, in which

fiscal policy (combining all levels of government) was markedly more expansionary than it was

in 1929, and that in both cases it was due to payments to veterans.


       In some ways World War II gave the veteran more prominence in American society than

he or she had ever had before. As can be seen in figure 1, the number of veterans per 1000

persons rose to a height that exceeded even the level reached immediately after the Civil War.

Overall, the military participation rate during World War II reached 11.5 percent, compared with

9.0 percent in the Civil War. The difference between the wars was the death rate. Deaths from

combat, disease, and other service related causes during the Civil war amounted to 1.4 percent of

the 1865 population. The comparable figure for World War II was .3 percent of the 1945

population. The unity of the nation, the clear-cut victory over the Axis, and the return to

prosperity, assured that the United States would do well by the veterans of World War II. The

result was a large number of innovative programs.


       Planning for World War II veterans began during the war. The Postwar Manpower

Committee reported to President Roosevelt in June 1943 proposing a number of benefits for

veterans. The report was influenced by the perception that demobilization had gone badly after

World War I, by the Wisconsin Educational Bonus Law of 1919 (which had provided tuition, a

subsistence allowance, and other benefits for disabled veterans attending vocational schools,

high schools, or colleges), and by recently passed Canadian legislation. These examples were


                                                 23
brought home to the Congress through the lobbying efforts of the veterans organizations, the

Veterans of Foreign Wars and the American Legion. The landmark legislation that finally passed

Congress in 1944, the Servicemen’s Readjustment Act, has been known ever since by its popular

name, the GI Bill of Rights.


       The GI Bill provided a wide range of benefits including; health care; mustering out pay;

job placement; unemployment insurance; loans to buy a home, farm or business; reemployment

rights and other employment preferences; and educational benefits. The bill reflected a variety of

concerns, but the fear that the veterans would return to find the depressed economic conditions of

the 1930s, that they would go from battle lines to bread lines, gave special urgency to the bill,

and there was little opposition.


       The revolutionary education title provided tuition, fees, and subsistence support. The

Veterans Administration determined who was eligible, the veteran chose the school, and the

school determined whether the veteran would be admitted. The schools had to be accredited, but

the act specifically denied the federal government any control over the schools that were

accepting veterans. College enrollments boomed after the war, partly as a result of the GI Bill.

The peak year was 1947 when 1.7 million veterans were enrolled in higher education, making up

about 71 percent of the student body. The impact of the student loan program on the structure of

federal spending on veterans can be seen in figure 2. A large gap opened up between total




                                                 24
spending and spending on compensation and pensions: while the total reached unprecedented

levels, the latter was remained at levels comparable to those reached after the Civil War.


       As figure 3 shows, enrollment in colleges and universities remained high and continued

to grow long after students supported by the GI Bill and its extensions ceased to be a major

factor in total enrollment. Evidently, the often-made claim that the GI Bill was the major cause

of the vast expansion of higher education in the United States after World War II cannot be taken

at face value. (Stanley 2000). The decision to stress education in the Bill simply reflected a

widely shared underlying faith in education, a faith that earlier in the century had led to the

expansion of America’s high schools. Nevertheless, the GI Bill deserves some of the credit for

the postwar expansion of higher education. Despite complaints that some veterans were just in

college for a good time, most veterans acquitted themselves well, overcoming fears that the

expansion of higher education would reduce quality. And, especially on the East Coast, the

training programs introduced during the war, and the large number of veterans who entered

immediately afterwards, forced once genteel liberal arts colleges to learn how to provide higher

education for a mass constituency. There would have been more resistance to the postwar

expansion of higher education had the way not been paved by the veterans.


The Postwar Era
       In terms of sheer numbers, World War II gave the veteran an unprecedented prominence

in American life. As figure 1 shows, the number of veterans per 1000 Americans reached more



                                                  25
than 130 as a result of World War II. As this percentage declined, it was reinforced subsequently

by veterans of the Korean Conflict, Vietnam War, the Persian Gulf War, and other conflicts. As a

result, the number of veterans per 1000 persons in the United States was still higher at the end of

the twentieth century than it had been in the immediate aftermath of the Civil War.

       The Korean War GI Bill, the Veterans’ Readjustment Assistance Act of 1952, was

similar in many ways to the World War II legislation. The education title of the Korean War bill

was, however, somewhat less generous than that of the World War II bill. The 1952 Act, for

example, limited educational or vocational training to 36 months, while the 1944 Act permitted

training for up to 48 months. Reduced fears of widespread unemployment, and a perception that

some veterans had unfairly exploited the original GI Bill, may account for the difference.

       The Vietnam GI Bill was passed in 1966, and in some respects its education title was less

generous again than the education title in the 1952 GI Bill. One would certainly reach this

conclusion if one compared education benefits with current wages. A number of factors may

account for the difference in benefits, including the unpopularity of the war and the military’s

opposition to a program that would compete with its own education programs. The Vietnam Bill,

however, did provide benefits for those who served between Korean and Vietnam conflicts.

Initially, the number of veterans taking advantage of the Vietnam era provisions was

disappointing. But within a few years, partly in response to an increase in benefits, utilization of

the education provisions increased and became comparable to the usage of the World War II

benefits. Although educational benefits were substantial, subsequent research showed that

serving in Vietnam was a disadvantage in the long run. (Angrist 1990). Draftees ended up


                                                  26
earning 15 percent less, other things equal, than men who did not serve. The reason may simply

be that the men who served lost time that they could have spent developing their skills and

advancing their careers in the private sector.


        In 1973 the United States ended the draft and established an all-volunteer armed force.

The movement toward an all-volunteer force was driven partly by the desire to implement

libertarian political principles, and partly by the hope that ending the draft would reduce antiwar

activities and reduce domestic dissension. Although changes had been in the works for some

time, the establishment of an all-volunteer force significantly altered the role of veteran’s

benefits. Historically veteran’s benefits, although occasionally legislated with an eye on current

recruitment , had mainly been a reward granted ex-post by a grateful nation for service

performed during a war (and by politicians anxious to curry favor with a powerful interest

group). But with a volunteer army, veteran’s benefits became a recruiting tool designed to help

fill the ranks.


        In the late 1970s, as soaring inflation cut the purchasing power of the wages of the

average enlisted person’s income, it became increasingly clear that significant financial

incentives would be needed to fill the ranks with higher quality personnel. In 1977 Congress

passed the Post-Vietnam Era Veterans’ Educational Assistance Act. The Act instituted a system

of federal matching funds for personal expenditures for education. But it was not utilized as

much as had been hoped. In 1984 Congress passed a new measure, the All-Volunteer Force


                                                  27
Educational Assistance Program to provide a permanent system of benefits and to make service

in the armed forces more attractive. The title was later changed to the Montgomery GI Bill -

Active Duty Educational Assistance Program, in honor of G.V. “Sonny” Montgomery Democrat

if Mississippi, who served on the House Veterans Affairs and Armed Services Committees. It

provides cash grants for education based on service and financial contributions made while on

active duty, and continues to be the basis for educational aid for veterans. Most of the veterans

who make use of this program attend colleges or universities. Research by Angrist (1993)

showed that these programs did encourage veterans to attend school, and did increase their long-

run income, although whether this effect offset the loss of experience in the civilian labor market

is an open question.


       Increased understanding of the physiological and psychological problems faced by

veterans has repeatedly produced additions to the list of benefits and services provided veterans.

In 1979, responding to the concern that Vietnam veterans were not receiving sufficient help

adjusting to civilian life, the Veterans Administration set up a group of centers specially

designed to help Vietnam veterans with post-traumatic distress disorder, alcohol and drug

dependency, and similar problems. In 1988, in response to disclosures about service people’s

exposure to nuclear testing during the early cold war era, Congress passed the Radiation-

Exposed Veterans Compensation Act that provided for veterans suffering from disabilities

caused by atomic radiation. A long drawn out battle, one that involved considerable criticism of


                                                 28
the Veterans Administration, concerned the payment of compensation and provision of medical

care for health problems caused by the use of Agent Orange as a defoliant in Vietnam. The

Veterans Administration responded by gradually adding to the list of disabilities that it

considered to have been caused by Agent Orange. Finally, in 1991, Congress passed the Agent

Orange Act creating the presumption that a range of disabilities were linked to the use of

herbicides in Vietnam, and should be treated as service related disabilities.


       Prompted by these and related concerns the Department of Veterans Affairs has

continually devoted resources to basic medical research. Although a small part of total spending

on medical programs (less than 3 percent in recent years), this area has become a source of pride

for the Department of Veterans Affairs, especially in 1977 when two scientists from the

Department, Rosalyn Yalow and Andrew Schally, shared the Nobel Prize for Medicine with

Roger Guillemin for their work on peptide hormones.


       Although veterans benefits have long been one of the major items in the federal budget

and the veterans administration one of the largest federal employers, it was not until 1989 that

the agency was made the fourteenth cabinet level department. A year later in fall 1990 the United

States launched operation Desert Shield to block further expansion of Saddam Hussein’s Iraq. In

January 1991 Operation Desert Storm was launched, the beginning of the Persian Gulf War,

which drove Iraqi forces out of Kuwait. In the following month Congress passed the Persian Gulf

Conflict Supplemental Authorization and Personnel Benefits Act, which declared the Persian


                                                 29
Gulf conflict to be a war for the purposes of determining eligibility for veterans benefits. At the

time of writing the current rules and regulations governing the payment of veterans benefits, and

recent statistics on the number of veterans in civil life by age and period of service, expenditures

of the Department of Veterans Affairs, and so on could be found at the website of the

Department of Veterans Affairs: www.va.gov.


Conclusion


       After America’s wars, especially the Civil War, World War I and World War II,

America’s veterans were at the center of the national stage. Politicians from both major parties

listened intently to the millions of veterans and vied for their support. The veteran’s

organizations, such as the Grand Army of the Republic for Union Army veterans of the Civil

War, The Veterans of Foreign Wars, the American Legion, and other organizations, played an

important role focusing and maintaining the influence of veterans. But these organizations were

not the source of the veteran’s influence. Ultimately, it was the moral debt that Americans knew

they owed the veterans, those former citizen soldiers, and the sheer weight of numbers that told.

The result was a series of laws establishing veterans benefits, laws that created major precedents

for the welfare state: the Civil War pension for Union veterans, insurance and hospital care for

World War I veterans, and the famous “GI Bill of Rights” that provided educational, housing,

and other benefits for World War II veterans. Liberals have cited the Civil War pensions as a




                                                 30
form of old-age pension, and wondered why it took the United States so long to enact social

security; conservatives have cited the educational benefits provided to GIs after World War II as

a successful example of educational vouchers, and wondered why educational vouchers provoke

so much opposition. Supporters and opponents of socialized healthcare point to the Veterans

Hospital and Medical care system, the nation’s largest, as an example of what could or would

happen if health care were socialized.


        In the post-World War II era, however, the role of veterans changed. The smaller scale of

the wars between 1950 and 1991, the deep divisions over Vietnam, and the establishment of the

all-volunteer armed forces meant that there were fewer veterans in society, and that they spoke

with distinct voices, and in the long run that meant that veterans would have less weight in

political deliberations. A more mundane consideration, the need to provide an attractive package

of benefits to men and women planning a career in the armed forces, would determine the type of

benefits won by veterans. The future role of America’s veterans is as impossible to predict as

war itself.


        Henry Caplan, Annette Hamilton, and Michael Wells, at the U.S. Department of Veterans

Affairs provided help with preparing the statistics for this chapter. Neither they, nor the

Department of Veterans Affairs, are responsible for any of the opinions expressed here, or the

use I have made of their work. Stanley Engerman, John Whiteclay Chambers II, and Scott

Gartner read previous drafts of this chapter and made valuable suggestions.


                                                  31
References
Angrist, Joshua D. “Lifetime Earnings and the Vietnam Era Draft Lottery: Evidence from Social
Security Administrative Records.” The American Economic Review, Vol. 80, No. 3. (Jun., 1990),
pp. 313-336.

Baack, Ben and Edward John Ray. “Federal Transfer Payments in America: Veterans’ Pensions
and the Rise of Social Security.” Economic Inquiry 26 (October 1988): 687-702.

__________. “The effect of veterans benefits on education and earnings” Industrial & Labor
Relations Review, Jul 1993; Vol. 46, Iss. 4; pp. 637-53.

Brown, E. Cary. “Fiscal Policy in the ‘Thirties: A Reappraisal.” The American Economic
Review, Vol. 46, No. 5 (Dec., 1956), pp. 857-879.

Costa, Dora L. The Evolution of retirement: An American Economic History, 1880-1990.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1998.

Dillingham, William P. Federal Aid to Veterans, 1917-1941. Gainesville, Florida: University of
Florida Press, 1952.

Farnam, Henry W. Chapters in the history of social legislation in the United
States to 1860. Washington, D.C: Carnegie Institution of Washington, 1938.

Glasson, William H. Federal Military Pensions in the United States. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1918.

Holcombe, Randall G. “Veterans Interests and the Transition to Government Growth: 1870-
1915.” Public Choice. Vol. 99 (3-4). p 311-26. June 1999.

http://www.cpe.uchicago.edu. The website of the Center for Population Economics of the
University of Chicago.
http://www.va.gov. The website of The United States Department of Veterans Affairs.


Karsten, Peter. Soldiers and Society: the Effects of Military Service and War
on American life. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1978.


Levitan, Sar and Karen A. Cleary. Old Wars Remain Unfinished: the Veterans Benefits System.
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1973.




                                                32
McConnell, Stuart Charles. Glorious Contentment : the Grand Army of the Republic, 1865-1900.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1992.


Oberly, James W. Sixty Million Acres: American Veterans and the Public Lands before the Civil
War. Kent, Ohio: Kent State University Press, 1990.


O’Callaghan, Jerry. “The War Veteran and the Public Lands.” Agricultural History 28 (1954):
163-68.


Olson, Keith W. The GI Bill, the Veterans, and the Colleges. Lexington, Kentucky: University of
Kentucky Press, 1974.

Ratchford, B. U. and K.C. Heise. “Confederate Pensions.” Southern Economic Journal 5
(October, 1938): 207-17.

Resch, John P. “Politics and public culture: the Revolutionary War Pension Act of 1818.” .
Journal of the Early Republic, v. 8, (Summer 1988): 139-58.

Ross, Davis R. B. Preparing for Ulysses; Politics and Veterans during World War
II. New York: Columbia University Press, 1969.

Rubinow, Isaac Max. Social Insurance: with Special Reference to American Conditions.
New York: H. Holt, 1913.

Severo, Richard. The Wages of War: When America's Soldiers Came Home - from Valley
Forge to Vietnam. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1989.

Skocpol, Theda. Protecting Soldiers and Mothers: The Political Origins of Social Policy
in the United States. Cambridge MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1992.

Stanley, Marcus Magnus. Essays in Program Evaluation. Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University,
2000.

Taussig, Michael K. “Background Paper.” In Those Who Served: Report of the Twentieth
Century Fund Task Force on Policies Toward Veterans. New York: The Twentieth Century
Fund, 1974, pp. 41-134.


U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, Office of Public Affairs, VA Pamphlet 80-97-2, “VA
History in Brief”, September 1997.




                                               33
“Veterans” and related entries in The Oxford Companion to American Military History, ed.-in-
chief, John Whiteclay Chambers II. New York: Oxford University Press, 1999, pp. 749-754.




                                              34
                                                                                   Figure 1
                                                       The Number of Veterans Relative to the Total Population, 1865-1999
                                                                         (Veterans Per 1000 Persons)

160



140



120



100



80                                                                                                                                                                      Veterans
                                                                                                                                                                        (Union only)

60                                                                                                                                                                      All Veterans



40



20



 0
      1865 1870 1875 1880 1885 1890 1895 1900 1905 1910 1915 1920 1925 1930 1935 1940 1945 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 1999


       Sources: Veterans (Union only), series SSG.B.1.1. Confederate veterans were estimated by multiplying the number of union veterans, series SSGB.2.4, by
       .468 an estimate of the ratio of Confederate to Union forces. Population, Historical Statistics (1976), series A6, A7, and Statistical Abstracts of the United
       States .




                                                                                                35
                                                                Figure 2
                                             Veterans Benefits Relative to GDP, 1869-1998
                                        (Dollars per $1000 of a 5-year moving average of GDP)
50




40




30

                                                                                                                                                                   Pensions and
                                                                                                                                                                   Compensation


20                                                                                                                                                                 Total Expenditures




10




 0

     69 873 877 881 885 889 893 897 901 905 909 913 917 921 925 929 933 937 941 945 949 953 957 961 965 969 973 977 981 985 989 993 997
18      1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1

       Note: The peak during the 1930s is the Veteran's bonus. See the text.
       Sources: Total Expenditures, 1869-1959, series SSG.B.5.1; 1960-1998, series SSG.B.6.1. Pensions and Compensation, 1869-1959, series SSG.B.5.2 plus
       SSG.B.5.9; 1960-1998, series SSG.B.6.8. GDP, 1869-1929 (GNP), Christina D. Romer, "Prewar Estimates of GNP Reconsidered: New Estimates of Gross
       National Product 1869-1908," Journal of Political Economy , 97 (February 1987), pp. 22-23; 1930-1958, Historical Statistics (1976), series F1; 1959-1998,
       Economic Report of the President .




                                                                                           36
                                                            Figure 3
                                 The Number of Students Enrolled in Higher Education Under GI Bills


16,000,000


14,000,000


12,000,000


10,000,000


 8,000,000
                                                                                                                                                 All
 6,000,000                                                                                                                                       Students
                                                                                                                                                 Veterans
 4,000,000


 2,000,000


        0

           30 933 936 939 942 945 948 951 954 957 960 963 966 969 972 975 978 981 984 987 990 993 996
         19   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1

             Sources: Veterans, Table SSG.B.19, the sum of series 2,6,10,15, and 16. All students in higher education, Statistical Abstract of
             the United States , various issues.




                                                                       37
Chronology of Important Events in the history of veterans in the United States


1636                      To encourage service in the Pequod war, the Plymouth colony
                          provides for the maintenance of disabled soldiers, the first veteran's
                          benefits in an English-speaking colony.
1776                      The Continental Congress promises pensions to officers and soldiers
                          disabled in the course of service.
1778                      The Continental Congress promises half pay for seven years for
                          officers who serve until the end of the war.
1780                      The Continental Congress promises half pay for seven years for the
                          widows and orphans of officers who die in service. This is the
                          nation's first provision for widows and orphans.
1783                      The Commutation Act. The Society of Cincinnati is founded, the
                          nation's first veterans organization.
1828                      Full pay for life granted to surviving officers, noncommissioned
                          officers, and soldiers who had served until the end of the war.
1865                      National Home for Disabled Volunteer Soldiers established.
1879                      The Arrears of Pension Act
1890                      Disability Pension Act of 1890
1913                      The Veterans of Foreign Wars is formed from the merger of smaller
                          organizations of veterans of the Spanish-American War and the
                          Philippine Insurrection.
1917                      Legislation authorizes the issuance of life insurance policies to
                          members of the armed services
1921                      The Veterans Bureau established to consolidate veterans services
                          into one agency.
1936                      Congress passes legislation (over President Roosevelt’s veto)
                          providing for immediate payment of the World War I bonus.
1944                      President Roosevelt signs the "Servicemen's Readjustment Act of
                          1944" commonly known as the GI Bill of Rights. (Public Law 346,
                          passed unanimously by the 78th Congress), offering home loan and
                          education benefits to veterans.
1965                      Servicemembers' Group Life Insurance. Subsidized term life
                          insurance purchased from private insurers.
1973                      The United States institutes an All Volunteer armed force. Veteran's
                          benefits become an important incentive for recruitment.



                                              38
1977   Rosalyn Yalow and Andrew Schally, scientists at the Veterans
       Administration, receive the Nobel Prize for Medicine.
1989   The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) was established.




                         39
