                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          URBAN DECLINE AND DURABLE HOUSING


                                           Edward L. Glaeser
                                            Joseph Gyourko


                                          Working Paper 8598
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8598


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2001




We thank Jan Brueckner, Matt Kahn, Chris Mayer, Andrew Metrick, Todd Sinai, and participants at the
NBER Summer Institute and the Wharton Applied Economics Seminar for comments on previous drafts.
Both authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Research Sponsors Program of the Zell/Lurie
Real Estate Center at Wharton. Glaeser also thanks the National Science Foundation. Jesse Shapiro and
Christian Hilber provided excellent research assistance. Finally, this paper is dedicated to our teacher,
Sherwin Rosen, who taught us all much about housing markets. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Edward L. Glaeser and Joseph Gyourko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Urban Decline and Durable Housing
Edward L. Glaeser and Joseph Gyourko
NBER Working Paper No. 8598
November 2001
JEL No. R



                                              ABSTRACT


        People continue to live in many big American cities, because in those cities housing costs less
than new construction. While cities may lose their productive edge, their houses remain and population
falls only when housing depreciates. This paper presents a simple durable housing model of urban decline
with several implications which document: (1) urban growth rates are leptokurtotic -- cities grow more
quickly than they decline, (2) city growth rates are highly persistent, especially amount declining cities,
(3) positive shocks increase population more than they increase housing prices, (4) negative shocks
decrease housing prices more than they decrease population, (5) the relationship between changes in
housing prices and changes in population is strongly concave, and (6) declining cities attract individuals
with low levels of human capital.




Edward L. Glaeser                                                         Joseph Gyourko
Department of Economics                                                   The Wharton School
Harvard University                                                        University of Pennsylvania
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@kuznets.harvard.edu
   I.      Introduction


In eight of the fifteen largest cities in the U.S. in 1950— Baltimore, Buffalo, Cleveland,
Detroit, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, St. Louis, and Washington, D.C.— population has
declined in every subsequent decade. Another three of these top fifteen also have smaller
populations now than in 1950. All of these cities are still large, but many have lost more
than one-third of their populations. With decline has come poverty and social distress:
across cities, the correlation between the poverty rate in 1989 and population growth in
the 1980s was -40 percent. While firms try to downsize by firing their least skilled
workers, cities appear to downsize by losing their most skilled residents.


Many forces contributed to the decline of these, primarily rustbelt, cities. Improvements
in transportation technology eliminated the advantages that these cities once had as ports.
As lower transport costs made firms footloose, people and firms fled the harsh climates
of the Northeast and Midwest. Manufacturing has declined and de-urbanized. In 1963,
Detroit had 338,000 manufacturing jobs, and by 1992, the Motor City had only 62,000
manufacturing jobs. Local policies often exacerbated these declines as some city
officials made redistribution a higher priority than keeping businesses. National policies
also may have favored sprawl and the sunbelt. While once the rustbelt cities had high
wages—reflecting their productivity—now they are generally mired in poverty (e.g.
Detroit’s median income is 62 percent of the national average), reflecting the fact that
they no longer have a productive edge.


Indeed, the key question about these declining cities is not “why aren’t they growing?”
The key question is “why are they still there are at all?” Quickly growing cities rise at
dizzying rates—Las Vegas has grown by more than 50 percent in four out of the last five
decades. Why is it that declining cities collapse so slowly? The lowest growth rate in the
1990s among the set of consistently declining cities was -12.5 percent (St. Louis). And
why, when these cities decline, do they lose their most skilled workers?




                                                                                             2
Agglomeration models provide an explanation for why people stay in cities long after
those places have lost their comparative advantages. Following Krugman (1991),
agglomeration theorists argue that if a critical mass of firms assembles in one place, then
workers will stay there because they are either able to earn higher wages, or buy cheaper
manufactured goods, or face less unemployment risk. However, these theories tell us
little about the continuing existence of Detroit and many other declining cities, as these
places have low wages and high unemployment. In addition, American Chamber of
Commerce price data tells us that non-housing goods are not materially cheaper in
declining cities.1


This paper argues that people still live in the blighted cities of America’s rustbelt for a far
more prosaic reason than agglomeration economies. These places have houses, and
houses are very durable. When cities decline, housing prices fall and people continue to
live in the houses. To a first approximation, there is a one-to-one correspondence
between the number of homes in a city and the number of people in that city. It takes
decades, if not centuries, for the housing in cities to disappear, and while the houses
remain, the cities remain, attracting residents with homes that cost a fraction of new
construction costs. In 1990, over 60 percent of all owned, single unit residences in
Philadelphia were priced below the cost of new construction, and 30 percent of all homes
in the city were valued at no more than 70 percent of construction costs. In Detroit, 80
percent of the owner-occupied single family housing was valued at least 30 percent
below construction costs in 1990.


Figure 1 illustrates our framework. The supply of housing is characterized by a kinked
supply curve which is highly elastic with respect to positive shocks and almost
completely inelastic with respect to negative shocks in the medium run. The durability of
housing is such that it takes decades for a house to become economically unviable and to


1
 See No. 771—Cost of Living Index—Selected Metropolitan Areas, Fourth Quarter 1999 in the Statistical
Abstract of the United States 2000 for more detail. The American Chamber of Commerce computes the
cost of a mid-management standard of living in a number of participating metropolitan areas (not cities).
While not all of the shrinking cities mentioned above are not tracked in these data, among those which are,
purchasing the targeted standard of living costs more than the average in the nation. Thus, there are no
meaningful savings found in terms of non-housing goods expenses.


                                                                                                          3
disappear from the market. A negative demand shock, like that illustrated in Figure 1,
leads to a large fall in price, but little change in the stock of housing—and, therefore, in
population. In growing places, positive demand shocks result primarily in more units
with little increase in price.


We incorporate this feature of supply, namely that there is an asymmetry between
positive and negative shocks, into a dynamic version of the Alonso-Mills-Muth urban
model. In our framework, housing depreciates stochastically and a fixed number of
people live in each house. Houses that decay are rebuilt if and only if the value of the
unit (including its land value) exceeds its resale price. Thus, city populations decline
only when the prices of some of their homes fall below the cost of new construction. If
the productivity of a city falls, housing prices will drop immediately as a classic
compensating variation for lower wages (see Rosen (1979)), but housing itself decays
slowly. Population declines only gradually as the houses disintegrate.


Our simple urban model with durable housing can explain several key features of urban
dynamics. First, it can explain some of the remarkable persistence of urban growth rates,
especially among declining cities. Almost nine out of ten cities that declined in the 1990s
also declined in the 1980s. Nearly eight of ten cities that declined in the 1930s also lost
population between 1940 and 1990. Because housing decay is slow, it takes decades for
the city housing stock to adjust to a new steady state.


The model also predicts leptokurtotic growth rates. If shocks to urban productivity (or
city amenities) are symmetric, then cities will grow more quickly than they decline when
housing is durable. As Figure 1 suggests, new construction is readily forthcoming when
prices are above construction costs, but units and population disappear only slowly over
time. The skewness of city growth rates is ubiquitous throughout the 20th century.


The model also predicts an asymmetric response to positive and negative “exogenous”
shocks to cities. Negative shocks will have only a small impact on urban growth,
because housing depreciates slowly. Positive shocks will have a large effect, because



                                                                                               4
housing can be built relatively quickly (at least over the decade-long periods we
examine). Just as the durable housing view of cities predicts a convexity in the
relationship between population growth and exogenous shocks, it predicts concavity in
the relationship between price changes and exogenous shocks. Negative shocks impact
prices significantly, but positive shocks will show up more in new housing, thereby
vitiating some of the increase in prices. Both asymmetries generally are borne out in
regression analysis using data on shocks to amenities (weather) and productivity (local
labor demand as represented by manufacturing employment).


Next, housing durability implies that the distribution of house prices is an excellent
predictor of future population growth—and not merely because high house prices reflect
future price growth. Population growth is quite rare in cities with large numbers of
homes valued below the cost of new construction. We do not interpret this as a causal
connection, but claim that this strong correlation illustrates the role the housing market
plays in mediating growth.


The model also explains why declining cities disproportionately attract low human
capital residents. As labor demand falls in declining cities, high and low skilled workers
lose wages roughly in proportion to their base income. However, the benefits from
lower housing prices help the poor more than the rich, because the elasticity of demand
for housing structure is far less than one (Glaeser, Kahn and Rappaport, 2000).2 As such
a drop in the price of housing attracts the poor relatively more than it attracts the rich. If
housing prices fall to keep a median resident indifferent between a declining city and the
rest of America, then a low income resident will strictly prefer the city, and a high
income resident will prefer to leave. Those outside the labor force will be particularly
attracted to cheap, declining places. For them, there is no wage loss associated with a
declining city and they get their housing cheaply. This may help us understand the
correlation between urban social problems and declining urban population.



2
 Older estimates with higher income elasticities all look at total spending on housing. The overwhelming
component of higher spending on houses by higher income individuals is higher spending on
neighborhood, not higher consumption of physical structure.


                                                                                                           5
The next section presents basic facts about housing and cities that will serve to justify the
assumptions of the model. Section III presents the model. Section IV looks at facts
about city growth. Section V examines city composition and urban dynamics. Section
VI investigates more seriously the role that housing costs might play in inducing
individuals to stay in declining cities. Section VII concludes.


    II.      Housing and City Growth—Introductory Facts


This section establishes three basic facts that underpin our bricks and mortar view of
urban dynamics. First, we document the powerful connection between housing and
population. This connection is critical for our argument that the housing stock
determines the size of a city. Second, we establish that there are large portions of urban
America where housing costs are substantially below the cost of new construction (even
if land is free). This fact justifies our emphasis on declining cities with prices below the
cost of new construction. Third, we establish a connection between housing construction
and the share of the housing stock that costs less than the price of new construction.


The Connection between Housing Units and City Population


In principle, the connection between the number of homes and the number of people in a
city could be weak. Declining cities could see large increases in the vacancy rate, and
cities might grow through increases in the number of people per unit. But this is false.
The link between the housing stock and city population is extraordinarily tight. Figure 2
shows the relationship between the logarithm of the number of housing units and the
logarithm of city population in 1990. 3 The r-squared is 98.6 percent—the elasticity is
.996. In 1980, the elasticity is 1.007 and the r-squared of the relationship is 99.0 percent.
In 1970, the elasticity is 1.017 and the r-squared in 99.0 percent. Across cities, at any
given point in time, the link between the number of people and the number of homes is
almost perfect.

3
 All of the data in this section come from the 1970, 1980 and 1990 censuses. We consider all cities with
more than 30,000 people in each decade for the levels regressions and all cities with more than 30,000
people in the initial time period for the change regressions.


                                                                                                           6
The relationship between changes in housing units and changes in population is more
important for our model. Figure 3 shows this connection for the 1970s. The elasticity
estimated is essentially one (1.007) and the r-squared is 91.0 percent. The fit is less good
in the 1980s, as the elasticity from a regression of change in housing units on change in
population is only 0.82, and the r-squared is 81 percent. Closer examination of the data
from that decade finds the mismatch between housing and population to be almost
entirely due to fast growing California cities in which housing growth did not keep up
with population growth. Perhaps, this was because immigrants crowded into homes or
perhaps because of constraints on new construction.4 If we exclude California cities, the
r-squared in the 1980’s rises to 87 percent and the estimated elasticity increases to 0.96.
Importantly, the mismatch between changes in population and changes in housing units
occurs almost exclusively in rapidly growing cities. The connection between people and
homes continues to be extremely tight in declining cities.5


The Distribution of Housing Prices and Construction Costs

This paper is primarily concerned with cities that lie on the vertical part of the housing
supply curve in Figure 1. For our durable housing model to explain the persistence of
Philadelphia or Detroit, it must be cheaper to live there than to build a comparable house
on the edges of the sunbelt, where land is essentially free. Thus, we compare the
distribution of the value of the housing stock with the cost of new construction, and
compute the distribution of houses priced above and below construction costs for 123
cities in 1980 and 93 cities in 1990.




4
  We suspect that building constraints are a more important factor, as immigrant inflows are also quite large
in very fast growing cities in Arizona, Florida, and Texas. Growth in units outpaces growth in population
in cities in those states, leading us to believe restrictions on development are relevant. However, that is a
separate issue for future research.
5
  An important reason the relationship between growth in units and growth in population still is so tight is
that, while vacancy rates are higher in declining cities, they are only slightly more so. For example, in
1990 the vacancy rate was 7.8 percent among cities that grew in the 1980s, and 9.3 percent among cities
that declined in population. If California cities are excluded, the mean vacancy rate among growing cities
is 8.5 percent, further narrowing the difference in vacancies between declining and expanding cities.


                                                                                                            7
Housing unit values are obtained from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series
(IPUMS) maintained by the Minnesota Population Center at the University of Minnesota
and from the American Housing Survey (AHS). The IPUMS and AHS series contain
micro data on individuals and housing units, with self-reported values. In each, we focus
exclusively on observations of single unit residences that are owner occupied in order to
better facilitate a comparison with construction costs. We use construction cost data from
the R.S. Means Company (hereafter, the Means data). 6 This firm computes construction
costs per square foot of living area for single family homes in a wide variety of American
and Canadian cities. The Means data on construction costs include material costs, labor
costs, and equipment costs for four different qualities of single unit residences. No land
costs are included so their data are for the physical structure itself.7


We adjust the data to account for the depreciation that occurs on older homes, to account
for general inflation when making comparisons across different years, to account for the
fact that research shows owners overestimate the value of their homes, and to account for
regional variation in the presence of key house attributes that have a major impact on
value. The data appendix discusses these and other data construction issues in detail.


Tables in the appendix report summary statistics on the distribution of house value to
construction costs for each city in 1980 and 1990. Figure 4 highlights the extensive
heterogeneity across cities in the share of single family housing that was priced below
construction costs in 1980. Many cities in California (and Hawaii) have almost no
housing priced below the cost of new construction, while many of the older cities in the

6
  Two publications are particularly relevant for greater detail on the underlying data: Residential Cost
Data, 19th annual edition, (2000) and Square Foot Costs, 21st annual edition (2000), both published by the
R.S. Means Company.
7
  It is noteworthy that the Means data contain information on four qualities of homes—economy, average,
custom, and luxury. The series are broken down further by the size of living area (ranging from 600ft2 to
3200ft2), the number of stories in the unit, and a few other differentiators. We developed cost series for a
one story, economy house, with an unfinished basement, with the mean cost associated with four possible
types of siding and building frame, and that could be of small (<1550ft2), medium (1550ft2-1850ft2), or
large (1850ft2-2500ft2) size in terms of living area. Generally, our choices reflect low to modest
construction costs. This conservative strategy is appropriate given our purposes. Because we are
particularly interested in accounting for why people continue to live in relatively unattractive areas, we
could easily bias the findings toward a ‘cheap housing’ explanation by choosing a high quality house for




                                                                                                               8
colder regions of the country (the Midwest especially), are filled with cheap housing.
These data alone should raise questions about urban models that suggest land generally is
worth a great deal.


Nationally, 41 percent of single unit housing in cities in 1980 are valued below the cost
of new construction. In 1980, nearly 60 percent of all owned, single unit, attached and
detached residences in the central cities of the northeast and midwest were valued below
the cost of new construction. One-third of the stock in these regions was worth no more
than 80 percent of construction costs. Conversely, in the west only 5 percent of homes
were priced more than 20 percent below new construction costs, and nearly three-quarters
were valued in excess of 120 percent of construction costs. These regional patterns
persist in 1990 despite a general rise in housing values. By 1990, the midwest still had a
large amount of very cheap housing relative to construction costs; the west still had
plenty of land that is worth a great deal, and the south and northeast were somewhere in
between these two extremes.8


Changes in Units and Housing Prices below Construction Costs


The third building block of our model is that existing cheap housing is a substitute for
new construction. For this to be true, it should be the case that cities with large amounts
of cheap housing do not have new construction. If old housing were not a close
substitute for new housing, then abundance of old, cheap housing would not deter new
construction.


Table 1 reports some basic findings for the relation between growth and the extent to
which a city’s housing is valued at less than the cost of new construction. To illustrate
the relationship, we split our sample of cities into three groups based on housing values in


which construction costs are high. Existing homes, especially those in declining areas, are more likely to
look cheap compared to that alternative. By choosing a modest home, we guard against that possibility.
8
  We also examined the 1989 and 1991 AHS to provide a comparison to the census data. Reported house
prices tend to be a bit higher, so fewer units are estimated to be valued below construction costs. However,
the basic patterns discussed above are clearly evident in these data. In addition, investigation of the 1999
AHS indicates similar regional patterns persisted throughout the 1990s.


                                                                                                           9
1990: (a) cities with abundant cheap housing, i.e. those with over one-half of their
housing stock priced below the cost of new construction and with over 30 percent of the
total stock valued at least 20 percent below the cost of new construction; (b) cities with
little cheap housing, i.e. those with less than 25 percent of their stock priced below the
cost of new construction and with less than 10 percent of their stock priced at least 20
percent below the cost of new construction; and (c) cities in the middle, which are the
remaining cities.


Table 1 shows that cities with expensive housing do not necessarily grow, but cities with
cheap housing are almost uniformly shrinking. Of the 15 cities with abundant cheap
housing in 1990, 14 lost population in the 1980s, with mean and median growth rates of
about –9 percent. Of the 20 cities in the middle group, 11 had positive growth in the
1980s, while 9 had negative growth. The 45 cities with little cheap housing relative to
construction costs grew at much higher rates on average. The overall statistical
relationship between growth and the share of the housing stock that is priced below the
cost of new construction is quite strong: the correlation coefficient is –0.55 for the 1980s.
These results confirm that new homes are not built, and population does not come, to
cities with abundant cheap housing.


III. Theory and Evidence on Skewness and Persistence


In this section, we introduce our model of durable housing and urban decline.
We consider an “open city” model where workers will continue to migrate to the city
until the utility in the city equals an outside reservation utility (denoted U ). Thus, utility
for urban residents must equal U at every point. Wages and amenities are assumed to be
exogenous, independent of city population and variable over time. The annual flow of
utility for workers in the city from wages equals W and from amenities equals A.


The housing structure of the city is the simplest form of the classic Alonso-Muth-Mills
model with only one source of heterogeneity within the city—proximity to the
downtown. Following Solow (1973), our city is a line through the central business


                                                                                             10
district (CBD). Each resident works in the CBD, and pays annual commuting costs equal
to T times the distance to the city center. Each worker must consume one unit of housing
that must sit on one unit of land. The notation N refers to the number of homes, the
number of people in the city, and the total amount of land being used in the city. Since
the city is a line through a point, the distance between the CBD and the edge of the city
equals N/2. Thus, for the consumer at the edge of the city (which is N/2 units of land
from city center) the costs of commuting equal TN/2.


Housing prices within the city must in equilibrium make consumers indifferent between
living at the center and paying no commuting costs versus living elsewhere in the city.
Hence, if R(d) refers to the annual rent at distance d from the CBD, then
R(d ) + Td = R(0) , where R(0) is the rent for a house at the city center. There is no non-
urban use for the land, so land is free at the edge of the city. Within the city, the price of
land is determined by the demand for proximity.


The reservation utility that must be realized at every distance d from the city center at
which people live can be defined as wages plus amenities minus rent minus travel costs,
or W+A-R(d)-Td. To simplify our notation, we use X to denote W + A − U . Thus, the
open city assumption of the model gives us X = R(d ) + Td , which implies that the
combined rental and commuting costs of living in the city must equal wages plus
amenities minus the reservation utility.


So far, we have described a completely standard urban model. However, our focus is on
the role of housing supply and, in particular, on housing durability. While there is an
existing literature on durable housing that is well reviewed in Brueckner (2000), we differ
from most of this literature because our primary interest is in cities in decline, not
growing cities. Our basic housing supply assumption is that homes can always be built
with one unit of land at a cost of C. This cost, C, is meant to correspond with the
physical costs of construction reported in the Means data.




                                                                                             11
In addition, during each time period, a fraction of houses, δ , collapse. These houses
must be completely rebuilt at cost C if they are to be used. Houses collapse randomly,
and there is no decay of non-collapsing homes. In reality, housing decay is much more
continuous. Moving to continuous depreciation would not change the basic results of the
model, as the basic durability of housing would remain. However, continuous
depreciation makes the model much less tractable.9


New construction, or renovation, occurs when the expected rental flows from the
property equal the cost of new construction. We assume that developers discount future
rent payments with a discount rate, r, and of course, there also is the probability of
collapse which further reduces the value of the flow of housing. Thus, if we let R(d, t+j)
denote the rent at distance d from the city at time t+j, for the marginal piece of new
construction it must be the case that:


                                    (1 − δ ) j R(d , t + j ) 
(1)                  C = Et  ∑ j ≥0
                                                             
                                           (1 + r ) j
                                                               


As R(d , t + j ) = X (t + j ) − Td , if we assume that Et ( X (t + j )) = X (t ) , then equation (1)

can be rewritten as C = (1 + r )( X (t ) − Td ) /(δ + r ) .10 This equation tells us that homes
will be built, or renovated, at distances from the CBD that are less than
X (t ) / T − (δ + r )C /(1 + r ) . At distances further than this, it will not pay to build new
homes and it will not pay to renovate collapsed homes.


In a static model where X is constant over time, the distance from the city center to the
edge will equal X / T − (δ + r )C /(1 + r ) and the population level will equal two times this

9
  And, as the filtering literature has stressed, if the poor demand less housing quality, then a continuously
decaying housing stock will create an additional reason why the poor will live in declining cities.
10
   The random walk assumption will be problematic in some places. For example, the persistence of
growth rates implies an explosive process for X. A more general formulation might assume that
Et ( X (t + j )) = X + θ j ( X (t ) − X ) , which (as long as 1 + r > θ ) would
imply P ( d , t ) = ( X − Td ) / r + ( X (t ) − X ) /(1 + r )(1 + r − θ ) , but we will not treat this more general
case. Our view is that this does not raise a problem within the relevant range of the data.


                                                                                                                12
amount. In the static model, undeveloped land will be priced at zero, so we can also
determine housing prices because the price of a home at the edge of the city will equal
C.11 At all other points in the city, the price of housing must satisfy the following
                                           P
difference equation: P = R − δC +              , which implies that price this period equals the
                                          1+ r
discounted value of price next period plus expected revenues minus expected costs, or
P(d ) = (1 + r )( X − Td − δC ) / r . The average housing cost in the city then equals
(1 + r ) X / 2r + (r (1 − δ ) − δ )C / 2r . Average housing prices do not rise one-for-one with
construction costs because these costs also restrict the size of the city and lead to a
reduction in average commuting costs. The basic structure of this urban model is
illustrated in Figure 5, with house prices being single peaked at the CBD and city size
being bounded by prices on the edge that equal construction costs.


We now consider an unexpected permanent shock to the city, so that there is a new value
of X, denoted X’, where X ′ = X + ε . For simplicity, we assume that this is the only
shock that is expected to occur. If ε > 0 , then new construction will occur and there will
be an increase in housing units (and population) equal to 2ε / T .


When ε < 0 , new construction will not occur. The new boundary point for construction
will be X ′ / T − (δ + r )C /(1 + r ) . Renovation will occur on homes that are closer to the
CBD than this point. However, homes that collapse which are further from the CBD than
this point will not be rebuilt. As of the first time period, there are 2ε / T homes that lie
between the old city boundary and the new point that determines efficient renovation.
Exactly 2δε / T homes will, therefore, collapse in this region between the first period and
the second period, and this will create the only change in population. Over a longer time
period, between time t and time t+j the number of homes that will collapse in this region
will equal 2(1 − (1 − δ ) j )ε / T . As j goes to infinity, the effect of a negative shock will
approach 2ε / T , which is the effect of a positive shock. This is illustrated in Figure 6.


11
   Because there is option value to land in a stochastic model, even the undeveloped land at the edge of the
city will have a positive value, as there is some chance that this land may be worth a positive amount in the
future.


                                                                                                           13
One of the most well known stylized facts about urban growth is that the growth rate is
orthogonal to the initial population level (Eaton and Eckstein, 1997; Glaeser et al., 1995).
For this to be the case, we will assume that ε = µ * Population , where the mean and
variance of µ is independent of city size. This formulation justifies our focus on growth
rates rather than raw population growth and leads to the first proposition (proofs are in
the appendix):


Proposition 1: If there is a shock at time t denoted ε = µ * Population that is
unexpected, and there are no further shocks, then the distribution of population changes
between time t and t+j is leptokurtotic, in that the mean is greater than the median. The
gap between the median and the mean of the distribution diminishes as j gets larger.
Furthermore, the rate of depreciation satisfies
                                             Nt − Nt+ j                    
                                         E                N t + j < N t 
                                                Nt                         
1 − (1 − δ ) j =                                                                                   ,
                   N t+ j − N t N t+ j − N t       N t + j − N t    N t + j − N t   
                 E                            > 2                        − 2        
                        N            N                   N                   Nt       Med
                          t            t                    t          Med 


when the median growth rate is positive and
                  N t − N t+ j    N t+ j − N t        N − N t    N t + j − N t       
                E                              < 2 t + j               + 2        
                      Nt               Nt                 Nt         Med      Nt       Med
1 − (1 − δ ) j =                                                                                      ,
                                               Nt+ j − Nt                  
                                           E               N t + j > N t 
                                                   Nt                      
when the median growth rate is negative.


The skewness in city population growth rates predicted by Proposition 1 is ubiquitous
throughout the 20th century as Table 2 documents. The first column reports the skewness
coefficients for urban growth rates in each decade from 1920 to 2000. In every decade,
the distribution is quite skewed. Figure 7 highlights this visually for the 1980s, a decade
in which growth rates were not abnormally skewed. Even in the 1990s, which has the
lowest skewness coefficient by far, we can still conclude that growth rates are skewed at



                                                                                                           14
standard confidence levels (97 percent in this case). The bottom panel of Table 2 reports
the same information for growth rates over increasingly longer time periods. As the
model suggests, skewness becomes less severe over longer periods, but symmetry in the
distribution of urban growth rates can still be rejected over these longer intervals.


The last column in Table 2 reports the value of δ that was defined in Proposition 1. On a
decadal basis, housing depreciation tends to have averaged from 2.5-3.5 percent per
annum until the 1960s. The data then suggest a systematic increase in the rate of
depreciation from the 1960s onward—which empirically reflects a more symmetric path
of urban growth. There are two plausible explanations for this higher depreciation. First,
increasing social problems in declining cities may have led to actions (e.g. more arson)
that increased the rate of depreciation. Second, the model may be somewhat faulty, and
the distribution of city-level shocks might have changed in the 1980s and 1990s. There
are fewer extremely quickly growing cities (relative to the median). The analogous
figures for multiple decade periods reported in the bottom panel of Table 2 show a
similar trend of faster depreciation in recent decades. However, the implied rates are
lower and seem more sensible to us.


Our second proposition concerns the persistence of growth rates. Here, we again assume
that there is a single unexpected shock at time t that is proportional to initial city size.


Proposition 2: Growth rates will be positively correlated over time. The current growth
rate will be increasing in the lagged growth rate when the lagged growth rate is negative
and will be independent of the lagged growth rate when the lagged growth rate is
positive.


The positive relationship between current and lagged growth rates occurs because
population does not instantaneously adjust when there is a negative shock, as the rate of
decline is determined by the depreciation rate of housing. There is no persistence of
positive shocks in this case because new housing is built to accommodate positive




                                                                                               15
shocks. With only one shock, the second period growth rate is zero if the first period
growth rate is positive.


The persistence of growth rates predicted by Proposition 2 is one of the most striking
features of urban growth rates. Table 3 documents the effect of regressing current growth
on lagged growth for decades in the post-World War II era. As suggested by the model,
we use a spline at zero and test if the impact of past growth on current growth is greater
when past growth is negative.12 In all decades, the coefficient on past growth is higher
when past growth is negative. In three of four cases, we can reject the equality of the two
coefficients.


Of course, as Table 3 makes clear, one aspect of the model is clearly counterfactual.
While persistence is very strong among declining cities, there also is significant serial
correlation among cities that had positive growth. One explanation for this is that there is
serial correlation in the city-specific shocks.13 Alternatively, it could take time to build
new houses and positive shocks to cities might only be accommodated over decades.
Nevertheless, the greater elasticity of current growth with past growth when past growth
is negative provides support for the importance of bricks and mortar in urban dynamics.


IV. Theory and Evidence on Shocks and City Growth


We now return to the model and consider the connection between population growth,
housing price growth and exogenous shocks. As discussed above, a population response
to a positive shock will equal 2ε / T , and the population response to a negative shock
equals 2δε / T . This difference makes the relationship between population movements
and ε convex.



12
   In each decade, we include all cities with a population level greater than 30,000 in the initial decade of
each time period. Data from two series are used. One is the sample of cities with consistent population
figures dating back to 1920. The other is a much larger sample that dates back only to 1970. This series
will be used extensively below. The notes to the table provide the details.
13
   Building this serial correlation into the model would not affect the qualitative results of the model, but
would lead to significant increases in tractability.


                                                                                                                16
As discussed above, the median housing price in the city before a shock will equal
(1 + r ) X / 2r + (r (1 − δ ) − δ )C / 2r , and prices at each distance from the city center, d,
equal (1 + r )( X − Td − δC ) / r . After a positive shock, prices at all distances from the city
center will equal (1 + r )( X ′ − Td − δC ) / r . The median housing price will equal
(1 + r ) X ′ / 2r + (r (1 − δ ) − δ )C / 2r , and the growth in median prices will equal
(1 + r )ε / 2r . The growth in prices for any given house will equal (1 + r )ε / r . The
growth in median prices equals one-half of the price growth for any given house because
as the city grows, it adds cheap housing on the fringe of the city.


When there is a negative shock, the price at each point in space equals
(1 + r )( X ′ − Td − δC ) / r , with the price change for any given house equal to (1 + r )ε / r .
However, because the supply response to urban decline is limited by housing durability,
the change in the median price will not be symmetric. For example, if housing were
completely durable, then the median house after the shock would be exactly as far from
the city center as the median house before the shock, and the price of this house would
drop by (1 + r )ε / r . Thus, the median housing price will have declined by twice as much
in a downturn as it rises during an upturn in this case.


When housing is not completely durable, some housing far from the center collapses and
is not rebuilt. After this collapse, the median house becomes the home that is δε / 2T
land units closer to the city center (because δε / T units of housing have collapsed on the
edge of the city).14 Thus, the median house price declines by (1 + r )ε / r units because
the city has become less attractive and increases in value by − (1 + r )δε / 2r units because
the median home is now closer to the city. The overall change in median housing prices
equals (1 + r )(2 − δ )ε / 2r . In sum, when all housing collapses each period, the impact of
shocks on prices is symmetric and when all housing is perfectly durable, the impact of
positive shocks is one-half of the size of the impact of negative shocks. This reasoning
leads to the following proposition:

14
  This requires that the median home is itself worth renovating after the shock, which we assume to be the
case.


                                                                                                        17
Proposition 3:
         a. The effect of an exogenous shock on population will be convex around zero.
More specifically, the slope of population growth with respect to positive shocks will
equal 1 / δ times the slope of population growth with respect to negative shocks.
         b. The effect of exogenous shocks on median housing price growth will be
concave around zero.
         c. The relationship between average housing price growth and population growth
will be concave around zero.


Evidence on Asymmetric Responses to Exogenous Shocks


We start with the concavity of the relationship between population growth and average
housing price growth. There is no exogenous variable in this relationship, and this
regression is not meant to suggest causality, as both variables are being moved by
unmeasured exogenous shocks to urban productivity and urban amenities. Instead, the
regression results reported in Table 4 test an important implication of our durable housing
stock model.


By using the log change in median house price as the dependent variable in these
regressions, we are ignoring potential changes in housing quality. We could only
estimate reliable hedonic prices for constant quality units in 77 cities across 1980 and
1990.15 As this is a small number of cities for our purposes, and as the correlation
between adjusted and unadjusted housing prices is quite high (63 percent), to increase our
sample size, we use the unadjusted housing prices for our regressions.16

15
   In terms of micro data, census data from the IPUMS are superior, as the AHS samples of housing units
tend to be very small for all but the largest cities, making it difficult to adequately control for quality
differences in many cities. Fewer cities were identified in the 1990 IPUMS, reducing the number for which
consistent data could be obtained across years.
16
   Since this is the dependent variable, it is not clear that there will be any bias associated with not
controlling for quality. The case we thought most worrisome potentially was the one in which housing
quality declines in shrinking cities and grows in rising cities. We investigated this possibility by analyzing
whether the difference between unadjusted housing price changes (i.e., in the median price) and adjusted
housing prices changes (estimated via hedonic techniques using micro data) is higher in growing or
declining cities. This difference should reflect housing quality changes. This difference is not significantly


                                                                                                           18
Table 4 documents the relationship between housing price changes and population
changes for our larger sample of cities that we track from 1970. The first and second
columns report regression results for the basic spline of population during the 1970s and
1980s. There is an economically and statistically significant difference between growing
and declining cities in the relationship between population and prices in both decades.
Figure 8’s plot illustrates the strong concavity in the relationship between price and
population changes in the raw data for the 1980s.17 Among cities with shrinking
populations in this decade, a one percent higher rate of population decline is associated
with two percent lower prices. Among growing cities, price change and population
change are uncorrelated.18


A similar pattern holds for the 1970s (column 2). Finally, Proposition 3 also applies to
rental properties, so the change in median rental prices over the 1980s is examined in the
final column. The strong asymmetry again is apparent. Overall, the results from Table 4
indicate that the concave relationship between changes in prices and changes in
population is a robust fact that corroborates the model.




higher in declining cities. Also, there is no significant correlation between population growth and the
difference between adjusted and unadjusted price changes.
17
   Somewhat surprising to us is the coefficient on the spline for positive population growth, which is small
and not significantly different from zero for positive growth cities in the 1980s. In principle, this might be
explained by changing housing quality for growing cities, but the evidence regarding quality growth in this
group of cities suggests this is not the case. It seems more likely that the lack of any positive real price
growth among these cities reflects a housing supply that is quite elastic for many of these growing cities—
at least over decade-long periods.
18
   While the proposition does not indicate that we should control for exogenous variables that drive city
growth, we did investigate whether the relationship documented in Table 4 and Figure 8 is robust to
inclusion of a variety of common city-level controls. A strong and significant asymmetry remains in an
expanded specification that includes values for the following variables as of the beginning of the relevant
decade: the fraction of single unit structures in the city, the log of city population, the family poverty rate,
and the log of median family income; 30 year weather averages for mean January temperature, mean July
temperature, and annual rainfall; and census region dummy variables.
          Finally, we also estimated similar models on the much smaller sample of 77 cities for which we
could compute the growth in constant quality prices. While statistically significant results are not
forthcoming from the full specification, the qualitative nature of the findings still holds. That is, the
coefficient on the negative spline of growth is relatively large and positive, while that on the negative
spline of growth is relatively small and negative. And, if the region dummies are omitted, the quantitative
results are very similar to those reported in the first column of Table 4, with the coefficient on the spline for
positive growth being significant at the 8 percent level (t=1.8).


                                                                                                              19
We now proceed to tests using a more “exogenous” shock to the city population. We
experiment with two sources of such shocks: the weather and industry structure. The
weather is one of the most reliable determinants of population growth at the city and state
level. Over the past fifty years, warm places have grown and cold places have declined.
The simple correlation between mean January temperature and city growth has ranged
from 0.47 to 0.73 in the three decades since 1970 (see Glaeser and Shapiro, 2001, for
more discussion).


Obviously, the weather of cities is not changing. Instead, it is the demand for weather
that is changing. Rising incomes, or improving air conditioner technology, have
increased the relative importance of the weather as an urban amenity. In the context of
the model, this could be formalized by assuming that A=z*V, where z is the taste for the
weather and V is the weather. The shock to X, comes through a change in z, not a change
in V. Using this formulation, the value of ε should be thought of as ( z (t + 1) − z (t ))V , or
the city’s basic climatic quality times the change in the value that is placed on climate.
Of course, the variation associated with the weather can reflect other shocks (including
political ones), but for our purposes, the key is that the weather provides exogenous
variation, not that any estimated impacts only reflect a change in the value of good
weather.19


While the weather seems to be a reasonable source of exogenous variation, it not easy to
guess at the level at which weather increases population (versus decreasing it). To
address this issue, we use the model which tells us that the share of cities with negative
population changes will equal the share of the distribution of exogenous factors which
predict negative growth. As 30.3 percent of our sample of cities declined in population
during the 1990s, we will assume that the lowest 30.3 percent of mean January
temperatures can be thought of as reflecting a negative population shock from the
weather. This implies that all cities with mean January temperatures above 26.7 degrees

19
  For example, if the older and colder cities of the north systematically suffered more negative political
shocks (i.e., had more costly corruption or engaged in more intense efforts at local redistribution that
mobile firms and workers could avoid), the underlying causal force influencing population change would
be different from that just described.


                                                                                                             20
will be thought of as having a positive shock and cities with temperature levels below
that quantity will be thought of as having a negative shock. For the 1980s, this value
changes slightly (as 33.5 percent of cities declined in the 1980s) and the cut-off becomes
28.4 degrees. Fully 45 percent of cities suffered population declines in the 1970s, so the
spline is set at 31.8 degrees for that decade.


Table 5 shows the response of population levels to this ‘weather shock’.20 The predicted
convexity of population change and weather shocks is evident in all three decades, as
cities with good weather grew quite rapidly, while cities with bad weather either grew
more slowly (1970s) or shrank slowly (1980s and 1990s). It also is the case that the
relevant coefficients are significantly different from one another.21 Figure 9 graphs the
results for the 1980s, with population growth plotted against the weather and the solid
line showing the predicted values from the regression. While some aspects of our
procedure may seem subjective, these results are extremely robust to alternative
definitions of the positive-negative cutoff point.22


In Table 6, we look at the response of prices to weather shocks. The regression results in
the first column show the response of median housing prices in the 1980s. Figure 10
plots the results. As the model predicts, there is a strong impact of weather on prices
when the shock is negative, but only a weak effect when the shock is positive. The next
column shows the analogous results for the 1970s. Note that the predicted asymmetry


20
   Because population figures from the 2000 census are available, we also include regressions for changes
over the 1990s in this table. We also estimated a specification that takes more seriously the assumption that
it is only a change in the demand for weather quality that is captured in the weather variable. In that case,
we controlled for the fact that temperate climates are desirable and made adjustments for the fact that very
hot places (those with mean January temperatures in excess of 60 degrees Fahrenheit, more specifically)
were less desirable. The economic and statistical nature of the findings is largely unchanged.
21
   We also estimated specifications that included other local controls as of the beginning of the relevant
decade. These included the fraction of single unit residences and beginning of period population, poverty
rate, and median family income. Adding these controls has very little impact, statistically or economically,
on the estimated impacts of bad and good weather. Because region controls are so strongly correlated with
the weather, we do not think they should be included. However, as further check on robustness, we also
performed the estimation with them included. The basic asymmetry still is evident with region controls,
but the results are less precise so that we no longer can conclude that there is any significant difference in
the two relevant coefficients in this case.
22
   Furthermore, since the proposition technically deals only with previously growing cities, we have
checked that our results still hold for cities that only grew during the previous decade.


                                                                                                           21
does not hold here.23 The final column reports results for the 1980s using median rental
prices. Once again, the basic asymmetry exists, with prices responding more strongly to
negative shocks. Hence, the data from the 1980s, but not the 1970s, confirm this part of
Proposition 3.24


We now proceed to a similar analysis using an industry structure variable in the 1980s.
Here we use the initial share of manufacturing employment in the city as a source of
exogenous urban variation. This is defined as the sum of each city’s employment share
in durables and non-durables goods manufacturing. The de-urbanization of
manufacturing that has occurred suggests that cities with large initial shares of
employment in manufacturing have suffered negative shocks. Consistent with our
approach above, we presume that 33.5 percent of cities suffered negative shocks (i.e., the
number of cities receiving negative shocks equals the number of cities that declined
during the period). Transforming the variable into one minus the employment share in
manufacturing (so that lower values represent ‘negative shocks’ to be consistent with the
weather variable above) leads us to spline the data at 74.6 percent. This implies that
cities with manufacturing employment shares above 25.4 percent are presumed to have
negative shocks.


Table 7 reports our results. The point estimates in column one still exhibit the asymmetry
predicted by the model, with positive shocks having a stronger impact on population
growth.25 In the next regression, we look at the price response to these industry level
shocks. Here the results do not match the model. Increases in demand tend to be related
to lower prices, especially when demand shocks are negative. Not only is this
incompatible with a model of durable housing, it is also incompatible with any model in
which housing supply is positively sloped.

23
   Real house price growth was quite strong if there was a positive or negative weather shock during that
decade. For example, real median house price appreciation in our cities was 24.3 percent during the 1970s
versus only 7.5 percent in the 1980s. Moreover, the housing price change distribution changed radically
between the decades. The variance about the mean was a relatively low 4.5 percent in the 1970s versus 9.5
percent in the 1980s. The distribution was much more skewed in the 1980s, with its skewness coefficient
being 0.78 versus 0.003 for the 1970s.
24
   As with the results in Table 5 on population changes and weather, adding common local controls does
not change the findings in any important way—for the 1970s and the 1980s.



                                                                                                       22
A close examination of the data reveals the observations that are driving this particular
finding. In the 1980s, there are a number of one-time manufacturing cities near New
York City and Boston that had substantial price increases because they switched from
being centers of production to being more suburban-like residential centers. These cities
are predicted to decline but in fact experience significant housing price increases.26 If we
exclude these cities in the New York-Northern New Jersey and Boston-Lawrence-Salem
CMSAs (other than New York City and Boston) and the Providence Metropolitan
Statistical Area, this perverse result goes away. However, even excluding those cities
does not allow us to recover the any meaningful asymmetry between positive and
negative shocks that we saw in Table 6 with respect to the weather.


VI.      Housing Prices and Urban Decline


At this point, we return to our empirical work connecting the abundance of below cost
housing with urban decline. Naturally, we do not suggest that this connection is causal—
indeed the model explicitly argues that cheap housing will be the result of past negative
shocks. Instead, our goal is to document the predictive power of housing market prices.


We turn again to the model and consider the growth rates of cities one period after a
shock. In period one, there is an unexpected shock to urban productivity or amenities.
There will immediately be a price response to that shock. If the shock is positive, then
none of the housing that currently exists will cost less than the price of new construction.
If the shock is negative then all houses beyond X ′ / T − (δ + r )C /(1 + r ) units of distance
from the city center will be priced less than the cost of new construction. There will be
− 2ε / T such houses. The total share of housing that costs less than the price of new
construction will thus equal: − ε / (X − T (δ + r )C /(1 + r ) ) , which we denote as “S”. The




25
  The pattern still holds after controlling for a variety of local controls.
26
  Because of this problem, the overall connection between this variable and price change is not even
positive, rendering it an ineffective demand shift instrument.


                                                                                                       23
change in population equals 2δε / T , or − 2δ (X − T (δ + r )C /(1 + r ) )S / T , which implies
the following proposition:


Proposition 4: Expected population growth is declining in the share of the housing stock
with prices below the cost of new construction.


At first blush, it would seem that a connection between housing prices and population
growth is not surprising. After all, housing prices should reflect expectations about
future growth so that one might expect higher price areas to grow more. We have two
ways of addressing this concern. First, we can control for median housing prices in the
regression analysis. Second, we can also show that there is no meaningful relationship
between our housing price measure—the share of the city’s housing stock that is priced
below the cost of new construction—and the growth of real house prices over the next ten
years. The simple correlation between the two variables is 0.06 and the adjusted R-
square from regressing real price appreciation over the 1980s on the fraction of stock
priced below construction costs in 1980 is –0.002. It seems unlikely that this variable is
actually capturing expectations, perhaps because long-run housing prices are just too
unpredictable.


Empirical Results


Table 8 shows our first results on the connection between urban growth and the share of
the housing stock priced below the cost of new construction. The construction of this
variable was discussed above and is described in detail in the appendix. The results in
the first two columns illustrate the connection between our variable and population
growth in the 1980s. The first specification includes only the fraction of the city’s
housing stock that is valued below the cost of new construction. The coefficient of -0.32
implies that for every 10 percent more of the housing stock that is priced below the cost
of new construction, the growth rate of population is reduced by just over 3 percent. The
r-squared of the regression is 38 percent, corresponding to over a 60 percent correlation
coefficient between this variable and growth over the next 10 years. Apart from lagged


                                                                                             24
growth, this construction cost and price variable is the best we have for predicting cities’
future growth.


The second specification includes a rich set of other controls. These include the median
housing price at the beginning of the decade, as well as a variable capturing the share of
the housing stock that sells for at least a 30 percent premium to construction costs.
Interestingly, these other housing price variables do not predict positive growth. In fact,
cities with lots of expensive housing tend to have lower growth in the 1980s, possibly
because they are facing supply constraints. The median value of housing has no
predictive content for growth in the 1980s once we have controlled for the other
variables. The coefficient on the share price below construction costs is almost
unchanged from the first model.27


The final two specifications in Table 8 include findings for the 1990s. The results are
less stable, but the fraction of housing stock valued below construction cost variable has a
significantly negative coefficient unless lagged growth is included. While the percentage
of the stock valued at least 1.3 times construction costs is not independently significant in
the 1990s, it is its inclusion which is associated with the doubling of the coefficient on
the fraction of the stock priced below construction costs.28 While the impressive
connection between cheap housing and future decline cannot be considered surprising as
the underlying economics could not be more straightforward, the power of the variable
suggests that the housing market really does mediate urban growth.29


27
   For completeness, we also estimated a specification that included the lagged population growth rate from
the 1970s. In the model, the share of housing that is priced below construction costs is capturing urban
decline and as such, we do not necessarily expect much of an impact of this variable once we control for
lagged population growth. Yet, the fraction of the housing stock priced below construction costs at the
beginning of the decade still matters. The coefficient drops by about one-quarter, but it remains significant.
Places with much housing priced below the cost of new construction just do not grow.
28
   By 1990, there is a very strong regional concentration in the west of cities with substantial fractions of
their housing stocks priced well above construction costs. If the region controls are dropped, the
coefficient on the fraction of stock priced at least 30 percent above construction cost rises substantially in
absolute value (the coefficient becomes negative in this case) and is highly statistically significant.
29
   It is noteworthy that the alternative measure of housing price based on the constant quality price series
discussed above confirms the findings in this section. When that measure of housing price premium




                                                                                                           25
VII.     Human Capital and Urban Decline


In this section, we address the connection between human capital, the housing stock and
urban decline. At this point, we assume that there are high human capital types and low
human capital types. Otherwise, the model is unchanged. Low human capital types
receive wages of W, pay transport costs of T, and have a reservation utility outside of the
city that is equal to U . High human capital types have wages equal to (φ + 1)W , travel

costs equal to (φ + 1)T , and reservation utility equal to U . The fact that travel costs and
wages scale by the same amount is meant to capture the time costs of travel. The crucial
aspect of the model is not that transport costs and wages scale identically, but that the
high human capital types have both higher wages and higher commuting costs.
Significantly, high and low human capital types are assumed to receive the same utility
flow from amenities.


At this point, we address empirically our assumption that human capital acts to multiply
city level productivity. We examined mean hourly wage rates in 1990 for full-time (or
nearly full-time) workers of various skill groupings for samples of growing and declining
cities.30 We split the sample into cities which gained population over the 1980s and cities
that lost population over the 1990s. On average, workers in the growing cities indeed
earned more than workers in the declining cities. If there are different levels of “W” in
those two samples, then our model requires that the higher levels of W in growing cities
impact all workers in proportion to their base wages.


relative to construction costs is used as the dependent variable, it, too, strongly predicts future growth.
Those results are available upon request.
30
   The figures discussed below are unweighted means of the city means. The underlying figures
themselves reflect averages across workers in each city that were computed using 1990 census data from
the IPUMs. The samples were restricted to city residents who reported substantial labor market and work
activity in 1989. More specifically, the individual worked at least 40 weeks during the year and typically
worked at least 20 hours per week. The range of ages was restricted to between 19 and 59. Hourly wages
were computed by dividing reported wage and salary income by total hours worked during 1989. Total
hours worked was computed as the multiple of weeks worked and usual hours worked per week. We
experimented with different treatments for outliers (e.g., individuals who worked 80 hours per week, 52
weeks per year), but the results are not sensitive how we dealt with them. The wage rates reported just
below presume that everyone took at least two weeks of vacation, that nobody typically worked more than
60 hours per week, and that nobody working at least 800 hours (the minimum required to be in our sample)
earned less than $1,000.


                                                                                                         26
To examine this hypothesis, we divided workers into four skill groups based on their
educational achievement: high school dropouts (i.e. those with less than 12 years of
schooling), high school graduates (those with exactly 12 years of schooling), people with
some college (those with more than 12 and less than 16 years of schooling), and college
graduates (those with more than 16 years of schooling). The difference in average wages
across growing versus shrinking cities then was computed for each group. The wage gap
was –1.3 percent for the dropouts (i.e., they earned slightly less in growing cities), 5.4
percent for the high school graduates, 7.5 percent for those with some college and 4.5
percent for college graduates. These numbers are just mean percentage differences, but
controlling for other factors makes little difference.31


For the three highest groups, the assumption of proportionately seems basically correct.
However, high school dropouts actually earn slightly more in declining cities. This may
be because of omitted human capital controls, or because improving city level
productivity impacts the skilled more than the less skilled. While this does not support
our assumption exactly, it makes the empirical relationship between decline and poverty
even more understandable. If we were to assume that negative shocks lower wages for
high human capital people even more than for low human capital people, our basic
theoretical result— population declines are associated with a greater population share for
the less skilled—would follow even more easily.


However, we stick with our proportionately assumption and given this assumption,
people with high levels of human capital will live closer to the city center.32 The

31
   Because the underlying sample sizes of workers are small in some cities for certain skill groups
(especially for dropouts), we computed the analogous figures for more aggregated groupings. For example,
dividing workers into two skill categories, with the low skill group having 12 or fewer years of schooling,
finds that wages for this group are 2.8 percent lower on average in declining cities; wages for the high skill
group (i.e., those with at least some college training) are 5.5 percent lower on average in declining cities.
Finally, we also examined wage differences by occupation. Very small sample sizes for individual
occupations in most cities forced us to aggregate across many occupations. However, it proved possible to
compute mean wages for groups of pretty clearly defined skill groups (e.g., engineers and scientists versus
various low level service personnel). Those results are consistent with those for those just discussed.
32
   Of course, this is counter-factual in some cases. ), this is true. A richer model (see Glaeser, Kahn and
Rappaport, 2000), with better predictions about where the poor and rich live, would still find that the poor
would live disproportionately in declining cities.


                                                                                                           27
equilibrium population of the city will be characterized by two key equations. The first is
the furthest point where it pays to construct new housing or renovate old housing. Since
the low human capital types live at the edge of the city, this point is determined by their
parameter values. The edge of construction will equal (W + A − U ) / T − (δ + r )C /(1 + r ) ,

just as before, and we denote this distance d . In the completely static city, the
population will again equal two times this amount.


There is also a distance which marks the furthest point at which high human capital types
will live, which is denoted d*. This is the point at which low and high human capital
types are willing to pay equal rents. The rental payments in the high human capital
region of the city equal R(0) − (1 + φ )Td , and, the open city assumption tells us that

R(0) = (1 + φ )W + A − U . The rental payments in the low human capital region of the

city equal R(d ) + T (d − d ) and the open city assumption requires that

R(d ) = W + A − U − T d . Solving these equations tells us d * = ( R(0) − R(d ) − T d ) / φT ,

or d * = W / T − (U − U ) / φT . In a static city, the share of the city that is high human

capital equals the ratio of d* to d : (W − (U − U ) / φ ) /(W + A − U − T (δ + r )C /(1 + r )) .


We assume that this is less than one. Differentiation reveals that the skill level of the city
will be (a) rising with W, (b) falling with A, (c) rising with C, (d) rising with U , and (e)

falling with U . Thus, growing cities will tend to increase their skill quantity if the
growth is the result of W and decrease their skill quantity if the growth is the result of A.


As we have observed throughout this paper, the durability of housing will mute the
population losses at far distances from the city center. This means that declining cities
will tend to lose fewer low human capital individuals than they would if housing
depreciated instantaneously. More precisely, consider a city with an innovation to both
wages and amenities (denoted ∆ W and ∆ A respectively). If these innovations are

positive, the increase in population will equal 2(∆ W + ∆ A ) / T . The change in the skill




                                                                                                   28
level will be positive if the change in wages dominates and negative if the change in
amenities dominates.


However, when the city shrinks, assuming that the decline is sufficiently modest so that it
still pays to maintain the housing of the high human capital types, decreases in population
will equal - 2δ (∆ W + ∆ A ) / T , and the change in the skill level will differ, because the
housing on the edge of the city decays only slowly.


Declining amenity levels generally will lead to increasing skill levels, but the effect will
be smaller than the impact of rising amenities on skill levels (by roughly the ratio 1/δ).
Decreasing wages will have a greater impact on decreasing skill levels than increasing
wages will have on increasing skill levels. This asymmetry occurs because there are
large amounts of low cost housing that disproportionately attract the poor remain in the
city. The following statement formalizes this intuition.


Proposition 5: If ∆ W = z∆ A , and z is such that population increases are skill neutral,
then population decreases will be associated with declining levels of human capital.


Since we do not know whether rising population levels are coming from amenities or
wages, we do not know whether increases in population will cause increased skills or not.
However, we do know that the decreases in population will be much more likely to be
associated with declining skill levels, even when the co-movement of amenities and
wages is symmetric.


Empirical Results


Tables 9-12 report empirical results on the connection between city growth and human
capital levels. We begin with two conventional measures of education: the share of
college graduates (Table 9) and the share of high school dropouts (Table 10).
The first regression in Table 9, for the 1980s, shows the relationship between the share of
the city’s population that has a college degree and city growth. The primary independent


                                                                                                29
variable is the growth rate of population and we use a spline at zero. The results indicate
that greater population decline is associated with sharply falling skill levels when city
population growth is negative. However, when cities grow they actually face a decrease
in the share of the population that are college graduates (although the effect is not
statistically significant). This pattern is compatible with amenities being more important
to city growth than wages. This could create a situation where both increases and
decreases in population lead to declines in the skill level.


In the second specification, we include a rich set of controls including region dummies
and a host of initial controls. We also control for the change in the share of the
population that is Hispanic. This control is important because many of the growing
cities of the west grow because of increasing Hispanic populations. When we include
these controls, there is still an asymmetry whereby less sharp decline leads to more
college graduates as a share of population when population growth is negative, while it
has no significant impact when population growth is positive.


In the third regression, we add a control for the log of the median value of housing at the
end of the time period. The model suggests that poor people come to declining cities
primarily because of the availability of cheap housing. If this is the case, then controlling
for housing prices should eliminate the connection between city growth and increasing
human capital levels for declining cities. We see that this is indeed the case. The
housing price control, and no other local variable, has the effect of eliminating the
connection. This supports our contention that housing markets enable us to understand
why there is a strong connection between declining cities and declining skill levels.


Because our explanation of the connection between urban decline and urban deskilling
rests on the poor and less-skilled losing relatively less from lower wages and gaining
relatively more from lower house prices in declining cities, it is useful to know more
about the magnitudes of wage and housing prices declines in shrinking cities. The
differences in wage outcomes in growing versus declining cities pale in comparison to
the differences in mean house prices. For cities that lost population in the 1980s, the



                                                                                            30
mean house price (of the means for the 31 declining cities in the sample for which we
were able to compute mean wages by skill category) was $61,342. This is 49 percent
below the mean of $119,177 for the 65 cities that gained population in the 1980s. The
abundance of relatively cheap housing in declining cities combined with the fact that
wages for lower skilled workers are not lower in declining cities (especially compared to
the situation for higher skilled workers) bolsters the case for our hypothesis that these
places are relatively attractive to this group.


Regressions (4)-(6) of Table 9 repeat regressions (1)-(3) for the 1970s. The results are
similar. Lower population growth is associated with falling human capital levels when
population growth is negative, but not when population growth is positive. Here, we
really seem to be close to the situation described in the proposal where city-level shocks
are neutral on the upside but strongly decrease skill levels on the downside. Once again,
including a rich set of local controls leaves the results virtually unchanged (column 5),
but controlling for the logarithm of the median value of housing at the end of the period
again eliminates the connection between population decline and declining skills during
this time period.


Table 10 repeats this exercise using the share of adults over 25 years of age in the city
with less than 12 years of schooling as the dependent variable. In this case, local
controls—the change in Hispanic population share especially—are needed for the results
to support the model.33 In the absence of those controls, the first column shows that
rising population generally is associated with rising dropout rates in the 1980s. As
suggested by the findings from the second specification, this is due to the fact that many
high growth cities in the west and southwest had increasing Hispanic populations which
tend not to be highly educated. When this factor is controlled for, less negative growth in
declining cities strongly decreases the share of the population that dropped out of high
school. For growing cities, the point estimate is less than half that for declining cities.
The specification in the third column includes the housing price variable, but it has little
effect on the findings in this case.

33
     We find similar results to those in column 2 if we exclude cities with large Hispanic populations.


                                                                                                          31
The final three specifications examine dropouts in the 1970s. The pattern of results is
very similar to that for the 1980s. This time, including the housing price variable makes
the population-dropout relationship statistically insignificant among declining cities,
providing further evidence that housing prices explain why the poor come to declining
cities.


Tables 11 and 12 look at income-based measures of human capital: median family
income and the poverty rate. These variables are problematic because if rising population
levels are caused by rising wages, then we should expect to see a positive relationship
even if the housing market factors that dominate our model are not important.
Nonetheless, since these measures may be better measures of human capital than
educational degrees, we repeat the analysis using them.


The first regression in Table 11 shows that population growth and rising income are
closely linked when population growth is negative but not when population growth is
positive. This again supports the model. While a general connection between rising
growth and rising wages should occur whenever rising labor demand drives growth, the
asymmetry in the results makes this seem less likely to be causing the relationship, as it
requires a complicated story whereby labor demand drives declining cities but labor
supply drives growing cities. Among declining cities, a one percent decline in growth in
the 1980s is associated with a 1.14 percent decrease in real income. Including the
standard set of local controls does not change the basic result (column 2). However,
controlling for the end of period median housing price does eliminate much of the
connection between income growth and population growth among declining cities. We
have repeated these regressions for the 1970s and found extremely similar results. In the
1970s, there is no relationship between income growth and population growth, once we
control for the end-of-period price of housing.


Table 12 then presents results using the change in the poverty rate as the dependent
variable. The asymmetry shows up in this variable as well. Greater population losses



                                                                                             32
strongly increase the poverty rate for declining cities, but not for growing cities. Our
other controls do not affect the result, but controlling for the end period housing price
does materially reduce the impact. We find similar results using poverty rates in the
1970s.


Tables 9-12 have documented a strong connection between falling population and
decreasing skills (and incomes) among declining cities, but little connection among
growing cities. The tendency of declining cities to disproportionately attract the poor is
particularly important if concentrations of poverty then further deter growth. If low skill
cities have lower rates of innovation or have social problems that then repel future
residents, the tendency of cheap housing to attract the poor can create a vicious cycle. A
preliminary urban decline can cause the skill composition of the city to shift. Then, this
lower skill composition can drive out future residents and further depress the growth of
the city. These dynamic considerations are a pressing topic for future research.


VIII. Conclusion


Heretofore, the urban growth literature has not considered the physical nature of cities as
an important factor in explaining urban dynamics. While the durability of housing may
not be a crucial element of urban dynamics for growing cities, it is the key to
understanding the nature of urban decline, and we are in an era of decline for many our
major cities. Consequently, we develop a dynamic version of the Mills-Muth-Alonso
model in which housing is durable and can explain five key features of urban change.


First, city growth rates are leptokurtotic. The durability of the housing stock can explain
why cities grow much faster than they decline. Second, the persistence of city growth is
particularly striking. The degree of persistence is strongest among declining cities—as
predicted by our bricks and mortar model of urban dynamics. Third, exogenous shocks
lead to (different) asymmetric responses of population and house prices. Negative shocks
have a relatively small impact on population growth, especially among declining cities, as
the durability of housing leads to declines in demand being reflected more in prices than



                                                                                            33
in people. Conversely, the ability to build means that positive shocks have greater impact
on growth because new supply dampens the effect on prices. Both asymmetries are
borne out in the data. Fourth, the distribution of house prices is an excellent predictor of
future population growth. In particular, the data show that growth is quite rare in cities
with large fractions of their housing stock valued below the cost of new construction.
This link is not causal, but rather illustrates the role the housing market plays in
mediating growth. Fifth, the model helps explain why cities in greater decline tend to
have lower levels of human capital, as cheap housing is relatively more attractive to the
poor. This is confirmed in the data in terms of the share of college graduates, the share of
high school drop outs, real income growth, and changes in poverty rates. This finding
may help us understand the correlation between urban decline and urban social problems.




                                                                                             34
                                      References

Brueckner, Jan. “Urban Growth Models with Durable Housing: An Overview”, in
   Jacques-Francois Thisse and Jean-Marie Huriot (eds.), Economics of Cities.
   Cambridge University Press, 2000.

Eaton, Jonathon & Zvi Eckstein, “Cities and Growth: Theory and Evidence from France
   and Japan”, Regional Science and Urban Economics, 27(4-5), August 1997: 443-74.

Glaeser, Edward and Jesse Shapiro, “Is There a New Urbanism?”, National Bureau of
   Economic Research Working Paper No. 8357, July 2001.

Glaeser, Edward, Matthew Kahn and Jordan Rappaport, “Why Do the Poor Live in
   Cities?”, Harvard Institute for Economic Research Working Paper 1891, April 2000.

Glaeser, Edward, Andrei Shleifer, and Jose Scheinkman, “Economic Growth in a Cross
   Section of Cities”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 5013,
   February 1995.

Goodman, John C. and John B. Ittner, “The Accuracy of Home Owners’ Estimates of
   House Value”, Journal of Housing Economics, 2(4), December 1992: 339-57.

Krugman, Paul, “History and Industry Location: The Case of the Manufacturing Belt”,
   American Economic Review, 81(2), May 1991: 80-83.

____________, “Increasing Returns and Economic Geography”, Journal of Political
   Economy, 99(3), June 1991: 483-99.

R. S. Means. Residential Cost Data, 19th Annual Edition, R.S. Means Company, 2000.

_________. Square Foot Costs, 21st Annual Edition, R.S. Means Company, 2000.

Rosen, Sherwin, “Wage-Based Indexes of Urban Quality of Life” in P. Mieszkowski and
   M. Straszheim (eds.), Current Issues in Urban Economics. Johns Hopkins University
   Press: Baltimore, MD. 1979.

Solow, Robert, “Congestion Cost and the Use of Land for Streets”, Bell Journal of
   Economics, Vol. 4, no. 2, Autumn 1973: 602-618.

U. S. Bureau of the Census. American Housing Survey, data tapes, various years.

______________________. Statistical Abstract of the United States. Government
      Printing Office: Washington, DC. 2001.

University of Minnesota. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 2.0
       Historical Census Projects, Minneapolis, 1997, various census years.



                                                                                      35
       Appendix 1: Construction of the House Value/Construction Cost Ratio

A number of adjustments are made to the underlying house price data in the comparison
of prices to construction costs. These include imputation of the square footage of living
area for observations from the IPUMS for the 1980 and 1990 census years. Following
that, we make three adjustments to the house price data to account for the depreciation
that occurs on older homes, to account for general inflation when comparing across years,
and to account for the fact that research shows owners tend to overestimate the value of
their homes. Finally, we make an adjustment to construction costs in order to account for
the wide regional variation in the presence of basements. The remainder of this
Appendix provides the details.


First, the square footage of living area must be imputed for each observation in 1980 and
1990 from the IPUMS. Because the AHS contains square footage information, we begin
by estimating square footage in that data set, using housing traits that are common to the
AHS and IPUMS data. This set includes the age of the building (AGE and its square),
whether there is a full kitchen (KITFULL), the number of bedrooms (BEDROOMS), the
number of bathrooms (BATHROOMS), the number of other rooms (OTHROOMS), a
dummy variable for the presence of central air conditioning (AIRCON), controls for the
type of home heating system (HEAT, with controls for the following types: gas, oil,
electric, no heat), a dummy variable for detached housing unit status (DETACHED),
dummy variables for each metropolitan area (MSA), and dummy variables for the U.S.
census regions (REGION).


Thus, the linear specification estimated is of the following form:


SQUARE FOOTAGEi = f{AGEi, AGE2i, BEDROOMSi, BATHROOMSi, KITFULLi,
                   OTHROOMSi, AIRCONi, HEATi, DETACHEDi, MSAi,
                   REGIONi}34,



34
  Data frequently was missing for the presence of air conditioning (AIRCON) and the number of other
rooms (OTHROOMS). So as not to substantially reduce the number of available observations, we coded in
the mean for these variables when the true value was missing. Special dummies were included in the
specification estimated to provide separate effects of the true versus assigned data.


                                                                                                  36
The subscript i indexes the house observations and separate regressions are run using the
1985 and 1989 AHS data. Our samples include only single unit, owned residences in
central cities (which can be attached or detached).35 The overall fits are reasonably good,
with the adjusted R-squares being .391 in the 1985 data and .306 in the 1989 data.


The 1985 coefficients are then used to impute the square footage of the observations from
the 1980 IPUMS, and the 1989 coefficients are used analogously for the 1990 IPUMS
sample. Once house value is put into price per square foot form, it can be compared to
the construction cost per square foot data from the R.S. Means Company.


However, we make other adjustments before actually making that comparison. One
adjustment takes into account the fact that research shows owners tend to overestimate
the value of their homes. Following the survey and recent estimation by Goodman &
Ittner, 1992, we presume that owners typically overvalue their homes by 6 percent.36


A second, and empirically more important, adjustment takes into account the fact that the
vast majority of our homes are not new and have experienced real depreciation.
Depreciation factors are estimated using the AHS and then applied to the IPUMS data.
More specifically, we regress house value per square foot (scaled down by the Goodman
& Ittner, 1992, correction) in the relevant year (1985 or 1989) on a series of age controls
and metropolitan area dummies. The age data is in interval form so that we can tell if a
house is from 0-5 years old, from 6-10 years old, from 11-25 years old, from 25-36 years
old, and more than 45 years old.37 The coefficients on the age controls are each negative
as expected and represent the extent to which houses of different ages have depreciated in
value on a per square foot basis.


Because the regressions use nominal data, we make a further adjustment for the fact that
general price inflation occurred between 1980-1985 and 1989-1990. In the case of

35
   We excluded observations with extreme square footage values, deleting those with less than 500 square
feet and more than 5,000 square feet of living area (4,000 square feet in the 1989 survey is the top code).
36
   This effect turns out to be relatively minor in terms of its quantitative impact on the results.
37
   Slightly different intervals are reported in the AHS and IPUMS. We experimented with transformations
based on each surveys intervals. The different matching produce very similar results.


                                                                                                         37
applying the 1985 results to the 1980 IPUMS data, we scale down the implied
depreciation factor by the percentage change in the rental cost component of the
Consumer Price Index between 1980 and 1985. In the case of applying the 1989 results
to the 1990 IPUMS observations, we scale up the implied depreciation factor in an
analogous fashion.38

Finally, we make an adjustment for the fact that there is substantial regional and cross-
metropolitan area variation in the presence of basements. Having a basement adds
materially to construction costs according to the Means data. Units with unfinished
basements have about 10 percent higher construction costs depending on the size of the
unit. Units with finished basements have up to 30 percent higher construction costs,
again depending on the size of the unit. Our procedure effectively assumes that units
with a basement in the AHS have unfinished basements, so that we underestimate
construction costs for units with finished basements. Unfortunately, the IPUMS data in
1980 and 1990 do not report whether the housing units have a basement. However, using
the AHS data we can calculate the probability that a housing unit in a specific U.S. census
division has a basement. The divisional differences are extremely large, ranging from 1.3
percent in the West South Central census division to 94.9 percent in the Middle Atlantic
census division. Thus, in the West South Central census division we assume that each
unit has 0.013 basements, and that each unit in the Middle Atlantic division has 0.949
basements. Because of the very large gross differences in the propensity to have
basements, this adjustment almost certainly reduces measurement error relative to
assuming all units have basements or that none have basements.


After these adjustments, house value is then compared to construction costs to produce
the distributions reported in the main text.




38
  The depreciation factors themselves are relatively large. After making the inflation and Goodman-Ittner
correction, the results for 1980 suggest that a house that was 6-11 years old was worth $3.17 per square
foot less than a new home. Very old homes (i.e., 46+ years) were estimated to be worth $11.94 per square
foot less than a new home that year.


                                                                                                       38
                               Appendix 2: Proofs of Propositions

Proposition 1: If there is a shock at time t denoted ε = µ * Population that is
unexpected, and there are no further shocks, then the distribution of population changes
between time t and t+j is leptokurtotic, in that the mean is greater than the median. The
gap between the median and the mean of the distribution diminishes as j gets larger.
Furthermore, the rate of depreciation satisfies
                                             Nt − Nt+ j                    
                                         E                N t + j < N t 
                                                Nt                         
1 − (1 − δ ) j =                                                                                   ,
                   N t+ j − N t N t+ j − N t       N t + j − N t    N t + j − N t   
                 E                            > 2                        − 2        
                        N            N                   N                   Nt       Med
                          t            t                    t          Med 
when the median growth rate is positive and
                  N t − N t+ j    N t+ j − N t         N − N t    N t + j − N t      
                E                               < 2 t + j               + 2       
                      Nt               N                   N               
                                                                          Med       Nt      Med
1 − (1 − δ ) j = 
                                           t                     t
                                                                                                       ,
                                                Nt+ j − Nt                  
                                            E               N t + j > N t 
                                                    Nt                      
when the median growth rate is negative.
                                  Nt+ j − Nt       2 εt   2µ t
Proof: When ε t > 0 , then                     =        =      . When ε t < 0 ,
                                      Nt           T Nt    T

Nt+ j − Nt     2 (1 − (1 − δ ) j )ε t 2(1 − (1 − δ ) j ) µ t
             =                       =                       . We use the notation
    Nt         T         Nt                   T

         Nt+ j − Nt
∆N j =                and ∆N Med
                             j   is the median growth rate. Skewness means that the mean
             Nt

of the variable is greater than the median. The average value of ∆N j is

2                                    
     E ( µ ) − (1 − δ ) j ∫ µf ( µ )dµ  . We have assumed that µ is symmetrically distributed
T                      µ <0
                                       
                                       
around a constant, which must be E ( µ ) , so the median growth rate is either equal to

2                           2(1 − (1 − δ ) j )
  E ( µ ) if E ( µ ) > 0 or                    E ( µ ) if E ( µ ) < 0 . In the case where E ( µ ) > 0 is
T                                  T
positive, it is obvious that the mean is above the median. The gap equals



                                                                                                           39
2                          
     (1 − δ ) j ∫ µf ( µ )dµ  which goes to zero as j gets large. In the case where E ( µ ) < 0 ,
T            µ <0
                             
                             

               2(1 − δ ) j                            
                                 E ( µ ) − µf ( µ )dµ  which is positive, but also goes to zero as
the gap equals
                   T                       ∫          
                                          µ <0        
j gets large.


For the second part of the theorem, we define e = µ − µˆ , where µ̂ is the median and
mean of µ , and e is then a variable that is symmetrically distributed around zero. Using

the symmetry of e, we know that for any number “z”, E (e e < z ) = − E (e e > z ) , which

implies


(A1) E ( µ µ <0) = E ( µˆ + e µˆ + e <0) = E (e e < − µˆ ) + µˆ = µˆ − E (e e > µˆ ) .


This further implies that:
                               2                                   2
(A2) E ( − ∆N j   ∆N j <0) =     (1 − (1 − δ ) j )(− E ( µ µ <0)) = (1 − (1 − δ ) j )( E (e e > µˆ ) − µˆ ) ,
                               T                                   T
and
                                                   2                           4 µˆ 2
(A3)   E (∆N j − 2∆N Med
                     j   ∆N j > 2∆N Med
                                    j   )=           (( E (e e > µˆ ) + µˆ ) −     = (( E (e e > µˆ ) − µˆ ) ,
                                                   T                           T    T

and the first formula follows. For the second formula, we use the following:

(A4) E (− µ µ <2 µˆ ) = E (− µˆ − e e < µˆ ) = E (−e e < µˆ ) − µˆ = − µˆ + E (e e > − µˆ ) .

                                    2
When µˆ < 0 , then ∆N med
                      j   =           (1 − (1 − δ ) j ) µˆ , and
                                    T
                    2
E (∆N j ∆N j >0) =    (( E (e e > − µˆ ) + µˆ ) , and thus
                   T
                                        2(1 − (1 − δ ) j )
(A5) E (− ∆N j ∆N j < − 2∆N Medj   ) =                     (( E (e e > µˆ ) − µˆ ) ,
                                                 T

and the second formula follows.




                                                                                                                 40
Proposition 2: Growth rates will be positively correlated over time. The current growth
rate will be increasing in the lagged growth rate when the lagged growth rate is negative
and will be independent of the lagged growth rate when the lagged growth rate is
positive.


Proof: In the first period, if there is a positive shock the city immediately adjusts and
there is no further growth—thus there is no correlation between first period growth and
second period growth. If during the first period, there is a negative shock, then growth
rate in the first period will equal ∆N = 2δµ / T , and growth during the second period
equals 2(1 − δ )δµ / T , which is obviously correlated with first period growth positively
(perfectly in fact). If there was a second period shock, the first and second period growth
rates would still be orthogonal, if the first period growth was positive (since, after a
period of a positive shock) the city is basically starting afresh. If there is a negative
shock, then in the second period, there will still be a positive correlation because of the
tendency of the housing stock priced below the cost of new construction to decay and not
be replaced.


Proposition 3:
       a. The effect of exogenous on population will be convex around zero, and mores
specifically, the slope of population growth with respect to positive shocks will equal
1 / δ times the slope of population growth with respect to negative shocks.
       b. The effect of exogenous shocks on median housing price growth will be
concave around zero.
       c. The relationship between average housing price growth and population growth
will be concave around zero.


Proof: For (a), in the case of a positive shock, ∆N = 2ε / T ; in the case of a negative
shock, ∆N = 2δε / T . If the size of µ , is identified, then the ratio of the slopes holds.
       For (b), in the text we argued that a negative shock leads to a total change of
(1 + r )(2 − δ )ε / 2r in housing prices and a positive shock leads to a total change of
(1 + r )ε / 2r . It is again obvious that the slope with respect to the exogenous shock is


                                                                                              41
greater when the exogenous shock is positive than when the shock is negative, and thus
the relationship is piecewise linear in the shock and convex around zero.
        For (c), the slope of housing price growth (in percentage terms) on percentage
                                    T (1 + r ) Initial Population
changes in population will equal                                  when population growth is
                                       4r         Initial Price
               T (1 + r )(2 − δ ) Initial Population
positve and                                          when population is negative. As
                      4δr            Initial Price
2 −δ
     > 1 , it follows that slope is concave with a kink at zero.
  δ


Proposition 4: Expected population growth is declining in the share of the housing stock
with prices below the cost of new construction.


Proof: The change in population equals 2δε / T , or − 2δ (X − T (δ + r )C /(1 + r ) )S / T , so
the population change will be declining in S—the share of the housing stock that costs
less than the price of new construction.


                                                    φW − U + U
Proposition 5: If ∆ W = z∆ A , and z equals                             so that population
                                               φA + U − (1 + φ )U − φrC
increases are skill neutral, then population decreases will be associated with declining
levels of human capital.


Proof: For population changes to be skill neutral, it must be the case the ratio of high
skill people to total population is equal before and after the shock, i.e.:


             W − (U − U ) / φ                     W + ∆ W − (U − U ) / φ
(A6)                                    =                                              .
       W + A − U − T (δ + r )C /(1 + r ) W + ∆ W + A + ∆ A − U − T (δ + r )C /(1 + r )


This implies




                                                                                              42
           1   
(A7) ∆ A =  − 1∆ W ,
           H   


where H refers to the initial skill level,
(W − (U − U ) / φ ) /(W + A − U − T (δ + r )C /(1 + r )) . After a negative shock, the value of

d* becomes (W + ∆ W ) / T − (U − U ) / φT and the population of high human capital
individuals is twice this amount.


The total population of the city 2(W + A − U ) / T − 2(δ + r )C /(1 + r )) is reduced by

2δ (∆ W + ∆ A ) / T after a negative shock. This means that the ratio of high skill to total
population after a negative shock equals:


                 W + ∆ W − (U − U ) / φ
(A8)                                                   ,
       W + δ∆ W + A + δ∆ A − U − T (δ + r )C /(1 + r )


which is less than (W − (U − U ) / φ ) /(W + A − U − T (δ + r )C /(1 + r )) , as long as


            1     
(A9) ∆ A >     − 1∆ W ,
            δH    


which must always hold, as long as (A7) holds (recall that both shocks are negative).




                                                                                               43
Appendix 3--Table 1: House Price/Construction Cost Distribution, Summary Statistics, 1980
(cities listed in ascending order of % homes below 100% of construction costs--middle column)
                                     %houses valued at %houses valued
                                                                           %houses valued at least
                                      least 20% below    below 100% of
                                                                           20% above construction
                                     construction costs construction costs
                                                                              costs(0.5=50%)
City                         State       (0.5=50%)         (0.5=50%)
Honolulu city                HI            0.003              0.009                0.983
Anaheim city                 CA            0.007              0.012                0.967
San Diego city               CA            0.018              0.031                0.936
San Francisco city           CA            0.020              0.033                0.913
Oxnard city                  CA            0.015              0.040                0.874
Las Vegas city               NV            0.023              0.053                0.763
Riverside city               CA            0.019              0.059                0.772
Denver city                  CO            0.011              0.071                0.862
Los Angeles city             CA            0.032              0.071                0.884
Washington city              DC            0.018              0.077                0.825
Fort Lauderdale city         FL            0.045              0.079                0.771
Vallejo city                 CA            0.037              0.087                0.746
Madison city                 WI            0.008              0.088                0.630
Santa Barbara city           CA            0.038              0.093                0.765
Salt Lake City city          UT            0.043              0.104                0.682
Bridgeport city              CT            0.062              0.110                0.646
Ann Arbor city               MI            0.022              0.118                0.687
Albuquerque city             NM            0.059              0.131                0.672
New Orleans city             LA            0.038              0.133                0.744
Fresno city                  CA            0.072              0.153                0.622
Seattle city                 WA            0.060              0.155                0.677
Minneapolis city             MN            0.041              0.180                0.466
Newport News city            VA            0.049              0.181                0.562
Colorado Springs city        CO            0.044              0.186                0.506
Raleigh city                 NC            0.088              0.189                0.666
Bakersfield city             CA            0.069              0.193                0.538
Portland city                OR            0.051              0.202                0.573
Charleston city              SC            0.091              0.203                0.603
Eugene city                  OR            0.050              0.204                0.485
Miami city                   FL            0.089              0.224                0.586
New Haven city               CT            0.075              0.229                0.492
Charlotte city               NC            0.092              0.242                0.565
Tulsa city                   OK            0.114              0.242                0.562
Columbia city                SC            0.096              0.254                0.611
Tucson city                  AZ            0.111              0.255                0.526
Huntsville city              AL            0.097              0.257                0.528
Phoenix city                 AZ            0.108              0.259                0.509
Greensboro city              NC            0.108              0.261                0.494
Austin city                  TX            0.117              0.262                0.558
Norfolk city                 VA            0.061              0.262                0.473




                                                                                        44
                               Appendix 3, Table 1 (cont.d)
Nashville-Davidson city   TN          0.123               0.263   0.496
Oklahoma City city        OK          0.123               0.274   0.512
Lexington-Fayette city    KY          0.096               0.286   0.448
Little Rock city          AR          0.116               0.291   0.522
Stockton city             CA          0.137               0.306   0.456
Winston-Salem city        NC          0.146               0.306   0.527
Orlando city              FL          0.163               0.320   0.423
Richmond city             VA          0.124               0.323   0.423
Jackson city              MS          0.175               0.326   0.430
Davenport city            IA          0.111               0.329   0.397
Sacramento city           CA          0.148               0.332   0.481
Knoxville city            TN          0.184               0.339   0.419
Houston city              TX          0.184               0.340   0.494
Shreveport city           LA          0.201               0.352   0.474
Albany city               NY          0.167               0.356   0.292
El Paso city              TX          0.140               0.356   0.410
Milwaukee city            WI          0.129               0.358   0.281
Baton Rouge city          LA          0.218               0.365   0.461
Tacoma city               WA          0.136               0.370   0.321
New York city             NY          0.086               0.376   0.311
Roanoke city              VA          0.121               0.383   0.316
Dallas city               TX          0.231               0.387   0.482
Wichita city              KS          0.179               0.406   0.355
Peoria city               IL          0.204               0.418   0.307
Mobile city               AL          0.215               0.430   0.360
Memphis city              TN          0.207               0.433   0.346
Durham city               NC          0.176               0.441   0.369
Lorain city               OH          0.142               0.446   0.230
Cincinnati city           OH          0.198               0.450   0.301
Chattanooga city          TN          0.208               0.460   0.304
Chicago city              IL          0.219               0.465   0.307
Tampa city                FL          0.250               0.471   0.327
Birmingham city           AL          0.206               0.477   0.285
Fort Wayne city           IN          0.263               0.480   0.227
Providence city           RI          0.163               0.484   0.338
Baltimore city            MD          0.237               0.502   0.228
Fort Worth city           TX          0.347               0.505   0.339
Columbus city             OH          0.211               0.515   0.234
Spokane city              WA          0.171               0.520   0.211
Des Moines city           IA          0.220               0.525   0.210
Hartford city             CT          0.230               0.526   0.199
Rockford city             IL          0.236               0.533   0.205
Topeka city               KS          0.262               0.536   0.172
Waterbury city            CT          0.206               0.549   0.163
Kalamazoo city            MI          0.316               0.556   0.198
Toledo city               OH          0.259               0.558   0.224
San Antonio city          TX          0.346               0.563   0.265



                                                                      45
                         Appendix 3, Table 1 (cont’d.)
Indianapolis city   IN           0.349               0.571   0.254
Atlanta city        GA           0.322               0.572   0.299
Erie city           PA           0.211               0.576   0.136
Jacksonville city   FL           0.310               0.577   0.231
Beaumont city       TX           0.356               0.578   0.258
Macon city          GA           0.280               0.583   0.235
Lawrence city       MA           0.162               0.599   0.076
Kansas City city    MO           0.363               0.601   0.210
Louisville city     KY           0.406               0.611   0.228
Newark city         NJ           0.327               0.637   0.112
Duluth city         MN           0.221               0.642   0.133
Omaha city          NE           0.336               0.644   0.187
Jersey City city    NJ           0.295               0.645   0.112
Grand Rapids city   MI           0.307               0.651   0.129
Evansville city     IN           0.340               0.659   0.169
Allentown city      PA           0.227               0.670   0.144
Lansing city        MI           0.315               0.678   0.163
Syracuse city       NY           0.291               0.686   0.132
St. Louis city      MO           0.450               0.700   0.131
Utica city          NY           0.361               0.707   0.123
Pittsburgh city     PA           0.390               0.720   0.107
Dayton city         OH           0.332               0.721   0.076
Cleveland city      OH           0.383               0.736   0.057
Boston city         MA           0.435               0.750   0.108
Akron city          OH           0.454               0.767   0.130
Philadelphia city   PA           0.503               0.773   0.098
South Bend city     IN           0.430               0.791   0.101
Worcester city      MA           0.376               0.804   0.070
Springfield city    MA           0.471               0.829   0.072
Rochester city      NY           0.495               0.834   0.060
Youngstown city     OH           0.507               0.835   0.047
Buffalo city        NY           0.549               0.840   0.079
Scranton city       PA           0.445               0.845   0.042
Gary city           IN           0.599               0.853   0.064
Flint city          MI           0.651               0.905   0.057
Detroit city        MI           0.822               0.937   0.022




                                                                 46
Appendix 3--Table 2: House Price/Construction Cost Distribution, Summary Statistics, 1990
                                      %houses valued at     %houses valued      %houses valued at
                                       least 20% below      below 100% of        least 20% above
                                      construction costs   construction costs   construction costs
City                          State       (0.5=50%)           (0.5=50%)             (0.5=50%)
Oxnard city                   CA            0.000                0.005                0.989
Honolulu city                 HI            0.010                0.010                0.987
Anaheim city                  CA            0.010                0.010                0.987
New Haven city                CT            0.000                0.011                0.989
San Diego city                CA            0.007                0.016                0.958
Los Angeles city              CA            0.011                0.020                0.958
Lowell city                   MA            0.000                0.020                0.931
Washington city               DC            0.008                0.021                0.921
Bridgeport city               CT            0.000                0.023                0.969
Lawrence city                 MA            0.015                0.030                0.962
Hartford city                 CT            0.017                0.034                0.881
San Francisco city            CA            0.034                0.035                0.954
Vallejo city                  CA            0.027                0.036                0.920
Waterbury city                CT            0.019                0.037                0.932
Reno city                     NV            0.000                0.038                0.880
Boston city                   MA            0.018                0.040                0.880
Riverside city                CA            0.024                0.045                0.886
Seattle city                  WA            0.008                0.046                0.856
Albany city                   NY            0.037                0.046                0.889
Springfield city              MA            0.011                0.059                0.855
Providence city               RI            0.024                0.065                0.878
Ann Arbor city                MI            0.031                0.069                0.779
Worcester city                MA            0.019                0.077                0.812
Jersey City city              NJ            0.034                0.079                0.910
New York city                 NY            0.039                0.079                0.857
Greensboro city               NC            0.027                0.080                0.800
Miami city                    FL            0.033                0.110                0.756
Paterson city                 NJ            0.070                0.116                0.791
Fort Lauderdale city          FL            0.027                0.117                0.680
Las Vegas city                NV            0.014                0.121                0.603
Colorado Springs city         CO            0.020                0.124                0.611
Nashville-Davidson city       TN            0.040                0.128                0.685
Sacramento city               CA            0.042                0.128                0.735
Denver city                   CO            0.022                0.129                0.659
Newark city                   NJ            0.079                0.145                0.789
New Orleans city              LA            0.055                0.153                0.673
Lexington-Fayette city        KY            0.049                0.156                0.611
Stockton city                 CA            0.066                0.159                0.713
Baton Rouge city              LA            0.090                0.163                0.701
Bakersfield city              CA            0.022                0.179                0.585
Austin city                   TX            0.055                0.184                0.634




                                                                                         47
                           Appendix 3, Table 2 (cont’d.)
Winston-Salem city    NC             0.028                 0.197   0.631
Orlando city          FL             0.057                 0.199   0.521
Dallas city           TX             0.084                 0.206   0.644
Atlanta city          GA             0.065                 0.207   0.642
Tulsa city            OK             0.096                 0.263   0.547
Anchorage city        AK             0.091                 0.269   0.436
Corpus Christi city   TX             0.100                 0.282   0.419
Eugene city           OR             0.102                 0.284   0.503
Syracuse city         NY             0.090                 0.290   0.421
El Paso city          TX             0.068                 0.301   0.474
Memphis city          TN             0.118                 0.303   0.470
Rochester city        NY             0.104                 0.306   0.309
Fresno city           CA             0.105                 0.316   0.404
Jackson city          MS             0.123                 0.318   0.429
Fort Worth city       TX             0.143                 0.319   0.469
Tampa city            FL             0.138                 0.345   0.448
Shreveport city       LA             0.187                 0.356   0.479
Allentown city        PA             0.094                 0.363   0.316
Chicago city          IL             0.137                 0.364   0.414
San Antonio city      TX             0.158                 0.374   0.421
Oklahoma City city    OK             0.181                 0.375   0.427
Baltimore city        MD             0.148                 0.378   0.339
Mobile city           AL             0.164                 0.383   0.438
Houston city          TX             0.202                 0.406   0.418
Chattanooga city      TN             0.164                 0.431   0.352
Grand Rapids city     MI             0.125                 0.434   0.270
Minneapolis city      MN             0.079                 0.440   0.230
Lubbock city          TX             0.158                 0.457   0.310
Portland city         OR             0.185                 0.465   0.285
Louisville city       KY             0.231                 0.490   0.306
Jacksonville city     FL             0.259                 0.539   0.237
Fort Wayne city       IN             0.262                 0.554   0.187
Springfield city      MO             0.255                 0.563   0.221
Lorain city           OH             0.216                 0.581   0.186
Buffalo city          NY             0.347                 0.607   0.226
Philadelphia city     PA             0.403                 0.621   0.204
St. Louis city        MO             0.314                 0.630   0.142
Beaumont city         TX             0.369                 0.644   0.210
Peoria city           IL             0.389                 0.654   0.185
Kansas City city      MO             0.453                 0.667   0.187
Milwaukee city        WI             0.256                 0.677   0.096
Erie city             PA             0.389                 0.678   0.122
South Bend city       IN             0.421                 0.686   0.153
Spokane city          WA             0.368                 0.706   0.130
Des Moines city       IA             0.296                 0.718   0.086
Toledo city           OH             0.435                 0.719   0.147
Davenport city        IA             0.299                 0.735   0.143



                                                                      48
                       Appendix 3, Table 2 (cont’d.)
Pittsburgh city   PA             0.468                 0.793   0.119
Cleveland city    OH             0.493                 0.853   0.039
Gary city         IN             0.696                 0.901   0.033
Flint city        MI             0.683                 0.908   0.037
Detroit city      MI             0.885                 0.963   0.018




                                                                  49
                                                              Table 1:
                             Population Growth and the Share of Housing Below Construction Costs in 1990
                                         Cities with               Cities with Moderate Amounts
                                                                                                     Cities with Little Cheap Housing
                                  Abundant Cheap Housing                 of Cheap Housing
                                                                                                     (<25% of Single Family Housing
                              (50%+ of Single Family Housing     (Between 25% and 50% of Single
                                                                                                      Below Construction Costs and
                                Below Construction Costs and    Family Housing Below Construction
                                                                                                       Less than 10% at Least 20%
                                 30%+ at Least 20% Below        Costs and between 10% and 30% at
                                                                                                        Below Construction Costs)
                                     Construction Costs)       Least 20% Below Construction Costs)
# of Cities                                  15                                 20                                   45
# of Cities in Group with
                                              1                                    11                                     36
Positive Population Growth
Mean Population Growth,
                                           -9.3%                                  4.3%                                  10.8%
1980-1990
Median Population Growth,
                                           -9.0%                                  2.6%                                   5.4%
1980-1990

Notes:
   1. Sample consists of 93 cities with sufficient micro housing data in the 1990 IPUMS and construction cost data from the R.S.
       Means Company. See Appendix 3 for the full list of cities.
   2. See Appendix 1 for the details for the calculation of house values relative to construction costs.




                                                                                                                                   50
                    Table 2: The Skewness of Urban Growth and
                    the Implied Depreciation Rate of Housing
                                  Decadal Periods
                                Skewness           Implied δ
                    1920-30        1.66              0.034
                    1930-40        1.93              0.025
                    1940-50        2.18              0.020
                    1950-60        1.82              0.031
                    1960-70        1.89              0.045
                    1970-80        0.90              0.048
                    1980-90        1.00              0.062
                    1990-2000      0.49              0.133
                               Multiple Decade Periods
                    1920-2000      0.54              0.016
                    1930-2000      0.62              0.013
                    1940-2000      0.66              0.018
                    1950-2000      0.79              0.018
                    1960-2000      0.78              0.018
                    1970-2000      0.75              0.039
                    1980-2000      0.83              0.035
Notes:
   1. Data are for sample of 114 cities with continuous population data from 1920-
       2000. Each city was the equivalent of a census-designated place in 1920 and had
       a population of at least 10,000 in that year.
   2. Implied δ is the implied depreciation rate based on the formula in Proposition 1.
       See the text for details.




                                                                                      51
                Table 3: Summary Statistics on the Persistence of Growth,
                             Evidence from the Post-WWII Era
                                                Dependent Variables
Independent            Log Change       Log Change        Log Change in       Log Change in
Variables              in Population, in Population, Population,              Population,
                       1960-1970        1970-1980         1980-1990           1990-2000
Spline for negative
                             0.870            1.112             0.804               0.814
growth in previous
                           (0.465)*        (0.273)**         (0.103)**           (0.119)**
decade
Spline for positive
                             0.256            0.416             0.506               0.533
growth in previous
                          (0.072)**        (0.074)**         (0.041)**             (0.039)
decade
Intercept                    0.055           -0.004             0.065               0.043
                            (0.030)         (0.020)          (0.009)**           (0.007)**
Adj. R-square                 0.19             0.41              0.53                0.53
F-statistic for
equality of spline            1.49             4.98              5.50                4.07
coefficients
Prob>F:                       0.22             0.03              0.02                0.04
# of Observations             114              114               322                 322
Notes:
    1. All cities had a population of at least 30,000 in the initial period pertaining to the
        relevant regression analysis.
    2. The 114 city sample used to estimate the specifications reported in the first two
        columns is drawn from the long time series on city population dating back to
        1920.
    3. The 322 city sample used to estimate the specifications reported in the final two
        columns are drawn from a shorter time series running from 1970-2000.
    4. Standard errors of coefficients are in parentheses. A single * indicates
        significance at the 10% level; a double ** indicates significance at the 5% level.




                                                                                           52
                       Table 4: Price Changes and Population Changes
    Independent Variables        Log Change       Log Change         Log Change
                                 Med. House       Med. House Price,  Median Rent,
                                 Price, 1980-90   1970-1980          1980-90
    Spline for negative growth         2.135            1.349            0.890
    in decade                        (0.424)**        (0.159)**        (0.202)**
    Spline for positive growth         -0.171           0.495            0.018
    in decade                         (0.138)         (0.064)**         (0.075)
    Intercept                          0.141            0.252            0.149
                                     (0.026)**        (0.014)**        (0.012)**
    Adjusted R-square                   0.07             0.42             0.07
    F-statistic for equality of        21.62            19.13            12.98
    spline coefficients                (0.00)           (0.00)           (0.00)
    (Prob>F)

Notes:
   1. Data are drawn from large city sample dating to 1970. All cities used had populations
       of at least 30,000 in 1970.
   2. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Clustering occurs because of identical weather
       data for some cities located within the same metropolitan area. For the first four
       specifications using the log change in median house price as the dependent variable,
       data from 322 cities is used in the analysis, with 215 unique clusters observed in the
       sample. For the final two specifications using the log change in median rent as the
       dependent variable, data from 284 cities is used in the analysis, with 204 unique clusters
       observed in the sample.
   3. A single * denotes significance at the 10% level; a double ** denotes significance at
       the 5% level or better.




                                                                                               53
                               Table 5: Population Changes and Weather
                                                   Dependent Variables
                Independent            Log Change    Log Change        Log Change
                Variables              Population,    Population,      Population,
                                       1990-2000      1980-1990        1970-1980
                Spline for               -0.0025         -0.0009         0.0025
                negative shock          (0.0016)*       (0.0018)        (0.0018)
                Spline for               0.0034           0.0061          0.088
                positive shock         (0.0007)**      (0.001)**       (0.0014)**
                Intercept                 0.098            0.044         -0.084
                                        (0.038)**        (0.043)        (0.045)*
                # of observations          284              322            321
                Adjusted R-                0.09            0.18            0.17
                square
                F-statistic for            8.77             8.95           5.04
                equality of spline        (0.00)          (0.00)          (0.00)
                coefficients
                (Prob>F)
Notes:
   1. Data are drawn from the large city sample dating to 1970. All cities had populations of at least
       30,000 in 1970.
   2. Robust standard errors of the coefficients are in parentheses. Clustering occurs because of
       identical weather data for some cities located within the same metropolitan area. For the first
       two regressions using population changes in the 1990s, 203 unique clusters are observed. For
       the middle two regressions using population changes in the 1980s, 214 unique clusters are
       observed. For the final two regressions using population changes from the 1970s, 214 unique
       clusters are observed.
   3. A single * denotes significance at the 10% level; a double ** indicates significance at or better
       than the 5% level.




                                                                                                     54
                        Table 6: House Price Changes and Weather
                                             Dependent Variables
        Independent          Log Change        Log Change        Log Change
        Variables            Med. House Price, Med. House Price, Median Rent
                             1980-1990         1970-1980         1980-1990
        Spline for negative         0.0212          0.0023            0.0066
        shock                    (0.0039)**        (0.0026)        (0.0020)**
        Spline for positive         -0.0001         0.0104           -0.0004
        shock                      (0.0021)       (0.0014)**         (0.001)
        Intercept                    -0.483          0.093            -0.041
                                  (0.083)**        (0.068)*          (0.047)
        # of observations             322             321              287
        Adjusted R-square             0.08            0.18             0.03
        F-statistic for              15.09            5.05             7.07
        equality of spline           (0.00)          (0.03)           (0.01)
        coefficients
        (Prob>F)
Notes:
   1. Data are drawn from the large city sample dating to 1970. All cities had populations of
       at least 30,000 in 1970.
   2. Robust standard errors of the coefficients are in parentheses. Clustering occurs because
       of identical weather data from some cities located within the same metropolitan area.
       For the first two regressions using house price changes in the 1980s, 214 unique clusters
       are observed. For the middle two regressions using house price changes in the 1970s,
       214 unique clusters are observed. For the final two regressions using rent changes in
       the 1980s, 203 unique clusters are observed.
   3. A single * denotes significance at the 10% level; a double ** denotes significance at
       the 5% level.




                                                                                              55
                           Table 7: Population and Price Changes
                           and Manufacturing Employment Share
                                                  Dependent Variables
                  Independent              Log Change     Log Change
                  Variables                Population,    Med. House
                                           1980-1990      Price,
                                                          1980-1990
                  Spline for negative         0.1857           -0.8367
                  shock                      (0.15825)        (0.5103)
                  Spline for positive         0.5599           -0.6593
                  shock                     (0.1474)**       (0.2955)**
                  Intercept                    -0.092          0.7279
                                              (0.158)        (0.3618)**
                  # of observations             322              322
                  Adjusted R-square             0.07             0.05
                  F-statistic for equality      1.93             0.06
                  of spline coefficients       (0.17)           (0.80)
                  (Prob>F)
Notes:
   1. Data are drawn from large city sample dating to 1970. All cities had populations of at
       least 30,000 in 1970.
   2. Standard errors of the coefficients are reported in parentheses.
   3. A single * denotes significance at the 10% level; a double ** denotes significance at
       the 5% level.




                                                                                               56
        Table 8:   Home Prices, Construction Costs, and Future Growth
                                            Dependent Variables
                              (1)           (2)             (4)         (5)
Independent              Log Change    Log Change      Log Change  Log Change
Variables               Population,   Population,     Population, Population,
                          1980-1990    1980-1990        1990-2000   1990-2000
%Homes Priced Below         -0.324        -0.315          -0.151      -0.267
Construction Costs,       (0.046)**     (0.122)**       (0.038)**   (0.100)**
Beginning of Decade
%Homes Priced 1.3x                        -0.357                       0.046
Construction Costs,                     (0.115)**                    (0.090)
Beginning of Decade
% Single Units                           -0.0007                      -0.003
                                         (0.001)                    (0.001)**
East Region                               0.056                       -0.059
                                        (0.026)**                   (0.025)**
West Region                               0.047                        0.094
                                         (0.047)                    (0.035)**
South Region                              0.101                        0.051
                                        (0.043)**                    (0.036)
Log Population,                           -0.013                       0.005
Beginning of Decade                      (0.010)                     (0.010)
Family Poverty Rate                       -0.009                      -0.010
Beginning of Decade                     (0.003)**                   (0.002)**
Mean January                               0.004                       0.001
Temperature                             (0.002)**                    (0.001)
Mean July                                 0.0002                      -0.001
Temperature                              (0.001)                     (0.002)
Mean Annual Rainfall                     -0.006                       -0.003
                                        (0.001)**                   (0.001)**
Log Median House                           0.006                      -0.238
Price, Beginning of                      (0.087)                    (0.067)**
Decade
Intercept                   0.179         0.510           0.108       3.156
                          (0.026)**      (1.032)        (0.020)**   (0.817)**
Observations                  123           123             93          93
R-squared                    0.38          0.60            0.11        0.65
Notes:
   1. Sample of cities drawn from those with construction cost estimates
       from the Means data. All possible cities used. All cities had
       populations in excess of 30,000 as of 1970.
   2. Standard errors in parentheses. No clustering of cities in the same
       metropolitan area occurs in this sample.
   3. A single * denotes significance at the 10% level; a double ** denotes
       significance at the 5% level.




                                                                            57
                                                  Table 9: Human Capital and City Growth,
                                           The Share of College Graduates in the 1970s and   1980s
                                      (1)              (2)               (3)                 (4)              (5)              (6)
                                      ∆ College Grad   ∆ College Grad    ∆ College Grad      ∆ College Grad   ∆ College Grad   ∆ College Grad
                                      Share, 1980-90   Share, 1980-90    Share, 1980-90      Share, 1970-80   Share, 1970-80   Share, 1970-80
Spline for negative growth            12.224           6.727             0.457               5.652            6.642            -1.228
                                      (2.687)**        (2.789)**         (2.501)             (2.397)**        (2.812)**        (2.913)
Spline for positive growth            -0.968           1.651             1.404               1.413            3.057            1.246
                                      (1.157)          (1.393)           (1.264)             (1.564)          (1.665)*         (1.416)
% Single Units, Beginning of Decade                    -0.019            0.023                                -0.029           0.008
                                                       (0.013)           (0.013)                              (0.013)**        (0.012)
East Region                                            1.987             1.100                                -0.447           0.069
                                                       (0.443)**         (0.333)**                            (0.820)          (0.716)
West Region                                            0.060             -0.867                               2.834            1.523
                                                       (0.648)           (0.478)*                             (0.725)**        (0.631)**
South Region                                           0.414             0.780                                1.926            1.915
                                                       (0.521)           (0.445)                              (0.560)**        (0.564)**
Log Population                                         0.434             0.361                                0.924            0.785
Beginning of Decade                                    (0.141)**         (0.118)**                            (0.169)**        (0.142)**
Family Poverty Rate, Beginning of                      -0.066            0.026                                0.006            0.087
Decade                                                 (0.031)*          (0.027)                              (0.039)          (0.044)*
Mean January Temperature                               0.016             -0.044                               -0.084           -0.107
                                                       (0.017)           (0.014)**                            (0.025)**        (0.024)**
Mean July Temperature                                  -0.022            0.016                                -0.014           0.008
                                                       (0.022)           (0.010)                              (0.014)          (0.011)
Mean Annual Rainfall                                   0.005             0.009                                0.045            0.048
                                                       (0.016)           (0.011)                              (0.018)**        (0.017)**
% College Grads,                                       0.088             0.051                                0.053            0.009
Beginning of Decade                                    (0.021)**         (0.020)**                            (0.049)          (0.048)
∆ Hispanic Population Share                            -0.182            -0.224                               -0.198           -0.176
                                                       (0.043)**         (0.041)**                            (0.063)**        (0.063)**
Log Median House Price, End of                                           3.493                                                 4.603
Decade                                                                   (0.318)**                                             (0.773)**
Intercept                             4.139            -0.163            -41.952             5.494            -2.756           -55.906
                                      (0.199)**        (2.648)           (4.286)**           (0.292)**        (2.506)          (9.193)**
Observations                          324              323               323                 276              276              276
R-squared                             0.03             0.28              0.46                0.02             0.23             0.33
F test, equality of spline            15.91            2.42              0.10                1.51             1.06             0.48
coefficients (Prob>F)                 (0.00)           (0.12)            (0.75)              (0.22)           (0.31)           (0.49)
Notes:
    1. Data are drawn from large city sample dating to 1970. All cities had populations in excess of 30,000 in 1970.
    2. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. For the first three regressions using college share changes in the 1980s, 216
        unique clusters are observed. For the final three regressions using college share changes in the 1970s, 199 unique clusters are
        observed.
    3. A single * denotes significance at the 10% level; a double ** denotes significance at the 5% level or better.




                                                                                                                                       58
                                                 Table 10: Human Capital and City Growth,
                                         The Share of High School Dropouts in the 1970s and 1980s
                                            (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)              (6)
                                      ∆ Non-HS Grad    ∆ Non-HS Grad    ∆ Non-HS Grad     ∆ Non-HS Grad     ∆ Non-HS Grad    ∆ Non-HS Grad
                                      Share, 1980-90   Share, 1980-90   Share, 1980-90    Share, 1970-80    Share, 1970-80   Share, 1970-80
Spline for negative growth                10.439           -10.285            -9.742           11.107           -11.054           -6.088
                                         (3.745)**        (3.307)**         (3.356)**        (3.172)**         (5.545)**         (5.494)
Spline for positive growth                 8.320            -4.385            -4.378            0.822            -4.464           -3.747
                                         (2.172)**        (1.548)**         (1.547)**         (2.524)          (1.961)**        (1.893)**
% Single Units, Beginning of Decade                         0.007              0.004                             0.002            -0.025
                                                           (0.017)           (0.020)                            (0.020)          (0.022)
East Region                                                 -1.717            -1.652                              1.492            1.154
                                                          (0.540)**         (0.521)**                           (0.960)          (0.882)
West Region                                                  0.111             0.180                             -3.507           -2.270
                                                           (0.699)           (0.699)                           (0.856)**        (0.751)**
South Region                                                -2.056            -2.072                             -0.744           0.742
                                                          (0.496)**         (0.499)**                           (0.780)          (0.770)
Log Population                                              -0.126            -0.122                             -0.824           -0.748
Beginning of Decade                                        (0.183)           (0.182)                           (0.216)**        (0.205)**
Family Poverty Rate, Beginning of                            0.108             0.102                              0.235            0.180
Decade                                                     (0.059)*          (0.060)*                          (0.058)**         (0.061)*
Mean January Temperature                                    0.076              0.080                             0.084             0.111
                                                          (0.019)**         (0.022)**                          (0.023)**        (0.028)**
Mean July Temperature                                       0.021             0.018                              0.009            -0.013
                                                           (0.029)           (0.030)                            (0.015)          (0.015)
Mean Annual Rainfall                                       -0.010             -0.010                             -0.070          -0.075
                                                           (0.019)           (0.020)                           (0.018)**        (0.018)**
% Non-High School Graduates,                                -0.220            -0.222                             -0.317          -0.350
Beginning of Decade                                       (0.037)**         (0.038)**                          (0.057)**        (0.060)**
∆ Hispanic Population Share                                  0.574             0.577                             0.391            0.388
                                                          (0.072)**         (0.073)**                          (0.081)**       (0.083)**
Log Median House Price,                                                       -0.266                                             -3.444
End of Decade                                                                (0.480)                                           (1.137)**
Intercept                                 -7.985           -4.697             -1.360           -11.563           7.950           50.114
                                         (0.326)**         (3.213)           (7.104)          (0.434)**         (3.347)        (15.660)**
Observations                                324              323                323              324              322              322
R-squared                                   0.10            0.62               0.62             0.03             0.43             0.45
F test, equality of spline                  0.17             2.53              2.09             4.06             1.08             0.14
coefficients (Prob>F)                      (0.68)          (0.11)             (0.15)           (0.05)           (0.30)           (0.71)
Notes:
    1. Data are drawn from large city sample dating to 1970. All cities had populations in excess of 30,000 in 1970.
    2. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. For the first three regressions using college share changes in the 1980s, 216
        unique clusters are observed. For the final three regressions using college share changes in the 1970s, 215 unique clusters are
        observed.
    3. A single * denotes significance at the 10% level; a double ** denotes significance at the 5% level or better.




                                                                                                                                     59
                                                 Table 11: Human Capital and City Growth,
                                                Real Income Growth in the 1970s and 1980s
                                          (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)             (6)
                                   Log Change Real    Log Change Real    Log Change Real    Log Change      Log Change       Log Change
                                   Income, 1980-90    Income, 1980-90    Income, 1980-90    Real Income,    Real Income,     Real Income,
                                                                                            1970-80         1970-80          1970-80
Spline for negative growth              1.142               1.022              0.412             0.534            0.428           0.100
                                      (0.175)**          (0.161)**          (0.103)**          (0.069)**       (0.074)**        (0.068)
Spline for positive growth              0.095               0.213              0.169             0.126            0.093           0.053
                                       (0.050)*          (0.050)**          (0.036)**          (0.028)**       (0.026)**       (0.026)**
% Single Units,                                            -0.002              0.002                              0.001          0.003
Beginning of Decade                                      (0.001)**           (0.001)*                         (0.0003)**      (0.0003)**
East Region                                                0.104               0.043                             -0.003          0.018
                                                         (0.021)**          (0.013)**                           (0.014)         (0.013)
West Region                                                0.037              -0.050                             -0.026          -0.084
                                                          (0.027)           (0.016)**                           (0.019)        (0.016)**
South Region                                               0.001              -0.008                              0.043           0.023
                                                          (0.018)            (0.011)                           (0.015)**       (0.013)*
Log Population                                             -0.003             0.005                               0.000           0.005
Beginning of Decade                                       (0.006)            (0.004)                             (0.004)        (0.004)
Family Poverty Rate, Beginning                            -0.0002             -0.006                              0.001          -0.001
of Decade                                                 (0.003)           (0.002)**                            (0.001)        (0.001)
Mean January Temperature                                   0.002              -0.002                             -0.0006         -0.002
                                                         (0.001)**          (0.001)**                           (0.0005)      (0.0005)**
Mean July Temperature                                      -0.002               0.001                            -0.0001          0.001
                                                          (0.001)*          (0.0003)**                          (0.0001)      (0.0003)**
Mean Annual Rainfall                                        0.001              0.001                            -0.0013         -0.0008
                                                          (0.001)           (0.0004)**                        (0.0005)**       (0.0005)*
Log Real Family Income,                                     0.030              -0.414                             -0.024         -0.302
Beginning of Decade                                       (0.066)            (0.052)**                           (0.048)       (0.054)**
∆ Hispanic Population Share                                -0.005              -0.006                             -0.005         -0.004
                                                         (0.002)**           (0.001)**                         (0.001)**       (0.001)**
Log Median House Price,                                                         0.244                                             0.190
End of Decade                                                                (0.014)**                                         (0.019)**
Intercept                               0.019              -0.138               1.448           0.020            0.253            0.841
                                       (0.010)            (0.691)             (0.461)         (0.007)**         (0.507)         (0.469)*
Observations                              322                321                 321             321              321              321
R-squared                                0.22               0.49                0.76            0.28             0.43             0.68
F test, equality of spline              27.62              20.16                4.63            23.86            18.14            0.38
coefficients (Prob>F)                  (0.00)              (0.00)              (0.03)          (0.01)           (0.00)           (0.54)
Notes:
    1. Data are drawn from large city sample dating to 1970. All cities had populations in excess of 30,000 in 1970.
    2. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. For the first three regressions using college share changes in the 1980s, 215
        unique clusters are observed. For the final three regressions using college share changes in the 1970s, 215 unique clusters
        also are observed.
    3. A single * denotes significance at the 10% level; a double ** denotes significance at the 5% level.




                                                                                                                                      60
                                                 Table 12: Human Capital and City Growth,
                                                Poverty Rate Change in the 1970s and 1980s
                                   ∆ Poverty Rate,    ∆ Poverty Rate,   ∆ Poverty Rate,      ∆ Poverty         ∆ Poverty        ∆ Poverty
                                       1980-90            1980-90           1980-90        Rate, 1980-90     Rate, 1980-90    Rate, 1980-90
Spline for negative growth             -26.777            -26.762           -15.133           -20.246           -15.105           -7.805
                                       (4.97)**          (4.745)**         (4.347)**         (2.663)**         (2.645)**        (2.411)**
Spline for positive growth              -1.754             -5.388            -4.559            -4.124            -2.052           -1.162
                                        (1.162)          (1.350)**         (1.133)**         (1.172)**         (0.755)**         (0.730)
% Single Units,                                             0.034             0.039                              -0.037           -0.078
Beginning of Decade                                       (0.019)*         (0.018)**                           (0.011)**        (0.012)**
East Region                                                -2.155            -0.981                              0.079            -0.403
                                                         (0.575)**          (0.541)*                            (0.478)          (0.439)
West Region                                               -1.470               0.206                              0.100            1.379
                                                         (0.727)**           (0.579)                            (0.511)         (0.506)**
South Region                                              -0.008              0.158                              -1.504           -1.058
                                                          (0.469)            (0.386)                           (0.448)**        (0.395)**
Log Population                                             0.020              -0.136                              0.362            0.256
Beginning of Decade                                       (0.214)            (0.192)                           (0.133)**        (0.116)**
Family Poverty Rate, Beginning                             -0.062              0.045                             -0.272           -0.219
of Decade                                                 (0.090)            (0.079)                           (0.058)**        (0.057)**
Mean January Temperature                                  -0.014              0.050                               0.015           0.037
                                                          (0.019)           (0.024)**                           (0.014)         (0.014)**
Mean July Temperature                                     -0.003              -0.053                             0.010            -0.010
                                                          (0.033)            (0.033)                            (0.012)          (0.013)
Mean Annual Rainfall                                      -0.047              -0.047                             0.029            0.017
                                                         (0.022)**          (0.016)**                          (0.014)**         (0.014)
Log Real Family Income,                                    -3.062              5.414                             -1.828            4.374
Beginning of Decade                                       (1.879)*          (2.082)**                           (1.603)         (1.823)**
∆ Hispanic Population Share                                0.213               0.227                             0.235             0.205
                                                         (0.059)**          (0.053)**                          (0.039)**        (0.041)**
Log Median House Price,                                                       -4.646                                              -4.233
End of Decade                                                               (0.613)**                                           (0.520)**
Intercept                               1.670              34.910              4.657            0.069           17.897             4.802
                                      (0.239)**          (20.055)*           (18.110)          (0.242)         (17.111)          (17.721)
Observations                              324                321                321              323              320               320
R-squared                                0.18               0.34               0.49             0.28             0.67              0.73
F test, equality of spline               21.06             16.62               5.24             24.97            20.77             6.19
coefficients (Prob>F)                   (0.00)            (0.00)              (0.02)           (0.00)           (0.00)            (0.01)
Notes:
    1. Data are drawn from large city sample dating to 1970. All cities had populations in excess of 30,000 in 1970.
    2. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. For the first three regressions using college share changes in the 1980s, 215
        unique clusters are observed. For the final three regressions using college share changes in the 1970s, 215 unique clusters
        also are observed.
    3. A single * denotes significance at the 10% level; a double ** denotes significance at the 5% level or better.




                                                                                                                                      61
Figure 1: The Nature of Housing Supply and Construction Costs




                                                                62
                                                         log housing units, 1990                                                             Fitted values
                                                                                                                                                                                     New York
                          14.9223

                                                                                                                                                                        Los Ange
                                                                                                                                                                    Chicago

                                                                                                                                                         Houston
                                                                                                                                                         Philadel
Log Housing Units, 1990




                                                                                                                                                 Dallas c
                                                                                                                                                   San Dieg
                                                                                                                                                Phoenix
                                                                                                                                                  Detroit
                                                                                                                                               San Anto
                                                                                                                                         San  Fran
                                                                                                                                          Indianap
                                                                                                                                          Baltimor
                                                                                                                                    Washingt
                                                                                                                                     Columbus
                                                                                                                                     Jacksonv
                                                                                                                            Denver
                                                                                                                              New      c San
                                                                                                                                    Memphis
                                                                                                                                     Orle
                                                                                                                                Clevelan
                                                                                                                               Nashvill
                                                                                                                                            c Jose
                                                                                                                                     Milwauke
                                                                                                                                   Boston
                                                                                                                                  Seattle
                                                                                                                             Austin
                                                                                                                          Oklahoma
                                                                                                                          Kansas     Cc
                                                                                                                        St.Portland
                                                                                                                             Loui
                                                                                                                           Fort
                                                                                                                        Atlanta
                                                                                                                       Tucson      Wor
                                                                                                                                   c
                                                                                                                     Tulsa
                                                                                                                    Minneapo
                                                                                                                      Pittsbur
                                                                                                                       Charlottci
                                                                                                                         LongElBea
                                                                                                                     Cincinna
                                                                                                                      Albuquer      Paso
                                                                                                                     Oakland
                                                                                                                    Sacramen
                                                                                                                   Buffalo
                                                                                                                        Virginia
                                                                                                                     Honolulu
                                                                                                                    Miami
                                                                                                                  Omaha
                                                                                                                   Toledo   ccici
                                                                                                                 Wichita
                                                                                                              Tampa
                                                                                                          St.Birmingh
                                                                                                               Pete
                                                                                                              Louisvil
                                                                                                              Colorado ci
                                                                                                                    Fresno     c
                                                                                                              St. Paul
                                                                                                             Arlingto
                                                                                                            Las  Vega
                                                                                                        Baton Newark
                                                                                                                ciC C c
                                                                                                         Rocheste
                                                                                                            Corpus
                                                                                                             Norfolk
                                                                                                         Lexingto
                                                                                                         Akron Ro
                                                                                                     Richmond
                                                                                                        Anchorag
                                                                                                            Anaheim
                                                                                                       Raleigh
                                                                                                         Jersey
                                                                                                     Shrevepo
                                                                                            Fort   Des
                                                                                                  Little
                                                                                                   Lau
                                                                                                  Greensbo
                                                                                                  Dayton
                                                                                                 Spokane
                                                                                                   MadisonMoin
                                                                                                      Mobile
                                                                                                          R c cSanta An
                                                                                                         Riversid
                                                                                                     Jackson
                                                                                                     Lincoln
                                                                                                   Lubbock
                                                                                                 Fort  Way
                                                                                                  Montgome
                                                                                                Knoxvill
                                                                                                 Tacoma
                                                                                               Salt
                                                                                               OrlandoLak
                                                                                                   Grand
                                                                                               Syracuse
                                                                                              Irving        c
                                                                                                            Ra
                                                                                                       Stockton
                                                                                                       c
                                                                                                 Columbus
                                                                                            Chattano
                                                                                               Worceste
                                                                                                Newport
                                                                                              Amarillo
                                                                                               Huntsvil
                                                                                              Providen
                                                                                          Winston-
                                                                                           Kansas Bakersfi
                                                                                     Hollywoo
                                                                                           Springfi
                                                                                        Reno
                                                                                        Durham        cC
                                                                                                  citHialeah
                                                                                               Springfi
                                                                                               Modesto
                                                                                               San
                                                                                        Savannah
                                                                                           Flint
                                                                                       Evansvil
                                                                                         Rockford
                                                                                    Topeka
                                                                                      New
                                                                                       Lansing
                                                                                      Boise      c ci Bern
                                                                                          Bridgepo
                                                                                          Hartford
                                                                                      TallahasHave
                                                                                       Pasadena Ci
                                                                                  Beaumont
                                                                                 Springfi
                                                                                  Eugene
                                                                                   Peoria
                                                                                  Santa
                                                                                 Waterbur
                                                                                    Gary
                                                                               Albany
                                                                                South
                                                                                Macon
                                                                                Allentow
                                                                                Cedar
                                                                                   Erie     Rocc
                                                                                             cit
                                                                                          Paterson
                                                                                          c
                                                                                         Garden
                                                                                          Be
                                                                                           Ra
                                                                                           ci         G
                                                                             NewWaco
                                                                            Roanoke
                                                                             Manchest
                                                                                Stamford
                                                                                 Abilene
                                                                                 Ann
                                                                                 Salem
                                                                               Portsmou
                                                                                Escondid cit
                                                                                        Arbo
                                                                                      Bedf
                                                                                  Elizabet  ci
                                                                                          Oxnard
                                                                              Pueblo
                                                                            Youngsto
                                                                           Davenpor
                                                                            Fall
                                                                             Lafayett
                                                                              Wichita
                                                                          Midland
                                                                          Odessa
                                                                         Decatur   Riv
                                                                                Lowell
                                                                             Columbia
                                                                        Canton
                                                                         Santa
                                                                         Boulder
                                                                         Billings
                                                                         Duluth    Ba  c ccc
                                                                                  Vallejo
                                                                                       Pomona        cc
                                                                 West
                                                                  Lakeland
                                                             DaytonaFort  Fort
                                                                           Brockton
                                                                          Pal
                                                                       Lawton
                                                                        San
                                                                         Gainesvi
                                                                               Ange
                                                                        Charlest
                                                                      Reading
                                                                          Trenton
                                                                         Racine
                                                                          Smi
                                                                      Tyler
                                                                        Sioux
                                                                      Norwalk  ci  cccLaredo
                                                                              Aurora
                                                                        Scranton  Col
                                                                                  Salinas
                                                                                 Ci              c
                                                           Galvesto  Fargo
                                                                     Fayettev
                                                                   Pawtucke
                                                                      Kalamazo
                                                                Portland
                                                                   Utica
                                                                   Wilmingt
                                                                       Kenosha
                                                                      Tuscaloo
                                                                  Longview
                                                                  Lake
                                                              Ashevill
                                                                   Muncie  ciBrownsvi
                                                                      Albany
                                                                          Cha     c
                                                           Melbourn
                                                      Sarasota
                                                         Huntingt
                                                           Greenvil
                                                         Wilmingt
                                                           Pensacol
                                                           Anderson
                                                             Las
                                                                       Joliet
                                                                 Waterloo
                                                                  Rocheste
                                                              Niagara
                                                           Charlest
                                                                  Saginaw
                                                                  Columbia
                                                                    Lorain
                                                                     Clarksvi
                                                                 Lynchbur
                                                                 Redding
                                                                      Visalia
                                                                  Lawrence
                                                                 Killeen
                                                             Champaig
                                                                Danbury
                                                                     Cruc
                                                                 Appleton
                                                             Hamilton         ccc
                                                                         McAllen
                                                       Binghamt
                                                       Harrisbu
                                                         Santa
                                                           Terre
                                                            Greeley
                                                        Danville
                                                         Battle
                                                         Bryan
                                                        Yakima
                                                       Altoona
                                                         Yuma       CFe
                                                                     Ha
                                                                     ci
                                                                      ccMa
                                                                    cit   Provo ci
                                                      Blooming
                                                  Augusta
                                               Atlantic
                                                   Fort  Lancaste
                                                  Bradento
                                                       Bellingh
                                                        Dothan
                                                            Blooming
                                                      Mansfiel
                                                           Eau
                                                        Monroe
                                                         Mye
                                                     Johnson
                                                       Janesvil
                                                   Vancouve Santa    c
                                                                   Clai
                                                     Decatur
                                                     Alexandr
                                                    Medford
                                                 Ocala
                                                     Santa
                                                 Joplin   cci
                                                  Lafayett
                                                   Elkhart
                                                     Biloxi
                                                      St.cit
                                                 Fayettev
                                                    Lima
                                                   Athens
                                                  York
                                                 Middleto
                                                Burlingt
                                             Fort
                                           WheelingPie      citccCr c
                                                         Merced
                                                           Clou
                                                Charlott
                                                Fitchbur
                                           Parkersb
                                            Hagersto
                                                Chico
                                              Muskegon
                                           Olympia
                                             Florence
                                              Bremerto
                                             Jackson
                                          Jamestow
                                            Wausau
                                      Johnstow
                                         Texarkan       cci
                                          Richland
                                                New
                                         Williams
                                      Poughkee        Brun
                                     Anniston
                                      New
                                    AndersonLond
                                       Florence
                                        Houma State
                                                 ci Co
                                    Pascagou
                           9.2999
                                    10.162                                                                                                                                         15.8065
                                                                                                     Log Population, 1990
                                    Figure 2: Housing Units and Population Levels, 1990




                                                                                                                                                                                                63
                                                         log unit growth, 1970-80                                                    Fitted values

Log Change Housing Units




                                                                                                                          Visalia
                               .7                                                                                          McAllen
                                                                                                                     Modesto
                                                                                                                 Colorado
                                                                                                               Merced   c
                                                                                                   Ocala ci FortSantaCol Ro
                                                                                              Clarksvi           Bakersfi
                                                                                                      Austin      Brownsvi
                                                                                         BoiseEugene  Greeley
                                                                                                        Reno c ccit cit
                                                                                                      Albuquer
                                                                                                             Yuma
                                                                                                           Bradento
                                                                                                   CiStockton
                                                                                                Fort     Provo
                                                                                                       Mye
                                                                                                   Killeen
                                                                                                     San    Jose ci
                                                                                                             Springfi
                                                                                              Houston
                                                                                                 LasPhoenix
                                                                                               RichlandVega
                                                                                                Longview
                                                                                        Las  Cruc
                                                                                           Tucson
                                                                                           Salem
                                                                                        Santa    Fresno
                                                                                                 Fe
                                                                                           Raleigh    ci
                                                                                                   Bryan
                                                                                                   Dothan  ccic
                                                                                                       c Chattano
                                                                                            JacksonBaton
                                                                                             Montgome  Salinas
                                                                                                       Medford
                                                                                                  Anaheim
                                                                                             Gainesvi       Ro
                                                                                  Tallahas
                                                                                   Fort   Pie
                                                                                      Lafayett
                                                                                    Melbourn
                                                                                    Fargo
                                                                             Tuscaloo         cici
                                                                                            San    El  Paso
                                                                                                    Dieg
                                                                     St.   Clou
                                                                     JohnsonLakeland
                                                                               Blooming
                                                                             Blooming
                                                                       Lynchbur           Riversid
                                                                                    Boulder
                                                                                       Tyler
                                                                                         Santa Orlando
                                                                                         Sarasota
                                                                                  Honolulu         Ma
                                                                                                   Laredo     c
                                                                               San    Lexingto
                                                                                      Olympia
                                                                                        Fayettev
                                                                                      Anto
                                                                                     Lubbock
                                                                                     Bellingh
                                                                                    Eau Danbury
                                                                                      Savannah
                                                                                        Daytona
                                                                                   Lincoln ClaiSanta
                                                                            Billings
                                                                        Alexandr
                                                                         Newport
                                                                         Greensbo
                                                                          Middleto
                                                                       Biloxi
                                                                        Columbus   Fort
                                                                               Janesvil
                                                                                  Vallejo
                                                                               Fort   Lau
                                                                                 cOdessa  Little
                                                                                          Smi     R       Cr
                                                               Muncie
                                                            Roanoke  Pueblo
                                                                  ChampaigFayettev
                                                                          SacramencSan
                                                                                Decatur
                                                                            cDallas
                                                                              Florence
                                                                               Tulsa   cMidland
                                                                                  Corpus
                                                                            Rocheste
                                                                              Oklahoma
                                                                           Pascagou     ciAnge
                                                                                    Florence C
                                                                                             c
                                                                     Bremerto  West
                                                                         Appleton
                                                                         Houma
                                                                         Columbia
                                                                     Vancouve
                                                                 Memphis     Ann
                                                                          Mobile
                                                                            Lawton
                                                                               State ci
                                                                                    Arbo
                                                                                     c  Pal
                                                                                      Amarillo
                                                                                        c
                                                                                        Co
                                                                      Nashvill
                                                                  Burlingt
                                                                       Yakima
                                                                   Madison    Aurorac
                                                             Denver
                                                                    Galvesto
                                                              Charlest
                                                                    Spokane
                                                                 Wausau
                                                               Elkhart
                                                           Mansfiel    Manchest
                                                                 Kenosha
                                                                      Albany
                                                                   Beaumontcc Ra
                                                                    Waterloo
                                                                     Wichita
                                                                        Miami   c ccccit c
                                                                            Brockton
                                                                        Davenpor
                                                                    Knoxvill   Abilene
                                                      Kansas
                                                             Topeka  Monroe
                                                                      Tacoma
                                                                 Norwalk
                                                             Portland
                                                           Fort    Way
                                                                   Cedar
                                                                   Lansing
                                                                 Wichita
                                                               Lafayett
                                                                Lorain
                                                                  Peoria
                                                                   Joliet
                                                                   Anderson
                                                            Stamford
                                                               Athens
                                                                Tampa
                                                                  Danville
                                                               Lake
                                                             Texarkan   Cha
                                                                    Columbus
                                                                 Fort
                                                             Allentow
                                                             Waterbur
                                                             Wilmingt
                                                           Kalamazo C    Wor  c ci
                                                                          cWaco
                                                                          Santa
                                                                             cci
                                                                        Charlott    Ba
                                                       New Salt
                                                             Des
                                                              Sioux
                                                           Hamilton
                                                          Fitchbur
                                                     Ashevill
                                                            New    Lak
                                                             Greenvil
                                                                  Lowell
                                                               Pensacol
                                                            Evansvil
                                                           Toledo
                                                            Erie    Moin
                                                               Portland
                                                                   cit
                                                             Hagersto
                                                           Birmingh
                                                     Columbia   Lond
                                                               Fall      Los
                                                                       cBedf
                                                                         Ci
                                                                    Joplin
                                                                    Orle
                                                                      Riv     ccAnge
                                                   Omaha
                                                       Racine
                                                    Albany
                                                     IndianapMacon
                                                               New
                                                          Poughkee
                                                          Battle
                                                          Pawtucke
                                                           Duluth
                                                        Andersonci  C
                                                             Rockford
                                                           Anniston
                                                             Lancaste
                                                       Parkersb c
                                                         Worceste
                                                   Richmond         c c   ci
                                                   Atlanta
                                                     Williams
                                                   Norfolk
                                                    Boston
                                                      Lima
                                                  SouthNew  Lawrence
                                                            Springfi
                                                     Milwauke
                                                        Altoona
                                                   Binghamt Be
                                                       Muskegon
                                                      Wheeling
                                                          Grand  c
                                                                cit
                                                                Have
                                                            Seattle
                                                            Oakland
                                               Niagara
                                           Dayton     Jamestow
                                                  Syracuse
                                                    cTrenton
                                                   Philadel
                                                   Wilmingt
                                                Springfi
                                                   Jackson
                                                      York
                                                   Akron
                                                CantonNew
                                                      Reading
                                                 Cincinna
                                                  Scranton
                                                    Kansas
                                                  Huntingt
                                                   Baltimor
                                                   Terre
                                                   Providen
                                                             San
                                                         Bridgepo CRa
                                                                    Fran
                                                               citCharlest
                                                             ciYork
                                                            cHa
                                 0         Augusta
                                               Johnstow
                                             Rocheste
                                               Louisvil
                                             Youngsto
                                               Utica  Chicago
                                                Saginaw
                                          Buffalo      cici Cc
                                                  Jersey
                                                  Newark
                                                Flint
                                                   Hartford
                                              Pittsbur
                                                 Atlantic
                                          Harrisbu
                                        Clevelan
                               -.1          Detroit
                                     St. Loui


                                            -.25                      0                                                                    .9
                                                                                                   Log Change Popuation
                           Figure 3: Log Change in Housing Units and Population, 1970-1980




                                                                                                                                                     64
                                 .1




                               .075
Percent of Cities, .10=10%




                                .05




                               .025




                                  0
                                      0             .25               .5                 .75       1
                                                 Percent Homes Below 100% of Construction Costs
                             Figure 4: Distribution of Cities for Share Below Construction Costs




                                                                                                       65
Figure 5: Solow’s Linear City With A Single Amenity
         (the central business district (CBD))




                                                      C




                                                          66
Figure 6: Short-Run and Long-Run Changes in City Size
from a Negative Demand Shock




                                                        67
                               .2




                              .15
Fraction of Cities, .15=15%




                               .1




                              .05




                               0
                                    -.3     -.15      0           .15         .3       .45   .6
                                                    Log Population Change, 1980-1990
                                    Figure 7: City Population Growth Rates in 1980s




                                                                                                  68
                                                              log ch real med house price, 19                                         Fitted values
                                                                                       Boston c
                                      1.04
                                                                                       Jersey C

                                                                                      Fall Riv
                                                                                      New  Springfi
                                                                                             Worceste
                                                                                             Fitchbur
                                                                                              Bedf
                                                        Newark c                           New    York
log change real median house price


                                                                               Brockton
                                                                             Trenton
                                                                             Yonkers
                                                                             Poughkee         Waterbur
                                                                                            Elizabet
                                                                                        Paterson Lawrence Lowell c
                                                                                     New  NewBrun
                                                                                         ProvidenHavePasadena
                                                                                          Hartford
                                                                                 NewWilmingt
                                                                                         Lond    San Fran          Santa Cr Glendale
                                                                                                      Sunnyval Long Bea             Oxnard c
                                                                                                                                    Fremont
                                                                                   AlbanyTorrance
                                                                                       Pawtucke
                                                                                              Portland
                                                                                               c
                                                                                      Norwalk
                                                                                   Berkeley    Stamford
                                                                                  Bridgepo Danbury    MiddletoLos Ba
                                                                                                      Oakland
                                                                                                     Manchest
                                                                                                              Santa
                                                                                                                       Ange
                                                                                                                           San Jose El Monte
                                                                            Rocheste                                  Orange cSimi Val
                                                                                                   Alexandr
                                                                                    HonoluluHuntingt                Hayward  WilmingtThousand
                                                                   Utica ci                                     Inglewoo
                                                                                                          Fullerto     Anaheim
                                                                       Atlanta         Allentow
                                                                                                               Garden    G               VallejocSanta AnSanta Ma Oceansid
                                                                                                                                       Durham
                                                                                                                                        Salinas
                                                                             Syracuse                                                    Santa Pomona
                                                                                                                                                  Ro      c
                                                                        Philadel                  Concord
                                                                                              Seattle                         San Dieg                   Ontario
                                                                     Buffalo
                                                                        Augusta
                                                                      Scranton                   Burlingt                             Sacramen              Modesto Escondid
                                                                         BinghamtHarrisbu           Hampton      Jacksonv             Riversid
                                                             St. Loui Baltimor              Hagersto
                                                                                          Tampa
                                                                                       Lancaste
                                                                                 Norfolk             ci
                                                                                              Columbus                                           Stockton
                                                                                  Portsmou
                                                                                     Greenvil
                                                                                                    Winston-      Newport
                                                                                                                Fort
                                                                                                             Daytona  Wor
                                                                                                                  Greensbo
                                                                                                                                Orlando
                                                                                                                                    Chesapea
                                                                                                                                       Laredo
                                                                                                                                          San    cBern Battle C Chula Vi
                                                                          Atlantic Reading                     Charlest
                                                                                                                   c San Anto Fayettev
                                                                     Richmond
                                                                         Washingt
                                                                             Columbia
                                                                          York
                                                                                     St. Pete
                                                                                           Grand
                                                                                  cit Pensacol
                                                                                       Charlott  West
                                                                                             IndianapRaDallas
                                                                                                   State
                                                                                                  Athens   Co
                                                                                                         Palc
                                                                                                             Ashevill
                                                                                                          Huntsvil           Charlott                    Mesquite
                                                                                                                                           Raleigh Lakeland Tallahas
                                                                   Anniston
                                                                      Chicago
                                                                   Macon     ci        Ann    Arbo
                                                                                           Miami  Nashvill
                                                                                                    ci                   Aurora   c
                                                                  Louisvil
                                                                Chattano     Savannah
                                                                            Roanoke
                                                                         Biloxi  Muskegon
                                                                          Alexandrc Lawton
                                                                              Kansas     Waco
                                                                                          C  Sarasota
                                                                                                 ccit        Bellingh      Johnson              Irving c
                                                                        Memphis       TexarkanJoplin
                                                                                                Elkhart
                                                                                           Tuscaloo    c
                                                                                                Amarillo
                                                                                                Springfi
                                                                                                 Omaha
                                                                                             Montgome         Blooming
                                                                                                         Columbus
                                                                                                      DothanciSanc             Melbourn                  Virginia
                                        0                               Dayton
                                                                               Fort
                                                                          Monroe
                                                                             Jamestow
                                                                            South
                                                                         Knoxvill
                                                                         Cincinna
                                                                                      Lau
                                                                                       c
                                                                                       Fort Smi
                                                                                    c Be
                                                                                  Lynchbur        Tyler
                                                                                              Albany
                                                                                                                Decatur
                                                                                                        c ciSanta
                                                                                                        Corpus
                                                                                                        Little
                                                                                                        Tacoma
                                                                                                                     Ange
                                                                                                                 Danville
                                                                                                               R CcFeEl Paso
                                                                                                               Albuquer           Hialeah Las    Cruc
                                                                                                                                          Clarksvi
                                                                                                                                        Austin
                                                                                                                                          Killeenc Scottsda
                                                                Warren
                                                           Niagara         cShrevepo
                                                                          Galvesto
                                                                      Kansas Livonia Kalamazo
                                                                                     Fort
                                                                                Lansing     Way
                                                                                     Independ
                                                                                         Wichita
                                                                                 C Hollywoo             Columbia
                                                                                                    Sterling  Fayettev
                                                                                Mobile
                                                                            Williams
                                                                       Birmingh   Joliet   ccGainesvi
                                                                                                 Lubbock Appleton
                                                                                                       Lexingto
                                                                                                    Boulder       Blooming Bryan   ci Reno
                                                                                                                                   Colorado  cit
                                                              New    Orle
                                                                        Terre    Florence
                                                                             Beaumont
                                                                              Evansvil
                                                                                 Ha           Bremerto
                                                                                        Lafayett    Wichita     Brownsvi
                                                                                                         Longview
                                                                                                     Oklahoma                 McAllen
                                                                                                                           PhoenixGarlandOverland                     Bakersfi
                                                                              Jackson                                                                         Las Vega
                                                                                                                                                                     Arlingto
                                                             Clevelan
                                                            Pittsbur
                                                                        Jackson
                                                                       Lake
                                                                        Akron  Cha
                                                                              Hamilton
                                                                        Mansfiel
                                                                    Muncie
                                                                   Altoona
                                                                    AndersonLima
                                                                                      St. Paul
                                                                                  ciRockford
                                                                                   ccit Tulsa
                                                                                c Minneapo        ciChampaig
                                                                                                    Abilene
                                                                                               Springfi       St. Clou Tucson
                                                                                                         Lincoln                  c Tempe ci
                                                                                                                              Midland                      GlendaleFresno c      Mesa cit
                                             Gary cit          Flint ci Toledo
                                                                Saginaw            Baton
                                                                                  Odessa
                                                                                 Cedar     Ra
                                                                                                      Yakima
                                                                                             Roc Vancouve
                                                                                           Kenosha     Eau Clai  c        Boise  Ci     Fort  Col
                                                        Parkersb    Erie  cit    SaltTopeka
                                                                            c Pueblo
                                                                          Denver      c Lak
                                                                                          cSpokane       Madison Fargo
                                                                                                  c Lakewood                  ci Fa
                                                                                                                           Sioux
                                                          DetroitCantonLorain       c Des                    Greeley cRocheste
                                                                                                            Wausau
                                                                Charlest
                                                                     Duluth c Racine     Janesvil
                                                                                             Moin
                                                                                        Houston
                                                                                 Milwauke
                                                      Youngsto
                                               Johnstow
                                                  WheelingHuntingt     HoumaSioux ci       Cic Pasadena           Lafayett
                                                                                                                       Salem   ci
                                                                                                                                              Aurora c
                                                               Decatur                           Eugene c         Provo   ci
                                                                                                                        Billings
                                                                   Peoria c                                          Portland
                                                                     Davenpor

                                                               Waterloo
                                      -.56
                                              -.26                                      0                                                                                          .64
                                                                                                  log change population
                                     Figure 8: House Price Growth and Population Growth, 1980s




                                                                                                                                                                                            69
                                                          log population change, 1980-199                                        Fitted values
                                                                                                                                     Mesa cit


                                   .56                                                                                                      Escondid
                                                                                                                                    BakersfiOceansid
                                                                                                                           Arlingto
                                                                                                                              Fresno c         Chula Vi
log population change, 1980-1990



                                                                                                                            Las Vega
                                                                                                                              ModestoSanta       Ma
                                                                                                                                           Tallahas
                                                                                                                                            Glendale
                                                                         Battle C                                  Virginia Mesquite         Ontario          Lakeland
                                                                                                                                          Scottsda
                                                                                                                              Stockton      Pomona  Santa
                                                                                                                                                        c An
                                                                                          Aurora c                            Irving c
                                                                                       Overland                  Raleigh
                                                                                                          Clarksvi      Las Cruc Killeen
                                                                                                                                Santa        San Bern
                                                                                                                                        RoSalinas
                                                                                     Fort  Col                  Durham c Sacramen Vallejo
                                                                                                                                      Austin   c Thousand
                                                                                                  Reno cit Chesapea                      Tempe
                                                                                                                                   Fremont         ci Laredo
                                                                                                                                                  El
                                                                                                                                              RiversidMonte c
                                                                                                                                                  Oxnard   c
                                                                                        Colorado                             Garland              Glendale
                                                                                                                                                  Simi   Val Orlando
                                                                                                                     Fayettev
                                                                                                                           Midland                             Melbourn
                                                                                                                              Wilmingt PhoenixSanMcAllen    Dieg
                                                       Sioux Fa                             Boise Ci       Johnson                    San
                                                                                                                                      Bryan Jose
                                                                                                                                              ci
                                                                                                                                         Tucson     c
                                                    Rocheste         Aurora   c
                                                                       Billings                                 Salem ciEl Paso                     Anaheim
                                                                                                                                                    Orange c
                                          Fargo ci                                                                             Hayward  San CrAnto
                                                                                  Long Provo
                                                                              Blooming   Bea ci                Portland
                                                                                                            Greensbo
                                                                                                                   Newport           Santa    Jacksonv
                                                                                                                                            Lafayett   Los Ange
                                                                                      Blooming               Danville
                                                                                                       Albuquer
                                                                                                        Fayettev   Decatur Fort
                                                                                                                              SanWor
                                                                                                                                   Ange
                                                                                                                                      CharlestSanta   Inglewoo
                                                                                                                                                    Garden
                                                                                                                                                         Ba  Brownsvi
                                                                                                                                                             G
                                              St. Clou
                                                     Wausau c                   Greeley  Santa     Fe       Ashevill
                                                                                                           Bellingh                                      Daytona
                                                             Madison Lincoln
                                                            Appleton                Columbus
                                                                                  Lowell    c
                                                                                     Columbia
                                                                                 Lawrence    Lakewood              Huntsvil
                                                                                                                  Tacoma     cDallas  c           Longview
                                                                                                                                                   Fullerto
                                                                                                                                                  Pasadena
                                                                                                                                                     Corpus C
                                                   Eau Clai              Manchest
                                                                              Champaig Yakima
                                                                                      Middleto  Lexingto
                                                                                                   c     Oklahoma  Little
                                                                                                                 Hampton  R           Dothan
                                                                                                                                      Sunnyval
                                                                                                                                     Oakland    c
                                                                          Sterling  DanburyWichita Boulder       Winston-
                                                                                                             Vancouve     Abilene
                                                                    Omaha     ci State
                                                                            Elkhart
                                                                                          Co
                                                                                     Waterbur
                                                                                       Stamford
                                                                                                        Alexandr
                                                                                                 Springfi
                                                                                                            Nashvill
                                                                                                               Lubbock
                                                                                                         Amarillo EugeneAthens
                                                                                                                 Burlingt        c San
                                                                                                                                Tyler
                                                                                                                             c ColumbusConcord
                                                                                                                                      ci  Fran Huntingt
                                                                                                                                         Pasadena                     West Pal
                                                                       Portland
                                                                       Grand
                                                                     Kenosha
                                                                               Springfi
                                                                           WorcesteIndianap
                                                                                  Ra
                                                                              Fitchbur
                                                                                 Spokane New       Joplin
                                                                                             Hagersto
                                                                                              Elizabet
                                                                                                 Have
                                                                                               New    York c Bremerto
                                                                                                                    Seattle     Montgome
                                                                                                                          Tuscaloo
                                                                                                                                     Albany   c       GainesviSarasota Miami ci
                                                                   JanesvilLafayett  Springfi
                                                                                       Providen
                                                                                    Hartford Jersey
                                                                                       Pawtucke
                                                                                          BostonPatersonC
                                                                                                     cBedf
                                                                                               Wilmingt  Tulsa     Wichita
                                                                                                                ci Smi cTexarkanWaco citHouston    TorranceTampa ci
                                                      St. Paul    Des Moin  AnnWay
                                                                            Kalamazo
                                                                           Fort     Arbo    Lancaste
                                                                                     Allentow
                                                                                  Topeka
                                                                                       Norwalkc
                                                                                            New
                                                                                       Independ NewBrun      Fort
                                                                                                         Charlott
                                                                                                               Lawton                      Pensacol                     Hollywoo Honolulu
                                                                  Rockford                       Fall Riv           Greenvil                                     St. Pete
                                     0               MinneapoSioux  CiAlbany
                                                                  Cedar
                                                                  Milwauke
                                                                         Ra
                                                                        Joliet
                                                                     Racine
                                                                       Lansing cccReading
                                                                         Muskegon     New Bridgepo
                                                                                             Lond
                                                                                          Harrisbu
                                                                                        Salt
                                                                                     Brockton
                                                                                           Hamilton
                                                                                       Kansas
                                                                                           Pueblo
                                                                                                              Portsmou
                                                                                                LakC c Lynchbur  Florence Odessa c Berkeley
                                                                                                                   Norfolk Columbia
                                                                                                                                         Baton Ro
                                                                                                                                         Mobile
                                                                                                                                     Savannah      c                    Fort Lau
                                                                        Jamestow
                                                                             Poughkee
                                                                         Syracuse
                                                                     Livonia
                                                                           South
                                                                            Rocheste Be
                                                                                   Williams   Evansvil
                                                                                                 Trenton
                                                                                                 YonkersRoanoke                Jackson
                                                                                                                               Shrevepo    Beaumont
                                                                                  Lima   cit         c Washingt              Monroe    c
                                                                                                                                    Alexandr   Galvesto
                                                                      Binghamt
                                                                       Jackson  Akron
                                                                           Toledo  Terre
                                                                               Mansfiel
                                                                                Scranton ciDenver
                                                                                    Dayton Ha
                                                                                      cKansasYork   cit
                                                                                             Cincinna
                                                                                                  Atlantic
                                                                                               cPhiladel
                                                                                                   C
                                                                                                                Memphis
                                                                                                              Knoxvill
                                                                                                         Baltimor          Lorain
                                                                                                                             Augusta
                                                                                                                        Birmingh    c        Biloxi
                                                                                                                                          Lake    Cha
                                                                                                                                                Houmac ci
                                             Duluth c                  Chicago
                                                                     DavenporMuncie
                                                                                Anderson
                                                                             Buffalo    c                 Richmond     Atlanta
                                                                       Peoria
                                                                     Utica        c cit
                                                                                Erie
                                                                             ci Canton Altoona
                                                                                           c                             Anniston
                                                                                                                                Macon ci
                                                                     Saginaw      Decatur          Louisvil
                                                                                                   Charlest Chattano                        New Orle
                                                           Waterloo     Flint ciClevelan  St. Loui
                                                                                     Pittsbur
                                                                            Niagara                Huntingt
                                                                             Detroit         Parkersb
                                                                             Youngsto Newark c
                                                                                         Wheeling
                                                                                      Johnstow
                                   -.26                                    Gary cit


                                             4                                             29                                                            60
                                                                                          mean January temperature
                                          Figure 9: Population Growth and Weather, 1980s




                                                                                                                                                                                            70
                                                           log ch real med house price, 19                                         Fitted values
                                                                                           Boston c
                              1.03905
                                                                                            Jersey C

                                                                                                 Fall Riv
                                                                           Worceste Springfi
                                                                             Fitchbur                 Bedf
                                                                                               New York
                                                                                               Newark
                                                                                    Brockton    Trentonc
                                                                                    Waterbur
                                                                             Poughkee         Elizabet
                                                                                                Yonkers
                                                                                 Lowell
                                                                                Lawrence    c  Paterson                                             Pasadena
log price change, 1980-1990



                                                                                         New
                                                                                           NewHave
                                                                                       Providen    Brun
                                                                                   Hartford
                                                                                     New Lond  Wilmingt                               Santa     Cr Glendale
                                                                                                                                     San
                                                                                                                                    Fremont Fran    Oxnard    c
                                                                                                                                       Sunnyval Torrance
                                                                       Portland
                                                                      Albany    cLongPawtucke
                                                                                         Bea
                                                                                      Stamford
                                                                                      Norwalk                                           Berkeley
                                                                                                                                       San    JoseSanta    Ba
                                                                                                                                                    El Monte
                                                                         Manchest    Middleto
                                                                                   Danbury                                            Oakland
                                                                            Rocheste      Bridgepo                                                        Los Ange
                                                                                                       Alexandr                 Hayward                Orange
                                                                                                                                                    Simi   Val c
                                                                                                                               Wilmingt                  Inglewoo
                                                                                                                                                   Huntingt
                                                                                                                                                     Fullerto
                                                                                                                                                      Anaheim
                                                                                                                                                   Thousand                          Honolulu
                                                                     Utica ci                                                                          Santa An
                                                                                                                                                      Garden    G
                                                                                                                 Durham     c      Vallejo
                                                                                                                       Atlanta Santa Ro       Oceansid
                                                                                                                                             Salinas
                                                                         Syracuse    Allentow                                             Santa    Ma c
                                                                                                                                              Pomona
                                                                                                Philadel            Seattle AugustaConcord     OntarioSan Dieg
                                                                             Buffalo                                              SacramenEscondid
                                                                      Binghamt
                                                                               Scranton   Harrisbu               Hampton Modesto
                                                                                                                 Burlingt                       Riversid
                                                                                                                                                Jacksonv
                                                                         Battle C St.        Hagersto
                                                                                           Lancaste
                                                                                               Loui     Baltimor  Norfolk
                                                                                                                   Newport    Stockton
                                                                                                                                Columbus Chula Vi Tampa                ci
                                                                                                                  Winston-
                                                                                                               Chesapea
                                                                                                               Portsmou     Fort Wor                    Laredo  Orlando
                                                                                                                                                                c
                                                                                                                                                           Daytona
                                                                                 Reading Atlantic Ashevill  GreensboGreenvil
                                                                                                                     Fayettev          Charlest
                                                                                                                                          San   San
                                                                                                                                                Anto  Bern
                                                                       Grand Ra  State                    Richmond
                                                                                          CoYork cit Washingt      Huntsvil   Dallas
                                                                                                                              Mesquite c                           St. Pete
                                                                                  Indianap              Charlott  Raleigh
                                                                                                             Nashvill        Columbia
                                                                                                                        Athens    c          Pensacol
                                                                                                                                              Tallahas           LakelandWest Pal
                                                                    Aurora  Ann
                                                                       Chicagoc Arbo                                     AnnistonMacon                                      Miami ci
                                                                    Omaha
                                                                          Muskegon
                                                                            Elkhart
                                                                              ci       Kansas
                                                                                     Blooming
                                                                                   Columbus       Louisvil
                                                                                                  CJoplin
                                                                                                Springfi
                                                                                                            Johnson
                                                                                                       Roanoke Chattano
                                                                                                               Lawton
                                                                                                           cBellingh
                                                                                                        Amarillo                 Waco
                                                                                                                          cTuscaloo
                                                                                                                               Irving
                                                                                                                            Texarkan     citci Biloxi c
                                                                                                                                      Savannah
                                                                                                                                     Alexandr
                                                                                                                                      cDothan                    Sarasota
                                                                                                                                                                  MelbournFort Lau
                                                                        Jamestow                             FortMemphis
                                                                                                                   Virginia
                                                                                                                   Decatur
                                                                                                                   SmiLas CrucSanMontgome
                                                                                                                              MonroeAngec         c
                                                                           South Dayton
                                                                                    Be Santa Cincinna    Clarksvi
                                                                                               c Fe Albuquer Danville
                                                                                                       LynchburKnoxvill          Tyler
                                                                                                                                  Killeen
                                                                                                                                       ci
                                                                                                                                      AlbanyScottsda
                                                                                                                                       Austin   cc      Corpus   C
                                                                            Kalamazo
                                                                           Fort  Way Columbia
                                                                                       Independ                    Little
                                                                                                                  Tacoma   RElcShrevepo
                                                                                                                                Paso
                                                           Appleton Livonia
                                                                          Sterling
                                                                       Lansing
                                                                            Niagara
                                                                              Blooming Kansas     C Fayettev
                                                                                                Lexingto
                                                                                                 Reno              Wichita
                                                                                                         cit Lubbock                        MobileGalvesto
                                                                                                                                                 ci c Gainesvi
                                                                        Joliet  c Williams
                                                                           Lafayett     Colorado
                                                                                       Overland
                                                                                           Wichita
                                                                                                  Boulder     Bremerto  Birmingh
                                                                                                                  Florence    Garland  Bryan
                                                                                                                                     BakersfiBeaumont
                                                                                                                                               New              Brownsvi Hollywoo
                                                                                                                                                     Orle McAllen
                                                                                                                                                     Longview
                                                                                  Terre
                                                                             Champaig
                                                                       Jackson  Clevelan  Ha EvansvilOklahoma
                                                                                           Hamilton                          LasJackson
                                                                                                                          Abilene Vega
                                                                                                                            Arlingto           Phoenix
                                                                                                                                             Lake
                                                                                                                                             Mesa   Cha
                                                                                                                                                    cit
                                             St. ClouSt. Paul
                                                    Minneapo Rockford           Akron
                                                                               Springfi
                                                                               Mansfiel
                                                                             Muncie
                                                                        Lincoln        c ci
                                                                                       Altoona
                                                                                Anderson
                                                                                    Pittsbur            Tulsa ci               Fresno    c Tempe
                                                                                                                                            Tucson   cic
                                                                                                                                               Glendale
                                                  Eau Clai          KenoshaToledo
                                                                        Flint
                                                                     Saginaw     Limac
                                                                               ci citFortcit
                                                                                       Yakima
                                                                                           Boise  c Ci                     Midland
                                                                                                              VancouveOdessa c Baton Ro
                                         Fargo ci            Fa Cedar
                                                      SiouxMadison      Ra GaryErie        Col
                                                                                      citSalt
                                                                                Spokane
                                                                               Canton
                                                                                 Topeka
                                                                             Detroit          cLak cc
                                                                                          Denver
                                                                                          cPueblo
                                                                                             Parkersb
                                                                                             Lakewood                       Lorain c
                                                    Wausau c Des
                                            Duluth cRocheste          Moin cGreeleyAuroraCharlest
                                                                  Janesvil
                                                                 Milwauke
                                                                    Racine                           c                                       Houston
                                                                                                                                              Lafayett
                                                              Sioux Ci       Youngsto                                                             Houma ci
                                                                                                                                            Pasadena
                                                                                      Johnstow
                                                                       Billings Decatur  Wheeling
                                                                                         Provo    ciHuntingt SalemEugene c
                                                                                                                          ci
                                                                       Peoria c                                 Portland
                                                                    Davenpor

                                                           Waterloo
                              -.557086
                                           4.3                                                                                                                                     72.6
                                                                                           mean January temperature
                                         Figure 10: House Price Growth and Weather, 1980s




                                                                                                                                                                                                71
