                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           WHY PUBLIC SCHOOLS LOSE TEACHERS


                                            Eric A. Hanushek
                                              John F. Kain
                                            Steven G. Rivkin


                                          Working Paper 8599
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8599


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2001




Stanford University, National Bureau of Economic Research, and University of Texas at Dallas; University
of Texas at Dallas; Amherst College and University of Texas at Dallas, respectively. This research has been
supported by the Packard Humanities Institute. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Eric A. Hanushek, John F. Kain and Steven G. Rivkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Why Public Schools Lose Teachers
Eric A. Hanushek, John F. Kain and Steven G. Rivkin
NBER Working Paper No. 8599
November 2001
JEL No. I20, J45



                                               ABSTRACT


        Many school districts experience difficulties attracting and retaining teachers, and the impending
retirement of a substantial fraction of public school teachers raises the specter of severe shortages in some
public schools. Schools in urban areas serving economically disadvantaged and minority students appear
particularly vulnerable. This paper investigates those factors that affect the probabilities that teachers
switch schools or exit the public schools entirely. The results indicate that teacher mobility is much more
strongly related to characteristics of the students, particularly race and achievement, than to salary,
although salary exerts a modest impact once compensating differentials are taken into account.




Eric A. Hanushek
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
hanushek@stanford.edu

John F. Kain
Green Center for Study of Science and Society
University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, TX 75083-0688
jkain@utdallas.edu

Steven G. Rivkin
Department of Economics
Amherst College
Amherst, MA 01002
sgrivkin@amherst.edu
                                 Why Public Schools Lose Teachers
                          by Eric A. Hanushek, John F. Kain, and Steven G. Rivkin

         Issues of teacher shortages have pervaded policy discussions for decades. Although the exact

nature of the concerns – specific subjects such as math or science, recruiting difficulties in urban centers,

or elements of quality such as availability of fully certified teachers – has varied over time and across

locations, the perceived need to act has not. In response, educators have offered a variety of

compensation policies designed to attract more teachers into the profession and to retain more of those

currently teaching. These include higher pay (typically across the board but sometimes targeted on

specific communities or subjects), forgiveness on student loans in exchange for a commitment to teach

(often in difficult to staff schools), and the expansion of alternative certification and housing reserved for

teachers but to name a few. The efficacy of any of these strategies depends crucially on the

responsiveness of supply, and, as we demonstrate below, must be evaluated in terms of other powerful

forces operating in teacher labor markets.

         A basic impediment to the development of effective teacher labor market policies is the lack of a

comprehensive understanding of the determinants of teacher labor supply. Teacher labor supply actually

aggregates a variety of decisions made at different points in time and based on different information and

influences. With some variants, the pre-teaching phase begins with a decision to train for teaching and

with successful completion of teacher preparation and certification (or at least enough schooling to

qualify for an emergency license). It then moves to the application and job matching process. Having

been hired at a particular school, the career path is determined by the continuation and retention

decisions of both teachers and schools. This paper focuses on those who have already entered teaching

and considers the details of the supply decisions of current teachers.2 Their transitions relate much more


   2
    While many more teachers are certified each year than are needed to fill vacancies, the pre-teaching phase is
important for consideration of some specialities such as the current shortages in advanced math and science, in
special education, and in bilingual education. The policy discussions in these areas generally concentrate on
issues of overall salary levels and of requirements for certification (e.g., Murnane et al., 1991; Hanushek and Pace,
1995).
directly to the circumstances and policies of specific districts and their interaction with teacher

preferences.

        A number of papers including Murnane and Olsen (1989, 1990) and Dolton and van der Klaauw

(1995, 1999) have examined the link between duration in teaching and pay. These studies generally find

that higher teacher pay reduces the probability that teachers leave the profession, particularly once

differences in alternative earnings opportunities are taken into consideration.

        One potential problem for these studies is the limited amount of information on working

conditions that may be correlated with salary. While Murnane and Olsen attempt to account for

differences in working conditions by including demographic information on school districts from U.S.

Census data, the lack of direct information on public school students, availability of only a single year of

data on student characteristics and other limitations inhibit the analysis of these factors. Not only does

the lack of good information on student and school characteristics (such as class size) potentially bias the

estimated effects of salary, it also reduces the understanding of the association between student

characteristics and transitions.

        We make use of matched student/teacher panel data on Texas public elementary schools to gain a

better understanding of the effects of salary and other school factors on teacher transitions. These data

permit a detailed description of student demographic and school characteristics and pre- and post-move

comparisons for teachers who switch schools within Texas or leave the Texas public schools. Given the

large number of teachers and teacher transitions in the data, we can divide teachers on the basis of

experience, school community type, ethnicity and other factors and examine differences in the

responsiveness to salary and student characteristics on the basis of teacher experience, race and ethnicity.

        The results show that teacher transitions are much more strongly related to particular student

characteristics than to salary differentials. Schools serving large numbers of academically disadvantaged,

black or Hispanic students tend to lose a substantial fraction of teachers each year both to other districts


                                                     -2-
and out of the Texas public schools entirely. An implication is that the supply curve faced by these

districts differs markedly from that faced by middle and upper middle class communities in which a far

lower proportion of teachers seek to improve their employment arrangement by switching to another

public school.



Determinants of the Supply of Teachers

         The standard microeconomic framework for analyzing teacher supply and salaries would began

with individual labor supply decisions and aggregate these up to a market supply function. The supply of

labor to district d within a geographical area j can be characterized by:

                                           qdjS = f ( wd ,WCd , A j , O j )


where qS is the supply of teachers for district d in area j; wd and WCd are wages and working conditions,

respectively, in district d; and Aj and Oj are amenities and other employment opportunities, respectively,

in area j. Consideration of each of these elements allows us to frame the analysis and to put previous

work into a more general context.

Salaries (wd). A fundamentally important issue in the consideration of teacher labor markets is which

salary differences to look at and how they should be interpreted.1 At any point in time, teacher wages

will vary within a district. These wage differences reflect different components of teacher salary

contracts involving experience, graduate education levels, and a variety of other factors. Observing these

wage differences provides information about movements along a supply schedule, but it does not provide

information about what would happen if the entire salary schedule were shifted. Much of the analysis of

achievement effects of salaries, for example, has considered differences in wages along a salary schedule


   1
    Fringe benefits are an important and growing share of compensation, and differences in the generosity of
benefits is certainly not perfectly correlated with salary differences. Unfortunately, we, like all past researchers, do
not have information on fringe benefits.

                                                          -3-
or combined movements along schedules with changes in the overall salary structure (Hanushek 1997),

while much of the policy debate focuses on the level of the entire salary schedule.2 By constructing

annual salary schedules for single years of experience in each district over only teachers who do not have

a graduate degree, we can isolate the effects of both cross-sectional and inter-temporal variations in

overall salary levels.3

Alternative Earnings Opportunities and Amenities(Oj ,Aj ). It is long established that one must account

for differences in alternative opportunities for teachers. This is clearest in consideration of differential

competition for specific teachers, say math and science teachers versus those in other specialities (e.g.,

Kershaw and McKean 1962; Zarkin 1985; Murnane et al., 1991). It also comes into play in terms of

consideration of the districts that form the relevant decision set. If areas differ by prices or amenities or if

labor markets are geographically confined, salaries must be considered in comparison to the relevant

group of competing districts. This point, made by Chambers (1977) and Ferguson (1991), provides

information on the specification of the wage and compensation comparisons. Important elements of the

overall market factors are also highlighted in Flyer and Rosen (1997) and Boardman, Darling-Hammond,

and Mullin (1982).

        The empirical evidence supports the belief that alternative earnings opportunities affect teacher

labor supply. In a series of papers, Dolton and van der Klaauw (1995, 1999) and van der Klaaw (1997)

investigate the impact of alternative opportunities on teacher transitions. They find evidence that

opportunity wages affect the probabilities of both entry and exit. These results are consistent with earlier

work by Murnane and Olsen (1989, 1990), which found that opportunity wages affected duration in


   2
    There has also been a substantial amount of discussion about the use of teacher pay as a direct incentive for
better performance by individual teachers. See Cohen and Murnane (1986) and Hanushek et al (1994) for
discussions of merit pay. There is little evidence of systematic variation in salaries based on performance in Texas
schools, although a number of districts have considered such moves.

   3
    We have focused on salaries of teachers without post-bacheloriate schooling, because only roughly one fourth
of Texas elementary school teachers possess a master’s degree.

                                                        -4-
teaching in both Michigan and North Carolina. In this paper, differences in alternative wage

opportunities are accounted for by the inclusion of dummy variables for each Texas Education Agency

defined region of Texas and school district fixed effects in some specifications. Because virtually all

teachers in our data possess at least a B.A. and teach elementary school age children, additional

differences in alternative opportunities such as those considered by Dolton and van der Klaauw should

not be very important in this analysis.

Working Conditions (WCd). Much has been made of the fact that there is more to a teaching job than just

the overall salary or compensation levels. Some of the earliest work considered how teacher preferences

might affect the selection of schools (Greenberg and McCall 1974; Murnane 1981). More generally,

teachers might be willing to take lower salaries to obtain better conditions in their schools, a proposition

first found in Antos and Rosen (1975) and subsequently pursued in a variety of other analyses (e.g.,

Baugh and Stone 1982; Hanushek and Luque 2000). Some have interpreted the push for lower class

sizes by teachers as reflecting an element of teacher compensation, as opposed to an educational policy

designed to improve student achievement (cf. Grissmer and Kirby 1992).

        If differences in working conditions are not accounted for and they are correlated with salaries,

estimates of the relationship between teacher transitions and salaries will confound salary influences with

those of other factors that affect teacher labor supply. For example, if salaries are higher in urban

districts and teachers prefer suburban districts, estimates of teacher salary effects on labor supply

confound the impacts of salary and community type unless adequate controls for community type are

included. Loeb and Page (1998) argue that the failure to account for differences in working and labor

market conditions explains why many studies fail to identify the true relationship between achievement

and salaries.

        A central element of the empirical analysis here is the description of movements of teachers

across different types of schools and student populations in order to study the preferences of teachers and


                                                     -5-
the form in which compensating wage differentials are played out. Four measures of student

characteristics that may be related to teacher labor supply are included: percent low income, percent

black, percent Hispanic, and average student achievement score. Whether these specific characteristics

directly affect teacher decisions or they serve as proxies for other factors cannot be determined. In any

case the estimates will identify those schools that experience the greatest difficulties in teacher labor

markets.

Personnel Policies. While the relationship between salaries and employment is observed, it is not

possible to infer a priori that the relationship is a “supply function” for teachers. Rather district hiring

and retention practices are an important element in the labor market for teachers. This issue, made

forcefully in a set of recent analyses (Ballou and Podgursky 1995, 1997 and Ballou 1996), is very

important because it frames the interpretation of movements observed in the market. For example, the

observation that retention and salaries are negatively related (controlling for all compensating

differentials) is consistent with a positively sloped supply curve and a positive relationship between

salaries and the probability that districts will not rehire teachers.

        In this paper we describe changes in salary for district switchers in addition to the analysis of the

probability teachers exit schools. The fact that we do not observed whether a teacher’s actions are

initiated by the teacher or the district does affect the interpretation of the results. It is doubtful that pay

increases or improvements in non-pecuniary factors would be as large for involuntary as for voluntary

job changers, therefore the observed changes in salaries and other characteristics for school changers

should understate the gains of those who choose to change schools. Similarly, the link between the

probability of quitting and salaries should be more negative than that between the probability of being

fired and salaries; again the estimated link between quitting and salaries should underestimate the supply

relationship.




                                                       -6-
The Texas Database

        The ability to understand the character and outcomes of teacher labor market activities derives

from the unique data base developed under the UTD Texas Schools Project. Working with the Texas

Education Agency (TEA), this project has combined different data sources to compile matched panel

data sets on students and teachers. The samples contain the universe of Texas public school teachers in

each year along with entire cohorts of Texas students that permit accurate descriptions of the schools of

each teacher’s employment.

        The Public Education Information Management System, TEA’s state-wide educational data base,

reports key demographic data including race, ethnicity and gender for both students and teachers as well

as student eligibility for a subsidized lunch. It also contains detailed annual information on teacher

experience, salary, education, class size, grade, population served and subject. Importantly, this data base

can be merged with information on both student and teacher achievement. Beginning in 1993, the Texas

Assessment of Academic Skills (TAAS) was administered each spring to eligible students enrolled in

grades three through eight.4 These criterion referenced tests, which evaluate student mastery of grade-

specific subject matter, are merged with the student and teacher information.5

        Empirical salary schedules are constructed for each school district using the teacher microdata

for the years 1993 to 1996. Emphasis on district schedules reflects our interest in the effects of shifts in

salary schedules. Each district’s constructed salary schedule corresponds to the median salary of primary

school teachers for the first ten single years of experience for all regular teachers without advanced




   4
     Many special education and limited English proficient students are exempted from the tests, as are other
students for whom the test would not be educationally appropriate. In each year roughly 15 percent of students do
not take the tests, either because of an exemption or because of repeated absences on testing days.

   5
    Reading and math tests each contain approximately 50 questions, although the number of questions and
average percent correctly answered varies across time and grades. We transform all test results into standardized
scores with a mean of zero and variance equal to one for each grade and year. Thus, our achievement measures
describe students in terms of their relative position in the overall state performance distribution.

                                                       -7-
degrees. The detailed panel data for each district and for individual teachers permit an unusual

opportunity to address concerns about measurement error.6

         The salary information excludes a variety of special pay provisions for individual teachers.

Districts offer a variety of individual extra pay opportunities, generally involving extra duties. Over 85

percent of the observed teachers receive no extra pay, and the median for those receiving it is

approximately $1,000. (Given the errors in reporting the salary data, however, our base pay measure may

well include some portion of extra pay). While we do not address these issues here, it is possible that

some districts regularly and openly reward individual teachers or groups of teachers through extra pay

channels. In such a case, extra pay may provide additional incentives affecting labor market behavior.

For 90 percent of all districts, less than a quarter of all teachers receive any extra pay. Nonetheless, for

3½ percent of the Texas districts, over half of the teachers receive some extra pay.



Teacher Mobility, Salaries and Student Demographics

         While teacher quality is known to be a primary determinant of student achievement, there is

substantial uncertainty about the leverage that a school district has to improve the stock and performance

of its teachers through compensation, class size and other non-pecuniary job characteristics. We begin

with an analysis of the patterns of teacher moves in order to sort out the relative attractiveness of

different districts.


   6
     The panel data provide the opportunity to detect and correct errors in ways not generally possible in prior
work. We first employ median salaries because of concerns about coding errors leading to extreme values in
salary. Further, we examined each district that experienced nominal median salary decreases either over time at
any level of experience or across higher experience categories in any given year. We excluded individual teachers
whose salary observations appeared to be unreflective of base salaries, but, if it was not possible to detect obvious
errors, the district/experience/year cell was coded as missing. There was also substantial error in the teacher
experience variable, exemplified by inconsistencies in reported experience for individual teachers tracked
annually. If a single year did not conform to an otherwise consistent string for an individual teacher, reported
experience for that year was changed. Otherwise, reported experience was left unchanged. Error was also
introduced by inconsistencies in district adjustments for part time teachers, and obvious mistakes were corrected.
The cells for graduate degrees and for years of experience above ten become too thin in many districts to provide
reliable salary information.

                                                         -8-
Transitions Between and Within Districts (1993-96)

        A primary goal of our mobility analyses is to sort out the separate influences of salary and other

determinants of job attractiveness. Teachers are observed moving within districts, between districts, and

out of Texas public schools entirely annually between 1993 and 1996. Importantly, we have information

about salaries and student characteristics for both the sending and receiving schools for each transition.

        Overall on an annual basis 79 percent of teachers remain in the same school, 14 percent exit

Texas public schools, 4 percent change schools within districts, and 3 percent switch districts each year.

This mobility is somewhat higher than national averages which indicate that 86 percent of all teachers

remained in the same school, while only 6.6 percent left teaching between 1994 and 1995 (U.S.

Department of Education, 1997). Part of the discrepancy is explicable. Our calculations for exiting from

Texas public schools include people leaving teaching plus people teaching either in private schools or

outside of the state. Moreover, the rapid growth over this period of the Texas student population and the

Texas economy in general undoubtedly influence teacher movements.

        Similar to job turnover patterns for the labor market as a whole, transitions differ sharply by

teacher experience. Table 1 indicates that mobility is much higher among probationary teachers (0-2

years of experience), who are almost twice as likely as prime age teachers (11-30 years experience) to

exit Texas public schools and over four times as likely to switch districts. As expected, mobility picks up

again as teachers near retirement age, and almost one-fourth of teachers with over thirty years of

experience leave the Texas public schools each year. The national patterns of mobility across experience

categories do follow a similar pattern to that in Texas.

        The pattern of moves tends to contradict the conventional wisdom that large urban districts are

the proving ground for teachers, who move to suburban jobs when possible. Table 2, restricted to those

changing districts, provides only weak support for the belief that teachers commonly leave urban districts

for suburban positions. Among teachers in large urban districts, most of those switching districts relocate


                                                     -9-
to suburban schools, but overall less than two percent of teachers in large urban schools switch districts

in each year. The absolute number moving into urban districts is only slightly smaller than the number

moving out. During this period the share of Texas teachers in urban districts increased, implying that the

small net outflow of teachers from urban districts is not simply a reflection of changes in the distribution

of teaching positions across community types.

         The bottom panel of Table 2 shows that a very similar pattern of movement holds for the sub-

sample of probationary teachers, where again the net outflow from urban districts is small. Overall,

probationary urban teachers are only one percentage point less likely to remain in the same school as

probationary suburban teachers (71 versus 72 percent), and this is an identical gap to that for teachers of

all experience levels. Two significant differences between new teachers starting in urban and starting in

suburban districts do exist: Probationary urban teachers are roughly 3.5 percentage points more likely to

exit teaching than those in suburban districts (not shown), while probationary suburban teachers are

somewhat more likely simply to switch schools within districts.

         Movement from rural districts follows a very distinct pattern. The majority of movers goes to a

different rural district. Significantly fewer rural teachers move to urban districts than is the case for

teachers initially in urban or suburban districts.

         These aggregate transition rates among community types provide no information on the actual

changes in salary and student composition. Tables 3, 4 and 5 report in increasing detail the relationship

between pre-move and post-move salaries and student characteristics for teachers who switch schools

and districts. Each table concentrates on how the average of specific characteristics (C) change with a

move from district d to district d', calculated across all teachers who move as


(2)   ∆ Cd ,d ' = (Ctd ' − Ctd )




                                                     -10-
where year t is the first year in the new district. In other words, ∆C is the change in characteristics

between sending and receiving schools calculated in the year of move.

         The salary changes are computed by single years of experience. For example, the salary change

for a moving teacher with four years of experience equals the district average salary of 5th year teachers

in the new district minus the district average salary of 5th year teachers in the old district, both calculated

in the year of the change. Because consistent salary schedule information is only available for teachers

with ten or fewer years of experience, all teachers with more experience are excluded from these tables.

(Roughly three-fourths of teachers switching districts have less than 10 years of experience).

         Table 3 reports change in salaries and district average student demographic characteristics by

experience and gender. The top panel indicates that on average probationary teachers who move improve

their salaries relative to what they would have earned in the initial district. Men gain 1.4 percent in salary

with a move, while women gain half that amount.7 The average salary gain declines with experience, and

the difference is statistically insignificant for more experienced teachers.8 The gain averaged across all

movers with less than ten years of experience is 0.4 percent of annual salary at the time of the move.

         Because compensating differentials could conceal the true change in salary holding other factors

constant, we attempt to control for other determinants of teacher labor supply. Log salary at each

experience level is regressed on 19 region dummies, 3 community type dummies, the district average

achievement score, and the district average percentages of Black, Hispanic and low income students.9



   7
    Because women are more likely to be married or have children than men of the same age, the smaller gains of
women may reflect the fact that more transitions are precipitated by family considerations. However, we have no
information on reason for moving or family status.

   8
   We present the analysis in terms of teacher experience, but tenure within the district may also have separate
implications for salary and other factors that affect satisfaction and mobility.

   9
     The achievement score is the average of math and reading scores. These regressions explain about 60 percent
of the raw variance in log salaries, and the district student characteristics are significantly related to salaries.
Standard errors in the tables have not been adjusted for the fact that these are residuals.

                                                        -11-
The residuals from these regressions provide salary measures adjusted for differences in working

conditions, amenities and local labor markets. Consistent with the existence of compensating

differentials, the second row of Table 3 shows that average adjusted salaries increase by 50 percent more

than raw salaries (0.6 percent versus 0.4 percent), though there is substantial variation in the pattern of

results across experience and gender.

         In contrast to the modest changes in salary, the bottom panel of Table 3 provides strong evidence

that teachers systematically favor higher achieving, non-minority, non-low income students. The findings

for achievement are the clearest and most consistent across gender and experience categories, showing

that the district average achievement rises by roughly .08 standard deviations, or three percentile points

on the state distribution, for the average mover. The percentages black, Hispanic and eligible for a

subsidized lunch also decline significantly for movers. Although there is variation across experience

categories, black and Hispanic compositions of districts decline by 2.5 and 5 percent, respectively, and

the percent eligible for free or reduced lunch falls by 6.6 percent.

         The average changes, however, mask considerable heterogeneity, some of which appears to be

systematically related to origin and destination community types. For example, the strongest support for

presence of compensating differentials comes from teachers who move among urban and suburban

districts. Table 4, which characterizes moves by different types, shows that teachers who move from

large urban to suburban schools experience average nominal salary losses of 0.65 percent but average

adjusted salary increases of 1.4 percent.10 Similarly, the adjusted salary increase is three times as large

as the raw salary increase for teachers who switch among suburban districts.

         Similar to the pattern for salaries, Table 4 reveals dramatic changes in district average student

characteristics for teachers who move from urban to suburban districts, including a 0.35 standard


   10
     The residual salaries control for interregional price differences but not for intraregional differences such as
commonly observed housing price gradients. Thus, these estimates quite likely understate the fully compensated
differences in salary.

                                                        -12-
deviation (14 percentile) rise in average achievement and falls in racial and ethnic concentrations of 15-

20 percent. Perhaps more surprising, teachers who move among suburban districts also experience

similar, albeit smaller, changes in student characteristics than found in the urban-suburban moves:

district average achievement rises by more than one tenth of a standard deviation, and the percentages

Black, Hispanic and eligible for a subsidized lunch all decline.

        The right hand side of Table 4 calculates the changes in campus average student characteristics

rather than district averages. Changes in campus characteristics provide information on the extent to

which district switchers tend to move to schools in particular parts of the district achievement or student

demographic distributions. These changes also highlight any systematic changes in student

characteristics for teachers who switch schools within districts.

        There is little evidence from Table 4 that teachers who move from urban to suburban districts

experience changes that exceed the differential between district averages. In other words, urban-

suburban movers appear to retain their same relative position in the two districts. On the other hand,

teachers who move within urban districts experience a substantial increase in average achievement and a

decline in percent minority and percent eligible for a subsidized lunch. Those who choose to switch

schools within urban districts appear to seek out schools with fewer academically and economically

disadvantaged students. These patterns are consistent with the frequently hypothesized placement of new

teachers in the most difficult teaching situations within urban districts coupled with an ability to change

locations as they move up the experience ranks (cf. Raymond, Fletcher, and Luque 2001).

        An important question is whether teacher preferences differ systematically on the basis of race,

ethnicity or other factors. Specifically, while the typical transition increases average student achievement

and reduces percent economically disadvantaged and percent nonwhite, there may be substantial

differences among black, Hispanic and white teachers.




                                                    -13-
         Table 5 shows distinct differences in the transition patterns of black and Hispanic teachers. Black

teachers tend to move to schools with higher black enrollment shares than the schools they left,

regardless of whether or not they change districts. On the other hand, the average change in percent

Hispanic for Hispanic teachers is quite similar in direction and magnitude to the changes experienced by

teachers as a whole.11 In addition, the change in average test scores is much smaller for black and

Hispanic teachers.

         It is difficult to disentangle the possible underlying mechanisms for this race/ethnic pattern in

mover outcomes. It may reflect differences in teacher preferences, or it may emanate from very different

preferences for factors related to race or ethnicity. For example, if there is extensive residential

segregation and teachers prefer to work closer to where they live, blacks may rank predominantly black

schools much more highly than Hispanic and white colleagues, other things equal.

         Of course differences by teacher ethnicity may not be driven entirely by teacher preferences.

There is no way to quantify the extent to which district personnel policies contribute to the systematic

differences observed in Table 5. For example, if school and district opportunities for black teachers were

dependent on their willingness to teach in schools with higher proportions of black students, patterns

such as these could easily result.

         To summarize the effects on students, Table 6 reports simple school average transition rates at

different points in the distribution of school and district characteristics. The table shows that teachers in

schools in the top quartile of adjusted salaries are 3 percentage points less likely to exit the public

schools and almost 1 percentage point less likely to switch districts than teachers in the bottom quartile

schools.




   11
     We look at annual changes, but Kain and Singleton (1996) show that these moving patterns accumulate and
interact with new hiring to produce significant differences in teacher characteristics for Black and white students,
even across campuses within individual districts.

                                                        -14-
         The most dramatic differences in school transition rates are related to student achievement.

Teacher transition rates for schools in the bottom achievement quartile are much higher than those in the

top quartile. Over 25 percent of teachers in the bottom quartile schools leave each year, while in the top

quartile schools less than 20 percent leave. The largest difference is in the probability of exiting public

schools entirely. These differences imply that the lowest achieving students are more likely to

have teachers new to the school and to the profession, and evidence from Texas strongly suggests that

this will adversely affect achievement (Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain, 2001).12

Transition Regressions

         The previous descriptive information on moves does not take into account the joint effects of the

various influences. Table 7 presents reduced form estimates for linear probability models of the

probability of leaving a district (either switching districts or exiting from the Texas public schools) as a

function of the combined teacher and district characteristics. Separate estimates are computed by

experience categories in order to allow for differences in preferences, family circumstances and job

security. In particular, those at higher experience levels have chosen for the most part to remain in their

current district for a number of years regardless of district characteristics, which would tend to reduce the

link between transition probabilities and the included district characteristics. In addition, the estimated

relationship between transitions and percentages black and Hispanic are allowed to vary by teacher race

and ethnicity.

         The specifications producing the top panel estimates do not include district fixed effects,

meaning that most of the variation in salary and other characteristics comes from differences between

districts. In contrast, the specification for the bottom panel includes district fixed effects. Therefore these

estimates are identified by differences across time in salary and other factors within districts. By


   12
     Note that a portion of the observed differential could reflect the fact that schools with a lot of teachers exiting
tend to have more probationary teachers (who on average do worse in the classroom). The magnitude to these
effects, however, is insufficient to lead to the overall results here (Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain 2001).

                                                         -15-
eliminating the unobserved differences in other determinants of teacher labor supply that may be

correlated with the included covariates, the fixed effect specifications are much more likely to identify

the link between the probability of exit and the included characteristics.

        The baseline non-fixed effect estimates are qualitatively similar to the previously presented

univariate statistics. Higher salaries reduce the probability of exiting a district, and the magnitude of the

effect tends to decline with experience. The transition rate is also significantly related to a number of

student characteristics including average achievement, percent black and percent Hispanic. Higher

average student achievement significantly reduces the probability of moving or exiting Texas public

schools at all levels of experience. Non-black or Hispanic teachers are more likely to transition the

higher are the Black and Hispanic enrollment shares, although the only significant effects are related to

percent black students for younger teachers. Exactly the opposite is true for black and Hispanic teachers,

who are less likely to transition the higher the minority enrollment shares. There is little evidence of an

independent effect of percent eligible for a subsidized lunch. Finally, (not shown) there is little or no

evidence that the probability of moving or exiting is systematically related to average class size in any

specification, raising doubts about the frequently hypothesized impact of smaller classes on teacher

decisions.

        The bottom panel reports results for models with district fixed-effects that remove the influence

of any time invariant district factors. A comparison of the top and bottom panels demonstrates the

importance of controlling for such unobserved variables. In particular, the student racial and ethnic

composition coefficients for non-black, non-Hispanic teachers change markedly. Now it becomes clear

that increases in the campus proportion of students who are Hispanic or black raises the probability of

exiting for these teachers, although similar to the other variables the effects tend to decline with




                                                     -16-
experience. In comparison the inclusion of district fixed effects has little impact on the estimates for

black and Hispanic teachers.13

         In terms of the salary variable, the estimated effect for probationary teachers falls by roughly two

thirds in magnitude following the inclusion of the fixed effects, while the estimates for teachers with six

to ten years of experience increases by more than a factor of three. While the fixed effect results alone do

not provide strong evidence in favor of the belief that teachers respond to salary, the consistently

negative coefficients for teachers with less than thirty years of experience in combination with a similar

and much more significant set of findings in the non-fixed effect specifications support the belief that

higher salaries reduce exits.14 It is quite plausible that the small salary variations across time provide a

noisy measure of the longer term salary shifts that would affect decisions to quit or change schools,

particularly because base year salary is a noisy representation of the entire salary structure.

         Finally, the estimated effects of average student test score on the probability of leaving a district

tend to fall slightly (15 to 20 percent in general) following the inclusion of the fixed effects. It appears

that some other characteristic of districts is correlated with student average achievement and teacher

transitions.

         The estimates reported in Table 7 restrict the effects of salary, student and classroom

characteristics to have the same effects on the probability of switching schools as on the probability of

leaving the Texas public schools entirely. It may be the case, however, that variable effects differ for

these two transitions. In particular, teachers knowledgeable of the generally low level of salaries in the


   13
      The inclusion of fixed effects also raises the magnitude and significance of the coefficient on eligibility for a
subsidized lunch, but the direction of the effect is inconsistent with a labor supply story in which teachers prefer
districts with higher income children. More likely, the negative relationship for subsidized lunch reflects institutional
changes at schools related to Texas school finance reform efforts. Schools with less wealthy student populations
experienced revenue increases during this period, money which may have been used to make teaching more
attractive (in ways not measured here).

   14
     Salary may have a much different effect on the retirement decisions for the small number of teachers with more
than thirty years of experience than on the decisions of younger teachers.

                                                          -17-
profession may be much more sensitive to salary differences among districts than between teaching and

other alternatives. Consequently we divide district leavers into those who move to a new district and

those who exit the Texas public schools entirely and estimate multinomial logit specifications. Again

separate estimates are computed for the five experience categories.

        The results in Table 8 indicate that teacher salary is much more strongly related to the probability

of switching districts (relative to remaining) than to the probability of exiting the Texas public schools.

This salary sensitivity for district moves holds across all experience groupings. In contrast, student

achievement appears to be a much more important determinant of the probability of exiting schools.

Teaching lower achieving students – whether because teachers find it more difficult or less rewarding –

is strong factor in decisions to leave Texas public schools, and the magnitude of the effect holds across

the full range of teacher experience.

        As seen previously, teaching in racially concentrated districts has a strong effect on both the

probability of leaving the public schools entirely and on the probability of switching districts. For white

teachers, the influence on switching districts remains across the experience distribution, while the

influence on exiting the public schools is concentrated in the earlier years. For black teachers, the

reactions to varying concentrations of black students is almost exactly the opposite that for whites in both

sign and magnitude.



Conclusions

        The results in this paper confirm the difficulty that schools serving academically disadvantaged

students have in retaining teachers, particularly those early in their careers. There is also strong evidence

that non-black, non-Hispanic teachers systematically prefer non-black, non-Hispanic students, while the

opposite appears to be the case for black and Hispanic teachers. These findings conform to the widely

publicized teacher shortages plaguing many of the nation’s inner city schools.


                                                    -18-
        A key issue is the magnitude of the additional compensation required to offset the disadvantages

some schools must overcome in order to compete for teachers. We examined the possibility that the

impact of salaries varied with student characteristics and the possibility that the effects of student

characteristics were non-linear. We found little or no evidence of such non-linearities, therefore the

salary coefficients in the tables provide the best estimates of the compensating differentials needed to

offset the labor market disadvantages of certain schools.

        The estimates indicate that higher salaries reduce the probability that teachers leave a district,

and the magnitude of this effect tends to be fairly similar across the experience spectrum with a range

from -0.1 to -0.3, implying that a ten percent salary increase (between two and three thousand dollars per

year depending upon the district) would reduce exits by at most three percent. By comparison, a one

standard deviation decrease in school average achievement increases the probability of exiting by

between one and two percent, and a ten percent increase in the percentage of students who are black or

Hispanic raises the probability that non-black, non-Hispanic teachers exit by an additional one to two

percent. Consequently, schools serving a high proportion of students who are academically very

disadvantaged and either black or Hispanic may have to pay an additional 20, 30 or even 50 percent more

in salary than those schools serving a predominantly white or Asian, academically well-prepared student

body. Of course the availability of black or hispanic teachers may substantially reduce the costs of hiring

for these schools.15

        Importantly, the pattern of multinomial logit estimates suggests that across the board salary

increases are unlikely to compensate for the labor market disadvantages facing some schools. It appears

that salaries relative to other districts rather than the absolute level of teacher salaries is the important

factor, as salaries appear to have a larger impact on the probability of switching districts rather than


   15
    The ability to attract minority teachers over time has diminished (National Center for Education Statistics
2000) and has been the subject of previous attention to teacher supply (Murnane et al., 1991; Hanushek and Pace
1995).

                                                      -19-
exiting teaching altogether. Of course the absolute level of salaries may affect the number of prospective

teachers, but that is beyond the scope of this work.

        An alternative to raising salaries is the abatement of the disadvantage associated with particular

types of students. If the results capture teacher preferences for student race or ethnicity then districts

possess few policy options. But these estimates may well proxy for other factors such as safety or travel

time to work related to these characteristics. In addition, improvements in academic preparation through

better preschools or child care services may well have the indirect benefit of making schools more

appealing to prospective teachers. Learning more about the precise sources of the relationship between

teacher labor supply and the specific student characteristics would provide important, policy relevant

information.

        Finally, this paper focuses solely on the quantity of teacher transitions with little or no attention

paid to quality. The actual cost of improving the quality of instruction depends crucially on the details of

district hiring, retention and other personnel policies. Ballou (1997) raises serious doubts that districts

systematically hire the best candidates available, suggesting that instructional quality could be improved

at little or no cost in terms of higher salary. The extent to which better personnel policies would merely

reallocate teachers among schools rather than raise the overall average level of instruction is an

extremely important issue that merits further research.




                                                       -20-
                                                References



Antos, Joseph R., and Sherwin Rosen. "Discrimination in the market for teachers." Journal of
Econometrics 2 (May 1975): 123-50.

Ballou, Dale. "Do public schools hire the best applicants?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, no. 1
(February 1996): 97-133.

Ballou, Dale, and Michael Podgursky. "Recruiting smarter teachers." Journal of Human Resources 30,
no. 2 (Spring 1995): 326-38.

---. Teacher pay and teacher quality. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research,
1997.

Baugh, William H., and Joe A. Stone. "Mobility and wage equibration in the educator labor market."
Economics of Education Review 2, no. 3 (Summer 1982): 253-74. N.

Betts, Julian R. "Is there a link between school inputs and earnings? Fresh scrutiny of an old literature."
In Does money matter? The effect of school resources on student achievement and adult success, edited
by Gary Burtless, 141-91. Washington, DC: Brookings, 1996.

Blais, André, and Stéphane Dion, eds. The budget-maximizing bureaucrat: Appraisals and evidence.
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1991.

Boardman, Anthony E., Linda Darling-Hammond, and Stephen P. Mullin. "A framework for the analysis
of teachers' demand and supply." Economics of Education Review 2, no. 2 (Spring 1982): 127-55.

Boe, Erling E., and Dorothy M. Gilford, eds. Teacher supply, demand and quality. Washington, D.C.:
National Academy Press, 1992.

Brewer, Dominic J. "Career paths and quit decisions: Evidence from teaching." Journal of Labor
Economics 14, no. 2 (April 1996): 313-39.

Brown, Byron W., and Daniel H. Saks. "The production and distribution of cognitive skills within
schools." Journal of Political Economy 83, no. 3 (June 1975): 571-93.

Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. "Does school quality matter? Returns to education and the
characteristics of public schools in the United States." Journal of Political Economy 100, no. 1 (February
1992): 1-40.

---. "School resources and student outcomes: An overview of the literature and new evidence from North
and South Carolina." Journal of Economic Perspectives 10, no. 4 (Fall 1996): 31-50.

Carnegie Forum on Education and the Economy. A nation prepared: Teachers for the 21st century. :
Carnegie Forum on Education and the Economy, 1986.


                                                    -21-
Chambers, Jay G. "The impact of collective bargaining for teachers on resource allocation in public
school districts." Journal of Urban Economics 4, no. 3 (July 1977): 324-39.

Cohen, David K., and Richard J. Murnane. "Merit pay and the evaluation problem: Understanding why
most merit pay plans fail and a few survive." Harvard Educational Review 56, no. 1 (February 1986): 1-
17.

Darling-Hammond, Linda. Doing what matters most: Investing in quality teaching. New York: National
Commission on Teaching and America's Future, 1997.

Dolton, Peter, and Wilbert van der Klaauw. "Leaving teaching in the UK: A duration analysis." The
Economic Journal 105 (March 1995): 431-44.

---. "The turnover of teachers: A competing risks explanation." Review of Economics and Statistics
(forthcoming).

Ferguson, Ronald. "Paying for public education: New evidence on how and why money matters."
Harvard Journal on Legislation 28, no. 2 (Summer 1991): 465-98.

Ferguson, Ronald F. "Paying for Public Education: New Evidence on How and Why Money Matters."
Harvard Journal on Legislation 28, no. 2 (Summer 1991): 465-98.

Flyer, Fredrick, and Sherwin Rosen. "The new economics of teachers and education." Journal of Labor
Economics 15, no. 1 (part 2) (January 1997): 104-39.

Gilford, Dorothy M., and Ellen Tenenbaum, eds. Precollege science and mathematics teachers:
monitoring supply, demand and quality. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1990.

Goertz, Margaret E., Ruth B. Ekstrom, and Richard J. Coley. The impact of state policy on entrance into
the teaching procession: Final report. : Educational Testing Service, 1984.

Greenberg, David, and John McCall. "Teacher mobility and allocation." Journal of Human Resources 9,
no. 4 (Fall 1974): 480-502.

Grissmer, David W., and Sheila Nataraj Kirby. Patterns of attrition among indiana teachers, 1965-1987.
Santa Monica: RAND, 1992.

Gritz, R. Mark, and Neil D. Theobald. "The effects of school district spending priorities on length of stay
in teaching." Journal of Human Resources 31, no. 3 (Summer 1996): 477-512.

Grogger, Jeffrey T. "Does school quality explain the recent black/white wage trend?" Journal of Labor
Economics 14, no. 2 (April 1996): 231-53.

Hanushek, Eric A. "Assessing the effects of school resources on student performance: An update."
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 19, no. 2 (Summer 1997): 141-64.




                                                   -22-
Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, and Steve G. Rivkin. "Inferring program effects for specialized
populations: Does special education raise achievement for students with disabilities?" Review of
Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.

Hanushek, Eric A. and Javier Luque. “Smaller Classes, Lower Salaries? The Effects of Class Size on
Teacher Labor Markets”, in Sabrina W.M. Laine and James G. Ward (ed.), Using What We Know: A
Review of the Research on Implementing Class-Size Reduction Initiatives for State and Local
Policymakers (Oak Brook, Ill.: North Central Regional Educational Laboratory, 2000), pp. 35-51.

Hanushek, Eric A., and Richard R. Pace. "Who chooses to teach (and why)?" Economics of Education
Review 14, no. 2 (June 1995): 101-17.

Hanushek, Eric A., Steven G. Rivkin, and Lori L. Taylor. "Aggregation and the estimated effects of
school resources." Review of Economics and Statistics 78, no. 4 (November 1996): 611-27.

Hanushek, Eric A. with others. Making schools work: Improving performance and controlling costs.
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1994.

Hoxby, Caroline Minter. "How teachers' unions affect education production." Quarterly Journal of
Economics 111, no. 3 (August 1996): 671-718.

Kain, John F., and Daniel M. O'Brien. "A longitudinal assessment of reading achievement evidence from
the Harvard/UTD Texas schools project". Paper presented at the Green Center Conference, "Achieving
Universal Literacy," University of Texas at Dallas, April 2-4, 1998.

Kain, John F., and Kraig Singleton. "Equality of Educational Opportunity revisited." New England
Economic Review (May/June 1996): 87-111.

Kershaw, Joseph A., and Roland N. McKean. Teacher shortages and salary schedules. NY: McGraw-
Hill, 1962.

Kirby, Sheila Nataraj, David W. Grissmer, and Lisa Hudson. New and returning teachers in Indiana:
sources of supply. Santa Monica: RAND, 1991.

Loeb, Susanna, and Marianne Page. "Examining the link between wages and quality in the teacher
workforce". (mimeo), Department of Economics, University of California, Davis, 1998.

Manski, Charles F. "Academic ability, earnings, and the decision to become a teacher: Evidence from the
National Longitudinal Study of the High School Class of 1972." In Public sector payrolls, edited by
David A. Wise, 291-312. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987.

Muranane, Richard J., and Randall Olsen. "The effects of salaries and opportunity costs on length of stay
in teaching: Evidence from Michigan." Review of Economics and Statistics 71, no. 2 (May 1989): 347-
52.

---. "The effects of salaries and opportunity costs on length of stay in teaching: Evidence from North
Carolina." Journal of Human Resources 25, no. 1 (Winter 1990): 106-24.


                                                   -23-
Murnane, Richard J. "Teacher mobility revisited." Journal of Human Resources 16, no. 1 (Winter 1981):
3-19.

---. "Staffing the nation's schools with skilled teachers." In Improving America's schools: The role of
incentives, edited by Eric A. Hanushek and Dale W. Jorgenson, 241-58. Washington, DC: National
Academy Press, 1996.

Murnane, Richard J., Judith D. Singer, John B. Willett, James J. Kemple, and Randall J. Olsen. Who will
teach? Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1991.

Niskanen, William A. Bureaucracy and Representative Government. Chicago: Aldine-Atherton, 1971.

---. "Bureaucrats and politicians." Journal of Law and Economics 18, no. 3 (1975): 617-44.

Raymond, Margaret E., Stephen Fletcher, and Javier A. Luque. 2001. Teach for America: An evaluation
of teacher differences and student outcomes in Houston, Texas. Stanford University: CREDO.

Rivkin, Steven G., Eric A. Hanushek, and John F. Kain. “Teachers, schools, and academic achievement.”
National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 6691, revised 2001.

Rumberger, Russell W. "The impact of salary differentials on teacher shortages and turnover: The case of
mathematics and science teachers." Economics of Education Review 6, no. 4 (1987): 389-99.

Strauss, Robert P. Public school teachers in Pennsylvania: Demand and supply through school year 2000.
Carnegie-Mellon University (mimeo), 1993.

---. "Teacher preparation and selction in Pennsylvania: Ensuring high performance classroom teachers for
the 21st century". (mimeo) Heinz School of Public Policy and Management, Carnegie-Mellon University,
1998.

van der Klaauw, Wilbert. "The supply and early careers of teachers". (mimeo), New York University,
1997.

Weaver, W. Timothy. America's teacher quality problem: Alternatives for reform. New York: Praeger,
1983.

Zarkin, Gary A. "Occupational choice: An application to the market for public school teachers."
Quarterly Journal of Economics 100, no. 2 (May 1985): 409-46.




                                                   -24-
Table 1. Year-to-year Transitions of Teachers by Experience, 1993-1996


                                 Percent of Teachers Who


                               change
                               schools
   Teacher                                                 exit Texas
                 remain in      within         switch                    Number of
  Experience                                                 public
                same school     same          districts                   teachers
                                                            schools
                               district



   0-2 years       71.2         5.0             5.8          18.0         73,261

   3-5 years       75.1         4.8             4.1          15.9         55,072

  6-10 years       79.2         4.6             2.8          13.5         60,831

  11-30 years      84.0         3.9             1.4          10.8        166,487

  >30 years        72.8         2.4             0.4          24.4         7,207

      All          79.1         4.3             2.9          13.7        376,078
Table 2. Destination Community Type for Teachers Changing Districts, by Origin Community Type and Teacher Experience Level




                                           % of Teachers Who Move to                                                   Change in share of
     Origin Community                                                                                                     teachers by
                                                                                                     Percent of origin
     Type and Teacher                                                             Number Teachers                       community type
                                                                                                         teachers
         Experience                                                               Changing Districts                      1993-1996
                                Rural      Large Urban   Small Urban   Suburban



I. All Teachers
Rural                            63.4            4.6        7.8         24.2           4,529               3.6               -0.8

Large Urban                      20.8            11.6       9.6         58.0           1,359               1.9                0.8

Small Urban                      28.8            10.6       12.8        47.8           1,184               2.4               -0.2

Suburban                         24.4            12.9       12.3        50.5           3,786               2.7                0.0


II. Probationary Teachers (0-2 yrs experience)


Rural                            58.5            5.3        8.1         28.1           1,803               8.0               -1.7

Large Urban                      16.4            11.2       10.6        61.7            517                3.8                2.1

Small Urban                      25.3            11.8       13.2        49.7            509                5.2               -0.9

Suburban                         21.0            14.5       11.7        52.8           1,450               5.3                0.5
Table 3. Average Change in Salary and Student Characteristics for Teachers Changing Districts, by Gender and Experience


                                                   men                                                        women                                         all

                              0-2 years         3-5 years         6-9 years                0-2 years          3-5 years          6-9 years              0-9 years
                             experience        experience        experience               experience         experience         experience             experience

log base year                  0.014             0.009              -0.003                  0.007               -0.002             -0.002                 0.004
salary                        (0.004)           (0.005)            (0.007)                 (0.002)             (0.002)            (0.002)                (0.001)

Adjusted Salarya               0.013             0.020              -0.002                  0.007               0.004              -0.002                 0.006
                              (0.003)           (0.004)            (0.006)                 (0.001)             (0.002)            (0.002)                (0.001)

District Average Student Characteristics

 Average Test                  0.064             0.074             0.036                    0.087               0.092             0.075                  0.080
 Scoreb                        (0.01)            (0.02)            (0.02)                   (0.01)              (0.01)            (0.01)                 (0.00)

 % Hispanic                     -6.0              -6.2               -2.3                    -5.2                -5.3               -4.2                   -5.0
                               (1.0)             (1.5)              (1.8)                   (0.4)               (0.6)              (0.6)                  (0.3)

 % Black                        -5.0              -2.2               0.5                     -2.8                -2.9               -2.9                   -2.6
                               (0.6)             (0.9)              (1.1)                   (0.3)               (0.4)              (0.4)                  (0.2)

 % Subsidized                   -6.0              -5.3               -2.4                    -7.3                -2.4               -6.1                   -6.6
 Lunch                         (0.9)             (1.5)              (1.7)                   (0.4)               (0.6)              (0.6)                  (0.3)



Notes:             a. Adjusted salary is residual of log salary by district and experience level on 19 regional indicators, 3 community type, indicators, the district
                   average test score, and the district average percentage black, Hispanic, and low income.
                   b. District average of mathematics and reading score on TAAS exams, normalized to mean zero and standard deviation one.
Table 4. Average Change in Salary and in District and Campus Student Characteristics for Teachers with 0-9 Years of Experience who
Change Districts, by Community Type of Origin and Destination District


                                                District Average Characteristics         Campus Average Characteristics
                                             large urban               suburban       large urban             suburban
                                                  to                       to              to                     to
                                           suburban move            suburban move   suburban move          suburban move

log base year                                 -0.0065                 0.0021
salary                                       (0.0024)                (0.0019)

Adjusted Log Salarya                           0.014                   0.006
                                              (0.002)                 (0.002)

Average Student Characteristics

 Average Test                                  0.35                    0.12             0.34                   0.13
 Scoreb                                       (0.01)                  (0.01)           (0.02)                 (0.01)

 % Hispanic                                    -18.8                    -7.0            -19.0                  -5.3
                                               (0.9)                   (0.6)            (1.4)                 (0.8)

 % Black                                       -15.1                    -4.1           -15.5                   -3.4
                                               (0.6)                   (0.4)           (1.3)                  (0.8)

 % Subsidized                                  -23.9                    -9.5           -24.3                   -9.6
 Lunch                                         (0.9)                   (0.6)           (1.3)                  (0.7)
Table 5. Average Change in Salary and in District and Campus Student Characteristics for Black and Hispanic Teachers with 0-9 Years
of Experience who Change Campuses


                                                   Between district moves                      Within district moves
                                           black teachers         Hispanic teachers   black teachers           Hispanic teachers




 Average Test                                  -0.01                    0.02              0.01                      0.03
 Scoreb                                       (0.03)                   (0.01)            (0.02)                    (0.01)

 % Hispanic                                     -5.0                    -5.5               -6.0                     -2.8
                                               (1.9)                   (0.9)              (1.4)                     (0.5)

 % Black                                       5.8                      0.2                3.8                       -0.7
                                              (2.5)                    (0.5)              (1.6)                     (0.4)

 % Subsidized                                  -1.3                     -4.9               -4.0                      -5.3
 Lunch                                        (1.9)                    (0.8)              (1.1)                     (0.6)

No. teachers moving                            254                     1,207              464                      1,360
Table 6. School Average Transition Rates by Distribution of Residual Teacher Salary and
Student Demographic Characteristics (data weighted by number of teachers in school)

                                      Probability
                                                                  Probability                   Probability
                                        teachers
                                                                   teachers                      teachers
        quartile of                  move to new
                                                                  move to new                   exit public
        distribution                     school
                                                                    district                      schools
                                    (within district)
Residual Salary
     lowest                                                           3.3%                        16.7%
     2nd                                                              3.2%                        14.7%
     3rd                                                              2.8%                        14.2%
     highest                                                          2.5%                        13.7%
Average test score
     lowest                              4.4%                         3.4%                        17.4%
     2nd                                 3.8%                         3.6%                        15.0%
     3rd                                 3.2%                         3.0%                        14.1%
     highest                             3.3%                         2.5%                        12.7%
% elig for free lunch
     lowest                              3.8%                         2.3%                        12.8%
     2nd                                 3.0%                         3.3%                        14.7%
     3rd                                 3.4%                         3.7%                        15.0%
     highest                             4.7%                         3.0%                        16.6%
% Black
     lowest                              3.4%                         3.6%                        16.2%
     2nd                                 3.7%                         2.7%                        13.4%
     3rd                                 3.6%                         2.8%                        13.6%
     highest                             4.1%                         3.3%                        15.8%
% Hispanic
     lowest                              3.3%                         3.1%                        14.1%
     2nd                                 3.8%                         3.1%                        14.3%
     3rd                                 3.5%                         3.2%                        14.7%
     highest                             4.3%                         3.1%                        16.5%


Note: The quartile divisions are calculated using the number of teachers as weights for the size of each school.
Differences in average class sizes imply that these weights do not exactly capture enrollment differences, but data
on enrollment were not available for all schools in all years.
Table 7. Estimated Effects of Starting Teacher Salary and Student Demographic
Characteristics on the Probability that Teachers Leave School Districts, by
Experience
(linear probability models with and without district fixed effects, absolute value of
huber-white adjusted t statistics in parentheses)


                                              Experience

                     0-2 yrs     3-5 yrs       6-10 yrs     11-30 yrs    >30 years

1. No District Fixed Effects

log first year        -0.26        -0.14         -0.06        -0.09         0.10
salary               (6.40)       (2.94)        (1.50)       (2.74)        (0.63)

Campus Average Student Characteristics

     Test Score      -0.035       -0.042       -0.045        -0.033        -0.053
                     (3.85)       (4.63)       (5.13)        (5.16)        (1.91)

     % elig. for      0.00         -0.04         0.00         0.03          -0.01
     subs lunch      (0.18)       (1.49)        (0.16)       (1.15)        (0.13)

      % Black         0.13         0.09          0.03         0.02          -0.09
                     (5.49)       (3.59)        (1.23)       (0.86)        (1.41)

     % Hispanic       0.04         0.05          0.00         -0.01         -0.07
                     (1.32)       (1.73)        (0.06)       (0.43)        (1.06)
Interactions
      Black *         -0.26        -0.18         -0.11        -0.08         0.08
      % Black        (7.31)       (4.84)        (3.88)       (5.14)        (1.34)

      Black *         -0.14        -0.04         -0.06        -0.06         0.10
     % Hispanic      (3.49)       (1.01)        (2.31)       (4.09)        (1.62)

     Hispanic *       -0.15        -0.04         -0.03        -0.07         0.38
      % Black        (3.33)       (0.81)        (0.61)       (2.11)        (1.68)

     Hispanic *       -0.12        -0.08         -0.07        -0.06         0.07
     % Hispanic      (4.56)       (2.93)        (2.52)       (3.65)        (0.76)
Table 7 (continued)


                                               Experience
                      0-2 yrs   3-5 yrs   6-10 yrs    11-30 yrs   >30 years

2. District Fixed Effects

log base year          -0.09     -0.14      -0.20       -0.15       0.22
salary                (1.14)    (1.20)     (1.97)      (1.60)      (0.65)

Campus Average Student Characteristics

     Test Score       -0.029    -0.034    -0.040       -0.029      -0.061
                      (2.99)    (3.60)    (4.45)       (4.09)      (2.23)

     % elig. for       -0.06     -0.08      -0.06       -0.01       -0.07
     subs lunch       (2.72)    (3.34)     (2.76)      (0.51)      (0.97)

      % Black          0.20      0.16       0.11        0.06        -0.09
                      (7.78)    (5.94)     (5.85)      (5.26)      (1.11)

    % Hispanic         0.10      0.12       0.09        0.04        -0.03
                      (3.60)    (3.93)     (4.17)      (2.47)      (0.40)
Interactions
      Black *          -0.27     -0.19      -0.11       -0.07       0.12
      % Black         (7.44)    (4.88)     (4.10)      (4.93)      (1.65)

     Black *           -0.15     -0.04      -0.06       -0.06       0.08
    % Hispanic        (3.54)    (0.97)     (2.46)      (4.82)      (1.15)

     Hispanic *        -0.16     -0.07      -0.08       -0.07       0.27
      % Black         (3.78)    (1.49)     (1.57)      (2.47)      (1.08)

    Hispanic *         -0.12     -0.08      -0.07       -0.06       -0.01
    % Hispanic        (5.04)    (2.90)     (2.67)      (4.45)      (0.12)

Observations          57,833    42,492    55,931      125,936      5,457
Table 8. Multinomial Logit Estimated Effects of Teacher Salary and Student Demographic
Characteristics on the Probabilities that Teachers Switch School Districts or Exit Teaching
(absolute value of t statistics in parentheses; remaining in the same district is the numeraire)


                                             Experience
                    0-2 yrs      3-5 yrs      6-10 yrs     11-30 yrs     >30 years
S w i t c h
Districts

log base year        -2.05         -2.10        -1.88         -1.59         -2.87
salary              (6.00)        (4.54)       (3.90)        (3.53)        (0.65)

Campus Average Student Characteristics

    Test Score       -0.05         -0.40        -0.11         -0.15         -1.74
                    (0.66)        (3.80)       (0.93)        (1.33)        (2.10)

    % elig. for      0.49          -0.06        0.27          0.41          0.50
    subs lunch      (3.06)        (0.31)       (1.17)        (1.87)        (0.30)

      % Black        1.02          0.84         0.83          0.88          -1.26
                    (6.35)        (3.69)       (3.33)        (3.57)        (0.61)

    % Hispanic       0.10          0.49         0.26          0.19          -0.99
                    (0.60)        (2.12)       (1.02)        (0.78)        (0.48)
Interactions
     Black *         -2.79         -1.67         -2           -2.21         4.08
     % Black        (6.98)        (2.91)       (3.83)        (5.24)        (0.58)

     Black *         -1.31         -0.11        -0.49         -1.62         2.82
    % Hispanic      (2.93)        (0.20)       (0.97)        (3.65)        (0.35)

    Hispanic *       -1.37          -1          -0.87         -0.02         -1.25
     % Black        (3.25)        (1.70)       (1.22)        (0.03)        (0.22)

    Hispanic *       -1.15         -1.06        -0.70         -0.81         -1.77
    % Hispanic      (5.44)        (4.01)       (2.12)        (2.70)        (0.76)
Table 8 (continued)

                                         Experience
                  0-2 yrs   3-5 yrs       6-10 yrs    11-30 yrs   >30 years
Exit Teaching

log base year      -1.22      -0.55         -0.06       -0.67       0.62
salary            (5.50)     (2.07)        (0.24)      (3.60)      (0.91)

Campus Average Student Characteristics

    Test Score     -0.25      -0.24         -0.40       -0.36       -0.28
                  (5.39)     (4.08)        (7.20)      (8.77)      (2.14)

    % elig. for    -0.18      -0.27         -0.15       0.23        -0.06
    subs lunch    (1.93)     (2.36)        (1.34)      (2.83)      (0.22)

     % Black       0.59       0.45          0.13        0.13        -0.51
                  (5.88)     (3.49)        (1.04)      (1.44)      (1.46)

   % Hispanic      0.24       0.27          0.01        -0.08       -0.35
                  (2.34)     (2.11)        (0.11)      (0.83)      (1.12)
Interactions
     Black *       -1.20      -1.10         -0.64       -0.58       0.49
     % Black      (5.95)     (4.21)        (2.77)      (4.29)      (1.31)

    Black *        -0.74      -0.29         -0.43       -0.48       0.56
   % Hispanic     (3.18)     (1.02)        (1.73)      (3.42)      (1.61)

    Hispanic *     -0.53      0.06          -0.08       -0.71       2.27
     % Black      (1.92)     (0.16)        (0.23)      (2.46)      (1.56)

   Hispanic *      -0.43      -0.24         -0.46       -0.61       0.52
   % Hispanic     (2.87)     (1.34)        (2.65)      (4.83)      (0.84)
Appendix Table A1. Descriptive Statistics — Means and Standard Deviations
                                                     4th Grade      5th Grade
Achievement Gains
    Math                                                -0.02          0.01
                                                       (0.65)         (0.59)
    Reading                                             -0.03          0.01
                                                       (0.67)         (0.63)
Log District Salary
    0 yrs experience                                    10.00         10.00
                                                       (0.11)         (0.10)
Teacher Experience Distribution
    % 0 years                                            6.2            5.7
    %1 year                                              5.8            5.8
    % 2 years                                            5.1            5.6
    % 3-4 years                                         11.7           10.8
    % 5-9 years                                         21.4           19.7
    % 10-19 years                                       30.9           31.0
    % 21-30 years                                       16.4           18.6
    % > 30 years                                         2.5            2.8
Teacher Transition Distribution from Prior Year
    % same campus & grade                               67.6           66.8
    % same campus, different grade                      12.8           11.6
    % different campus, same district                    4.2           5.6
    % different district                                 3.6           3.3
    % not in Texas public schools                       11.7           12.7
Student Demographic Characteristics
    % Black                                             14.1           14.0
                                                       (20.4)         (20.4)
    % Hispanic                                          31.0           31.0
                                                       (30.0)         (30.2)
    % Eligible for subsidized lunch                     46.8           46.7
                                                       (27.1)         (27.0)
