                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE EMPIRICS OF MONETARY POLICY RULES IN OPEN ECONOMIES


                                           Richard H. Clarida


                                          Working Paper 8603
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8603


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2001




This paper was prepared as a Keynote Address for the ESRC Conference on the Future of Macroeconomics
held at the Bank of England Conference Center on April 14, 2000. The views expressed herein are those of
the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Richard H. Clarida. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Empirics of Monetary Policy Rules in Open Economies
Richard H. Clarida
NBER Working Paper No. 8603
November 2001
JEL No. F31



                                             ABSTRACT


        This paper was prepared as a Keynote Address for the ESRC Conference on the Future of
Macroeconomics held at the Bank of England Conference Center on April 14, 2000. It uses the
empirical framework for formulating and estimating forward looking monetary policy rules developed
in Clarida ,Gali, Gertler (1998; 1999; 2000;2001) and Clarida (2000) to assess what we know , don’t
know, and can’t tell about monetary policy making in an open economy with an (implicit) inflation target.
Among the issues discussed are: the relationship between structural VAR models of monetary policy and
exchange rates and estimates of forward looking Taylor rules; the relationship between inflation targeting
and leaning against the (exchange rate) wind; why central bankers are averse to even wide - band target
zones; quantifying that stresses and costs of a one size fits all monetary policy for the members of a
monetary union or currency bloc.




Richard Clarida
NBER and Columbia University
Room 1014
420 W. 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
rhc2@columbia.edu
           THE EMPIRICS OF MONETARY POLICY RULES IN OPEN
                            ECONOMIES

                                 Richard H. Clarida

                                Columbia University
                      The National Bureau of Economic Research

1. Introduction and Motivation

       The line of research that Mark Gertler and Jordi Gali and I have been

working on for the past several years was initially motivated by a question and,

later, a realization. The question was how to use the tool of choice in empirical

macroeconomics, the structural VAR, to understand why some central banks (such

as the Fed and the Bundesbank) were more successful than others during the

1980s and 1990s in maintaining low and stable inflation.

           A structural VAR can be used to trace through the dynamic effects of

shocks to monetary policy on such variables as inflation, output, and the exchange

rate and to estimate the importance monetary policy shocks in explaining particular

episodes in macroeconomic history. This strategy has been employed with much

success by Sims (1980), Bernanke and Blinder (1992), and Christiano,

Eichenbaum Evans (1994) to study the US economy, and to study the effects of

monetary policy on exchange rates by Eichenbaum and Evans (1994). When

Clarida and Gertler (1997) applied this approach to Germany, they found similar

results.     A positive, structural shock to the policy instrument, the day-to-day




                                          2
interest rate, resulted in a decline in production and sales, an appreciation of the

DM, and eventually a slowdown in inflation.

       Empirical results of this sort, while useful and interesting in themselves, are

not particularly informative with respect to actually explaining the success of

central banks at reducing and maintaining low and stable inflation.       To answer

such a question, we realized that it is necessary to take a stand on the systematic

component of monetary policy, and not just identify the structural shocks to

monetary policy (which is all that the structural VAR approach requires). The

structural VAR restrictions provided estimates of             the contemporaneous

relationship between surprises in the policy instrument and surprises in other

macro variables such as inflation, production, sales, commodity prices, the US

interest rates, and the exchange rate, thus yielding a central bank reaction

function in surprises.   The question remained: how to tease out of the VAR, or

more precisely to tease out of the VAR equation for the short term interest rate, a

parsimonious and empirically refutable interpretation of the systematic response

of the policy instrument to all lagged as well as current information about the

macro variables included in the VAR.

       One possibility is to calculate from the VAR dynamic impulse responses as

well as a real time historical decomposition of the policy instrument so as to

characterize the average dynamic response of monetary policy to various macro

shocks as well as to estimate the relative importance of these shocks in explaining



                                          3
the historical behavior of short term interest rates, the presumed instrument of

policy.      Calculations such as these yield results that are straightforward to

interpret, at least as far as they go. For example, the dynamics of German short

term interest rates - the presumed policy instrument of the Bundesbank - appeared

during the 1980s and 1990s to be driven by swings in the DM/$ exchange rate,

US interest rates, commodity prices, and the business cycle in German output

(Clarida-Gertler (1997)). A weak (strong) DM/$ exchange rate, high (low) US

interest rates, or surges (declines) in commodity prices tended to be associated

with tight (easy) German monetary policy while cyclical slumps (booms)            in

German output tended to be associated with easy (tight) monetary policy.

          Although these findings such as these are     suggestive of a    policy of

“leaning against the wind”, they don’t provide the parsimonious characterization

of VAR interest rate equation one would need to describe the systematic part of

policy. Moreover, the impulse responses and historical decompositions that could

be derived from the VAR cannot be used to             sort through some interesting

hypotheses about central bank behavior that one might wish to examine. For

example, it appears from VAR evidence that central banks raise interest rates when

output is booming, and cut rates when output is slumping. Is this because the

central bank seeks only to stabilize inflation but reacts to the output gap because

it is a forecaster of future inflation?




                                          4
       To provide a parsimonious interpretation of         monetary policy that is

consistent with the VAR evidence for Germany and other countries, we were lead

to hypothesize that central banks rely on a forward looking Taylor rule

              r*t = rr + π* + βE[πt+n - π* | Ωt] + γE[xt|Ωt] + νt

as a guide for setting short term interest rates (McNees (1986) hypothesized a

forward looking Fed reaction function and used data on internal Fed forecasts to

evaluate this model). Here r*t is the reference (or target) level for the policy

instrument, π* is the (assumed constant) inflation target, xt is the output gap, νt is

a structural shock to monetary policy, and         rr   is the (assumed     constant)

equilibrium real interest rate. We thought ex ante (before we ran any regressions)

that this was a potentially attractive hypothesis. It to us seemed able to resolve the

dissatisfaction that we, and we suspect many others, had with a large literature

from the 1960s and 1970s that wrote down and estimated a wide variety of central

bank reactions functions with little if any attempt to justify the exclusion of

variables or to provide a robust structural interpretation for the variables that were

included.

2. Forward Looking Taylor Rules and Structural VARS

       To illustrate some key points, it will be useful to consider a simple example.

Let zt = [yt, πt , rt , et ] and suppose, as in Eichenbaum and Evans (1994), that the

short term interest rate is the policy instrument, and that the exchange rate, et , is




                                          5
ordered last. The structural VAR (with A lower triangular) representation is

written

                                     Azt = Bzt-1 + εt

and the reduced form VAR

                                   zt = A-1Bzt-1 + ut

The the interest rate equation in the structural VAR is given by

          rt = -A31xt - A32π t + B31 xt-1+ B32π t-1 + B33 rt-1 + B34 et-1 + ε r , t

Now, the simplest FLRT model can be written as

                          rt = βE[πt+n | Ωt] + γE[xt|Ωt] + νt

Project π t , n on Ωt, where Ωt = [xt , πt , zt-1].

           Eπ t , n | Ωt = α1xt + α2π t + θ1xt-1 + θ2π t-1 + θ3rt-1 + θ4 et-1

Substituting, we can write rt as

rt = β [α1xt + α2π t + θ1xt-1 + θ2π t-1 + θ3rt-1 + θ4 et-1] + γxt + νt + ωt

where ωt = βE[πt+n | Ωt] - βE[πt+n | Ωt].

       Thus we can think of the FLTR hypothesis as placing cross-equation

restrictions on a bivariate system comprised of (a) a projection of realized future

inflation on    Ωt (b) our forward looking Taylor rule which embodies these

projection coefficients as well as the parameters β and γ. We note that since Ωt ⊆

Ωt , both νt and ωt are orthogonal to Ωt (Mishkin (1982) proposed this idea to test

the hypothesis that only unanticipated money influences output). It follows that

the FLTR places overidentifying restrictions on the data. The bivariate system


                                             6
comprised of projecting inflation and the interest rate on Ωt                has twelve

orthogonality conditions (since there are six instruments and two equations) but

only eight parameters (the six coefficients in the inflation projection and the two

FLTR parameters β and γ) so there are four overidentifying restrictions. Note that

in the special case in which the VAR information set corresponds to the central

bank’s, Ωt = Ωt and we can interpret ε          r , t   = νt   as the structural shock to

monetary policy. However in general the composite error term will also contain

the difference between expected inflation conditional on the full information set

and expected inflation conditional on the VAR information set. The point is well

known but is worth repeating: in general, for the structural VAR disturbance ε         r,t


to represent a shock to monetary policy icy, we need not only to get “the order

right” but also to get “information set right”. This point is often made in the

context of trying to resolve the ‘price puzzle’ evident in many VAR models by

expanding the number of variables included so as to pick up shifts in expected

inflation that drive both interest rates and actual inflation higher at the same time.

       Comparing coefficients, the FLTR places the following restrictions on an

Eichenbaum - Evans type SVAR interest rate equation:

                                     -A31 = βα1 + γ

                                     -A32 = βα2

                                      B31 = βθ1

                                      B32 = βθ2


                                           7
                                      B33 = βθ3

                                      B34 = βθ4

From these equations, we see the relationship between the exact identification the

structural VAR shock ε    r, t   to monetary policy that is achieved by assuming a

triangular A matrix, and the overidentification of the monetary policy reaction

function parameters β and γ - parameters that describe the systematic as opposed

to the surprising part of policy - that is achieved by hypothesizing and testing that

the central bank pursues a forward looking Taylor rule. Under the assumption that

A is lower triangular (and that Ω t captures the central bank’s information set) , the

A and B matrices are uniquely recovered from the reduced form VAR as is the

vector ε t of structural disturbances. Under the hypothesis that the central bank

pursues a forward looking Taylor rule, the preceding system represents six

equations in two unknowns β and γ, since the α and θ are not free but are restricted

by hypothesis that the central bank sets policy based upon an inflation (and

perhaps also) output gap forecast. This is the key empirical implication of inflation

forecast targeting (Clarida-Gali-Gertler (2000)).

       The SVAR literature can tell us about the effects of monetary policy shocks

on the rest of the economy and on the exchange rate, but it takes no stand on

interpreting the systematic part of monetary policy. Moreover, unlike much of the

SVAR literature, the FLTR hypothesis places testable restrictions on the data

(Clarida-Gali-Gertler (2000)). One simply uses GMM to estimate the FLTR,


                                           8
instrumenting realized inflation and output with lagged - and perhaps a subset of

current - macro variables.

       We note a basic but essential point about our approach: it does not require

that we know the central bank’s information set. We can still recover estimates of

the structural parameters β and γ without having to assume that Ωt = Ωt. By the

law of iterated expectations, (Eπ    t,n   | Ω t - Eπ   t,n   | Ωt) will be orthogonal to Ωt.

Our theory has empirical content because it assumes, in common with the SVAR

literature, that νt is orthogonal to Ωt.

       We suspect that one reason the CGG approach has been popular is it

addresses, in a parsimonious, testable fashion, the “kitchen sink” problem that

many people have with VAR models (and, it should be noted, with the early

literature on central bank reaction functions pioneered by Dewald and Johnson

(1963)). VAR models (and the ‘first generation’ reaction function specifications)

find that a collection of n variables lagged q times can account for the dynamic

behavior of the short term interest rate. But why? Since Sims’ classic paper in the

early 1980s, economists have been aware of the danger of imposing exclusion

restrictions on lagged endogenous variables precisely because they are likely to

enter the optimal decision rules of rational agents who base their actions in part on

forecasts of future events. The FLTR explains the VAR interest rate equation as

the outcome of monetary policy decision rule which is based on a forecast of

target variables that enter the central bank’s objective function (Clarida-Gali-


                                              9
Gertler (1999; 2001). Or as we have described in other presentations, according

to the FLTR, ‘central banks look at everything but only to the extent that

‘everything’ is useful in forecasting inflation and possibly output’.

3. Are Central Banks Exchange Rate Targeters?

       Of course, one of things that central banks look at is the exchange rate. For

example, the Bank of England’s Inflation Report specifically reviews how the

current level of the pound and the forecasted path for the pound will impact on the

inflation forecast. Also, as Clarida and Gertler point out, in the 1970s, 1980s, and

1990s, the Bundesbank’s Monthly Reports            made frequent mention of why

fluctuations in the DM exchange rate would be factored into monetary policy,

with a weak DM indicating possible inflationary pressures and a strong DM

indicating a contraction in aggregate demand. Clarida and Gertler reported VAR

evidence the day-to-day money rate, the instrument of Bundesbank monetary

policy, did indeed respond to the DM in the way the Bundesbank described. G3

central banks, the Bank of England, and the Bank of Canada typically do not admit

to having a target for the exchange rate, but from the VAR evidence alone, it is

impossible to tell.

       The CGG approach can be used to test the hypothesis that the exchange rate

influences the policy instrument because it is an indicator of future inflation and

output trends against the alternative that the exchange rate influences the policy




                                          10
instrument because it is a target of monetary policy. Recall our equation for the

simple FLTR

     rt = β [α1xt + α2π t + θ1xt-1 + θ2π t-1 + θ3rt-1 + θ4 et-1] + γxt + νt + ωt

where the α’s and θ’s are the coefficients from the projection of realized inflation

on the macro instruments. This equation embodies the hypothesis that the

exchange rate influences the policy instrument only because it is an indicator of

future inflation. We have

                                  ∂ rt /∂ et-1 = βθ4

The response of the interest rate to the exchange rate is the product of the

response of the interest rate to expected inflation and the response of the inflation

forecast to an exchange rate depreciation. Consider the alternative hypothesis that

the exchange rate, along with inflation and the output gap, is a target of monetary

policy that directly enters the monetary policy rule

                   rt = βE[πt+n | Ωt] + γE[xt|Ωt] + ξ et-1 + νt

This generalization to FLTR implies, in our example, that

    rt = β [α1xt + α2π t + θ1xt-1+θ2π t-1+θ3rt-1 + θ4 et-1] +γxt+ ξ et-1 + νt + ωt

There are now FLTR parameters to estimate - β, γ, and ξ - with six instruments so

that there are three overidentifying restrictions. For this more general model

(which encompasses the benchmark specification) we have

                               ∂ rt /∂ et-1 = ξ + βθ4




                                          11
The response of the interest rate to the exchange rate now includes the direct

‘leaning against the wind’ channel through which the central bank adjusts the

interest rate so that the (log) exchange rate does not wander too far away from the

target level (here normalized to 0). This hypothesis can be tested by computing the

t-ratio for the estimated ξ coefficient.

       Clarida-Gali-Gertler (1998) report in Tables 1,2, and 3 that a forward

looking Taylor rule, suitably modified to capture the interest rate smoothing

behavior that central banks are observed to follow (Goodfriend (1991)) does a

good job of accounting for the setting of short term nominal interest rates by the

Bundesbank, the Bank of Japan, and the Federal Reserve during the 1980s and

1990s. The parameter estimates of the estimated reaction function for each G3

central bank are quite sensible, and in all cases indicate that these central banks

have tended to raise nominal interest rates aggressively in response to information

indicating a rise in expected inflation. The estimated reaction functions also imply

that these central banks seek to lower the real and nominal interest rates when

output is below a simple measure capacity even when expected inflation is on

target. That is, for the G3 central banks, the output gap appears to be a target of

monetary policy and not just an indicator of future inflation trends.

       Although CGG (1998) could not reject the overidentifying restrictions

implied by the hypothesis that the G3 central banks have followed forward looking

Taylor rules, the paper also investigates whether or not the Bundesbank and the



                                           12
Bank of Japan have allowed international considerations to influence the setting of

short term interest rates. The papers finds that deviations from purchasing power

parity of the nominal exchange rate with the dollar had statistically significant but

economically small effects of the expected sign on the setting of short term interest

rates by the Bank of Japan and the Bundesbank.

4. If Not Why Not?

       Thus, there is evidence that the Bundesbank and the Bank of Japan have

historically placed at least some weight on stabilizing the exchange relative to a

PPP path that incorporates inflation differentials (McKinnon (1995) has made this

observation in his criticism of Japan’s monetary policy during the 1990s). Yet

these central banks, the Fed, the ECB, and since 1992, the Bank of England have

been quick to reject calls that they go further and announce (and defend) formal

target zones for their currencies, even zones with very wide (plus or minus 10%)

bands. The theory of target zones is clear: if a zone is credible, there can be,

especially with wide bands, a great deal of latitude for countries to pursue

monetary policies tailored to domestic macroeconomic conditions. Moreover, this

latitude does not, under a credible commitment to defend the zonal boundaries,

come at the expense of stabilizing intraband exchange rate volatility relative to the

equilibrium that would prevail in the absence of the zone.

       One explanation for the reluctance of the G3 countries to embrace exchange

rate targeting more formally is that, even if such commitments could be made fully



                                         13
credible, the reduction intraband exchange rate volatility that could be achieved

would be modest given the width of the band that policymakers would accept.

Thus, even if a band were credible, a very wide band would do little to stabilize

expectations and to diminish intraband exchange rate volatility. The evidence, as

reviewed in Clarida (2000), indicates that the reduction in volatility that has been

observed in actual successful target zone arrangements (i.e. the Dutch and French

success in keeping their currencies within narrow bands of parity with the DM

during the last dozen years of the EMS) derives, in a significant way, from the

dedication of monetary policy to the task of keeping, via nonsterlized intraband

interventions, the exchange rate near the central parity - at the expense of other

macroeconomic objectives - and not, primarily from stabilizing expectations.

       Clarida (2000) discusses another possible explanation for reluctance of the

G3 countries to embrace exchange rate targeting more formally. Suppose an

explicit, wide band target zone when announced is not credible and that the

markets expect ‘business as usual’.       The markets expect the same monetary

policies that prevailed before the announcement to continue after the

announcement of the zone. Suppose that this expectation is, at least initially,

rational so that these policies do continue until the exchange rate first reaches a

zonal boundary (after all, the point of adopting a wide band is to provide central

banks with the leeway to pursue policies that incorporate objectives in addition to

exchange rate stability). It is only at this date, and not before, that the markets can



                                          14
learn anything about the credibility of the target zone commitment. Whether or not

they do learn anything on this date is another matter. The monetary policy that is

called for   to meet domestic objectives such as maintaining low but positive

inflation and keeping output at potential may also be consistent with reversing a

apparent ‘misalignments’ of the exchange rate relative to the fundamentals.

       If this is the case, then as the exchange rate approaches the zonal boundary,

the markets will learn nothing about the commitment to the target zone, and

expectations will not be stabilized. Now at some point, the zonal boundaries will

be approached and defending them will require that monetary policy be devoted to

this purpose to the exclusion of domestic objectives. It is at this date, and only at

this date, that the markets will learn something about the target zone commitment.

But even after this initial observation , it may take not just one, but several, such

observations (separated perhaps by       several years)    before the zone has full

credibility, and before this credibility delivers the intraband exchange rate stability

predicted by the theory. Thus, building up credibility for a wide band target zone

may take longer - much longer - than might be expected precisely because of the

leeway for monetary policy afforded by the choice of the wide band.

       To appreciate why it might be difficult for the markets to disentangle

‘status quo’ monetary policy from a commitment to a wide band target zone,

consider again the interest rate equation from an Eichenbaum-Evans style VAR

which would be estimated from the behavior of a central bank following a FLTR



                                          15
     rt = β [α1xt + α2π t + θ1xt-1 + θ2π t-1 + θ3rt-1 + θ4 et-1] + γxt + νt + ωt

Now what sort of relationship between the exchange rate and the short term

interest rate would be expected to result from such a status quo monetary policy?

This depends on the sign of θ4. Under plausible circumstances, we expect θ4 to

be positive, and there is support for this in the data. This means that when a

currency depreciates (relative to, say, PPP), expected inflation tends to rise. The

important implication of all this is that, even though if a central bank is not

targeting the exchange rate, the bank’s desire to stabilize the inflation forecast

will lead it to raise nominal and real interest rates when the currency is weakening,

and to lower nominal and real interest rates when the currency is strengthening .

This reaction, in turn, will tend to appreciate the exchange rate when it is weak and

to weaken the exchange rate when it is strong (relative to the PPP benchmark).

Thus, in practice, a monetary policy aimed at achieving only domestic objectives

may also serve to stabilize the exchange rate (see Wadhwani (1999) for an

elaboration of this point as it applies to the inflation targeting strategy of the Bank

of England), and thus be difficult to distinguish from a policy of maintaining the

exchange rate within a band.




                                          16
5. Does One Size Fit All?

       The FLTR hypothesis places testable restrictions on the data (and implicitly

on VAR models of monetary policy) and implies that a small number of

parameters are sufficient to describe the positive economics of monetary policy.

Clarida-Gali-Gertler (1998) go further and suggest that the parameters from an

estimated FLTR can also be used quantify and interpret the stresses and strains

that can and do emerge in fixed exchange rate systems (such as the EMS), in

monetary unions (such as EMU), and under currency boards (as are currently in

place in Hong Kong and Argentina). Although these systems differ in many ways,

they share some essential features: a common monetary policy for a collection of

countries that agree on     a common inflation target but that are subject to

idiosyncratic shocks that can push their business cycles and inflation rates out of

phase. Clearly countries perceive and derive substantial benefits from these

arrangements, but such commitments can also entail costs. Among these costs are

(1) the inability to lower interest rates (real and nominal) when the home country is

recession and to be forced to rely entirely on a gradual gain in competitiveness to

restore internal balance; and (2) the inability to raise interest rates (real and

nominal) when home country inflation surges above the common inflation target

and to be forced to rely entirely on a loss of competitiveness to restore internal

balance.




                                         17
      CGG propose that these costs can be quantified in the following way.

Compute for each country in the monetary arrangement a (counterfactual) Taylor

rule path for the domestic short term interest rate based upon that country’s

expected inflation and output gap and the estimated (or assumed) Taylor rule

weights for the central bank that is setting monetary policy for the group. This

counterfactual path for the nominal interest rate does not necessarily represent an

alternative for monetary policy that is actually available to the country, given its

objectives for inflation, output, and the exchange rate. Rather, the counterfactual

path can be compared to the realized path of interest rates in each country to

quantity the costs that are incurred by the commitment to a monetary regime that

ties the hands of domestic monetary policy.

      In Clarida-Gali-Gertler (1998), this approach was used to study the collapse

of the EMS in 1992 - 1993. For France and Italy, CGG found a positive gap

between French and Italian interest rates and their counterfactual Taylor rule

counterparts that widened steadily and substantially throughout 1991-1992,

resulting in Italian interest rates that were 1000 basis points higher than their

counterfactual Taylor rule counterpart in September 1992 (when Italy withdrew

from the ERM) and French interest rates that were 800 basis points higher than

their Taylor rule counterpart on the eve of the August 1993 ‘re-design’ of the

ERM (see Buiter-Corsetti-Pessenti (1996) for all the details). For Britain, when it

entered the ERM in October 1990, interest rates were in line with the Taylor rule



                                         18
“counterfactual”. As was the case for France and Italy, a positive gap between the

British interest rate and the counterfactual Taylor rule counterpart began to emerge

and widened steadily and substantially throughout 1991-1992, resulting in British

interest rates that were nearly 400 basis points higher than their counterfactual

Taylor rule counterpart in September 1992 (when Britain chose to drop out of the

ERM and adopt inflation targeting). Thus, during the last years of the ERM, the

costs of the ‘one size fits all’ monetary policy of the Bundesbank for the other

countries in the system was estimated to be substantial, ranging from 400 basis

points in Britain to 1000 basis points in Italy.          CGG refer to this difference

between actual interest rate in country j and the counterfactual FLTR interest rate

as a stress indicator.

                 stress j , t = r j , t - βE[π j ,t+n | Ωt] - γE[x j, t|Ωt]

       The motivation for defining stress in this way derives from the rationale that

policymakers themselves often use, after the fact, to explain their unwillingness to

hang on to an exchange rate arrangement that ties the hands of monetary policy

during an economic downturn. Here is a quote from the Bank of England in

November 1992

        Against a backdrop of sluggish activity and stable or falling
        inflation, a number of countries in Europe have experienced a
        growing conflict between the monetary policy required to
        maintain the exchange rate, and the policy that would be
        appropriate given domestic cyclical conditions. In a number of
        cases, nominal interest rates might have been lower but for the
        ERM. This was particularly the case for those countries which
        were . . in a different cyclical position.

                                            19
The CGG stress indicator is a simple to compute - and easy to understand - way to

gauge how much different interest rates might be but for been but for a binding a

commitment to an exchange rate arrangement, monetary union, or currency board.

         Stress can be decomposed in an interesting way. It is the sum of three

terms: ( i ) stress in the policy of the central bank setting interest rates for the

group (e.g., the Bundesbank in the case of the EMS, the ECB in the case of EMU,

and the US in the case of Hong Kong and Argentina); (ii) an index (using Taylor

Rule weights) of the divergence between inflation and output across countries (i.e.

between the EMU country under study and EMU wide averages); (iii) and the

interest differential between the country under study and the interest rate set by the

central bank running monetary policy for the group ( a measure of the credibility of

the commitment to the regime). In symbols we have

     stress j , c , t ≡ stress c , t+ [β(π c , t - π j , t) + γ(x c , t - x j , t)] + R j   ,t   - Rc,t

According to this decomposition, the cost of forgoing an independent monetary

policy increases with the divergence between home and average inflation rates and

output gaps, the interest differential, and the stance of monetary policy (relative to

the Taylor rule benchmark) by the central bank running monetary policy for the

group.




                                                    20
Conclusion

        This paper has used the empirical framework developed in Clarida ,Gali,

Gertler (1998; 1999; 2000) and Clarida (2000) to assess what we know , don’t

know, and can’t tell about monetary policy making in an open economy with an

(implicit) inflation target. We have shown how our approach can be used to

interpret structural VAR models of monetary policy and exchange rates and have

provided a novel explanation for why central bankers who currently set policy

based on inflation forecast might be averse to even wide - band target zones.

Finally, we suggest a way to quantify and decompose the stresses and costs of a

one size fits all monetary policy for the members of a monetary union or currency

bloc.




                                       21
References

Bernanke, B. and A. Blinder, “ The Federal Funds Rate and the Channels of
Monetary Transmission,” American Economic Review, September 1992, 901-921.

Buiter, W., G. Corsetti, and P. Pesenti, “Interpreting the ERM Crisis,” CEPR
Discussion Paper No. 1466, April 1997.

Christiano, L. , M. Eichenbaum, and C. Evans, “Identification and the Effects of
Monetary Policy Shocks,” FRB Chicago Working Paper 94-7, May 1994.

Clarida, R., “G3 Exchange Rate Relationships: A Recap of the Record and a
Review of Proposals for Change,” Princeton Essays in International Finance,
September 2000.

Clarida, R. and M. Gertler, “How the Bundesbank Conducts Monetary Policy,” in
C. Romer and D. Romer, eds., Reducing Inflation, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1997.

Clarida, R., J. Gali and M. Gertler, “Monetary Policy Rules in Practice: Some
International Evidence,” European Economic Review, June 1998.

Clarida, R., J. Gali and M. Gertler, “The Science of Monetary Policy: A New
Keynesian Perspective ,” Journal of Economic Literature, December 1999.

Clarida, R., J. Gali and M. Gertler, “Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic
Stability: Theory and Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, January 2000.

Clarida, R., J. Gali and M. Gertler, “Optimal Monetary Policy in Closed vs Open
Economies: An Integrated Approach,” American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings, May 2001.

Dewald, W. and H. Johnson, “An Objective Analysis of the Objectives of
Monetary Policy,” in Banking and Monetary Studies, D, Carson, ed., Richard D.
Irwin, 1963.

Eichenbaum, M. and C. Evans, "Some Empirical Evidence on the Effects of
Monetary Policy Shocks on Exchange Rates," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, (110) 1995.

Goodfriend, M. “Interest Rates and the Conduct of Monetary Policy,” Carnegie-
Rochester Conference Series on Monetary Policy (34), 1991.


                                       22
Mishkin, F., “Does Anticipated Monetary Policy Matter? An Econometric
Evaluation,” Journal of Political Economy, February 1982.

McKinnon, R., The Rules of the Game, MIT Press, 1995.

McNees, S., “Modeling the Fed: A Forward Looking Monetary Policy Reaction
Function” New England Economic Review, 1986.

Sims, C., “Macroeconomics and Reality,” Econometrica, 48, 1980, 1 - 48.

Wadhwani, S., “Currency Puzzles,” mimeo, Bank of England, September 1999.




                                       23
24
