                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      AGING AND HOUSING EQUITY: ANOTHER LOOK


                                             Steven F. Venti
                                             David A. Wise


                                          Working Paper 8608
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8608


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2001




Prepared for the conference on the Economics of Aging, May 17-20, 2001. We thank the National Institute
on Aging and the Hoover Institution for Financial Support. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Steven F. Venti and David A. Wise. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Aging and Housing Equity: Another Look
Steven F. Venti and David A. Wise
NBER Working Paper No. 8608
November 2001



                                              ABSTRACT


         Aside from Social Security and, for some, employer-provided pensions, housing equity is the
principle asset of a large fraction of older Americans. Many retired persons have essentially no financial
assets to support retirement consumption. We use data from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), the
Asset and Health Dynamics Among the Oldest Old (AHEAD), and the Survey of Income and Program
Participation (SIPP) to understand the extent to which families use housing equity to support general
consumption in retirement. The initial analysis is based on self-assessed home values reported by survey
respondents. Because the self-assessments exaggerate actual home equity, much of the subsequent
analysis is based on the selling price of recently sold homes, together with the reported equity in recently
purchased homes. Homeowners can change home equity by either discontinuing ownership or by
purchasing another home of lesser or greater value. We find that in the absence of a precipitating shock--
death of a spouse or entry of a family member into a nursing home- -families are unlikely to discontinue
home ownership. And even when there is a precipitating shock, discontinuing ownership is the exception
rather than the rule. On average, families that move and purchase a new home tend to increase home
equity. We find, however, that income-poor and house-rich families are more likely to reduce equity when
they move, while house-poor and income-rich households are more likely to increase housing equity.
Overall, accounting for discontinuing ownership and moving to another home, housing equity increases
with age until about age 75 and then declines slightly as households grow older. The overall decline
among older households (surveyed in the AHEAD) is about 1.76 percent per year, and this decline is
largely accounted for by a 7.84 percent decline among households who experience a precipitating shock.
Families that remain intact reduce housing equity very little, about 0.11 percent per year for two-person
households and 1.15 percent per year for one- person households. We conclude that, on average, home
equity is not liquidated to support general non-housing consumption needs as households age.




Steven F. Venti                                                   David A. Wise
Department of Economics                                           NBER
6106 Rockefeller Center                                           1050 Massachusetts Ave.
Dartmouth College                                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
Hanover, NH 03755                                                 dwise@nber.org
and NBER
steven.f.venti@dartmouth.edu
       Except for Social Security and, for some, employer-provided pension assets,

housing equity is the most important asset of a large fraction of older Americans. In

principle, these assets might be used to support consumption after retirement. In this

paper we take another look at the change in the home equity of older families as they

age, beginning at ages just before retirement. We use data from the Health and

Retirement Study (HRS), the Asset and Health Dynamics Among the Oldest Old

(AHEAD) survey, as well as the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP).

We distinguish changes in housing equity that may might be thought of as part of a

financial plan to use housing equity as a means of general support in retirement from

changes in housing equity that are precipitated by family shocks--death or severe

illness.

       This paper extends the analysis in Venti and Wise [2001], in which we found that

in the absence of changes in household structure, most elderly families are unlikely to

move.1 We also found that even among movers, those families that continue to own

typically do not reduce home equity. However, precipitating shocks, like the death of a
spouse or entry to a nursing home, sometimes lead to liquidation of home equity. Home

equity is typically not liquidated to support general non-housing consumption needs.

The analysis in the current paper is also based on both the HRS and AHEAD data, as

well as data from eight panels of the SIPP. Again, the key question is whether housing

wealth is typically used to support the general consumption of older persons as they


       1
         The AHEAD initially surveyed persons age 70 and over in 1993 and resurveyed
them in 1995 as part of the second wave of AHEAD and resurveyed them again in 1998
as part of the fourth wave of the HRS. For convenience we refer to these surveys as
the first three waves of AHEAD.
                                         Page 2
age, although the analysis is based on more extensive data. The present analysis also

presents a more formal accounting for the change in home equity when ownership is

discontinued and the change in home equity when moving to another owned unit (“up-

sizing” or “down-sizing”). In addition we give brief consideration to parallel changes in

non-housing assets as persons age.

       The change in housing equity as persons age has been considered in several

earlier papers, using data that covered an earlier time period or data for persons at

younger ages. In Venti and Wise [1989, 1990], we concluded that households “don’t

want to reduce housing equity” as they age. We found that large reductions in home

equity were typically associated with the death of a spouse, retirement, or with other

precipitating shocks. These analyses were based on the Retirement History Survey

(RHS) and covered persons in the 58 to 73 age range. Merrill [1984], based on the

Retirement History Survey (RHS), found that unless there was a change in family status

there was little if any reduction in housing equity as families aged Feinstein and

McFadden [1989], based on the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics (PSID), including

households with heads over age 75, also concluded that in the absence of change in

family status housing equity was typically not reduced. Megbolugbe, Sa-Aadu, and

Shilling [1997] also used the PSID and found that the change in housing equity varied
by age. The oldest households (age 75+) were as likely to trade up as to trade down

when they moved. Sheiner and Weil (1993) found some decline in home equity at older

ages, but these declines were primarily associated with shocks to family status and

health. Hurd [1999], in a general analysis of wealth change based on the first two

waves of the AHEAD, concluded that there was a modest decline in housing wealth and

rates of home ownership for two-person households that survived the two year period

intact, but larger declines for two-person households that lost a member between the

waves. He also found that total wealth increased between the waves for all types of

                                          Page 3
households and at all ages.

       Whether the elderly perceive home equity as a source of funds for general

consumption as they grow older is an important issue for at least two reasons. A

concern of some is that older households have substantial wealth locked in illiquid

housing and would like to release it. A proposed solution to this perceived “problem” is

a reverse annuity mortgage that allows the household to draw down home equity while

remaining in the home. To date, there has been little apparent interest in reverse

mortgages. It is not clear whether the failure is due to unfavorable financial terms of

reverse mortgages or simply to a lack of demand for a product that is intended to

exhaust housing equity over the life of the occupant. Several studies, including Venti

and Wise [1991], Mayer and Simons [1994], and Merrill, Finkel, and Kutty [1994], have

shown that a significant segment of the population appears to be “income-poor and

house-rich,” and might benefit from a reverse mortgage. We concluded in our earlier

analyses, however, that the equity choices of older persons were inconsistent with

substantial interest in such products. Nonetheless, knowing whether older households

wish to withdraw assets from housing equity helps to evaluate the extent of the potential

market for reverse mortgages, and we judge it important to revisit the issue.

       A second reason to consider whether the elderly plan to, or will, use home equity
to support general consumption is to understand the adequacy of saving for retirement.

If housing equity is used just like financial assets to support consumption after

retirement, then it might also be considered as a substitute for financial wealth and

perhaps treated interchangeably with financial wealth in considering the well-being of

the elderly. On the other hand, if households do not plan to draw down home equity as

they age, it may be more realistic to assume that general consumption expenditures will

come largely from accumulated financial wealth, including Social Security and other

annuities. Analysts considering how well households are prepared for retirement have

                                          Page 4
treated housing equity in various ways. Moore and Mitchell [2000] include housing

wealth in the set of assets that can be used to finance retirement. The Congressional

Budget Office [1993] also includes housing wealth with other wealth. On the other

hand, Bernheim [1992] in considering “Is the Baby Boom Generation Preparing

Adequately for Retirement” excluded housing wealth in making a determination. Engen

and Gale [1999] include zero, 50 percent, and 100 percent of housing equity. Gustman

and Steinmeier [1999] conduct analyses using zero and 100 percent of home equity.

       In this paper we first consider the relationship between age and housing equity

over the life cycle, based on data from the SIPP. This analysis is drawn largely from

Venti and Wise [2001]. The results are based on cohort analysis and are presented

graphically. Next, we present more detailed cohort analysis for older households,

based on the HRS and the AHEAD data.

       We then focus on within household changes in housing equity, giving particular

attention to the effect of precipitating shocks. We find that on average there is no

reduction in housing equity among persons who continue to own homes, even as they

age through their eighties and even into their nineties. Indeed, persons who sell one

house and buy another tend to increase housing equity, on average. Large reductions

in housing equity are typically associated only with selling and discontinuing home
ownership. Giving up ownership is most often associated with the death of a spouse or

entry into a nursing home. In these cases, home equity may be used to pay medical

expenses or indeed to support more general consumption of a surviving spouse,

although we have not attempted here to document such expenditures. In general,

however, we find that home equity is not systematically converted to liquid assets to

support non-housing consumption.

       Finally, our analysis draws attention to two limiting features of the HRS and

AHEAD data. The first feature concerns the use of imputations in analysis of panel

                                          Page 5
data. Our earlier analysis of the AHEAD data was based on preliminary releases of

AHEAD wave 2 and HRS wave 4 (the third wave of AHEAD). In the current paper we

use more recent releases of the second wave of AHEAD and the fourth wave of the

HRS that include asset imputations–including home equity--provided by the HRS staff.2

Tabulations from the new data sources are similar, to tabulations presented in Venti and

Wise [2001] that did not use these imputations. We find, however, that in many

instances the imputations appear to increase the “randomness” in the data. This is

perhaps not surprising, given that imputed values are “hot-decked,” based on

contemporaneous cross-section data. In panel applications, the imputed values should

be based on both family-specific longitudinal data, as well as cross-section data. In this

paper, all analyses using the “selling price” data (section C.5 forward) drop imputed

observations.

      A second, related, concern is the large number of inconsistent responses in the

reported data, particularly when comparing “move” and “stay” transitions to “own” and

“rent” housing tenures. For example, many households are reported to own in one

wave then rent in the next, and then return to ownership in the third wave, without

reporting a move between either the first and second waves, or between the second

and third waves. Many of these households begin and end with the same (or similar)

home equity. Most of these anomalies are apparently reporting errors. Each such error

results in two changes in housing equity that are of equal magnitude but opposite sign

and thus may have a large effect on calculated changes in home equity. In some of our

analyses we have dropped observations that reported a change in tenure but did not

report a move. We also find many unrealistically large wave-to-wave swings in home

equity among households that stay in the same home. These apparent errors are


      2
       The newer data also use additional information on death and nursing home entry
that has recently become available.
                                          Page 6
comparable in magnitude to the changes in home equity reported by movers.3

      Much of the analysis in this paper is based on recent selling prices and on the

reported equity in newly purchased homes. We believe these data are likely to be the

most reliable data on home equity. We also have given considerable attention to

evaluating the extent of bias in self-assessed home values. Thus on balance, while we

believe that more attention can be given to improving the data, we are comfortable with

our principle conclusions.



A.    COHORT DESCRIPTION

1.    SIPP Data on Home Ownership and Equity over the Life Course

      The SIPP provides housing equity (obtained from home value and mortgage

debt) data for seven years - 1984, 1985, 1987, 1988, 1991, 1993 and 1995.4 From the
random sample of cross-section data in each of these years we have created cohort

data. For example, to trace the home equity of persons who were age 26 in 1984, we

begin with the average home equity of persons age 26, based on the random sample of

persons age 26 in 1984 survey. Next we obtain the average equity of persons age 27


      3
       The HRS is currently using “call-back” procedures to resolve these issues.
      4
       The survey panels and wave that provide the data are as follows:

            Panel Wave Dates in Field

             1984    4       Sept-Dec 1984
             1984    7       Sept-Dec 1985
             1985    3       Sept-Dec 1985
             1985    7       Jan-Apr 1987
             1986    4       Jan-Apr 1987
             1986    7       Jan-Apr 1988
             1987    4       Feb-May 1988
             1990    4       Feb-May 1991
             1991    7       Feb-May 1993
             1992    4       Feb-May 1993
             1993    7       Feb-May 1995

                                             Page 7
from the 1985 survey, age 29 in the 1987 survey, and so forth. We identify cohorts by

their age in the 1984 survey. We do this for 17 cohorts defined by the age of the cohort

in the first year of the data. In fact, to obtain more precise estimates of housing equity,

the data for a cohort, like age 26, is the average of data for a three-year age interval

–25, 26, and 27. We do this for cohorts, age 26, 29, ...to age 71,74. All cohorts are

followed until age 80 in the SIPP.5

       Figure 1 shows the percent of two-person households who own a home, by

cohort. These data can be affected by differential mortality. For example, suppose that

home owners were less likely to die at any age than renters. In this case, the ownership

rate would be increased with age simply because the owners lived and the renters died.

To account for this possibility, we made a mortality correction to the data, which is

explained in the appendix. The mortality-corrected data for two person households is

shown in Figure 1. To make the figure easier to read, only selected cohorts are shown.

The key message of the figure is that home ownership does not decline with age,

through age 79. In addition, there appear to be no important cohort effects until about

age 70. That is, there are no large jumps when the data for one cohort ends and the

data for another cohort begins. At older ages, however, there do appear to be

noticeable cohort effects. Home ownership is lower for the last two cohorts. But like the

trends for the other cohorts, there is no evident decline in ownership as these cohorts

age.

       Home ownership data for one-person households are shown in Figure 2. Again

there is no apparent decline in ownership with age, though age 79. Indeed, the data

seem to show some increase in ownership at the oldest ages.

       Cohort home equity data for two-person families are shown in Figure 3. These

data in 1995 dollars and are corrected for mortality. The within-cohort data show no

       5
           Data for households over age 80 are not used because age is top coded at 80.
                                           Page 8
decline in home equity as the cohort ages. The data may even show some increase in

equity within cohorts for ages 65 to 79. There do appear to be some cohort effects in

equity, as evidenced by the jumps when the data for one cohort ends and the data for

another cohort begins.

      In estimates reported in Venti and Wise [2001] we show rather systematic cohort

effects. The estimates show that both older cohorts–those over age 70 in 1984--and

younger cohorts–those younger than 36 in 1984--have lower home equity than the

average, while the middle-aged cohorts have higher equity than the average. The

cohort effects are likely determined in large part by differences in housing price changes

over time.6

      Figure 4 shows the cohort equity data for one-person households, corrected for

mortality and inflation. As with the two-person households, there seems to be no

decline in equity through age 79.



2.    AT OLDER AGES: HRS and AHEAD

      To understand trends in home equity at older ages, we use the AHEAD as well

as the HRS. Both are panel studies. The HRS follows persons in households with

heads age 51 to 61 in 1992. Members of these households were interviewed in 1992
and again in 1994, 1996, and 1998. In 1998, the heads were age 57 to 67. Thus this

age range is included within the SIPP ages. The AHEAD study follows persons in

households with heads age 70 and older in 1993. These households were interviewed




      6
       For example, assume that homes are bought at age 35 on average, and
consider the cohort that was age 50 in 1984 compared to the cohort that was age 38 in
1984. The older cohort bought homes in 1969 on average and would have gained from
large home price increases in the 1970s. On the other hand, the younger cohort would
have bought homes in 1981 on average and would have seen much lower increases in
home equity during the 1980s and 1990s.
                                         Page 9
in 1993 and again in 1995 and in 1998 (as part of the fourth wave of the HRS.7 The

AHEAD age range overlaps the older SIPP ages. Thus both HRS and AHEAD allow

comparison with components of the longer life cycle SIPP data. Details of the survey

design are presented in Juster and Suzman [1995].

       In this analysis, we follow households in both the AHEAD and HRS files. One

complication is tracking households over time. A household may split through divorce

or separation, members may die, or a family member may enter a nursing home. For

the purposes of this analysis, we have adopted these conventions: In the first wave of

each survey households are identified as either one-person or two-person households

(institutionalized persons are excluded from the original sample). In subsequent survey

waves we classify each household--according to the change since the prior wave--into

one of the following six “states”:

       “1"    Continuing one-person household

       “2"    Continuing two-person household

       “D”    One of the original members has died

       “T”    Both of the original members have died

       “N”    One or more members has entered a nursing home

       “S”    Household composition has changed for some other reason (most often a
              split through divorce or separation or the addition of a new adult member.)

       “0"    Household refused the interview or is missing for other reasons

       The sequences observed in the HRS and AHEAD are presented in Tables 1.

These sequences are used to distinguish households included in analyses below. In

cohort analysis in the next section we restrict attention to continuing two-person or one-

person households identified as “2222" or “1111" for the HRS and “222” or “111" for the

AHEAD. In the following section we consider changes in housing equity and other


       7
        Juster and Suzman [1995] provide details of the survey design.
                                         Page 10
assets between waves. For this analysis we use each two-period sequence (creating

an “interval”), and we focus in particular on the within household relationship between

home ownership and home equity on the one hand and change in household

composition on the other hand. We consider cohort data on home ownership first.

Then we consider cohort data on home equity, as well as non-housing net assets.



a.    Home Ownership

      To obtain cohort data comparable to the SIPP cohort data, we construct cohorts

from the HRS and AHEAD data by grouping households in two-year age intervals.

These constructed cohorts are the basis for the cohort data shown below.

      The home ownership cohort data for two-person families are shown in Figure 5,

which covers ages from 50 to 93. To make the individual cohort data easier to view,

only selected–largely non-overlapping–cohorts are shown. The first three cohorts

plotted in the figure are from the HRS; the last five are from the AHEAD. Overall, the

within-cohort data show an increase in home ownership through age 70. Thereafter the

cohort data suggest a small decline in ownership. A more detailed analysis of these

data, presented below, shows that for the AHEAD sample the within-cohort decline in

ownership for continuing two-person households is about 0.66 percent per year for
cohorts age 70 to 78 in the initial year and 0.34 percent for cohorts age 80 or more in

the initial year. A comparison of these data with the SIPP data in Figure 1 shows that

for persons age 50 to 79 the SIPP and the HRS-AHEAD data are very similar. Both

data sources show ownership rates of about 90 percent for families over age 60. The

within-cohort SIPP data, however, show no decline in ownership through age 79.

      The pattern of home ownership for continuing one-person households, shown in

Figure 6, is quite different. Again, there are some cohort effects. The within-cohort data
for one-person households show a distinct rise in ownership between ages 50 and 75


                                         Page 11
and a decline in ownership at older ages. For AHEAD households–age 70 and

older–the within-cohort decline for the continuing one-person AHEAD households is a

little over one percent per year. (The data used to produce Figures 5 and 6 differ in

some respects from data used in similar calculations presented in subsequent sections

of the paper. First, the figures are based on persons who were continuing one- or two-

person households over all of the survey waves. Some of the subsequent calculations

are based on continuing one- or two-person households between two consecutive

survey waves. Second, the figures account for both own to rent (or other) and rent to

own transitions. Rent to own transitions offset to some extent own to rent transitions.

Some subsequent calculations are based only on the transitions of initial homeowners.

Third, a noticeable number of reported changes in tenure are not associated with a

move. We believe that most of these changes in tenure are reporting or coding errors,

as discussed below in section C.1. For example, considering the AHEAD portion of

Figure 6, the within-cohort decline in ownership for continuing one-person households is

1.29 percent per year, using the data as reported. If households that report changes in

tenure without a move are not included in the calculations, the decline is only about 0.98

percent per year. Using the latter data, home ownership of continuing one-person

households is 74.7 percent at age 70. At an annual decline of 0.98 percent per year,

61.28 percent of these one-person households would still be owners at age 90.)



b.    Home Equity

      Mean home equity cohort data for two-person households are shown in Figure

7.8 These within cohort data show an increase in home equity through about age 70 or
75. At older ages, the randomness in within cohorts makes it hard to see clear trends,


      8
        All dollar amounts for the SIPP and AHEAD have been converted to 1998
dollars using the CPI.
                                         Page 12
although there appears to be a within cohort decline in equity. In fact, data presented

below show that the average mean decline is about $2,100 per year, which is largely

accounted for by the reported decline the same-home equity of continuing owners.

      The home equity cohort data for one-person households are shown in Figure 8a.

As with the two-person households, there is a clear within-cohort increase in home

equity through age 70 or 75. At older ages a consistent within-cohort trend is not

apparent. Data presented below show that the average decline is about $3,000 per

year, again, largely accounted for by the reported decline the same-home equity of

continuing owners. There appear to be substantial differences in home equity by

cohort, although the randomness in the data makes it hard to distinguish cohort effects

from within-cohort changes in home equity.

      Median cohort data for two- and one-person households are shown in Figures 9

and 10 respectively. There is less randomness in the median data than in the mean

data and thus within cohort trends are easier to discern in there figures. For example,

for older two-person households the medians suggest modest within cohort decline in

home equity beginning at about age 75, but cohort effects are not apparent. On the

other hand, the median cohort data for older one-person households show little within-

cohort decline in home equity but rather substantial cohort effects. Older cohorts seem
to have successively less home equity. Below, we present quantitative estimates of the

within-cohort changes in home equity.



c.    Non-Home Equity

      In considering the equity value of housing as these cohorts aged, it is informative

to compare the value of housing with other assets. Cohort data on non-housing assets

are shown in Figures 11 through 14. Like the home equity data, mean and median

cohort data are shown for two- and one-person households. And separate figures are


                                         Page 13
shown for the older AHEAD households. As with the home equity data, the trend in the

non-home equity data for the HRS households is quite clear. But the extent of

randomness in the data makes the cohort data for the AHEAD households much harder

to interpret. Nonetheless, some trends are clear form the cohort data. (Below we show

quantitative within-cohort changes in non-home assets, as well as home equity.)

       First, it is clear for the HRS households that both home equity and housing

increased with age, but the non-housing assets increased much more. For example,

from Figure 7 it can be seen that the mean home equity of continuing two-person

households increased from about $80,000 at age 50 to about $120,000 for households

in their early 70s. There seem to be no apparent cohort effects. In Figure 11, it can be

seen that non-housing assets of the HRS households increased from about $200,000 at

age 50 to close to $400,000 at age 74, about five times as much as the increase in

home equity. Again, cohort effects are not apparent in this age range. In future

analysis we will try to determine which components of non-equity assets account for the

large increase.

       Second, for the older HRS households there are also large within-cohort

increases in non-equity assets. For the older households, however, there are also large

cohort effects, with successively older cohorts having lower non-housing assets. And,
for the older cohorts there is some within-cohort decline in home equity.

       It may be that there are in fact very large wave to wave changes in both home

equity and non-housing assets. We believe, however, that the data is likely to reflect

substantial reporting or recording errors. Thus further “verification” and “cleaning” of

the data--including callbacks to correct retrospective information--might result in more

consistent cohort patterns. These steps would have to be based on joint evaluation of

all assets over all waves of the HRS and AHEAD surveys–looking perhaps at a X x Y

matrix of data for each household.


                                          Page 14
C.     FAMILY STATUS AND HOME EQUITY: HRS and AHEAD

       We now turn to the relationship between changes in home equity and changes in

family structure. Again we consider two- and one-person households separately and

provide separate estimates for the HRS and the AHEAD families. Before considering

within-cohort household transitions, cross-section summary data on household tenure

(own, or rent or other combined) are shown by age and household structure (one-

person or two-person) in Table 2. Home ownership of two-person families exceeds 90

percent between ages 54 and 74 and then declines to around 80 percent at ages 85

and older. For one-person families, home ownership increases to about 68 percent for

age 70 to 74 households and then declines to about 50 percent for households age 85

and older. The home ownership rate for one-person households peaks in the 70-74 age

range, declines modestly over the next decade, then falls sharply after age.



1.     Within-Household Transitions

       We focus on the events that precipitate changes in home ownership and the

changes in home equity that are associated with the ownership changes. Table 3 shows

ownership transitions between consecutive survey waves (an “interval”). The first two

panels of the table pertain to households that owned a home at the beginning of the
interval. The third and fourth panels pertain to households that did not own a home at

the beginning of the interval. The table entries show the percent of households who

make a transition between adjacent waves of each survey. For example, the transition

labeled “22" identifies two-person household at the beginning of the interval (the first of

the two waves) and at the end of the interval (in the subsequent wave). The HRS yields

as many as three transitions (wave1 to wave 2, wave 2 to wave 3, and wave 3 to wave

4) and each represents a two year interval. The AHEAD yields two transitions. The first

interval is two years and the second three years. All intervals in the HRS are combined


                                          Page 15
to obtain the HRS results, and all intervals in the AHEAD are combined to obtain the

AHEAD results.

       Consider first the top panel of the table which pertains to the HRS households

who were homeowners at the beginning of an interval. The first column shows the

percent of households that own and the percent that rent (or have some other living

arrangement) at the end of the interval. Of continuing two persons households, 98.3

percent still owned at the end of the interval; 1.7 percent no longer owned. The

ownership of initial owners declined about 0.85 percent per year. Now consider

continuing two-person HRS households who were non-owners at the beginning of the

period shown in the third panel of the. Of these households 22.3 percent became

owners during the interval, about 11.1 percent per year. On balance the number of

homeowners increased: some initial owners became non-owners, but a larger number

of initial non-owners became owners. This net addition to the homeowner group is

shown graphically for the younger--HRS–cohorts in Figure 5. The figure, however,

pertains to households who continued as two-person families through all four waves of

the HRS. The data for continuing two-person households in the table, however, is

based on all households that continued as two person families during any two adjacent

survey waves.
       Other rows of the first panel of Table 3 show that if a spouse dies (2D), the

ownership rate remains high, at 95.6 percent. If a spouse enters a nursing home (2N)

the ownership rate declines more, to 88.6 percent, although the sample of nursing home

entrants is quite small for the younger HRS households.. For continuing one-person

HRS households the ownership rate also remains high, at 95.2 percent. (There are only

three single-person households in which the person entered a nursing home during the

interval.)

       The percent moving between adjacent waves is shown in the next column of


                                         Page 16
Table 3. Of two-person HRS households that own in both waves, 7.1 percent moved

over the two-year interval. For two-person households that change from own to rent-or-

other, the move rate is an unexpectedly low 65.7 percent. It is possible that ownership

is transferred from parents to children, so the parents do not move, but also no longer

own. However, this low move rate is more likely a reflection of reporting error.

Inspection of some of these cases shows households owning a house of roughly

constant value for three of the four waves. This evidence, combined with the absence

of a move (which is verified by survey-takers), suggests errors in reporting or coding for

one of the waves. Because there are a relatively small number of these households, a

few errors can have a substantial effect on the move rate.

      Similar results for the AHEAD sample are presented in the second and fourth

panels. Initial homeowners in AHEAD were also likely to remain owners unless there

was a change in family status. For example, 96.9 percent of continuing two-person

households continued to own. But if one of the members died the ownership rate

dropped to 88.8 percent. If one of the members entered a nursing home the rate

dropped to 75 percent. For continuing one-person households, 91.3 percent remain

owners. But if the single person enters a nursing home, the ownership rate drops to

39.9 percent. Thus, as with the younger HRS households, in the absence on
precipitating shock, most AHEAD homeowners continue to own. But in the event of a

shock, the decline in ownership is greater for older than for younger households. In

addition, the decline is greater for one-person than for two-person households.

      The move rate for the older AHEAD households that own in both waves is quite

low, about 3.9 percent for two-person households and 4.5 percent of one-person

households. Since the interval between waves is about 2 ½ years for the AHEAD, the

annual move rates are 1.6 percent and 1.8 percent respectively. Again, the low move

rates among households that report changing tenure suggest that some changes in


                                         Page 17
tenure in the AHEAD may be incorrectly reported.

       Overall, Table 3 suggests that homeowner households in the HRS age group are

very likely to remain owners. And even if one of the household members dies or enters

a nursing home, the rate of ownership remains high. Homeowners in the AHEAD age

group are also likely to continue to own unless there is a change in family status,

especially continuing two-person households. When a member of this older household

dies or enters a nursing home, the decline in ownership is greater than for younger

households. The greatest decline in ownership is for single-person AHEAD households

who enter a nursing home. Even among this group almost 40 percent continue to own.



2.     Change in Home Equity

       We next consider changes in home equity that parallel the transitions shown in

Table 3. Home equity changes are presented in two formats. The first format shows

changes for all households– initial owners and initial renters-others. It shows changes

for households who switch form owning to renting, as well as those switching from

renting to owning. And it shows the net change in home equity for both groups

combined. The second format is directed to the primary focus of our analysis, the

change in home equity for initial homeowners. In this format we give particular
attention to the change in the equity of movers who continue to own, compared to

stayers, those who remain in the same house. Although we discuss changes based on

changes in self-assessed home values here, we show below that the exaggeration of

self-assessed home value impart large bias to the implied changes in home equity.

Then we consider changes based on home selling prices compared to reported equity

in newly purchased homes. We believe these latter data are the most reliable, as

discussed below.

       In addition, the mover-stayer comparison is complicated by the data


                                         Page 18
inconsistencies discussed in the previous section. Some households report a change in

tenure without moving. While such changes are possible, we believe most such cases

reflect reporting or coding errors. The information on whether a household moved since

the previous wave is likely to be accurate because the prior address is incorporated in

the survey question on moving.9 In all calculations reported below, we deleting all

observations with apparent transitions involving a change in tenure without a reported

move. Following this procedure, 1.1 percent of the HRS households and 3.4 percent of

the AHEAD households are deleted.10
       Change in home equity using the first format is presented in Table 4. The family

status designations are the same as those used in Table 3. There are four tenure

designations: OO, OR, RO, and RR where “O” indicates own and “R” indicates rent or

other living arrangement. Large reductions in home equity are typically associated only

with a home sale and subsequent rental. Those who move from renting to owning, of

course, increase home equity. No matter what the change in family status, there is an

increase in the average equity of HRS households (with the exception of the few 1N

families). On the other hand, there is a decrease in the mean home equity of AHEAD

families, no matter what the change in family status. The greatest decrease occurred

when a family member entered a nursing home.         For all continuing two-person

households, the mean increase in housing equity was $6,192 in the HRS and -$5,241 in


       9
         For example, in wave 4 of the HRS (also wave 3 of the AHEAD)
noninstitutionalized respondents were asks “Are you still living, all of the year or part of
the year, in the same apartment/house in <previous wave address and city>?”
Respondents in nursing homes were asked: “Do you still have the same
apartment/house in <previous wave address and city>?” If respondents in nursing
homes answered affirmatively, they are may still be homeowners and they are not
classified as movers.
       10
        Deleting all respondents who change tenure without moving reduces the
frequency of own to rent transitions. This affects the HRS and AHEAD cohort figures
presented above. In particular, the cohort profiles for one-person AHEAD households
(Figure 6) become flat.
                                           Page 19
the AHEAD. The median increase was close to zero for households in each of the

surveys. In general, the median changes are smaller in absolute value than the mean

changes, but the relative patterns by family status and change in tenure are similar.

       Change in home equity of initial owners using the second format is shown in

Table 5. The key question here is whether continuing homeowners who move and buy

another house reduce home equity more than stayers, who can serve as the “control

group” in this comparison. If movers typically wanted to use some of the wealth

accumulated in home equity to support other non-housing consumption, the home

equity of movers would be reduced relative to the change in the equity of stayers. The

first two panels of Table 5 show the mean change in housing equity for the HRS and

AHEAD; the next two panels show medians. The change in family status is shown on

the left margin. Consider the first three rows of the upper panel of the table, which

pertain to two-person households in the HRS. The ownership status (tenure) at the end

of the interval is shown along the top margin. A household can continue to own or

become a renter (or have some other living arrangement) at the end of the interval.

The change in home equity is shown for continuing owners, for renters-others, and for

both groups combined (all). The initial home value for each group is shown in the right

column of the table. On average, the mean home equity of continuing two-person
households increased by $3,305. For those who remained home owners, equity

increased by $6,569. Initial homeowners whose transition was to the rent-other group

reduced home equity by $54,155 on average. The average initial home value of

continuing two-person households was $102,310. Thus home equity of the home

sellers was only about half of the average equity of all continuing two-person

households.

       Some of those who continued to own stayed in the same house, others moved

and bought a new house. The equity of those who stayed increased by $6,686. The


                                         Page 20
equity of those who moved and bought a new house also increased, by $5,074. In

somewhat more formal estimation below we use the change in the equity of the stayers

as a measure of the increase the movers would have experienced had they not moved.

In this case the decrease for movers was $1,612, about 1.7 percent of the initial home

equity of this group. Thus these movers who bought a new home are not typically taking

substantial home equity out of housing to support other consumption. By this measure,

the greatest decline in home equity occurred in mover households in which a member

died, although the sample sizes are small and the means are not precisely measured.

For example, the home equity of the small number of two-person households who move

but continue to own when one member dies declines by $21,935.

       The average equity of continuing one-person HRS households declined by $697,

a very small fraction of the average initial home equity of $95,555. Continuing one-

person households who moved but continued to own reduced home equity by $3,739,

and the stayers increased equity by $935. Using the stayers as a control, the movers

reduced equity by 4.8 percent of the initial home equity of this group.

       In summary: the average home equity of two-person HRS households increased

over this period. This was true for continuing two-person households as well as those in

which a member died or in which a member entered a nursing home. The equity of
one-person households declined only slightly. Continuing owners who moved typically

reduced home equity only marginally, when compared to stayers.. The only substantial

reduction in the home equity of continuing owners was for households in which one

member died.

       For the older AHEAD households, changes in home equity also are typically

associated with precipitating shocks. But for the older households the shocks are more

frequent. Consider continuing two-person households first. The equity of continuing

stayer owners (who do not move) declined by $4,103 and can serve as a base of


                                         Page 21
comparison for other groups. This reduction, if taken at face value, apparently reflects a

fall in the value of the homes of the older households as they continue to live in the

homes, but not direct withdrawal of housing equity to support other consumption.

(Estimates based on housing value rather than equity yields the same result.) This

decline is only slightly less than the average reduction for all continuing two-person

households, $5,367. Thus on average we conclude that little housing equity is taken

from housing to support other consumption.

       Continuing homeowners who move reduce home equity by $15,877, which is

$11,322 more than the reduction in home equity of the stayers. We take this to

represent funds taken from housing and that might be used to support other non-

housing consumption. It represents, however, only about 10.5 percent of initial home

equity for these households, and less than 4 percent of their initial non-housing wealth.

Remember that the typical older household will only move once from one home to

another. So if the reduction in housing equity can only be a one-time addition to funds

available for other consumption. Below we show that even this small reduction is

probably exaggerated and that in fact the average change is likely positive (an increase

in housing equity).

       For continuing owners in two-person households in which a member enters a
nursing home, the reduction in the home equity of the movers is $5,821 greater than the

reduction for the stayers. The reduction in the home equity of continuing one-person

households is also small. In particular movers who continue to own reduce home equity

by a small fraction of initial home equity.

       In summary: among the older AHEAD households, the reduction in home equity

of continuing owners is small relative to initial home equity, even among those who

move to a different house. Large reductions in home equity are typically observed only

for home owners who move and discontinue home ownership. The probability of such a


                                              Page 22
move is larger in cases of precipitating shocks. But as seen in Tables 3 and 4, even in

the event of shocks to family status, most households continue to own and thus do not

withdraw equity from housing to support other needs. For all HRS groups, the initial

home equity of the seller (rent-other) group was much lower than the equity of the

continuing owners. For the older AHEAD households the initial home equity of sellers is

also less than the initial home equity of continuing owners, although the difference is

much smaller than for the HRS households.

       Median changes in home equity are shown in bottom half of Table 5. The pattern

of change is essentially the same as the pattern for mean changes. The changes,

however, are typically smaller than the mean changes, in particular for the older AHEAD

households. For example, for continuing two-person households in the HRS the median

increase in home equity is $1,474. The increase for continuing owner-movers is only

$2,105 greater than for stayers. For continuing one-person families the median

increase is $222. And the reduction for continuing owner-movers is only $1,028 greater

than for stayers. Among continuing two-person households in the AHEAD sample,

movers reduce equity by $6,184. Continuing one-person households reduce equity by

$695. Again, the conclusion is that for the most part housing equity is substantially

reduced only after a precipitating shock. In the absence of a shock, the reductions in
housing equity by movers represent a small fraction of initial housing equity.

3.     Respondent Estimates of Home Values versus Sales Prices

       Before turning to some simple estimation, we emphasize that respondent

assessment of home equity likely overestimates home value by a substantial margin.

Thus reliance on reported home values yields exaggerated reductions in housing equity

when homeowners move. Substantial evidence shows that homeowners overestimate

the value of their homes. Kiel and Zabel [1999]) surveyed the literature and concluded

that self-reported home values exceed actual sale prices or appraisal values by -2 to 16


                                         Page 23
percent. Their analysis showed that homeowners on average overvalue their home by

8 percent, and that owners with long tenure overvalue their houses even more. In other

words, when a family moves the realized sale price is typically less than the family’s

prior estimate of the home value. This creates a bias in our estimate of the change in

housing equity among movers. The pre-move estimate is inflated. The post-move price

is presumably “accurate” because the purchase transaction was recently completed.

       The estimates in Tables 4 and 5 on the change in housing equity between waves

are based on HRS and AHEAD respondent self-assessment of home values and are

affected by such overvaluation. The tendency to overvalue homes confounds mover-

stayer comparisons. Recent movers are likely to know the market value of their homes.

Stayers, on the other hand, are likely to overvalue their houses.11 As a result, the

change in home equity is more likely show a larger price decrease for movers than for

stayers. Thus in the previous tables movers, relative to stayers, appear to be taking

more equity out of their homes than is actually the case.

       Information obtained in both the HRS and the AHEAD allows us to gauge the

extent of this bias. For households that have recently moved, the surveys inquired

about the “selling price” of the house. The sale price can be compared to the reported

value of the house in the previous wave. The survey also asks for the month and year
of the sale; the month and year of the self-assessed value is the interview date. We

index the pre-move assessed value of movers and the post-move price of movers to

obtain measures in 1998 dollars.12 From these values we obtain estimates of the

       11
         We suspect this is most likely to be the case when house prices are not rising
rapidly. Another factor that may lead to overestimates by stayers is that most
homeowners know the “asking” price of similar homes in their neighborhood, but may
be unaware of the actual selling price.
       12
        Some movers are missing data for the sale price. The HRS and AHEAD
provide no imputations for missing values of the sale price. A bracketing technique is
used to obtain ranges for persons unable to provide a sale price, but we have made no
attempt here to convert the bracketed amounts to values. The analysis is restricted to
                                         Page 24
overvaluation bias.

       Mean and median differences between assessed values and sale prices are

shown in the Table 6. The results suggest that both the HRS and the AHEAD

respondents overestimated their home values by 15 to 20 percent, based on a

comparison of mean values. Based on medians, home values are overestimated by 6

to 7 percent. The mean dollar differences are $20,000 to $30,000, and median dollar

differences are $6,000 to $8,000. This suggests that our calculated reductions in the

home equity of continuing owner-movers may be due entirely to valuation bias. For

example the mean reduction of $15,887 (or $11,322 using the stayers as a control) in

the home equity of two-person AHEAD families who move and continue to own would

be more than accounted for by such bias.



4.     More Formal Estimates of Change in Home Equity

       Here we consider more formally the change in home equity of movers and

stayers. As mentioned above, one way to think about this is to treat movers as the

treatment group and stayers as the “control” group. The home equity of stayers and

movers at the beginning and at the end of the interval can be represented by:

                                          Beginning            End
                  Stayers                    "                "+t
                  Movers                     "              "+t+m

In this case, a difference-in-difference estimate yields m, the “treatment” effect. We can

estimate this for all households combined, or for any subgroup, by

(1)    ∆E = t + mM
where t is a constant term--and represents a time (inflation) effect--and m is the


observations that specify a sale price.
                                            Page 25
additional effect for movers, with M a dummy variable identifying movers.

       Estimates of this equation, by change in household status, are shown in Table 7.

This table presents estimates for households who owned at both the beginning and at

the end of the interval. Data are presented by the subsequent–at the end of the

interval–status of the initial homeowners. OLS estimates are shown in the left portion of

the table. Median regression estimates are shown in the right portion of the table. The

median regression estimates should be less affected than the OLS estimates by

reporting errors or other outliers in the data.

       The key mover effect estimate, m, measures the difference between the change

in the equity of stayers and the change for movers. The OLS estimates show negative

mover effects in each comparison, but only the mover effects for the HRS 2D and

AHEAD 11 groups are significantly different from zero at the 5 percent significance

level. And, with the possible exception of the estimated mover effect for the 2 to D HRS

households, the estimated effect is much lower than the bias suggested in Table 6. For

example, the estimated mover effect for continuing two-person households is -$1,612.

Referring back to Table 6, however, we see that the bias estimate for HRS households

is between $20,000 and $33,000. Thus, since most families are continuing two person

families, a reasonable judgment from these data is that the equity of the continuing two-
person households in fact increased by about $25,000. Coincidentally, this increase

matches the estimated increased for such households based on selling prices, which is

discussed below. For each of the other groups, with the exception of the 2 to D HRS

families, the estimated mover effect is much less than the bias estimates shown in

Table 6, suggesting rather large increases in home equity.

       For the HRS households, the median regression mover effect estimates are also

small and typically not significantly different from zero. And, the estimates are less then

the median bias estimates Table 6. Thus, based on the estimated mover effects in


                                           Page 26
conjunction with the bias estimates, we conclude that home equity likely increases

substantially when families move and buy another home.

      The median estimates for the AHEAD households are larger than the median

HRS estimates and are more precisely measured. For the 2D and 2N groups, the

estimates are greater than the bias estimates in Table 6, in particular for the 2N group.

Thus these data suggest that for households in which a member dies, and for

households in which a member enters a nursing home, home equity is reduced when

these households move and buy again. The analysis below based on selling prices,

however, suggests an increase in the median home equity of these groups as well.



5.    Estimates Based on Selling Price

      Each home owner re-interviewed in the HRS and AHEAD is asked whether the

home was sold since the previous interview. For many of these households, the selling

price is reported.13 In this section, we estimate the change in the home equity of

families who sell and buy another home, and the change in equity of those who sell and

then choose another tenure. Table 8 shows summary data on home equity for adjacent

waves of HRS and AHEAD. The first column shows reported home equity from the first

of the two waves. The second column shows the reported selling price (obtained from
the second wave interview) minus the mortgage reported in the initial wave. The sale

occurred sometime between the two waves, but the mortgage pertains to the data of the

last interview prior to the sale. The third column shows home equity reported in the

second of the two waves. For households who purchased another home (the first and


      13
        There is more missing sale price data than home equity data, used in earlier
sections of the paper. Home equity (home value and mortgage balance) is obtained
from the Housing module. Information on the sale price is obtained from a module on
Capital Gains that has more incomplete responses. There are no imputations for
missing or incomplete (bracketed) sale price data. Partly for this reason, we do not use
the weights when analyzing the sale price data.
                                         Page 27
third panels of the table), this is the equity in the newly purchase home. For households

that did not purchase another home (the second and fourth panels), this column is zero.

        Like the data in Table 6 on reported home values versus selling prices, these

data show that households who sell and buy another home substantially overestimate

their pre-sale housing equity. For those who sell and do not purchase another home,

the over-estimation is not so apparent. For several of these groups the reported equity

seems to underestimate realized equity, based on selling price minus the mortgage. We

believe that the reported selling price is likely to be close to the actual selling price,

unlike the pre-sale assessment of home equity. The last column shows reported home

equity at the end of the interval. In principle, home equity right after a purchase should

also be accurately reported. For each of the intervals, the reported new home equity at

the end of the period is substantially greater than gain in home equity from the sale of

the prior home, suggesting that equity in the new home is greater than equity in the prior

home.

        Based on the same data, Table 9 shows the estimated change in home equity for

households that have sold a home and purchased another, by change in family status.

These estimates are obtained from simple OLS and median regression estimates of the

form

(3)            ∆E = m + ε

where )E is equity in the new home at the end of the period minus equity from the sale

of the prior home. Here, m is the estimated increase in home equity. This specification

is estimated for several years separately and for several family status change groups.

For all but two groups, there is a substantial increase in home equity. Many of the

estimates are for small groups, however, and are not significantly different form zero.

        We now consider whether the change in home equity depends on the


                                            Page 28
relationship between income and housing wealth. It might be expected that persons

with relatively low income and relatively high housing equity would be more likely to

withdraw housing equity. And those with low equity and high income would be more

likely to add to housing equity. We begin with estimates of the probability of moving and

buying another home, and the probability of moving and discontinuing home ownership,

thus withdrawing all housing equity. These outcomes will depend, in particular, on the

level of home equity and the level of income in the initial period. Then we show

estimates of the relationship between the change in equity, given a move, on the one

hand, and initial income and home equity levels on the other hand.

      Households that own in the initial period can either stay in the same house, move

to another house, or discontinue home ownership by moving to a rental apartment or

some other arrangement. The probabilities of the latter two transitions may be specified

as:
       Pr[OmO] = c( 2 D or 2 N or 1N ) + a11 + b22 + αY + βE + γY ⋅ E + ε
(4)
         Pr[OR] = c( 2 D or 2 N or 1N ) + a11 + b22 + αY + βE + γY ⋅ E + ε


where OmO identifies families who sell a home, then move and buy another home (own

to move to own) and OR identifies families who discontinue ownership (own to rent or

other). The parameter “a” is the effect of a continuing one persons household and “b”
the effect of a continuing two-person household. (The estimated parameters are of

course not constrained to be the same for the OmO and OR groups.) The omitted

categories, captured in the constant tern c(2D, 2N, and 1N), are the 2D, 2N, and 1N

households. Initial period income is denoted by Y and initial home equity is denoted by

E. . Here, ( indicates whether the effect of Y depends on E (or, equivalently, whether

the effect of E depends on Y).

      Given the decision to move to another home or to discontinue ownership, we


                                           Page 29
then estimate the conditional change in home equity for the two groups, given that a

move occurs. The change in equity equations are in the same format, given by


       ∆E (OmO ) = c( 2 D or 2 N or 1N ) + a11 + b22 + αY + βE + γY ⋅ E + ε

(5)      ∆E (OR) = c( 2 D or 2 N or 1N ) + a11 + b22 + αY + βE + γY ⋅ E + ε


Given the estimated probabilities and conditional changes in housing equity, we can

simulate the expected change in equity for homeowners as


              ∆E = ∆E (OmO) + ∆E (OR) =


                    Pr[OmO]∗ E ( ∆E| OmO ) +
(6)

                    Pr[OR]∗ E ( ∆E| OR)


where the expected change in decomposed into it’s component parts. We present

below the simulation for selected quantiles on income and home equity.

      Simulated probabilities of moving between the waves are shown in Table 10.

The estimated probit parameter estimates and selected quantiles of home equity and

income used to produce this table are shown in Appendix table 1. The top three panels

of Table 10 pertain to HRS households and the bottom three panels pertain to AHEAD

households. Simulated probabilities of moving and buying another home are shown on

the left side of each panel and probabilities of moving and discontinuing ownership are

shown on the right. The simulations show that initial income and home equity have little

effect on the probabilities of moving, although in some instances the estimated

parameters are statistically different from zero. For both HRS and AHEAD households

the difference between the probabilities for “house-poor and income-rich” households

and for “house-rich and income-poor” households is only a few percentage points.

                                           Page 30
Consistent with the findings reported above, the probability of moving is highest among

households that have experienced a disruption in household structure. For example,

among AHEAD households, the probability of moving and discontinuing ownership is

1.5 percent (evaluated at median income and home equity) for continuing two-person

households, 4.4 percent for continuing one-person households, and 21.2 percent for

households in which a member has either died or entered a nursing home between the

waves.

       The simulated change (between the survey waves) in home equity for families

who move and buy another home is shown in Table 11. The associated parameter

estimates in Appendix Table 2 show that initial income and home equity have

substantial and statistically significant effects on the change. Both OLS and median

regression estimates are shown.     The greater the level of initial home equity (based on

selling price minus the mortgage), the smaller the increase in equity when the family

moves. And the larger initial income, the greater the increase in home equity for

households that move. The equity-income interaction, however, is imprecisely

measured. The estimated difference in the change in home equity for the 11 or for the

22 groups compared to the 2D-2N-1N groups combined is not statistically significant.

These estimates are based on the sample of respondents that report a sale price for the
former home and report both the home value and mortgage debt for their current

home.14

       Evaluated at the median (50th quantile) of income and home equity, the simulated

change in equity shown in Table 11 is positive for all family status groups, with the

exception of the simulation for the 11 AHEAD households, based on median regression


       14
         Both the sale price of the old home and the value of and mortgage on the new
home are reported in the same wave. The survey does not inquire about the mortgage
obligation discharged on the old home. To obtain home equity for the old home we use
the mortgage reported in the prior wave.
                                         Page 31
estimates. For all family status groups the greatest simulated reduction in home equity

is at the 80th equity quartile and 20th income quantile. The greatest simulated increase

in home equity at the 80th income quartile and the 20th equity quantile. Thus relatively
house-rich and income-poor families reduce equity and relative house-poor and income-

rich households add to home equity when they move and buy another home. For

example, based on the OLS estimates for the 22 HRS households, at the high-equity-

low-income quantiles home equity is reduced by -$15,422; at the low-equity-high-

income quantiles home equity is increased by +$54,778. The pattern of the simulated
changes based on the median regression estimates is similar to the pattern based on

OLS estimates.

      The change (decrease) in the home equity of the families who discontinue home

ownership is shown in Table 12 and the associated parameter estimates are shown in

Appendix Table 3. In this case, the decline in equity is simply the sale price minus the

mortgage. Thus we cannot use the initial home equity to predict the change in equity,

as in Table 11 for those who sell and buy again. Thus estimates of the reduction in

equity are based on income only. Essentially the simulated changes show how home

equity is related to income. For this selected group of households who sell and do not

buy another home, home equity is negatively related to income. The greatest equity

reductions occur in families where a household member dies or in which a household

member enters a nursing home.

      As a summary, the move probabilities and change in home equity results

reported in Tables 10-12 are combined to calculate expected change in housing equity.

These results are reported on an annual basis in Table 13.15 The top part of the table

shows results for movers who sell and buy another house. The bottom part shows


      15
       Waves of the HRS were two years apart. In the AHEAD there were two years
between wave 1 and wave 2, and three years between wave 2 and wave 3.
                                         Page 32
results for movers who sell and discontinue ownership. The table shows results by

equity-income quantile, as in several of the tables above. But in this table, the expected

change in equity is decomposed into its component parts: the probability of a move, and

the change in equity given a move. For example, consider the HRS 22 households.

Evaluated at the median of home equity and income, the expected increase in equity

through home “upgrading” is $815. Only 3.3 percent of families upgrade each year, but

those that do add $12,531 to home equity. Averaged over all HRS households, home

equity is increased by $823 through selling and buying a new home. Evaluated at the

median of home equity and income, about 1.5 percent of AHEAD 22 households move

and buy another home each year. Those that do add $7,426 to home equity. The

expected increase in home equity, averaged across all AHEAD household types, is

$399. Viewed in this way, the expected changes in the equity of HRS and AHEAD

households are not very different at the median: +$823 for the HRS group and +$399

for the AHEAD group.

      For HRS 22 households with high initial housing equity and low income (the 80-

20 column), the expected annual reduction in equity is -$486: 3.2 percent move and,

given a move, the reduction in home equity is -$7,711. Averaged over all HRS

households in this high-equity-low-income group, the expected reduction in home equity

through selling and buying another home is -$528. The AHEAD households reveal a

similar pattern, although again they are less likely to move than the younger HRS

households.

      The estimates for persons who sell and discontinue ownership are shown in the

bottom half of the table. Again consider 22 HRS families evaluated at the median of

equity and income. Only 0.7 percent of households discontinue ownership each year.

Those that do reduce equity by -$29,162 on average. Averaged over all HRS 22

families, equity is reduced by -$379 through divesting of homes. This reduction can be


                                         Page 33
compared to the +$815 average increase through upgrading. Overall, the average

equity of all HRS households is reduced by -$610 in this way, compared to an increase

of +$823 through upgrading. For all AHEAD households average equity is reduced by -

$1,918 by sellers who discontinue ownership between survey waves, compared to an

increase of +$399 through movers who upgrade.

       Table 14 presents a succinct accounting of the expected annual change in the

home equity of all HRS initial homeowners combined and of all AHEAD initial

homeowners combined. The first column shows the expected change in home equity

for households who move and purchase another home. (Recall that the expected

change is the probability of a move times the average change in home equity given a

move.) Both HRS and AHEAD families that move to a new home increase home equity

on average. The second column is the expected reduction in the home equity of

households that discontinue ownership. The reduction is largest among households

experiencing precipitating shocks. The third column--the sum of the first two columns--

is the net annual change in home equity. (Like Table 13, Table 14 considers only initial

home owners; it does not account for the increase in the home equity that occurs when

initial renters buy a home.)

       On average, HRS households increase home equity by $214 per year. AHEAD

households, on average, reduce home equity by $1,519 annually, which represents an

overall decline of about 1.76 percent of initial home equity. The percentages in the last
column can be used to illustrate the significance of disruptions to family status among

AHEAD households: For example, there is almost no decline (-0.11 percent) in the

home equity of continuing two-person households. On average, the initial home equity

of these households is $94,257. Suppose that this is the average home equity of two-

person households at age 70. At an annual decline of 0.11 percent, the $94,257 would

be reduced by only $2,052--to $92,205--by age 90. The reduction of continuing one-


                                         Page 34
person households is somewhat larger. If the average home equity of one-person

households is $78,496 at age 70, and the annual reduction for one-person households

is 1.15 percent, the home equity of continuing one-person households would be

reduced by $16,211-- to $62,285--by age 90. Most of the overall reduction of 1.76

percent is accounted for by households who experience precipitating shocks - the

“other” group (2N, 2D, or 1N). For these households, home equity falls by 7.84 percent

on an annual basis. If each year, the equity of households in this group fell at this rate,

average equity of $87,777 at age 70 would be reduced to $17,149 by age 90. But, only

about 12 percent of households are in this group. Thus the reduction for all households

is much less than this. Even among households in this group - those experiencing

precipitating shocks - only 8.8 percent move in the survey interval in which the shock

occurs, as shown in Table 13. This suggests the decline in housing equity among

continuing one-person households may in part be the delayed consequence of a prior

transition from a two-person household to a one-person household.

       Thus, as suggested by the results in prior sections of the paper, the summary

results in Table 14 show that in the absence of precipitating shocks there is little

systematic reduction in home equity as families age. Families who move to a new

home increase home equity on average. Reductions in equity come from families who
sell and discontinue home ownership. And most of these moves are associated with

precipitating shocks to family status.   We find no systematic withdrawal of home equity

to support non-housing consumption.



D.     CONCLUSIONS

       Home equity is the principle asset of a large fraction of elderly Americans. In this

paper we have used HRS and AHEAD panel data, as well as SIPP data, to understand

the change in the home equity of households as they age. We give particular attention


                                          Page 35
to the relationship between changes in home equity and changes in household

structure. There are two ways for households to change home equity: by discontinuing

home ownership or by selling and moving to another home. W e find that, overall,

households are unlikely to discontinue home ownership. Ownership terminations are

most likely to occur following the death of a spouse or entry of a family member into a

nursing home. But even in these circumstances, selling the home is the exception and

not the rule. In the absence of a precipitating shock, it is much more likely that a family

will sell and buy a new home than discontinue ownership. And, households who sell

and buy again tend to increase rather than reduce home equity. That is, assets are

transferred to housing.

       Overall--combining the effects of discontinuing ownership and moving to another

home--we find that housing equity of HRS households increases with age, and the

equity of AHEAD households declines somewhat. The overall decline in the housing

equity of the older AHEAD households is about 1.76 percent per year, which is

accounted for primarily by a 7.84 percent decline among households experiencing

precipitating shocks to family status.   Families that remain intact reduce housing equity

very little, only 0.11 percent per year for two-person households and 1.15 percent per

year for one-person households.

       We use two approaches to determine whether households wish to reduce home

equity as they age. One approach is to compare the change in the home equity of

movers to the change for stayers. If households withdraw equity when they sell and

move to a new home, the reduction in the equity of the movers will typically be greater

than the change for stayers. These comparisons, however, are confounded by the

tendency of the self-assessed home values to exceed actual values, as measured by

selling prices. A comparison of the selling prices of homes with the prior self-

assessment of home values shows that home values reported prior to a sale far exceed


                                          Page 36
realized sales prices. Comparing the change in the home equity of movers and stayers,

but accounting for this bias, we conclude that families who sell and buy a new home

increase home equity on average.

       The second approach is based on the comparison of the selling price of the old

home (minus the mortgage on the home) with the reported equity value in the newly

purchased home. We believe that these are the most reliable data on the change in

home equity when families move from one home to another. Based on these “sale

price” data, we find that on average households increase home equity when they move

to a new house. We also find, however, that equity-rich and income-poor families tend

to reduce home values when they sell and buy a new house, while equity-poor and

income-rich families tend to increase home equity. For continuing two-person HRS

households, for example, we estimate that the between-wave reduction for those at the

80th equity quantile and at the 20th income quantile is -$15,422. On the other hand, we

estimate that households at the 20th equity quantile and the 80th income quantile,

increase equity by +$54,778.

       These results suggest that in considering whether families have saved enough to

maintain their pre-retirement standard of living after retirement, housing equity should

not, in general, be counted on to support non-housing consumption. Families
apparently do not intend to finance general retirement consumption by saving through

investment in housing, as they might through a 401(k) plan or through some other

financial form of saving. Rather we believe the findings here, as well as our earlier

findings, suggest that families purchase homes to provide an environment in which to

live, even as they age through retirement years. In this case, the typical aging

household is unlikely to seek a reverse annuity mortgage to withdraw assets from home

equity. It may be appropriate, however, to think of housing as a reserve or buffer that

can be used in catastrophic circumstances that result in a change in household


                                         Page 37
structure. In this case, having used the home equity along the way–through a reverse

mortgage for example–would defeat the purpose of saving home equity for a “rainy

day.”

        Although these results are based largely on new HRS and AHEAD data files, and

are based on different methods of analysis, the findings correspond closely to the

conclusions we reached in our earlier papers, based on different data sources. These

conclusions also correspond closely to the findings of a recent survey of older

households sponsored by the American Association of Retired Persons (AARP),

showing that the preponderance of older families agree with the statement that: “What

I'd really like to do is stay in my current residence as long as possible’."16 Like our

findings, the results of the AARP survey also imply that most households do not intend

to liquidate housing equity to support general non-housing retirement consumption as

they age.




        16
             More detail is presented in Venti and Wise [2001].
                                             Page 38
                        APPENDIX: MORTALITY CORRECTION



       The analyses using the SIPP data are based on cohorts constructed from cross-

section surveys. For example, the home ownership (or home equity) profile for a cohort

is constructed by combining data for all households age A in the first survey year with

data for households age A+T from a survey T years later. If the likelihood of survival

from A to A+T is related to wealth, then these cohort profiles can be affected by

differential mortality. We correct for this problem by reweighting the sample.

Households are assigned an adjusted weight that is inversely related to the probability

of survival from age A to age A+T.

       Baseline estimates of these survival probabilities for one and two person

households are obtained from waves 1 and 2 of AHEAD. A one-person household

“survives” if the person is present in waves 1 and 2. A two-person household “survives”

if both members are present in the second wave. Survival probabilities are estimated

from the AHEAD for five year age intervals and for housing equity quartiles.

Households that are older and households that have lower levels of housing wealth are

less likely to survive. Since the AHEAD only includes households age 70 and over,

published survival rates by age (from the NCHS) were used to extrapolate the AHEAD

survival probabilities back to age 50.

       The final step is to reweight the data . For each household observation of age A

and housing equity quartile Q, the SIPP frequency weight is multiplied by the inverse of

the cumulative survival probability. The survival probabilities are assumed to be one




                                         Page 39
for households less than age 50. Thus households that are unlikely to survive are given

higher weights. For each observation the probability of surviving to age A given equity

quartile Q is



                                     A
                     S ( A, Q) =   ∏ s(a , a + 1: Q)
                                   a = 50




where s(a,a+1;Q) is the one-year survival rate for a household in equity quartile Q.

For each household in each year the SIPP frequency weight is multiplied by the inverse

of S(A,Q).




                                            Page 40
                                     REFERENCES



American Association of Retired Persons. May 2000. “Fixing to Stay: A National
Survey of Housing and Home Modification Issues.”

Congressional Budget Office. 1993. Baby Boomers in Retirement: An Early
Perspective. September.

Bernheim, B. Douglas. 1992. Is the Baby Boom Generation Preparing Adequately for
Retirement. Technical Report. Merrill Lynch. Princeton N.J.

Engen, Eric, William Gale and Cori Uccello. 1999. “The Adequacy of Retirement
Saving.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Number 2, pp. 65-165.

Feinstein, Jonathan and Daniel McFadden. 1989. "The Dynamics of Housing Demand
by the Elderly: Wealth, Cash Flow, and Demographic Effects", in D. Wise (ed.) The
Economics of Aging, University of Chicago Press.

Gustman, Alan and Thomas Steinmeier. 1999. “Effects of Pensions on Savings:
Analysis with Data From the Health and Retirement Study.” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy. Vol. 50. June. P271-324.

Hurd, Michael. “Portfolio Holdings by the Elderly.” Mimeograph. December 1999.

Juster, F. Thomas and Richard Suzman. 1995. “An Overview of the Health and
Retirement Study.” Journal of Human Resources. Vol. 30. PS7-S56.

Kiel, Katherine and Jeffrey Zabel. 1999. “The Accuracy of Owner-Provided House
Values: The 1978-91 American Housing Survey.” Real Estate Economics. Vol. 27 no. 2
p. 263-298.

Mayer, Christopher and Katerina Simons. 1994. “Reverse Mortgages and the Liquidity
of Housing Wealth.” Journal of the American Real Estate and Urban Economics
Association. Vol. 22 No. 2 pp. 235-255.

Megbolugbe, Issac, Jarjisu Sa-Aadu, and James Shilling. 1997. “Oh, Yes, the Elderly
Will Reduce Housing Equity under the Right Circumstances.” Journal of Housing
Research. Vol. 8 no. 1 pp53-74.

Merrill, Sally R. 1984. "Home Equity and the Elderly", in H. Aaron and G. Burtless (ed.),
Retirement and Economic Behavior. Brookings Institution.

Merrill, Sally R, Meryl Finkel and Nadine Kutty. 1994. "Potential Beneficiaries From
Reverse Mortgage Products for Elderly Homeowners: An Analysis of AHS Data.”
Journal of the American Real Estate and Urban Economics Association. Vol. 22 No. 2
pp. 257-299.



                                         Page 41
Moore, James F. and Olivia S. Mitchell. 1997. “Projected Retirement Wealth and
Savings Adequacy in the Health and Retirement Study.” NBER Working Paper No.
6240, October.

Sheiner, Louise and David Weil. 1993. “The Housing Wealth of the Aged.” NBER
Working Paper No. 4115.

Venti, Steven F., and David A. Wise. 1989. "Aging, Moving, and Housing Wealth", in D.
Wise (ed.) The Economics of Aging, University of Chicago Press.

Venti, Steven F., and David A. Wise. 1990. "But They Don't Want To Reduce Housing
Equity", in D. Wise (ed.) Issues in the Economics of Aging, University of Chicago
Press.

Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise. 1991. “Aging and the Income Value of Housing
Wealth.” Journal of Public Economics. Vol. 44. P. 371-397.

Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise. 2001. “Aging and Housing Equity.” in Bodie,
Hammond, and Mitchell (ed.) Innovations for Financing Retirement. University of
Pennsylvania Press and the Pension Research Council.




                                       Page 42
   Table 1. Household status sequences in the HRS and in the AHEAD/HRS

         Sequences in the HRS                  Sequences in the AHEAD/HRS

Sequence      N      All %   Group %         Sequence    N     All %    Group %

 2222        3311   43.75    68.39%            222      1203   19.93    55.75%
 2220         225    2.97     4.65%           22D        293    4.86    13.58%
 222D         156    2.06     3.22%            220       133    2.2      6.16%
 222S         42     0.55     0.87%           22N        33     0.55     1.53%
 222N         10     0.13     0.21%            22T       27     0.45     1.25%
 2200         307    4.06     6.34%           2DD        234    3.88    10.84%
 22DD         131    1.73     2.71%            200       112    1.86     5.19%
 22SS         47     0.62     0.97%           2DT         47    0.78     2.18%
 22D0         10     0.13     0.21%           2ND         26    0.43     1.20%
 2000         377    4.98     7.79%            2TT        20    0.33     0.93%
 2DDD         116    1.53     2.40%           2D0         19    0.31     0.88%
 2SSS         94     1.24     1.94%           2NN         11    0.18     0.51%
 2D00         15     0.2      0.31%          Subtotal   2158            100.00%
Subtotal     4841            100.00%

 1111        1832   24.21    68.61%            111      2217   36.74    57.70%
 1110         119    1.57     4.46%           11D        405    6.71    10.54%
 111D         52     0.69     1.95%           11N        186    3.08     4.84%
 111S         12     0.16     0.45%            110       142    2.35     3.70%
 111N         10     0.13     0.37%           1DD        462    7.66    12.02%
 1100         179    2.37     6.70%            100       266    4.41     6.92%
 11DD         69     0.91     2.58%           1ND         98    1.62     2.55%
 11SS         10     0.13     0.37%           1NN         66    1.09     1.72%
 1000         323    4.27    12.10%          Subtotal   3842            100.00%
 1DDD         64     0.85     2.40%
Subtotal     2670            100.00%          Other      35     0.6
                                               All      6035   100.02
 Other        57    0.74
  All        7568   99.98




                                   Page 43
Table 2. Percent Own, Rent, and Other By Age, from Wave 1 of the HRS and Wave
                                1 of the AHEAD

                One-Person Households            Two-Person Households
   age        own        rent      other       own        rent      other

  51-53       58.3       34.0       7.7        87.7       10.8        1.5
  54-56       54.5       37.0        8.4       90.9       7.7         1.4
  57-61       62.5       29.5        8.0       90.5       7.1         2.4
  70-74       67.5       22.8        9.8       91.1       7.0         1.9
  75-79       64.0       25.6       10.3       87.8       8.6         3.7
  80-84       60.3       25.3       14.4       81.1       12.8        6.0
   85+        48.4       31.8       19.9       78.7       15.1        6.2




                                   Page 44
Table 3. Tenure transitions, by initial tenure and by change in household status,
                  for HRS and AHEAD households, in percent.

                         Initial Homeowners in the HRS

 Change in                     Subsequent Period
 Household
                  Tenure        Status (%)           % Move              N
  Status

     22       own                   98.3               7.1              9173
              rent or other         1.7                65.7              165

     2D       own                   95.6               8.4              316
              rent or other         4.4                55.6              13

     2N       own                   88.6               18.9              12
              rent or other         11.4                0                 1

     11       own                   95.2               6.1              3150
              rent or other         4.8                54.5              169

     1N       own                   100                  0                3
              rent or other          0                                    0


                        Initial Homeowners in the AHEAD

 Change in                     Subsequent Period
 Household
                  Tenure        Status (%)           % Move              N
  Status

     22       own                   96.9               3.9              2332
              rent or other         3.1                38.5              75

     2D       own                   88.8               9.4              358
              rent or other         11.2               76.1              51

     2N       own                    75                6.4               35
              rent or other          25                79.9              14

     11       own                   91.3               4.5              2841
              rent or other         8.7                47.2              269

     1N       own                   39.9                0                57
              rent or other         60.1               92.6              79




                                     Page 45
                                  Initial Renters in the HRS

   Change in                          Subsequent Period
   Household
                     Tenure            Status (%)              % Move              N
    Status

       22        own                       22.3                 51.3              220
                 rent or other             77.7                 21.1              822

       2D        own                       12.4                 46.8              8
                 rent or other             87.6                 40.2              64

       2N        own                        0                                      0
                 rent or other             100                  47.5               5

       11        own                       11.4                 46.5              239
                 rent or other             88.6                 22.2             2002

       1N        own                        0                                      0
                 rent or other             100                  43.6               3


                                 Initial Renters in the AHEAD

   Change in                          Subsequent Period
   Household
                     Tenure            Status (%)              % Move              N
    Status

       22        own                       11.9                 8.8               31
                 rent or other             88.1                 10.4              253

       2D        own                       14.5                 49.5              11
                 rent or other             85.5                 22.1              77

       2N        own                        5                    0                 1
                 rent or other             95                   34.3              17

       11        own                        7.4                 12.6              128
                 rent or other             92.6                 14.4             1744

       1N        own                        3.4                  0                 7
                 rent or other             96.6                 89.1              204

Note: Based on authors’ estimates from the HRS and AHEAD. All percentages are
based on weighted samples. However, the sample sizes presented in the table are
unweighted. Initial renters in the last two panels include households with “other” living
arrangements.




                                           Page 46
Table 4. Change in the housing equity of initial owners and initial renters, by
                         change in family status.

                       Means                           Medians
Family    Change Change in   Initial             Change in     Initial   Number
Status      in    Housing  Housing                Housing    Housing
          Tenure  Equity     Equity                Equity      Equity

 HRS
  22
            OO        6565      102893              1695        81326     8919
            OR       -61073      61073             -50905       50905      164
            RO        64117        0                35000         0        215
            RR           0         0                  0           0        822
            All        6192      92472                0         72721     10120
  2D
            OO        6223       84329              1734        72721      296
            OR       -75575      75575             -52281       52281      12
            RO        45707        0                6000          0         8
            RR           0         0                  0           0        64
            All        3345      69176                0         56928      380
  2N
            OO        4203       83650              2450        79994      12
            OR          0          0                  0           0         1
            RO                                                              0
            RR          0          0                 0            0         5
            All       2850       56727               0          34854      18

  11        OO         642       96874               621        62333     2961
            OR       -50716      50716             -40663       40663      161
            RO        51883        0                36361         0        228
            RR           0         0                  0           0       2002
            All        1126      57784                0         20897     5352
  1N
            OO       -44095      77747             -3971        33971       2
            OR                                                              0
            RO                                                              0
            RR          0          0                 0            0         3
            All      -25501      44964             -3971        33971       5




                                    Page 47
AHEAD

 22
        OO     -4555   116475       -2217   90242   2309
        OR    -80472    80472      -67682   67682    74
        RO     79697      0         45000     0      31
        RR       0        0            0      0      253
        All    -5241   103938        -207   80217   2667
 2D
        OO     -7182   107705       -2631   80217   354
        OR    -80749    80749      -73322   73322   50
        RO     70915      0         58825     0      11
        RR       0        0           0       0      77
        All   -10956    86415         0     62042   492
 2N
        OO    -18869   122320       -9941   95882    35
        OR    -97003    97003      -84602   84602    14
        RO     13369      0         13369     0       1
        RR       0        0           0       0      17
        All   -29941    90771       -9782   62042    67

 11     OO     -4675   103232       -1739   74869   2801
        OR    -81412    81412      -67682   67682    266
        RO     73623      0         50269     0      128
        RR       0        0           0       0     1744
        All    -5265    64540         0     37434   4939
 1N
        OO    -13013   82910        -6040   69521   57
        OR    -72546   72546       -56401   56401   79
        RO     57386     0          65000     0      7
        RR       0       0            0       0     204
        All   -18043   30229          0       0     347




                         Page 48
 Table 5. Mean Change in Housing Equity of Initial Owners, by change in family
 status and by subsequent tenure, for movers and stayers, means and medians.

                                    Mean Changes

                     Tenure in Subsequent Period      Number of Observations       Initial
 Change                                                                            Home
                         own rent
in Status                            or                       rent or
                                            all        own              all        Equity
                                 other                         other
  HRS

   22       all         6569     -54155        5855      8918     106   9024        102310
            stayer      6686                   6686      8295       0   8295        102852
            mover       5074     -54155       -3305       623     106    729         96335

   2D       all         6288     -28079       5547        294       7    301         83212
            stayer      8997                  8997        266       0    266         83939
            mover     -21935     -28079     -23169         28       7     35         77158

   2N       all         4203                  4203         12       0     12         83650
            stayer      4750                  4750          9       0      9         88372
            mover       1863                  1863          3       0      3         63426

   11       all           642    -48476       -697       2961      86   3047         95555
            stayer        935                  935       2779       0   2779         96012
            mover       -3739    -48476     -17549        182      86    268         90829

   1N       all       -44095                -44095          2       0          0     77747
            stayer    -44095                -44095          2       0          2     77747
            mover                                           0       0          0         0
AHEAD

   22       all        -4555     -73974      -5367       2309      30   2339        115978
            stayer     -4103                 -4103       2213       0   2213        115103
            mover     -15877     -73974     -29557         96      30    126        132706

   2D       all        -7182     -81900     -13805        354      39    393        105418
            stayer     -5777                 -5777        322       0    322        102228
            mover     -20432     -81900     -51390         32      39     71        120352

   2N       all       -18869    -105730     -37168         35      12     47        118825
            stayer    -18498                -18498         33       0     33        123456
            mover     -24319    -105730     -90020          2      12     14        105715

   11       all        -4675     -92350      -8446       2801     126   2927        102764
            stayer     -4011                 -4011       2671       0   2671        102209
            mover     -18500     -92350     -55077        130     126    256        108598

   1N       all       -13013     -73671     -48315         57      72    129         77533
            stayer    -13013                -13013         57       0     57         82910
            mover                -73671     -73671          0      72     72         73671



                                          Page 49
                                       Medians

                     Tenure in Subsequent Period      Number of Observations       Initial
 Change                                                                            Home
                         own rent
in Status                            or                       rent or
                                            all        own              all        Equity
                                 other                         other
  HRS

   22       all          693     -50905        1474      8918     106   9024         81033
            stayer      1745                   1745      8295       0   8295         81326
            mover       -360     -50905       -4946       623     106    729         72721

   2D       all         -1632    -32530       1474        294       7    301         71491
            stayer       2217                 2217        266       0    266         73193
            mover       -5481    -32530     -10999         28       7     35         42594

   2N       all         6794                  2450         12       0     12         79994
            stayer     -2311                 -2311          9       0      9         79994
            mover      15899                 15899          3       0      3         87989

   11       all           125    -40633         222      2961      86   3047         60493
            stayer        639                   639      2779       0   2779         62333
            mover        -389    -40633       -8854       182      86    268         49376

   1N       all         -3971                 -3971         2       0          0     33971
            stayer      -3971                 -3971         2       0          2     33971
            mover                                           0       0          0

AHEAD

   22       all         -5179    -64173      -2348       2309      30   2339         90242
            stayer      -2087                -2087       2213       0   2213         89114
            mover       -8271    -64173     -16869         96      30    126        101608

   2D       all       -10008     -73322      -4869        354      39    393         80090
            stayer     -2303                 -2303        322       0    322         76706
            mover     -17712     -73322     -50761         32      39     71         80217

   2N       all       -26230     -90242     -13978         35      12     47         90242
            stayer     -9941                 -9941         33       0     33         95882
            mover     -42520     -90242     -54145          2      12     14         90242

   11       all         -2087    -73322      -2434       2801     126   2927         73799
            stayer      -1739                -1739       2671       0   2671         73322
            mover       -2434    -73322     -37434        130     126    256         74869

   1N       all         -6040    -64173     -39921         57      72    129         64173
            stayer      -6040                -6040         57       0     57         69521
            mover                -64173     -64173          0      72     72         64173




                                          Page 50
           Table 6. Comparison of Estimated Home Values and Sale Prices

                             Estimate of       Reported
             Interval and                                       Mean        Percent
  Survey                    Home Value in     Sale Price in
             Sample Size                                      Difference   Difference
                             Initial Year      Next Year

                                        Means
   HRS        1992-1994
                N=250         135,607             115,665      19,942        14.7

              1994-1996
                N=233         157,068             123,883      33,186        21.1

              1996-1998
                N=236         162,264             138,206      24,048        14.8


  AHEAD       1993-1995
                N=163         101,568             81,625       19,943        19.6

              1995-1998
                N=179         131,382             109,447      21,935        16.7


                                        Medians
   HRS        1992-1994
                N=250         106,151             96,208        7,117         6.7

              1994-1996
                N=233         109,838             98,347        8,083         7.4

              1996-1998
                N=236         140,159             122,276       8,290         5.9


  AHEAD       1993-1995
                N=163          83,848             69,094        5,888          7

              1995-1998
                N=179          89,445             77,081        6,546         7.3

Source: Authors’ calculations from the AHEAD and HRS. All figures are in 1998 dollars
are use household weights.




                                        Page 51
Table 7. Estimates of the mover equity effect using stayers as the “control” group,
 for initial homeowners, for two- and one-person households, for the HRS and the
                    AHEAD households, by estimation method.

                         OLS Estimates                      Median Regression Estimates
 Change in       time              mover                     time            mover
                             t                t                        t                t
 household      effect   statistic effect                   effect statistic effect statistic
                                          statistic
   status          (t)              (m)                        (t)            (m)

    HRS
   2 to 2       6686       2.26     -1612    0.15           1745    6.98    -2104     2.24
   2 to D       8997       2.62    -30931    2.67           2216    1.66    -7698     1.76
   2 to N       4750       0.26     -2887    0.07           -2311   0.2     18210     1.16
   1 to 1        935       0.45     -4674    0.57            639    1.8     -1028     0.73
   1 to N

  AHEAD
   2 to 2       -4103      2.46    -11774    1.38           -2087   4.05     -6185    2.46
   2 to D       -5777      1.5     -14656    1.18           -2303   1.51    -15409    3.16
   2 to N      -18498      2.61     -5821    0.21           -9941   3.77    -32579    4.49
   1 to 1       -4011      2.57    -14489    1.99           -1739   5.28      -696    0.47
   1 to N

Note: Too few observations to estimate 1 to N transitions




                                         Page 52
     Table 8. Comparison of initial reported home equity, selling price minus
              mortgage, and home equity at the end of the interval.

                    Initial reported               Reported equity
                                     Selling price    at end of      Sample size
     Interval       equity prior to minus mortgage     interval
                      home sale

                Mean for Households that Purchased Another House
      HRS
    1992-1994           76518           64940           89317           181
    1994-1996          112382           86599          126228           174
    1996-1998          108412           89038          120990           166
     AHEAD
    1993-1995          108821           89284          110690            71
    1995-1998          154104          114388          123737            61

           Mean for Households that Did Not Purchase Another House
      HRS
    1992-1994         61851           55697           0                  55
    1994-1996         52308           57226           0                  48
    1996-1998         72408           86769           0                  38
     AHEAD
    1993-1995         75857           61543           0                  44
    1995-1998         78005           72313           0                  51


             Median for Households that Purchased Another House
      HRS
    1992-1994         57679          49806          65903               181
    1994-1996         74941          69045          88852               174
    1996-1998         82636          72082         110964               166
     AHEAD
    1993-1995         78258          67826          79590                71
    1995-1998         95013          70606          96000                61


              Median Households that Did Not Purchase Another House
        HRS
    1992-1994             55137         39649           0                55
    1994-1996             32819         42664           0                48
    1996-1998             69561         85949           0                38
       AHEAD
    1993-1995             72668         65244           0                44
    1995-1998             79590         73213           0                51
Notes:
1. No imputed variables are used.
2. All values are in 1998 dollars.
3. The data are not weighted.




                                     Page 53
Table 9. Estimates of the change in home equity for movers who bought another
 home, by method of estimations, for HRS and AHEAD intervals, in 1998 dollars.

                      Estimated                  t            Sample size
    Interval          Change in              statistic
                     Home Equity

                                OLS Estimates
     HRS
   1992-1994            24377                 3.54                181
   1994-1996            39629                 2.86                174
   1996-1998            31952                 4.55                166
    AHEAD
   1993-1995            21406                 1.37                 71
   1995-1998            9349                  0.59                 61

 HRS (pooled
   waves)
    2 to 2              31345                 6.39                373
    1 to 1              40014                 1.73                96
    other               20742                 1.5                 52
AHEAD (pooled
   waves)
    2 to 2              13887                 0.91                 63
    1 to 1              9052                  0.45                 52
    other               43794                 2.01                 17

                        Median Regression Estimates
     HRS
   1992-1994            6303                  1.86                181
   1994-1996            15455                 2.35                174
   1996-1998            19803                 3.42                166
    AHEAD
   1993-1995             1066                 0.24                 71
   1995-1998             9818                 1.12                 61

 HRS (pooled
   waves)
   2 to 2               17153                 4.01                373
   1 to 1                -294                 0.04                86
    other               8856                  1.11                52
AHEAD (pooled
   waves)
   2 to 2               3438                  0.37                 63
   1 to 1                 0                     0                  52
    other               10111                 0.55                 17




                                   Page 54
Table 10. Simulated move probabilities at selected income and home equity
                quartilies, for HRS and AHEAD households
        Buy Another Home                                 Discontinue Ownership

                              HRS 2 to 2 Households
                     equity                                         equity
income      20th      50th       80th         income        20th     50th        80th
 20th       0.063               0.063             20th      0.015            0.013
 50th                 0.065                       50th               0.013
 80th       0.069               0.070             80th      0.011            0.009

                              HRS 1 to 1 Households

 20th       0.055               0.056             20th      0.031            0.027
 50th                 0.058                       50th               0.026
 80th       0.061               0.062             80th      0.023            0.020

                     HRS Other Households (2D, 2N, 1N)

 20th       0.090               0.091             20th      0.031            0.027
 50th                 0.094                       50th               0.027
 80th       0.099               0.099             80th      0.024            0.021

                         AHEAD 2 to 2 Households

 20th       0.034               0.041             20th      0.017            0.015
 50th                 0.037                       50th               0.015
 80th       0.037               0.043             80th      0.014            0.011

                         AHEAD 1 to 1 Households
 20th       0.039               0.047             20th      0.049            0.044
 50th                 0.043                       50th               0.044
 80th       0.042               0.049             80th      0.041            0.035

                    AHEAD Other Households (2D, 2N, 1N)

 20th       0.049               0.059             20th      0.228            0.211
 50th                 0.054                       50th               0.212
 80th       0.053               0.062             80th      0.204            0.182




                                        Page 55
 Table 11. Simulated changes in housing equity at selected income and home
equity quartilies for households purchasing another home, for HRS and AHEAD
                                  households
                 OLS                               Median Regression

                               HRS 2 to 2 Households
                      equity                                      equity
 income      20th      50th       80th         income     20th     50th     80th
   20th      38176               -15422            20th   24353            -23870
   50th               25061                        50th           11929
   80th      54778                1854             80th   37510            -9537

                               HRS 1 to 1 Households

   20th      36090               -17508            20th   13825            -34397
   50th               22975                        50th            1402
   80th      52692                -232             80th   26982            -20065

                      HRS Other Households (2D, 2N, 1N)

   20th      36041               -17557            20th   14588            -33635
   50th               22926                        50th            2164
   80th      52644                -280             80th   27744            -19303

                          AHEAD 2 to 2 Households

   20th      34548               -28386            20th   29758            -46091
   50th               17970                        50th            5337
   80th      52781               -9021             80th   38129            -33449

                          AHEAD 1 to 1 Households
   20th      27834               -35099            20th   8974             -66874
   50th               11256                        50th           -15447
   80th      46067               -15735            80th   17345            -54233

                     AHEAD Other Households (2D, 2N, 1N)

   20th      43547               -19386            20th   29526            -46323
   50th               26970                        50th            5105
   80th      61781                -22              80th   37897            -33681




                                         Page 56
Table 12. Simulated changes in housing equity at selected income and home
 equity quartilies for households not purchasing another home, for HRS and
                             AHEAD households
                OLS                               Median Regression

                              HRS 2 to 2 Households
                     equity                                       equity
income      20th      50th       80th         income      20th     50th     80th
 20th      -53822               -53822            20th   -37994            -37994
 50th                -58323                       50th            -43176
 80th      -65153               -65153            80th   -51040            -51040

                              HRS 1 to 1 Households

 20th      -59492               -59492            20th   -46077            -46077
 50th                -63993                       50th            -51258
 80th      -70823               -70823            80th   -59122            -59122

                     HRS Other Households (2D, 2N, 1N)

 20th      -72577               -72577            20th   -56630            -56630
 50th                -77077                       50th            -61811
 80th      -83907               -83907            80th   -69675            -69675

                         AHEAD 2 to 2 Households

 20th      -54127               -54127            20th   -43203            -43203
 50th                -60653                       50th            -50522
 80th      -72544               -72544            80th   -63859            -63859

                         AHEAD 1 to 1 Households
 20th      -54039               -54039            20th   -51688            -51688
 50th                -60565                       50th            -59007
 80th      -72455               -72455            80th   -72344            -72344

                    AHEAD Other Households (2D, 2N, 1N)

 20th      -78865               -78865            20th   -78698            -78698
 50th                -85391                       50th            -86017
 80th      -97281               -97281            80th   -99354            -99354




                                        Page 57
 Table 13. Summary of annual change in home equity of initial home owners,
 decomposed into probability of a move times the change in equity given the
 move, by family status, for selected equity and income quantiles. Based on
    probit move probability estimates and OLS equity change estimates.
                                             Equity-Income Quantile
                                  50-50     80-20    20-80   80-80    20-20
                 For movers who sell and buy a new home
HRS     22      Prob OmO             .033    .032     .035    .035      .032
                Change|OmO          12531    -7711   27389     927     19088
                Expected Change      815     -486     1890     65      1203
        11      Prob OmO             .029    .028     .031    .031      .028
                Change|OmO          11488    -8754   26346    -116     18045
                Expected Change      667     -490     1607     -7       993
        Other   Prob OmO             .047    .046     .050    .050      .045
                Change|OmO          11463    -8779   26322    -140     18021
                Expected Change     1078     -799     2606     -14     1622
        All     Expected Change      823     -528     1935     42      1221
AHEAD   22      Prob OmO             .015    .017     .015    .018      .014
                Change|OmO          7426    -11730   21810    -3728    14276
                Expected Change      275     -481      807    -160      486
        11      Prob OmO             .018    .019     .017    .020      .016
                Change|OmO          4651    -14504   19036    -6502    11502
                Expected Change      200     -682      800    -319      449
        Other   Prob OmO             .022    .024     .022    .026      .020
                Change|OmO          11145    -8011   25529     -9      17995
                Expected Change      602     -473     1353      0       882
        All     Expected Change      399     -528     1045    -130      650




                                  Page 58
                For movers who sell and discontinue ownership
                                             Equity-Income Quantile
                                     50-50   80-20    20-80     80-80    20-20
HRS     22       Prob OmR            .007     .007     .006      .005     .008
                 Change|OmR         -29162   -26911   -32577    -32577   -26911
                 Expected Change     -379     -350     -359      -293     -404
        11       Prob OmR            .013     .014     .012      .010     .016
                 Change|OmR         -31997   -29746   -35412    -35412   -29746
                 Expected Change     -832     -803     -815      -708     -922
        Other    Prob OmR            .014     .014     .012      .011     .016
                 Change|OmR         -38539   -36289   -41954    -41954   -36289
                 Expected Change     -1041    -980    -1007      -881    -1125
        All      Expected Change     -610     -576     -588      -502     -662
AHEAD   22       Prob OmR            .006     .006     .006      .005     .007
                 Change|OmR         -25063   -22367   -29977    -29977   -22367
                 Expected Change     -376     -336     -420      -330     -380
        11       Prob OmR            .018     .018     .017      .014     .020
                 Change|OmR         -25027   -22330   -29940    -29940   -22330
                 Expected Change     -1101    -983    -1228     -1048    -1094
        Other    Prob OmR            .088     .087     .084      .075     .094
                 Change|OmR         -35286   -32589   -40199    -40199   -32589
                 Expected Change     -7481   -6876    -8200     -7316    -7430
        All      Expected Change     -1918   -1743    -2116     -1849    -1907




                                   Page 59
Table 14. Accounting for the overall change in home equity of initial homeowners
                           in the HRS and the AHEAD

                  Expected Annual Change in Home Equity
 Survey and      Move and                                    Initial home % of initial
                              Discontinue
 household     purchase new home                  All            equity    equity
                                  ownership
  structure        home

HRS
 22                  815              -379            436      75128          0.58
 11                  667              -832           -166      81105         -0.20
 Other              1078             -1041            37       79858          0.05
 All                 823              -610            214      76952          0.28

AHEAD
 22                  275              -376            -101     94257         -0.11
 11                  200             -1101            -901     78496         -1.15
 Other               602             -7481           -6879     87777         -7.84
 All                 399             -1918           -1519     86445         -1.76

column1: Pr(OmO)* E(∆HE|OmO)
column 2: Pr(OmR)* E(∆HE|OmR)
column 3: E(∆HE|O)
column 4: Initial home equity of sellers




                                           Page 60
        Appendix Table 1. Probit Estimates of Move Probabilities and
              Quantiles Used to Simulate Move Probabilities

                               HRS Households

                      Buy Another Home             Discontinue Ownership
      Variable      Estimate       t-stat          Estimate      t-stat
1 to 1               -0.256        -3.24            -0.007        0.06
2 to 2               -0.194        -2.64            -0.303        2.71
Equity                0.001         0.37            -0.006        3.22
Income               0.008          4.09            -0.020        2.66
Equity*Income        -0.000        -1.59             0.000        0.37
Constant             -1.354       -18.92            -1.808       16.81

        Selected Quantiles of Income and Initial Reported Home Equity
                    Income         Equity

       20th          17871          30796
       50th          42986          68192
       80th          81105         131984

                              AHEAD Households

                      Buy Another Home             Discontinue Ownership
                    Estimate       t-stat          Estimate      t-stat
1 to 1               -0.113         1.34            -0.907       13.57
2 to 2               -0.175         1.99            -1.367       15.47
Equity                0.009         3.24            -0.004        0.74
Income               0.014          1.87            -0.024        1.09
Equity*Income        -0.000         2.27            -0.001        0.61
Constant             -1.699        20.83            -0.701        8.89

        Selected Quantiles of Income and Initial Reported Home Equity

                     Income        Equity

       20th          10909          37434
       50th          21433          74869
       80th          40609         139042




                                  Page 61
 Appendix Table 2. OLS and Median Regression Estimates of the Change in
  Home Equity and Quantiles Used to Simulate Changes in Home Equity for
                  Households Purchasing Another Home

                               HRS Households

                               OLS                    Median Regression
      Variable      Estimate          t-stat       Estimate       t-stat
1 to 1                 48.4            0.00          -762.6        0.08
2 to 2                2134.4           0.16          9765.2        1.04
Equity               -5315.7          10.91         -4798.4        8.53
Income               2593.1            4.40          2024.1        2.33
Equity*Income          10.5            1.20           18.4         0.57
Constant            47719.4            3.64        25646.6         2.60
        Selected Quantiles of Income and Initial Reported Home Equity
                    Income         Equity

       20th          17871             30796
       50th          42986             68192
       80th          81105            131984

                              AHEAD Households

                               OLS                    Median Regression
                    Estimate           t-stat      Estimate       t-stat
1 to 1              -15713.5            0.49       -20551.8        0.80
2 to 2               -8999.6            0.29         231.9         0.01
Equity               -6234.6            5.21        -7619.1        4.56
Income                5998.9            1.83         2289.0        0.60
Equity*Income          37.5             0.36         141.5         0.64
Constant            60189.0             1.82       54972.1         1.77

        Selected Quantiles of Income and Initial Reported Home Equity

                     Income           Equity

       20th          10909             37434
       50th          21433             74869
       80th          40609            139042




                                     Page 62
 Appendix Table 3. OLS and Median Regression Estimates of the Change in
  Home Equity and Quantiles Used to Simulate Changes in Home Equity for
                Households Not Purchasing Another Home

                               HRS Households

                               OLS                   Median Regression
      Variable      Estimate           t-stat      Estimate      t-stat
1 to 1              13084.3             0.86       10552.8        0.48
2 to 2              18754.4             1.37       18635.4        0.85
Equity                 0.0              0.00          0.0         0.00
Income               -1791.8            2.40        -2063.0       1.46
Equity*Income          0.0              0.00          0.0         0.00
Constant            -69374.6            5.16       -51943.1       2.63
        Selected Quantiles of Income and Initial Reported Home Equity
                    Income         Equity

       20th          17871             30796
       50th          42986             68192
       80th          81105            131984

                              AHEAD Households

                               OLS                   Median Regression
                    Estimate           t-stat      Estimate      t-stat
1 to 1              24825.9             1.81       27010.7        2.30
2 to 2              24737.6             1.66       35495.2        2.47
Equity                 0.0              0.00          0.0         0.00
Income               -6200.7            2.47        -6954.9       1.43
Equity*Income          0.0              0.00          0.0         0.00
Constant            -72100.7            4.79       -71111.1       6.05

        Selected Quantiles of Income and Initial Reported Home Equity

                     Income           Equity

       20th          10909             37434
       50th          21433             74869
       80th          40609            139042




                                     Page 63
                         Figure 1. Percent Owning for Two-Person Households
                                     Mortality Adjusted Data from SIPP

            100

             90

             80

             70

             60
  Percent




             50

             40

             30

             20

             10

              0
                  26 29 32 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73 75 77 79
                                                       Age



Source: Authors' calculations, SIPP data.
                         Figure 2. Percent Owning for One-Person Households
                                     Mortality Adjusted Data from SIPP

            100

             90

             80

             70

             60
  Percent




             50

             40

             30

             20

             10

              0
                  26 29 32 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73 75 77 79
                                                       Age



Source: Authors' calculations, SIPP data.
                           Figure 3. Home Equity for Two-Person Households
                                  Mortality and CPI Adjusted Data from SIPP

            100000

             90000

             80000

             70000

             60000
  Dollars




             50000

             40000

             30000

             20000

             10000

                 0
                     26 29 32 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73 75 77 79
                                                          Age



Source: Authors' calculations, SIPP data.
                           Figure 4. Home Equity for One-Person Households
                                  Mortality and CPI Adjusted Data from SIPP

            70000


            60000


            50000


            40000
  Dollars




            30000


            20000



            10000


                0
                    26 29 32 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73 75 77 79
                                                         Age



Source: Authors' calculations, SIPP data.
                            Figure 5. Percent Owning for Two-Person Households
                                                     Data from HRS and AHEAD


            100

             90

             80

             70

             60
  Percent




             50

             40

             30

             20

             10

              0
                  50   52   54   56   58   60   62    64   66   68   70    72   74   76   78   80   82   84   86   88   90   92
                                                                          Age



Source: Authors' calculations, HRS and AHEAD data.
                            Figure 6. Percent Owning for One-Person Households
                                                 Data from HRS and AHEAD

            100

            90

            80

            70

            60
  Percent




            50

            40

            30

            20

            10

             0
                  50   52   54   56   58   60   62   64   66   68   70   72    74   76   78   80   82   84   86   88   90   92   95
                                                                         Age



Source: Authors' calculations, HRS and AHEAD data.
                          Figure 7. Mean Home Equity for Two-Person Households
                                                   Data from HRS and AHEAD

            140000

            130000
            120000
            110000
            100000
             90000

             80000
  Dollars




             70000
             60000
             50000
             40000

             30000

             20000
             10000

                 0
                     50   52   54   56   58   60   62   64   66   68   70   72   74   76   78   80   82   84   86   88   90   93
                                                                        Age



Source: Authors' calculations, HRS and AHEAD data.
                     Figure 8. Mean Home Equity for One-Person Households
                                       Data from HRS and AHEAD

            110000

            100000

             90000

             80000

             70000

             60000
  Dollars




             50000

             40000

             30000

             20000

             10000

                 0
                     50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 95
                                                     Age


Source: Authors' calculations, HRS and AHEAD data.
                          Figure 9. Median Home Equity for Two-Person Households
                                                    Data from HRS and AHEAD

            140000

            130000
            120000
            110000
            100000
             90000

             80000
  Dollars




             70000
             60000
             50000
             40000

             30000

             20000
             10000

                 0
                     50    52   54   56   58   60   62   64   66   68   70   72   74   76   78   80   82   84   86   88   90   93
                                                                         Age



Source: Authors' calculations, HRS and AHEAD data.
                          Figure 10. Median Home Equity for One-Person Households
                                                    Data from HRS and AHEAD

            110000

            100000

             90000

             80000

             70000

             60000
  Dollars




             50000

             40000

             30000

             20000

             10000

                 0
                     50    52   54   56   58   60   62   64   66   68   70   72    74   76   78   80   82   84   86   88   90   92   95
                                                                             Age



Source: Authors' calculations, HRS and AHEAD data.
                          Figure 11. Mean Non-Housing Equity for Two-Person Households
                                            Data from HRS and AHEAD

            500000

            450000

            400000

            350000

            300000
  Dollars




            250000

            200000

            150000

            100000

             50000

                 0
                     50    52   54   56   58   60   62   64   66   68   70   72   74   76   78   80   82   84   86   88   90   93
                                                                         Age



Source: Authors' calculations, HRS and AHEAD data.
                          Figure 12. Mean Non-Housing Equity for One-Person Households
                                            Data from HRS and AHEAD

            240000



            200000



            160000
  Dollars




            120000



             80000



             40000



                 0
                     50    52   54   56   58   60   62   64   66   68   70   72    74   76   78   80   82   84   86   88   90   92   95
                                                                             Age



Source: Authors' calculations, HRS and AHEAD data.
                      Figure 13. Median Non-Housing Equity for Two-Person Households
                                         Data from HRS and AHEAD

            200000

            180000

            160000

            140000

            120000
  Dollars




            100000

             80000

             60000

             40000

             20000

                 0
                     50   52   54   56   58   60   62   64   66   68   70   72   74   76   78   80   82   84   86   88   90   93
                                                                        Age



Source: Authors' calculations, HRS and AHEAD data.
                         Figure 14. Median Non-Housing Equity for One-Person Households
                                            Data from HRS and AHEAD

            50000




            40000




            30000
  Dollars




            20000




            10000




                0
                    50    52   54   56   58   60   62   64   66   68   70   72    74   76   78   80   82   84   86   88   90   92   95
                                                                            Age



Source: Authors' calculations, HRS and AHEAD data.
