NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE TRANSITION TO PERSONAL ACCOUNTS AND INCREASING
RETIREMENT WEALTH: MACRO AND MICRO EVIDENCE
James M. Poterba
Steven F. Venti
David A. Wise
Working Paper 8610
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8610
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2001

This paper was written while Poterba was a visiting fellow at the Hoover Institution. We are grateful to the
National Institute on Aging, the Hoover Institution, and the National Science Foundation for financial
support, and to Gary Engelhardt, Bill Gale, Al Gustman, Syl Scheiber, Jon Skinner, Tom Steinmeier and
participants in the Berkeley Department Seminar, the Stanford Public Economics workshop, and two NBER
meetings for helpful comments. We also thank Dan Beller at the Pension and Welfare Benefits
Administration of the United States Department of Labor for generous help in understanding the Form 5500
data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 2001 by James M. Poterba, Steven F. Venti and David A. Wise. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Transition to Personal Accounts and Increasing Retirement Wealth:
Macro and Micro Evidence
James M. Poterba, Steven F. Venti and David A. Wise
NBER Working Paper No. 8610
November 2001
ABSTRACT

Retirement saving has changed dramatically over the last two decades. There has been a shift from
employer-managed defined benefit pensions to defined contribution retirement saving plans that are largely
controlled by employees. In 1980, 92 percent of private retirement saving contributions were to employer-based
plans and 64 percent of these contributions were to defined benefit plans. Today, about 85 percent of private
contributions are to plans in which individuals decide how much to contribute to the plan, how to invest plan
assets, and how and when to withdraw money from the plan. In this paper we use both macro and micro data to
describe the change in retirement assets and in retirement saving. We give particular attention to the possible
substitution of pension assets in one plan for assets in another plan, such as the substitution of 401(k) assets for
defined benefit plan assets.
Aggregate data show that between 1975 and 1999 assets to support retirement increased about five-fold
relative to wage and salary income. This increase suggests large increases in the wealth of future retirees. The
enormous increase in defined contribution plan assets dwarfed any potential displacement of defined benefit plan
assets. In addition, in recent years the annual “retirement plan contribution rate,” defined as retirement plan
contributions as a percentage of NIPA personal income, has been over 5 percent. This is much higher than the
NIPA total personal saving rate, which has been close to zero.
Retirement saving as a share of personal income today would likely be at least one percentage point
greater had it not been for legislation in the 1980s that limited employer contributions to defined benefit pension
plans, and the reduction in defined benefit plan contributions associated with the rising stock market of the 1990s.
It is also likely that the “retirement plan contribution rate” would be much higher today if it were not for the 1986
retrenchment of the IRA program.
Rising retirement plan contributions, as well as favorable rates of return on retirement plan assets in the
1990s, explain the large increase in these assets relative to income. Employee retirement saving under a defined
contribution plan is easily measured and quite transparent to the employee. On the other hand, annual employee
“saving” under a defined benefit plan is more difficult to measure. It is also less likely to be clearly understood by
employees. The average annual saving rate under a typical 401(k) plan is roughly twice as high as the average
saving rate under a typical defined benefit plan, when properly measured. In addition, the early retirement
incentives inherent in the provisions of most defined benefit plans will tend to reduce the aggregate accumulation
of defined benefit retirement assets relative to defined contribution assets, since defined contribution participants
are likely to work longer and contribute for more years.
The micro data show no evidence that the accumulation of 401(k) assets has been offset by a reduction
in defined benefit assets. Because annual “saving” is much greater under 401(k) than under defined benefit plans,
assets at retirement after lifetime employment under a 401(k) plan would typically be much higher than under a
defined benefit plan. In addition, a large fraction of new 401(k) enrollees retained defined benefit coverage, which
probably further increased their retirement saving.
James M. Poterba
MIT and NBER
David A. Wise
Harvard University, NBER and Hoover Institution

Steven F. Venti
Dartmouth College and NBER

The transition from employer managed defined benefit pensions to retirement
saving plans that are largely managed and controlled by employees has been the most
striking change in retirement saving over the last two decades. Individual managed and
controlled retirement accounts, particularly 401(k) plans but also 403(b) plans for nonprofit organizations, 457 plans for state and local employees, the Thrift Savings Plan for
federal employees, Keogh plans for self-employed workers, and Individual Retirement
Accounts (IRAs), have grown enormously. Employer-provided defined benefit (DB)
pension plans have declined in importance. In 1980, 92 percent of private retirement
saving contributions were to employer-based plans; 64 percent of these contributions
were to DB plans. In 1999, about 85 percent of private contributions were to accounts
in which individuals controlled how much to contribute to the plan, how to invest plan
assets, and how and when to withdraw money from the plans.
We consider the changes in the magnitude and the composition of saving for
retirement over the last two decades. We begin with an analysis of aggregate data on
retirement plan contributions. We then turn to micro data, describe patterns in these
data, and try to reconcile these patterns with the aggregate data. We document the
changes in aggregate retirement saving over the past twenty-five years and describe
how these changes are related to the shift from employer-sponsored defined benefit
plans to individual-controlled retirement saving. We then investigate whether the shift
toward individual retirement saving, and the accumulation of retirement assets in these
accounts, has been offset by a reduction in the assets in other retirement saving plans.
In a series of earlier papers, summarized in Poterba, Venti, and Wise (hereafter
Page 1

PVW) [1996a and 1998a], we found large net saving effects of IRAs and 401(k)s. We
emphasized the potential offsets between saving in self-directed retirement accounts,
other forms of financial asset saving, and the accumulation of home equity. On balance
we found little, if any, offset in these cases. More recently, Benjamin [2000] and Pence
[2001] have also found little or no offset between 401(k) contributions and non-401(k)
financial asset saving, although the latter study also found little evidence that 401(k)s
increased total wealth. Recent work by Engen and Gale [2000] finds little offset among
low earners, but more substantial offsets among high earners.
Much less attention has been directed to the possible offset of personal
retirement assets by a reduction in the assets in DB pension plans. Engen, Gale, and
Scholz [1994] found a negative relationship between participation in defined benefit
pension plans and 401(k) plan assets in the 1987 and 1991 Surveys of Income and
Program Participation. Papke [1999] concluded that between 1985 and 1992 about
one-fifth of ongoing sponsors of DB plans terminated their plans and adopted or
retained a conventional DC or a 401(k) plan. It is not clear from her analysis, however,
whether the growth in 401(k) plans displaced DB plans. Papke, Petersen, and Poterba
[1996] surveyed firms with 401(k)s and found that very few had terminated a preexisting defined benefit plan when they instituted their 401(k) plan. Their sample,
however, may not have been representative of the broader population of firms.
More recently, Ippolito and Thompson [2000] combined Form 5500 data with
information from the Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation (PBGC) to study withinfirm changes in plans over time. They found little firm-level displacement of DB plans
by 401(k) plans, and concluded that the replacement of a DB plan by a 401(k) is rare.
Page 2

Engelhardt [2000], based on data from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS),
concludes that households eligible for a 401(k) have higher non-DB assets than
households not eligible for a 401(k), but have the same level of assets when DB wealth
is included. He interprets this as evidence of firm-level substitution of 401(k)s for DB
pensions. However, as we explain below, the HRS does not allow accurate
categorization of individuals into 401(k) eligible and non-eligible status.
Most recently, LeBlanc [2001] has estimated the reduction in contributions to the
Registered Retirement Saving Program (RRSP) in Canada when persons are newly
covered by an employer-provided DB plan. Based on a longitudinal panel of individual
tax data, and using a difference-in-difference estimation procedure, he finds that for a
dollar of DB plan saving, RRSP contributions are reduced by only about $0.15.
Our analysis of these issues is divided into six sections. In the first section we
consider aggregate data on the total stock of retirement wealth. The very large increase
in total retirement assets relative to income over the past 25 years strongly suggests
that the enormous growth in individual retirement assets has more than offset any
displacement of asset growth in traditional DB pension plans.
In section two, we show that the “retirement plan contribution rate” is much
greater than the personal saving rate reported in the National Income and Product
Accounts (NIPA) in recent years. Our “retirement plan contribution rate” is determined
by the retirement saving of current employees. The NIPA saving rate, in contrast,
depends on the saving and consumption patterns of retirees as well as those who are
currently working. We document the substantial growth over time in contributions to
self-directed retirement saving programs, such as 401(k) plans. We also suggest that
Page 3

the retirement plan contribution rate was reduced by legislation restricting contributions
to DB pension plans, as well as by the strong stock market performance of the late
1980s and 1990s and the associated reduction in required DB plan contributions.
In section three, we distinguish between retirement saving from the standpoint of
an employee, and employer contributions to retirement saving plans. We argue that
from the perspective of the employee, 401(k) retirement saving is likely to be much
greater than traditional DB plan saving at most ages. We use data on accruing DB plan
liabilities to compare 401(k) and DB plan saving rates, and conclude that the saving rate
under a typical 401(k) plan is about twice that under a typical DB plan.
In section four, we begin to explore the possible substitution between different
types of retirement plans. We use data from both the Department of Labor Form 5500
filings, and from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). We find no
evidence of strong substitution patterns between 401(k) participation and other
retirement plans. Section five shows that further analysis of substitution, using data
from the Health and Retirement Survey (HRS), supports the results in section four.
A brief conclusion summarizes our findings.

1. AGGREGATE DATA ON ASSETS IN RETIREMENT SAVING PLANS
1.1 Retirement Account Assets
While it is not possible to link particular assets with particular motives for saving,
for many households assets in retirement saving accounts are the best single indicator
of the amount that they have saved for retirement. A number of factors are likely to

Page 4

contribute to variation in retirement assets. For example, one would expect that
households with higher earnings would have more retirement assets. For a given level
of aggregate earnings, a larger share of the working population near retirement age is
likely to be associated with greater retirement assets. Variation in life expectancy and in
the typical retirement age can also affect the stock of retirement assets. The
“adequacy” of any given level of assets depends on the years of support the assets are
expected to provide.
Our analysis begins with measures of aggregate retirement assets that are not
adjusted for demographic trends. We then explain the likely effect of adjustment for
demographic changes. Figure 1 shows the ratio of assets in all private retirement
accounts--including DB plans, 401(k), other DC plans, IRAs, 403(b) plans, and Keogh
plans--to private wage and salary earnings.1 This ratio increased more than five-fold
between 1975 and 1998, from 0.39 to 2.02. The figure shows modest growth in the
ratio of retirement assets to earnings through 1981, more rapid growth between 1982
and 1994, after the introduction of IRAs and 401(k) plans and during a period of positive
stock market returns, and rapidly accelerated growth beginning in 1995, corresponding
to large increases in equity market returns. Figure 1 also shows the ratio of assets in all
retirement plans, the private plans as well as public sector plans, to wages and salaries.
The trend is very similar to that for private plan assets alone.
Figure 2 shows private retirement assets disaggregated into several
components. It shows that assets in DB plans continued to grow after the introduction

1

Appendix 1 describes all of our data sources.
Page 5

of 401(k) and IRA plans, but that the bulk of the gain was in individual accounts. In this
figure, 401(k) assets are included with other DC plans. There is no evidence of a
decline in the assets in conventional employer-provided plans during the time period
when assets in individual accounts were growing most rapidly.
The foregoing data alone cannot rule out the possibility of substitution, since we
do not have data on the time path that other retirement plan assets would have followed
in the absence of the growth in DC assets. To place the growth in DC assets into
perspective, however, we note that if all contributions to personal retirement accounts
between 1985 and 1998 had come at the expense of DB contributions, DB assets would
have grown by a factor of 8.4 instead of 2.7.
The private retirement assets in Figure 2 exclude assets in federal, state, and
local retirement plans, and assets held by life insurance companies in retirement plans,
that are also part of the retirement asset pool.2 Figure 3 shows the assets in private
plans as well as the assets in these other plans. In 1999, about 40 percent of all
retirement assets were in federal, state and local, and insurance plan funds.
Retirement account assets support current retirees, as well as future retirees.
Although we are unable to distinguish the assets held by current retirees from those
held by the working-age population, we suspect that the increase in these assets
represents a large upward trend in the assets of future retirees.
1.2 Housing and Other Non-Retirement Assets
2

The Flow of Funds accounts defines the latter series as including “assets of
private pension plans held at life insurance companies, such as guaranteed investment
contracts and variable annuity plans, that are managed for the benefit of individuals who
are not separately identified to the insurance companies.”
Page 6

Aside from promised Social Security benefits, housing equity is the most
important asset of a large fraction of Americans. Unlike the increase in retirement
account assets, however, there has been no increase in housing equity relative to
income over the past two and one-half decades. Figure 4 shows housing equity as a
fraction of disposable income from 1975 to 1998. The ratio increased about 25 percent
between 1975 and 1989, but by 1999 it was essentially at the same level as in 1975.
The figure also shows non-retirement-non-home-equity net worth as a share of
disposable income. This ratio decreased and then increased between 1985 and 1999.
The increase between 1975 and 1999, 27 percent, was not nearly as great as the
increase in retirement assets over this period.
1.3 Retirement Assets and Demographic Trends
The growth of retirement assets relative to income may be “explained” by a
number of changes. These include the advent of new retirement saving vehicles, as
well as other factors such as demographic change. Changes in three features of the
population--demographic composition, mortality rates, and labor force participation-have likely contributed to the rise in retirement assets relative to income. We describe
each of these changes, although we do not attempt a formal adjustment of retirement
wealth to correct for these changes.
The increase in life expectancy at retirement age is the first substantial change
that may have contributed to rising retirement assets. In 1975, life expectancy for a
U.S. man at age 62 was 15.5 years, while that for a woman was 20.3 years. By 1997,
male life expectancy at age 62 had increased to 17.6 years, while female life
expectancy had risen to 21.4 years. For men, this implies a 13.5 percent increase in
Page 7

the number of years that need to be supported with retirement resources, beginning at
age 62. For women, the change was 5.4 percent. These proportional changes provide
a crude measure--crude, because they do not reflect the potential role of risk and the
prospect of drawing down resources too quickly--of the increase in retirement resources
that would be needed to offset improved longevity. These changes might account for
an increase in resources of roughly ten percent, much less than the actual growth of
retirement assets relative to income.
The second important demographic change that might have contributed to rising
retirement assets was the aging of the labor force. Translating information on the age
structure of the population into predictions about the wealth to income ratio requires
detailed information on saving by age, yet there is no agreement on the relative
importance of life-cycle, precautionary, and other factors in saving decisions. In 1975,
the average age of those over the age of 20 in the U.S. population was 44.6 years. For
men, the average age was 43.9 years. Between 1975 and 1985 the average age of
those over 20 actually declined, to 44.3 years for the entire population and 43.5 years
for the male population. This reflected the entry of the “baby boom” cohorts into the 20plus age group. By 1998, the working age population had grown older: the average age
of all 20-plus persons was 45.5 years, and that of 20-plus men was 44.8 years. Thus
between 1985 and 1998, the average age of the adult population rose by just over one
year. Similarly, the the average age of those in the labor force in 1985 was 38.5 years,
while in 1998, it was 40.3 years.
These data on the population and labor force age structure suggest that by the
late 1990s, those who were in their earning years were a older, and had fewer
Page 8

remaining years of work to accumulate assets for retirement, than those in the working
population in the 1970s and early 1980s. This may also have induced a rise in
retirement assets.
The final change that may have affected retirement assets is the shifting age of
retirement in the U.S. population. During the 1980s and 1990s, these changes were
modest by comparison to earlier decades. Burtless and Quinn (2000) present detailed
information on age-specific labor force participation rates for U.S. men in 1970, 1984-5,
and 1998-9. Their data show a sharp decline in labor force participation rates between
1970 and 1984-5, but relatively little decline subsequently. The participation rates for
1998-99 were virtually identical to those in 1984-85. At ages above 65, the labor force
participation rate in the late 1990s was greater than that in the mid-1980s. There is no
systematic difference in labor force participation rates at younger ages. Labor force
participation rates for women in their early 60s increased between the mid-1980s and
the late 1990s, as cohorts of women with greater labor force participation rates when
they were younger entered the retirement-age cohort.
Changes in retirement ages are therefore not likely to account for substantial
changes in retirement wealth relative to income during the last two decades.
Demographic factors–shifting age structure and lengthening life expectancy--seem likely
to account for modest increases in retirement assets, but are unlikely to account for
more than a small fraction of the large changes we observe.
2. PLAN CONTRIBUTIONS & THE “RETIREMENT PLAN CONTRIBUTION RATE”
The accumulation of retirement assets depends on the inflow of contributions, the
Page 9

payout of benefits, and the return on invested assets. Figure 5a shows private pension
plan contributions, which increased almost six fold between 1975 and 1999, while
Figure 5b shows contributions to all retirement plans. Neither of the series include
contributions to privately held pensions plans administered by insurance companies,
which hold about 9 percent of the assets in all pension plans. Private plans include selfdirected plans such as 401(k) plans and IRAs. IRA contributions exclude rollovers,
while IRA assets include assets “rolled-in” to these accounts.
The pronounced “hump” in retirement plan contributions between 1982 and 1986
corresponds to the beginning and subsequent retrenchment of the IRA program. The
pattern strongly suggests that IRA contributions during this period were not offset by a
reduction in other forms of retirement saving. Indeed, the rate of increase of non-IRA
retirement saving was the same in the 1982-85 period as in prior years. This pattern
suggests that the total pool of assets in retirement plans would likely be much greater
today if the IRA program had not been limited in 1986.
Figure 6a shows both private and total retirement plan contributions scaled by
disposable income. Figure 6b shows plan contributions over wage and salary earnings.
In both figures, private contributions are scaled by private earnings, while all
contributions are scaled by all wage and salary earnings. We define these ratios as
“retirement plan contribution rates.” They measure the proportion of current earnings
that is saved in retirement accounts by current employees. The contribution rates do
not account for retirement plan earnings on existing assets, or for withdrawals from
these plans. Below, we compare retirement plan contribution rates to NIPA national
saving rates.
Page 10

Figures 6a and 6b show that “retirement plan contribution rates” are remarkably
stable over most of the period. Scaled by personal disposable income, the private plan
contribution rate was about 3.5 percent in 1975 and in 1999, and the contribution rate
for all plans varied between 5 and 6 percent for most of the period. When scaled by
private and by all wage and salary earnings, the contribution rates are also stable,
although they are greater than the rates scaled by personal disposable income. The
retirement plan contribution rate for all plans, including those in the federal and state
and local government sector, is near eight percent for most of the period, or about two
percentage points higher than the rate for the private sector alone.
The relative stability in the retirement plan contribution rates was broken only by
the large increase in the plan contribution rate when the IRA program was initiated, and
a decrease when the program was curtailed in 1986. For example, relative to earnings,
both the private and the all plan rates are about 2 percentage points higher during the
IRA period–over 8 and 10 percent, respectively.
2.1 Time Series Changes in the “Retirement Plan Contribution Rate”
The relative stability of the retirement plan contribution rate conceals fluctuations
in some of the factors that affect this rate. Contributions to private defined-contribution
type plans increased sharply over the 1975-1999 period, while DB contributions varied
widely. At the end of this period, DB plan contributions were only slightly higher than at
the beginning.
Retirement plan contributions are the product of the number of participants and
the average contribution per participant. Figure 7 shows the sum of the number of active

Page 11

participants in all defined benefit and defined contribution plans.3 It illustrates in
particular the rapid growth of 401(k) plans. These plans, which first became available in
1982, grew to almost 38 million participants by 1997. While 401(k) plan participation
grew in the 1980s and 1990s, participation in DB plans declined from about 30 million in
1984 to about 23 million by 1997. Participation in non-401(k) DC plans increased until
about 1986 and then declined, ending the period about 30 percent higher than at the
beginning. There is a clear “IRA effect” on plan participants, as well as plan
contributions, in the early 1980s. In total, the number of plan participants increased
from about 39 million in 1975 to over 80 million in 1997.
Figure 8a shows contributions per participant in DB, DC, and 401(k) plans.
Figure 8b shows IRA and 401(k) contributions, while Figure 8c shows contributions to
Keogh plans. DB contributions per participant fluctuated substantially during the last
two decades, and they were about 40 percent higher at the end of the period than at the
beginning. Non-401(k) DC contributions per participant increased about two-fold over
the period, and on average were higher than DB contributions. Over the past fifteen
years contributions per participant to 401(k) plans were, on average, twice as large as
contributions per participant to DB plans. Contributions to 401(k)s increased almost 50
percent between 1982 and 1996 alone.4 During the “unrestricted” IRA period, 1982-

3

These data, from Form 5500 filings and IRS tabulations of tax returns, show the
number of persons participating in each type of retirement saving plan. Many persons
participate in more than one plan, so the total number of participants overstates the
number of persons who participate in at least one plan. For 401(k) plans, participants
include all persons eligible to contribute, regardless of actual contributions.
4

401(k) contributions are calculated by dividing total contributions to 401(k) plans
by the total number of employees eligible to contribute, not the number that actually
Page 12

1986, IRA contributions on average were greater than 401(k) contributions.
Keogh contributions, although a small proportion of total retirement saving,
increased enormously between the early 1980s and late 1990s. There is a rise of more
than 200 percent between 1981 and 1986, when the Economic Recovery Tax Act of
1981 raised Keogh contribution limits from $7500 to $15000.
Figure 9 shows the trend in the number of participants in all plans combined and
the trend in average contributions per participant. These two trends together yield the
increase in total contributions shown above. The participation numbers reflect
substantial double counting, since many individuals participate in more than one plan.
The increase in average contributions per unique covered employee would be
substantially higher than the increase shown in Figure 9.
2.2 DB Contributions and the Retirement Plan Contribution Rate
Figure 10 shows an index of defined benefit plan contributions per participant. It
also shows an index for the number of participants, and the flow of contributions, to
these plans. There are at least three reasons for the erratic variation in contributions to
DB plans. The first is the slight rise and then steady decline in the number of active
participants (current employees) in DB plans over the 1975-98 period. The number of
total participants, including retirees, rose throughout the period.
A second is the link between returns on DB plan assets and current funding
decisions. Benefits promised by DB plans are prescribed by a formula, which is

make contributions. There is much less change during this period in the participation
rate of 401(k) eligibles, conditional on eligibility, than in the eligibility rate. Most of the
change in the number of contributors is therefore due to changes in eligibility.
Page 13

typically based on years of service and final salary. The promised benefits are a liability
of the firm, and the firm must insure that assets held in the plan are sufficient to cover
this liability. Other things equal, a rise in investment returns increases DB asset
balances relative to obligations, thereby reducing the need for additional contributions.
Bernheim and Shoven [1988] discuss this feature of DB funding.
A third reason for the fluctuation in DB contributions is the series of legislative
changes that limited the level of benefits that could be funded under DB plans and
discouraged firms from over-funding their pension plans. Prior to 1986, firms could fund
their DB plans to a level greater than their legal liability. A series of laws beginning with
a 10 percent reversion tax, which was part of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, put stricter
limits on funding. Ippolito [2001] estimates that in the absence of various funding
restrictions, DB pension assets in 1995 would have been 28 percent higher. Schieber
and Shoven [1997] report that when the limits on contributions to over-funded plans that
were part of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987 took effect, 48 percent of a
sample of large pension plans were precluded from making further contributions.
Our analysis of DB contributions, relative to contributions to other plans, is
directed at understanding how fluctuations in DB contributions affect the retirement plan
contribution rate. While developing a precise estimate is an unrealistic target, we try to
place a lower bound on the effect of movements in DB plan contributions on the
retirement plan contribution rate.
Total DB contributions are the product of the number of DB plan participants and
the average contribution per participant. Fluctuations are due largely to movements in
the contribution per participant. Figure 11 provides information on DB, DC, and Keogh
Page 14

contributions per participant over the 1975-1997 period. It shows that the wages of
wage and salary workers increased 150 percent over this period. DC plan contributions
per participant increased about 150 percent as well, as one would expect if
contributions were a proportion of wage earnings. On the other hand, DB contributions
per participant fluctuated substantially, and on average fell relative to wages.
Suppose that there had been no legislation limiting contributions to DB plans, that
market returns had not affected DB contributions, that life expectancy at retirement had
been constant, and that there were no changes in the demographic structure of the
workforce covered by DB plans. If the returns on DB plan assets were in line with
expectations, one might have expected DB contributions per participant, relative to
wages, to remain roughly constant. Given rising life expectancy and an aging workforce,
one might have expected contributions per employee to increase relative to wages.
To explore the effects of legislative and return-induced downward pressures on
defined benefit plan contributions, we construct a “what if” scenario. Considering the
private sector only, suppose that DB contributions per employee had increased at the
same rate as wages in every year after 1977. Figure 12 shows the private retirement
plan contribution rate under this counterfactual, together with the actual rate. The saving
rate under this counterfactual assumption was one percentage point higher than the
actual rate at the end of the period. In the years when the DB contribution rate was at its
lowest, the counterfactual saving rate was close to 2 percentage points higher than the
actual rate. This counterfactual suggests that legislative changes like those in 1986, and
unexpectedly favorable returns on DB plan assets, probably reduced the private
retirement plan contribution rate by a substantial amount.
Page 15

The aggregate data also suggest that the retirement plan contribution rate would
have been substantially higher were it not for the curtailment of the IRA program.
Between 1982 and 1985, IRA saving added approximately 2.3 percentage points to the
retirement plan contribution rate. Now it accounts for only 0.3 percentage points.
In summary, aggregate retirement assets increased dramatically over the past two
decades. All else equal, this reduces the likelihood that the rise of assets in DC
retirement plans was offset by a reduction of assets in DB plans. This conclusion is
consistent with the findings in previous studies using household data, which show
increases in individual financial assets with the advent of 401(k) and IRA plans, and with
the evidence that we present below. The decline in DB plans was probably due to many
factors other than the growth of DC plans. Gustman and Steinmeier [1992], for example,
find that at least half of the trend in DB plans from 1977 to 1985 “is due to a shift in
employment mix towards firms with industry, size, and union status that have historically
been associated with lower defined benefit rates.” Ippolito [1995] concludes that “about
half of the shift is attributable to a loss of employment in large unionized firms where DB
plans are used intensively.”
2.3 NIPA Saving and the Retirement Plan Contribution Rate
Contributions to retirement plans as a proportion of either wages and salaries or
personal disposable income have substantially exceeded the NIPA personal saving rate
in recent years. In the NIPA, saving equals disposable income, less consumption. This
definition implies that increases in measured income increase saving, and increases in
measured consumption decrease saving. Contributions to pension plans are treated as
income in the NIPAs, so these contributions increase saving. Interest and dividends
Page 16

received by pension plans are also imputed as a component of income, and pension
plan management fees are charged as a consumption outlay.
Neither capital gains on pension assets, nor distributions from pension plans, are
included in NIPA income. If distributions from pension plans are partly consumed,
however, the net effect of pension distributions will be to raise consumption and
therefore, without any corresponding increase in income, to reduce NIPA saving.
The NIPA treatment of pensions can be illustrated with an example. Consider an
employee who contributed to a 401(k) plan in 1982. Assuming that the contribution was
made from income earned in that year, and reduced the contributor’s consumption in
1982, the act of contributing would have raised personal saving in 1982. If the 401(k)
assets were invested in non-dividend paying stocks, the internal build-up in their value
would not have contributed anything to NIPA income in any year after 1982, until the
date of distribution.5 Assume that the assets were distributed from the 401(k) plan in
2001. At that point, there would be no increase in NIPA income. If the beneficiary of the
distributions raised consumption as a result of these distributions, the net effect would be
higher consumer spending and therefore lower saving. With large capital gains between
1982 and 2001, the distribution is likely to be very large relative to the initial contribution
in 1982.

Lusardi, Skinner, and Venti [2001] estimate that in 1999, the NIPA accounting

of DB pension transactions alone reduced NIPA personal saving by almost $55 billion.
Figures 13 and 14 show that in recent years, distributions from DB plans and IRAs have

5

The U.S. Department of Labor [1999] reports that in 1996, interest and dividends
on 401(k) assets totaled $20.7 billion, while contributions were $104 billion and capital
gains were $129.3 billion.
Page 17

far exceeded contributions to these plans.6
The growth in retirement plan assets during the last decade highlights the
limitations of the current NIPA treatment of pension saving. Gale and Sabelhaus (1999)
and Reinsdorf and Perozek (2000) discuss limitations of the current definition of personal
saving other than those associated with pensions. The distortions in the NIPA personal
saving rate that result from the treatment of pension income will only become worse in
the future. PVW [2001], for example, project that average 401(k) balances for the cohort
retiring in 2025 will be roughly ten times greater than the balances for those who retired
in the mid-1990s.

3. RETIREMENT PLAN CONTRIBUTIONS VERSUS EMPLOYEE SAVING
In this section we compare lifetime saving under an illustrative DB plan to that
under a DC plan. We show that the pattern of retirement asset accumulation under the
two plans is very different, and we note that an employee’s perception of retirement
saving under the two plans is likely to be very different as well. In addition, the early
retirement incentives inherent in many DB plans suggest that DB plan participants will
retire earlier than DC participants, and thereby will accumulate less in retirement assets.
We then discuss implications of these findings for the comparison of individual assets in
6

Until 2000, the treatment of public pensions in NIPA was almost the reverse of
the treatment of private pensions. Employee contributions to the federal civilian
retirement plan, state and local pension plans, and Social Security were not included in
income, while benefits from these plans were counted as income. Employee
contributions thus reduced saving. If benefits were fully spent, the resulting increase in
consumption would precisely offset the increase in income associated with the benefits
and saving would not be affected. Since 2000, public and private pensions are treated
the same in the NIPA.
Page 18

DB and DC plans, as well as the aggregate accumulation of pension assets, and
consider empirical evidence on asset accrual in DB plans.
3.1 Contributions vs. Saving: A Conceptual Framework
Contributions to traditional non-401(k) DC plans are typically a constant
percentage of employee earnings and are primarily funded by employer contributions.
Contributions to 401(k) programs are also proportional to earnings, but the precise
relationship between earnings and contributions depends on each firm’s match rate and
contribution limit, as well as on the saving choices of participants. About one-third of all
401(k) contributions are made by employers and two-thirds by participants.
In both 401(k) plans and other types of DC plans, contributions by employers and
employees are easily observed by participants, making it unlikely that there are any
differences between contributions to these plans and the amounts individuals perceive
as “saved.” This is not true for saving through DB plans. The annual DB “saving” that
can be ascribed to a given plan participant may be very different from the employer
contribution per participant. The amount a DB plan participant perceives to be saved on
his or her behalf may be very different from the actual saving, as well as from the
employer contribution to the plan.
Similarly, a participant’s DB pension wealth is not easily observed and is difficult
to determine. It is the discounted value of promised future benefits accrued to date. The
annual personal DB saving rate is the change in promised benefits associated with
working another year under the DB plan.7 Because most DB plans are “back-loaded,”
7

The measure of accrued DB pension wealth that we use corresponds to the
firm’s current, or terminal, liability. Firms also compute projected liabilities, which use a
Page 19

this annual benefit accrual is typically very small for young workers and much larger for
older workers, particularly as they approach the plan’s early retirement age.
Unless the specific features of a DB plan are known, it is not possible to calculate
saving rates at different ages under the plan. This makes it difficult to compare personal
saving--from the perspective of the participant--under DB and DC plans. We present a
simple framework to fix these ideas and to compare DC and DB saving rates.
For a person covered by a DB plan, saving is defined in terms of promised future
retirement benefits. The increment to future retirement wealth is the change in accrued
future benefits associated with working another year at the firm. Current saving is the
present value of this accrual. DB saving is defined by a formula that determines benefits
in the future, while DC saving is defined by the current contribution. In a DC plan, the
increment to future retirement wealth is determined by the future value of the current
contribution; that depends on the intervening rate of return on the plan assets.
In a simplified case, DB benefits are given by Bt = 8Wts, where 8 is is a parameter
of the plan, typically between 0.01 and 0.02, and Wt denotes earnings in year t, and s is
the number of years of service that the employee has in year t. After s years of
employment, this is the accrued benefit promised at the normal retirement age, say 65.
If the employee leaves the firm after s years, future benefits at retirement are given by
this formula. The change in B with another year of employment is given by

∆Bt = λ[Wt + s( dW / dt )] = ( ws + 1)Wt ⋅ λ

forecast of future wage growth to value the future cost of years of service accrued to
date.
Page 20

where w is the annual rate of increase in earnings. The change in future pension wealth
is given by this change in benefits, times the annuity value of a dollar at the retirement
age of 65, A(65). Thus in the DB case, the increase in future retirement wealth
associated with working another year is )DBPW=(ws + 1)*Wt*8*A(65). Saving at age t
under the DB plan, which can be compared to DC saving at age t, is this amount
discounted back to age t. This accrual is an increase in the DB plan obligation that must
be funded by the employer.
The ratio of the change in future retirement wealth associated with working
another year under the DC plan, to the change in wealth from working another year
under the DB plan is given by

kWt (1 + r ) 65− t
∆DCPW ( t )
(1 + r ) 65− t
k
=
=
∆DBPW ( t ) ( ws + 1)Wt λ ⋅ A( 65)
(1 + ws ) λ ⋅ A( 65)
Note that )DCPW depends on the market rate of return but not on the rate of increase in
the wage rate, which affects )DBPW. The market rate of return may affect )DBPW
through the A(65) term. Suppose that 8 = .015, that k = .10, and that A(65) = 8.
Suppose also that people work from age 25 to age 65. Then the ratio )DCPW/)DBPW
is [(1+r)65-t /(1 + ws)] * [.10 / .12] . Suppose further that r=0.09 and w=0.05. At one year
of employment the ratio is 20.04, at 20 years it is 2.05, and at 40 years it is 0.24. DC
wealth accrues early in the working life and DB wealth accrues late--it is “back-loaded”.
Most actual DB plans are not as simple as the one considered above. Actual
accruals depend on the specific provisions of the DB plan. An employee is usually not

Page 21

vested in the plan before working some minimum number of years.8 DB saving is zero
prior to vesting. In addition, most DB plans have an early retirement age (often 55),
which is an important determinant of the accrual pattern. After the early retirement age,
benefit accrual typically declines (often becoming negative), creating an incentive to
retire early. The more complicated accrual patterns under these circumstances, and the
associated incentives to retire, are described in detail in Kotlikoff and Wise [1987, 1988,
1989a, 1989b]. Lazear [1985] proposed that firms use these incentives to induce older
workers–paid more than their marginal product–to retire. In the illustration below we use
a typical plan, similar to a plan described in Kotlikoff and Wise [1989b], that incorporates
a substantial incentive to retire after the early retirement age.
Suppose the DB plan has vesting after 5 years of service, early retirement at 55,
normal retirement at 65, and an early retirement discount factor of 3 percent per year.
The factor 8 is set at 0.013. Table 1 shows saving at selected ages under this DB plan
and under a 401(k) plan with a nine percent contribution rate. In this example, the
nominal rate of growth of earnings declines from 7 percent per year at age 25 to 1
percent at age 65. These earnings should be thought of as the historical earnings of
persons now approaching retirement. The associated saving should be thought of as the
saving of workers covered under the DB or the 401(k) plan over a working lifetime.9 The
table shows three measures of saving: saving as a proportion of earnings at age t

8

This is also true for some 401(k) plans in which the employer matching
contribution is subject to a short vesting requirement.
9

Workers now approaching retirement could only have been covered by a 401(k)
plan for about two decades.
Page 22

(columns 3 and 4), saving in dollars at age t (columns 5 and 6), and the associated
increment to wealth at age 65 (columns 7 through 10).
Table 1, column (4) shows 401(k) plan saving as a percent of earnings. At age 25
for example, nine percent of earnings is contributed to a DC account. The dollar amount,
$831, is shown in column (6). At a 9 percent market rate of return, the $831 would grow
to $26,089 by age 65, as shown in column (8). At age 45, nine percent of earnings is
$2,422 and this amount grows to $13,572 by age 65. The total accumulation of assets
under the DC plan will be $575,970, by age 65, if the employee continues to work and to
make contributions until that age. This value is shown in the last row of column (8).
Columns (9) and (10) show the increment to assets at retirement if the employee works
until ages 55 and 60 respectively. The total accumulation of assets at these ages is
$221,182 and $362,205, respectively.
The calculation of saving under the DB plan is more complicated. There is no
saving in the DB plan until the employee is vested, which occurs at age 30. Much more
important are the provisions that determine pension accrual at later ages. Like the
typical DB plan, the provisions of the DB plan used in this illustration discourage work
past the early retirement age of 55,10 while providing a strong incentive to stay at the firm
until the early retirement age. Indeed the accrual of pension benefits is negative after
age 55. Figure 15 shows this accrual pattern (saving) and the related incentive effects.

10

HRS data show that 29.8 percent of all workers qualify for early retirement
before age 55, another 44.7 percent are eligible at exactly age 55, and only 14.8
percent qualify for early retirement after age 60. The average early retirement age is
54.2 and the average age of normal retirement is 61.3. See Gustman and Steinmeier
[2000a].
Page 23

In this plan, the value of future DB pension benefits is maximized if receipt of
benefits begins at age 55. Consider, for example, saving at age 45. The increment to
promised future pension wealth, shown in column (7), is $4,554, if receipt of benefits
begins at age 55. After age 55, the three percent increment in benefits for each year
that benefit receipt is delayed is not enough to offset the receipt of benefits for one fewer
year. For each year benefit receipt is delayed after 55, the present value of retirement
benefits declines. This is the common feature of DB plans that encourages retirement
after the early retirement age.
The dollar saving shown in column (5) at age 45 is $2,097. This is the increment
to assets at age 55, discounted back to age 45 at 9 percent.11 As a proportion of the
wage, DB saving, shown in column (3), is 7.8 percent at age 45. If the DB employee
remained in the firm until age 55 and then started to receive benefits, the value of lifetime
benefits would be $102,911.
Notice that at age 45, for example, DB saving is only moderately less than DC
saving–$2,097 versus $2,422. Yet the increment to total wealth at retirement is $4,554
under the DB plan, while it is $13,572 under the 401(k) plan, assuming that the

11

We realize that in principal the discount rate applied to future DB benefits need
not be the same as the market return earned on DC contributions. However, there is no
clear way to measure the risk under each type of plan, and thus no obvious way to
make a risk adjustment to the discount rates. Employees covered by DC plans face
investment risk, but in DB plans most of this investment risk is borne by employers.
Conversely, as a consequence of job change or job loss, employees covered by DB
plans face the risk of losing a large fraction of the benefits they would accrue without job
change. The erosion of benefits that results from job change is much less severe under
DC plans. The average discount rate used by DB plans in Form 5500 reports was 7.77
percent in 1997. For simplicity in this illustration we let the discount rate equal the
assumed rate of return.
Page 24

employee works until 65. The difference in the increment to wealth at retirement is
simply due to the difference in the assumed age of receipt of benefits. This is taken to
be age 55 under the DB plan, since that is the age that maximizes benefits under the DB
plan. The increment to DC wealth at age 55 (from saving at 45) is $5,733, as shown in
column (9).
Over a working life, the maximum present discounted value of future DB benefits
is achieved if the receipt of benefits begins at age 55. At that age, the present value of
future benefits is $102,911. Total accumulation in the 401(k) plan at that age is
$221,182. Accumulation of assets in DB and DC plans, assuming retirement at 55 under
both plans, is shown in Figure 16. But if the DC employee continues to work until 65, the
accumulation in the DC plan increases to $575,970. The DC employee continues to
make contributions at 9 percent of earnings, and assets accumulated at age 55 continue
to grow at 9 percent.
For the DB employee, however, benefits grow much more slowly after the early
retirement age. In our example, the nominal annual DB benefit continues to increase
because of earnings growth and additional years of service. In addition, benefits are
higher because they will be received for fewer years, but the increase is not enough to
offset the fewer years of benefit receipt. This is reflected in the reduction in DB saving
beginning at age 55, shown in columns (3), (5), and (7) of Table 1. The benefit at 55 is
determined by the promised benefit at 65 discounted at 3 percent. That is, the
adjustment for taking benefits before 65–and thus receiving benefits for more years–is
only 3 percent per year. Thus when the receipt of benefits is delayed, say until 65, the
benefit is increased by only 3 percent for each one-year reduction in the number of years
Page 25

benefits will be received. By age 65, pension wealth in age 65 dollars is $181,458. The
increase between 55 and 65 is not enough to offset the reduction in the number of years
benefits will be received.
Figure 17 shows the accumulations of assets under DB and DC plans, assuming
retirement at age 65. In current dollars, DB pension wealth grows by a factor of 1.76
between 55 and 65, while DC wealth grows by a factor of 2.64. At age 55, DC assets
are 2.12 times as much as DB assets. If employees work to age 65, DC assets are 3.17
times as much as DB assets.
The assumption underlying Figure 17, that DB plan participants work until age 65,
will tend to understate the difference between DB and 401(k) accumulation profiles.
Given DB incentives to retire early, few employees covered by DB plans work until age
65. Stock and Wise [1990a, 1990b], Lumsdaine, Stock and Wise [1990, 1992, 1994],
Gustman and Steinmeier [1989, 2000a], and Samwick [1998] present estimates of the
effect of such incentives. Evidence on the early retirement effect of such incentives in
public social security programs around the world is presented in Gruber and Wise [1998,
1999]. Coile and Gruber [2000] present recent estimates of such incentives in the United
States Social Security program. Friedberg and Webb [2000] suggest that compared to a
DB plan, a DC plan would increase the retirement age by two years. Samwick and Wise
[2000] find that the average annual labor force departure rate for HRS respondents
between ages 55 and 60 is 1.8 percent for persons without a pension plan, 3 percent for
those with a DC plan only, 11.5 percent for persons with a DB plan only, and 12.1
percent for those with both a DB and a DC plan.
One other factor may lead our calculations to overstate the actual pension wealth
Page 26

of DB participants. Many employees do not remain under the same DB plan until the
early retirement age, and thus do not accumulate the working life assets shown in the
illustration above. The DB wealth at retirement would be much less if a person were to
change jobs several times.
3.2.

Implications for Analyzing Pension Assets and Retirement Saving
The illustration above highlights the difference in the age profile of asset accrual

under DB and 401(k) plans, and the fact that 401(k) participants are likely to work longer
than DB participants, thereby accumulating more pension assets. Thus as larger and
larger numbers of employees accumulate more years of employment under DC plans,
retirement plan assets relative to current earnings are likely to rise.
To link our hypothetical DB-401(k) comparison with the earlier discussion of
aggregate pension assets in DB and DC plans, consider a setting in which the potential
“working life” is 40 years, from ages 25 to 65. Assume also that DC participants work the
entire 40 years, but DB employees work only 30 years, until age 55. They are retired for
10 of the 40 “working” years. Suppose that the annual DC contribution per participant is
C, and that the contribution per participant (employee) to the DB plan is C/2. Then over
the working age 25 to 65, contributions to the DC account will be C*40. But contributions
per participant to the DB plan will be only (C/2)*30, or only 3/8 of DC contributions. If the
DB employees work 35 years, until age 60, DB contributions will be 43.75 percent of DB
contributions. Thus, for any given cohort of workers, the accumulation of assets will
depend on not only on the contribution per active (working) participant to DC and to DB

Page 27

plans, but also on the number of years over which participants work.12
The DB-401(k) illustration can also help to inform the micro comparison of the
accumulation of individual pension assets under DB and 401(k) plans, as discussed
below. At age 63, for example, individual (annuity) assets of DB participants are likely to
be decreasing, while the assets of individual DC participants are likely still rising, as long
as they are still in the labor force. Indeed survey-based estimates of DB pension wealth
are often calculated by capitalizing the survey respondent’s reported annuity from a DB
plan. Consider, for example, the pension assets of two persons age 65, one covered by
a DB plan the other by a DC plan. Suppose the DC person just retired, while the DB
person retired at age 55. Working longer will increase the assets of the DC participant.
Because relatively few employees now near retirement have worked for a long period of
time under a DC plan, this effect may have only a modest influence on current
comparisons, like those discussed below. The effect will become quantitatively more
important with the spread of 401(k) plans. Although we do not have a quantitative
estimate of the magnitude of this effect, the direction seems clear.
3.3 Empirical Evidence on DB Accruals versus Contributions
To determine whether averaged over all ages, the increase in retirement support
from DC plan saving is greater than that from DB plan saving, we can consider external
data. Kotlikoff and Wise [1989] estimate that contributions to DB plans average 4 to 6
percent of the wage earnings of DB enrollees. The average 401(k) contribution is about

12

Workers who retire earlier also get more leisure. Our focus, however, is on the
accumulation of retirement assets, not on the comparison of utility of persons covered
by DB and DC plans.
Page 28

9 percent of earnings. The Form 5500 data on contributions per active (working)
participant above show 401(k) contributions per participant about twice as large as DB
contributions per participant, and we noted above that contributions to DC plans are
likely to continue over more years than contributions to DB plans. Assuming that
investment returns in the two plans are similar, the 401(k) plan should provide much
greater benefits at ages such as 65 for persons with similar earnings histories.
We noted above that DB plan contributions disproportionately benefit persons
who are covered by the same plan over an entire working life. Employees who change
jobs often will accumulate much less in DB pension assets, as documented by Kotlikoff
and Wise [1989]. This conclusion is consistent with the findings of Samwick and Skinner
[1998]. They compare DB and DC plans by running a broad range of earnings histories
through plan provisions from the Pension Provider Supplements to the 1983 and 1995
Survey of Consumer Finances. They find that DC plans provide substantially higher
retirement benefits than DB plans.
Form 5500 filings also provide data that matches closely the DC and DB annual
saving rates (or accruals), as described algebraically above. For an individual DB plan
participant, annual pension saving is the increase in promised future benefits due to
working an additional year under the plan, not the contribution per participant that the
firm makes to the plan. The annual accrual of promised DB benefits is reported in Form
5500 data for all plan employees combined.13 This summary statistic combines
13

These data are from Schedule B of the Form 5500. Each DB plan is asked for
the “expected increase in current liability due to benefits accruing in the plan year.”
About 25 percent of all DB plans did not file or have missing data for schedule B. The
tabulations reported here are based on completed responses.
Page 29

employees of all ages, and thus may be very different from the accrual for any individual
employee. Averaged over all DB plans, this accrual can be compared to the average
contribution per participant in 401(k) plans.
Table 2 shows the DB change in accrued liability per active employee for 1990
through 1997, together with 401(k) contributions per participant. These data suggest
that over these years the annual 401(k) saving rate per active (working) participant was
more than twice the annual average DB saving rate. While the values reported in the
Form 5500 data are imperfect--they depend on interest rate and mortality assumptions,
and the response rate is low --the accrual values per employee correspond rather closely
to contributions per employee in all years but 1993, when the DB contribution per
employee was unusually large ($2,074). Thus contributions per employee, average
accrued liability per employee, and the estimates of total DB versus 401(k) contributions
as a percent of wages all seem quite consistent.
The annual accrual under DB plans is the increase in promised future benefits
that the plan sponsor must fund. If the plan cannot be over- or under-funded, and there
are no changes in the plan that might affect obligations to retirees, then the annual
accrual puts a limit on the potential increase in plan assets. Plan contributions would
fluctuate depending on the accrual and on the market return on assets held in DB plans.
In contrast, there are no limits on the accumulation of assets in DC plans, although there
are limits on contributions. During periods of favorable asset returns, such as the 1990s,
assets of DC plans are likely to rise much more rapidly than assets in DB plans.

4. HOUSEHOLD-LEVEL DATA ON RETIREMENT PLAN ASSET SUBSTITUTION
Page 30

We now turn to direct analysis of substitution between defined contribution
pension assets and DB pension assets, using household data. One of the implicit
assumptions in many discussions of potential substitution between DB and DC plan
assets is that workers have one pension arrangement or the other. Yet in many cases,
workers have both plans; we call this “dual coverage.” Understanding dual coverage is
essential for analyzing the potential for displacement of DB assets by 401(k) assets. We
therefore begin our analysis of substitution by analyzing dual coverage, as well as other
aspects of pension coverage, using the U.S. Department of Labor’s Form 5500 filings.
After discussion of new findings based on the Form 5500 data, we consider the
potential substitution between 401(k)s assets and DB plan assets. There are several
ways substitution may occur, including direct replacement of existing DB plans by
401(k)s, shrinking or capping DBs when 401(k)s are introduced to firms with existing
DBs, and perhaps decisions not to introduce DB plans at firms that choose to introduce
401(k) plans instead. Engen, Gale, and Scholz [1994], Papke [1999], Engelhardt [2000],
Pence [2001], and Ghilarducci [2001] discuss the different channels of substitution. We
consider several ways to evaluate the possible displacement of DB plan assets by DC
assets, and 401(k) assets in particular.
In considering possible displacement of plan assets, it is useful to note the trend
in the number of plan participants. Figure 18 shows the proportion of wage and salary
workers who are pension plan participants, including persons counted in more than one
plan. The total increased from 64 to 81 percent between 1975 and 1997. Note that in
1985 and 1986, about 20 percent of the labor force participated in the IRA program. This
proportion fell to about 4 percent by the mid-1990s.
Page 31

4.1 Dual Coverage and 401(k) Plans
Information on employer-provided pension plans, including 401(k) plans, is
reported each year in firm Form 5500 filings, which provide data on funding and other
financial features of pension plans. We have used these data as the basis for a number
of calculations. The top panel of Table 3 shows the fraction of 401(k) participants that
also have a DB plan for the years 1984 to 1997. Three columns of data are presented.
The first column pertains to all 401(k) plans. For the years 1988 to 1997, the second and
third columns present results for pre-existing 401(k) plans and new 401(k) plans in each
year. The proportion of 401(k) participants with a DB plan declined substantially over
the period–from 82.4 percent to 42.4 percent. The proportion of DB participants in new
401(k) plans was substantially smaller than the proportion in existing plans, in all years.
On average, the proportion in new plans was about 26 percent. There is notable year-toyear fluctuation, which we suspect is due to small sample sizes.
The second panel of Table 3 shows the 401(k) participation rate, given eligibility,
for the years 1990 to 1997.14 These rates are in excess of 75 percent in all years. For
pre-existing plans, the rate is around 80 percent, declining from about 83 to 76 percent
between 1990 and 1997. The participation rate for new plans is about 65 percent on
average, with no clear trend over time. Although not shown in the table, in 1988, 86.3
percent of all plans were pre-existing and 93 percent of all participants were in preexisting plans. These proportions changed over time, so that by 1997, 95.7 percent of all

14

These data are not available prior to 1990. The participation rate is the ratio of
participants with positive account balances to total participants. All other panels in this
table are based on data for active (non-retired) participants.
Page 32

plans were pre-existing and 96.4 percent of participants were in these plans. Very little
of the decline in DB dual coverage is accounted for by 401(k) participants with dual
coverage who subsequently lost their DB plan.
Table 4 shows 401(k) contribution and participation rates by dual DB coverage
status. The average contribution per participant increased substantially over time, as
shown above. The information in Table 4 shows that the average contribution is 25 to 40
percent higher for those with than for those without a DB plan. Perhaps firms with DB
plans pay higher salaries than firms without DB plans. This may make both employer
and employee 401(k) contributions higher in firms offering DB plans. It is also possible,
as Katona [1965] suggested, that participation in one pension plan increases workers’
awareness of saving-related issues and thereby encourages other saving. Participation
rates in 401(k) plans are somewhat higher for persons who have a DB plan than for
those who do not. Persons with a DB plan may also be older, and PVW [1998b] show
that 401(k) participation rates tend to increase with age.
4.2 Loss of Dual Coverage
The data underlying Table 3, in particular the proportion of new- and continuingplan 401(k) participants with a DB plan, are shown in the first panel of Appendix Table 1.
From these data, it is possible to determine the rate at which 401(k) participants with
dual coverage lose DB coverage. We find that the loss rate is 1.0 percent for 1996-97,
4.6 percent (95-96), 1.7 percent (94-95), 0.7 percent (93-94), -1.1 percent (92-93), 6.1
percent (91-92), and -5.1 percent (90-91). A negative sign indicates that the number of
401(k) participants with DB plans increased from one year to the next. On average the
year to year loss rate was 1.1 percent.
Page 33

These data show that very few persons with dual coverage lost their DB coverage
over this time period. The data also show that the decline in the number of persons
covered by DB plans over this period cannot be accounted for by the loss of the DB
plans of 401(k) participants; we have no reason to believe that the experience in earlier
years was any different. These data suggest that the decline in the proportion of 401(k)
participants with DB plans is largely accounted for by the entry of new 401(k) participants
with low dual coverage rates. This is consistent with diffusion of 401(k) plans to smaller
firms without prior DB plans.
4.3 Hypothetical Growth of DB Assets Without 401(k) Plans
We now consider two simple scenarios of how DB assets might have evolved in
the absence of 401(k) plans. The scenarios make extreme assumptions concerning the
replacement of DB plans by 401(k) plans. The results can be interpreted as providing
bounds on the extent of substitution between 401(k) and DB plans. The simulations are
based on three data series for the period 1984 to 1997: (1) the number of participants in
401(k) and DB plans, (2) contributions per participant to 401(k) and to DB plans, and (3)
the percent of 401(k) participants that also has a DB plan. We obtain the sum of plan
contributions–both to 401(k) plans and to DB plans–by persons with a 401(k) plan. We
then compare this sum to contributions that would have been made to DB plans in the
absence of the 401(k) program. Table 5 shows the data and calculated values.
The number of DB and 401(k) plan participants is shown in columns (2) and (3) of
Table 5. The percent of 401(k) enrollees also enrolled in a DB plan is shown in column
(4). The average contribution per participant in these plans is shown in columns (5) to
(8). For persons with both a DB and a 401(k), total pension saving is necessarily greater
Page 34

than saving under a stand-alone DB plan.15 In 1984, about 82 percent of 401(k)
participants also had a DB plan. The percent of workers with dual enrollment declined
rather consistently to about 42 percent in 1997. In the first years after they became
available, most 401(k) plans were initiated in large firms with an already existing DB
plan. Subsequently, the diffusion of 401(k) plans included larger numbers of smaller
firms that were less likely to have pre-existing DB plans. To the extent that the
expansion in 401(k) plans has been increasingly through plans in smaller firms without
prior DB plans, 401(k) contributions are not substituting for contributions to pre-existing
DB plans. Whether such firms would have adopted another plan if it were not for the
401(k) option is an open question; we address this in the alternative scenarios below.
On average, per enrollee contributions to 401(k) plans are greater than per
participant contributions to DB plans. In addition, the average DB contribution is greater
for those who also have a 401(k) plan, and the 401(k) contribution is greater for those
who also have a DB plan.
Contributions to the plans of employees with a 401(k) are shown in columns (9) to
(12). We separately report DB contributions in firms with and without 401(k) plans, as
well as contributions to 401(k) plans in firms with and without DB plans. The nominal
sum of pension contributions on behalf of employees covered by a 401(k) plan over the
years 1984-1997 is $1061 billion. About $252 billion was contributed to the DB plans of
401(k) enrollees with dual coverage, about $499 billion to the plans of those with dual
15

DB plans generally preceded supplemental 401(k) plans. Because DB plans
are formula based, it is difficult to “scale back” DB benefits when 401(k)s are introduced.
Indeed, the data in Table 5 show that DB contributions are higher in firms where DB
plans are supplemented by a 401(k) plan.
Page 35

coverage, and about $309 billion to the plans of those enrolled only in a 401(k) plan.
How much higher might DB plan contributions have been in the absence of 401(k)
plans? We consider two alternative scenarios that put an upper bound on the
displacement of DB contributions by 401(k) contributions. First, we assume that all
persons who have stand-alone 401(k) plans would otherwise have had stand-alone DB
plans in the absence of the 401(k) program. (We also assume that DB contributions for
persons with both 401(k) plans and DB plans are unchanged.) As a practical matter it is
unlikely that most firms that now offer only 401(k)s--especially small firms--would ever
offer DB plans in the absence of 401(k)s, so this assumption should produce an upper
bound on the amount of substitution.
Under this scenario, contributions to all DB plans would have totaled about $466
billion from 1984 to 1997. This is shown in column (13), which is the product of columns
(3) and (7). This $466 billion is composed of $252 billion of actual contributions to DB
plans by persons with dual coverage and $214 billion in additional DB contributions that
would result if all stand-alone 401(k)s were converted to DB plans, and if these
converted plans than exhibited the average contribution rate for stand-alone DB plans.
This additional $214 billion of DB contributions represents only 26 percent of the $1,061
billion of the total contributions to the plans of 401(k) participants.
The low estimate is the consequence of two factors. First, stand-alone 401(k)
plans are a relatively recent phenomenon. Much of the growth of 401(k) participation,
particularly in the early years, is among persons who retained DB coverage. For these
persons there is little or no displacement. Second, average contribution rates to DB
plans are substantially lower than contribution rates to 401(k) plans. Replacing a standPage 36

alone DB plan by a stand-alone 401(k) will, on average, increase contributions per
participant.
A less extreme scenario, but one that is still likely to overstate substitution, is that
the entire reduction in DB plan participation between 1984 and 1997 can be attributed to
displacement caused by the introduction of the 401(k) program. The number of DB
participants displaced in each year under this scenario is shown in column (14). “Lost”
contributions to DB plans under this scenario are shown in column (15), and they total
about $86 billion. This is only 11 percent of all 401(k) contributions.
The absence of large-scale displacement is the consequence of several factors.
First, much of the growth of 401(k)s, particularly in the early years, is among persons who
retain their DB coverage. Second, 401(k) contributions as a share of salary are about
twice as great as DB plan contributions as a share of salary, so even in the most extreme
case, 401(k) assets could not have been fully offset by a reduction in what otherwise
would have been the DB assets of the 401(k) enrollees. Indeed, the earlier discussion
suggests that accumulation of retirement assets resulting from 401(k) contributions is likely
to be substantially greater than the accumulation from contributions to DB plans. Finally,
the decline in the number of persons covered by DB plans but not by 401(k) plans is too
small to account for much of the 401(k) growth.
4.4 Projections of 401(k) Assets
The foregoing calculations compare aggregate 401(k) plan assets with aggregate
DB plan assets in two hypothetical scenarios. We can also make comparisons between
401(k) assets and DB plan assets using household-level data. Data from the Health and
Retirement Survey suggest that in 1992, the mean value of assets in DB plans was
Page 37

$54,800 for persons aged 51 to 61. The average for employees of all ages would be
much less. In PVW [1998b], we estimated how much the 1992 HRS respondents would
have accumulated in their 401(k) accounts if they had been eligible for 401(k) plans over
their entire working lives. Based on our projections of the participation rates of future
cohorts, we made forward-looking projections, one for the cohort reaching age 65 in 2025,
and the other for those reaching age 65 in 2035. We compared our projected 401(k)
assets to Social Security assets, assuming that the Social Security program remained
unchanged.
We can also compare projected 401(k) assets to DB pension assets. While Social
Security assets of HRS respondents averaged $103,392, DB pension assets average only
$54,500. PVW [2001] suggests that projected 401(k) assets would be 136 to 451 percent
of DB pension plan assets (depending on how contributions are invested), assuming no
reduction in DB assets. Even if DB pension assets were set to zero for this cohort, which
is tantamount to assuming that 401(k) plans crowded out all DB plans, there would still be
substantial incremental 401(k) wealth. Data on 401(k) participation rates and contributions
that have become available since we made our projections lead us to believe that, if
anything, these 401(k) asset projections may underestimate future 401(k) assets.
The “cohort approach” used to obtain the projections described above has the
advantage of combining all survey respondents. It is therefore not contaminated by saver
heterogeneity. It is also unaffected by differences in the lifetime accumulation profiles of
DB and DC assets, since the comparison is between the realized assets of persons at, or
approaching, retirement. These comparisons reflect the realized assets, after a lifetime of
pension saving, that are available to support retirement consumption.
Page 38

4.5 The “Eligibility Experiment” Applied to DB Plan Assets
In PVW [1998b], we used data from the Survey of Income and Program
Participation (SIPP) to compare the financial assets and home equity of families eligible for
a 401(k) with the assets of families who were not eligible. We found little difference in the
assets of eligible and non-eligible families in 1984–near the introduction of the 401(k)
program. By 1991, however, the assets of the eligible group were substantially greater
than those of the non-eligible group. We concluded that there was essentially no
substitution of 401(k) assets for other financial assets or for home equity. This comparison
is the basis for our comparison of the pension assets of HRS respondents.
Following the same idea, we considered whether the apparent increase in the
financial assets of the 401(k) eligible groups could have been offset by a reduction in their
DB assets. For this to have happened, the DB coverage of persons who became eligible
for a 401(k) plan would have had to decline. The results, however, are difficult to interpret.
We now explain why, and offer our interpretation of the data patterns.
In 1984, there was little difference in the non-IRA-401(k) financial assets or the
home equity assets of the eligible and ineligible groups. But, the eligible group was much
more likely to have a DB plan, especially at the lower income levels, than it was in later
years. By 1991, there was still little difference in the non-IRA-401(k) financial assets or the
home equity assets of the two groups. But the net total financial assets of the eligible
group were much greater than the financial assets of the ineligible group. There is no
measure of DB plan assets for either year in the SIPP. Could the DB plan assets of the
eligible group, relative to those of the ineligible group, have fallen enough to offset the
increase in financial assets of the eligibles? To judge the likelihood of this, we considered
Page 39

the change in the DB coverage of the two groups.
The key DB numbers are the percent change between 1984 and 1991 in DB
coverage of eligible and not eligible families. The percent decline in DB coverage was
much greater for the ineligible group than for the eligible group. One might judge from this
fact that there was not a disproportionate fall in the DB assets of the eligible group. But
interpretation of the data is confounded by two trends. One is the general decline over
time in the proportion of employees covered by a DB plan, which would affect both the
eligible and the ineligible groups. The other trend is the increase in 401(k) eligibility. As
401(k) eligibility increases, families who were ineligible become eligible. The effect of this
movement from ineligible to eligible status on the percent of eligibles covered by a DB plan
depends on the pre-move DB coverage of the new 401(k) eligibles.
Suppose we rely on Ippolito’s [2000] result that existing DB plans are very rarely
terminated when 401(k) plans are started, and we accept our result above that once dual
DB-401(k) coverage is established, subsequent loss in DB coverage is very unlikely. The
HRS data alone do not enable us to disentangle the various determinants of DB coverage.
But our attempts to match the shift in the DB coverage of the 401(k) eligible and ineligible
groups suggests that during this period, most of those who moved from ineligible to
eligible status had a DB before becoming eligible--reducing the proportion of the ineligible
group with a DB and increasing the proportion of the eligible group with a DB plan.
4.6 Cohort Analysis of DB vs. 401(k) Substitution
We emphasized above that if the increase in 401(k) assets is to be offset by a
reduction in DB assets, the reductions must come for the most part through a reduction in
DB participation. We showed that the reduction over time in the DB coverage of 401(k)
Page 40

participants with dual 401(k) and DB coverage was very small, and concluded that shifting
composition of the 401(k) eligible pool was the most likely explanation for changing DB
participation rates of eligibles and ineligibles. Another way to evaluate the extent of the
reduction in DB participation with the increase in 401(k) plans is to consider cohort data.
Figure 19 shows the relationship between 401(k) eligibility and participation in DB plans for
three cohorts, using data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) for
1984, 1987, 1991, 1993, and 1995. These data span the first 13 years of the 401(k)
program. Each cohort is identified by its age in 1984. For example, the C(44) cohort is
followed from ages 44 to 55.
Within each cohort, there were enormous increases in 401(k) eligibility. But the
within-cohort increases in 401(k) eligibility are not nearly offset by corresponding withincohort reductions in DB participation. Indeed for the two younger cohorts, both DB
participation and 401(k) eligibility increase with age. There is no evidence of DB-for-401(k)
offset, with rising 401(k) participation associated with declining DB plan coverage. These
data pertain to all employed persons, and are not confounded by the “mixture” problem
that makes the results of the eligibility experiment difficult to evaluate.
The evidence in Figure 19 does not necessarily imply that 401(k) plans did not
displace any DB plans. Perhaps DB participation would have risen more rapidly were it
not for the spread of 401(k) plans, or firms would have offered more generous defined
benefit plans if 401(k)s had not expanded. But it seems to us extremely unlikely that DB
plan participation would have increased, other things equal, as quickly as 401(k) plans
spread. For example, for a cohort like the C(44) group, it is likely that DB participation
would have changed little with age, which is what the realized data shown in the presence
Page 41

of the 401(k) expansion.
In addition, the 401(k) data show very large cohort effects. At any age,
successively younger cohorts are much more likely to be eligible for a 401(k) plan. There
are also DB cohort effects, with successively younger cohorts less likely, on average, to be
covered by a DB plan. The data for the few cohorts shown in Figure 19, however, do not
reveal this trend. (The cohort data are only shown through age 55. The SIPP data do not
allow correction for the more rapid retirement of persons covered by DB plans after the
plan early retirement age, which is often 55. Thus at older ages it is not possible to use
these data to make accurate comparisons of 401(k) and DB plan participation rates.)

5. RETIREMENT PLAN SUBSTITUTION AMONG OLDER WORKERS: HRS EVIDENCE
The Health and Retirement Study (HRS) provides the most comprehensive
information available on persons approaching retirement. The heads of households for
HRS families were 51 to 61 in 1992. Some of these persons could have participated in a
401(k) plan for up to 10 years by 1992. In principle the HRS data should allow estimation
of the contribution of the 401(k) program to the saving of persons in this age group during
the early years of the program. Such estimates might be obtained through a comparison
of 401(k) eligibles and ineligibles, as described in the previous section and in PVW [1995].
Unfortunately, because the HRS asks respondents whether they contribute to 401(k) plan,
not whether they are eligible to contribute, it is not possible to directly estimate the 401(k)
eligibility effect.
In this section, we explain the problems of inferring 401(k) eligibility status in the
HRS. We then discuss estimates of 401(k) eligibility based on adjustments that at least
Page 42

partially address these problems. Finally, we use these estimates to analyze the
relationship between 401(k) eligibility and pension plan assets. Consistent with the results
reported above, we find no evidence that the increase in 401(k) assets was offset by a
reduction in DB assets. We believe, however, that comprehensive determination of 401(k)
eligibility status in the HRS is not possible and that our HRS results are likely to
underestimate the net gain in pension retirement assets from the 401(k) program.
The relationship between 401(k) plans and DB retirement assets in the 1992 HRS is
also the focus of a recent study by Engelhardt [2000]. He concludes that DB assets are
higher among households ineligible for a 401(k) than among those eligible for a 401(k),
suggesting substitution of 401(k) for DB pension assets. The findings presented above
suggest that employees covered by 401(k) programs should have more retirement assets
than employees not covered by a 401(k). We find that a key reason for the difference
between Engelhardt’s conclusions and ours’ is the assignment of eligibility status, which is
critical to determining pension wealth.
5.1 Data Limitations in the HRS
Our aim is to provide estimates of the pension and other assets of HRS
respondents who were and were not eligible for a 401(k) plan. To begin, we compare DB
coverage rates, for persons eligible and not eligible for a 401(k), in the HRS and in other
surveys. The other surveys explicitly inquire about 401(k) eligibility, while the HRS does
not. This comparison is presented in Table 6 and pertains to pension status on the
employees’ current job.16 The HRS rates are based on the assignment of eligibility used
16

The HRS provides some information on pension status on prior jobs as well.
We restrict attention to the current job since it is difficult to determine 401(k) eligibility on
Page 43

by Engelhardt [2000]. All entries in the table are weighted and all entries except those
derived from the Form 5500 data pertain to persons in the age range covered by the HRS.
The 1992 HRS stands out as the only survey in which DB coverage is higher
among 401(k) non-eligibles than among eligibles.17 In the other surveys, the DB coverage
rate for eligibles is more than twice as great as the DB coverage rate for non-eligibles.
The particular method used to assign eligibility is one reason for the large disparity
between the HRS and other surveys. We also show below, that even under alternative,
and we believe more reasonable, conventions for assigning eligibility, there remains a
wide gap between the HRS DB coverage rates and the rates reported in other surveys.
The HRS does not inquire about eligibility for a 401(k), although it asks about
401(k) contributions.18 Consider the 1992 HRS data on 401(k) contributor status and DB

prior jobs. Many employees have rolled prior 401(k) balances into IRAs, and thus we
are likely to underestimate 401(k) eligibility on prior jobs. The HRS percentages in the
table pertain to respondents who indicated that they had a DB or 401(k) plan. We have
made no attempt here to allocate other responses such as “both,” “don’t know,” and “DC
- type unknown.” We have also dropped self-employed persons.
17

Using households rather than persons, Engelhardt [2000] finds 51 percent of
the eligibles and 48 percent of the ineligibles have a DB. A household is classified as
eligible if either member is eligible for a 401(k). The data in Table 6 are also consistent
with the results of Engen, Gale, and Scholz [1994] who find the ratio of eligibles with DB
coverage to ineligibles with DB coverage in the SIPP to be 1.65 in 1984, 1.77 in 1987,
and 2.27 in 1991.
18

These are self-reported pension data. For persons who self-report having a
pension, the HRS collected pension data from the employer. Thus persons who
incorrectly self-report no pension coverage will be missing employer-reported data as
well. In addition, the need to match every respondent to a pension combined with an
employer response rate of only 65 percent means that fewer than half of the households
have complete employer-reported pensions. Both Engelhardt [2000] and Gustman and
Steinmeier [2000b] show an enormous degree of conflict between self-reported and
firm-reported pension status.
Page 44

coverage, shown in Table 7. The HRS respondents report whether they contribute to a
401(k) and whether they are covered by a DB plan. These data are shown in the left
panel of Table 8. They pertain only to persons who indicate they are included in their
employer’s plan. (They differ from the HRS data in Table 6, which were weighted and also
include additional persons assumed to be eligible for a 401(k).) The unweighted percent
of 401(k) contributors with a DB plan is somewhat greater than the percent of noncontributors with a DB plan--46 versus 41.7 percent. But compared to the DB coverage of
401(k) eligibles versus non-eligibles reported in other surveys (Table 6), these data for
contributors versus non-contributors show a very low rate of DB coverage. Given that the
HRS does not provide eligibility, we want to convert 401(k) contributor status data to
401(k) eligibility status data. In particular, to make the conversion we must identify
persons among the 401(k) non-contributors who are eligible to contribute to a 401(k).
There are two separate determinations to be made. The empirically more important
case involves non-contributing 401(k) eligibles who are covered by another pension.
These persons would be among the 1699 persons in Table 7 who do not contribute to a
401(k), but have a DB plan. The sequence of questions in the first three waves of the
HRS provides no way for a non-contributing 401(k) eligible, also covered by a DB plan, to
self-identify as eligible for a 401(k); such information will be available in the 2000 wave of
the HRS. Since a large portion of 401(k) eligibles are covered by a DB plan, it is likely that
a large fraction of the non-contributors with a DB are in fact eligible for a 401(k).
Engelhardt [2000] assumes that all of these are non-eligibles without a DB plan, thus likely
mis-classifying a large fraction of persons with a DB plan.
Here, we simply want to illustrate what the unknown eligibility numbers could be.
Page 45

Suppose we convert the contributor data to eligibility data as follows. We know from the
Form 5500 data that about 82 percent of eligibles contributed to their 401(k) in 1992. Thus
there would be 1351/.82 = 1648 persons eligible for a 401(k)–297 more than contributed to
a 401(k). Using an extreme example, suppose that all of the 297 had a DB plan but did
not contribute. Then there would be 919 = 622+297 eligibles with a DB plan, and 1402
non-eligibles with a DB plan. This estimate is shown in the right panel of Table 6. The key
point is that even with this assumption, only 55.8 percent of the eligible group would have
a DB plan compared to 37.1 percent for the non-eligible group, a ratio of 1.5. This ratio is
still much lower than the ratios from any of the other surveys. Thus it would appear that if
the data reported in the HRS are used to determine eligibility, the implied proportions of
401(k) eligibles and non-eligibles with a DB plan are far from the values in other surveys
that explicitly inquire about eligibility.
There is in fact an additional problem in the HRS data, and a second determination
to be made, which is not addressed in the Table 7 illustration. Respondents are asked
whether they are “included” in a pension plan. Respondents who say no (and presumably
do not have a DB plan), are asked whether they are eligible for a pension plan offered by
their employer. About 175 respondents say yes. But we don’t know what kind of pension
is offered. In particular, is it a DB, 401(k), or a non-401(k) DC, or some other plan?
Engelhardt [2000] assumes that all of these persons are 401(k) eligibles without a DB
plan.19 Thus this assumption adds respondents with no DB coverage to the pool of 401(k)
19

Evidence from other surveys suggests that not all of these persons are eligible
for a 401(k). The 1995 SCF asked a similar question but followed it up by asking what
type of plan the respondent was eligible to be included in. Eighty percent of the
weighted responses age 51-61 indicated 401(k) for their first job and 36 percent for their
Page 46

eligibles. Recall that the first--and more serious--mis-classification adds eligibles with DB
coverage to the pool of 401(k) ineligibles. These two mis-classifications bias upward the
DB assets of 401(k) ineligibles, and bias downward the DB assets of 401(k) eligibles. The
combined effect of these two forms of mis-classification may be substantial.
5.2 HRS Results Based on Eligibility
There is no easy way to determine with certainty the 401(k) eligibility status of HRS
respondents. The convention used by Engelhardt [2000], as explained above, biases
downward the proportion of 401(k) eligibles with a DB plan and biases upward the
proportion of 401(k) ineligibles with a DB plan. We adopt assumptions that we believe are
more neutral with respect to DB coverage by 401(k) eligibility status.
We need to determine the eligibility of each 401(k) respondent. All 401(k)
contributors are clearly eligible. Among 401(k) non-contributors, some are eligible and
some are not. Our approach is to determine the proportion of 401(k) non-contributors that
is actually eligible to contribute to a 401(k). We do this based on proportions of noncontributing eligibles that have a DB, as evident in the Form 5500 data. In 1992, 82
percent of 401(k) eligibles in the Form 5500 data were 401(k) contributors. Let EE be the
total number of eligibles, EC be the number of observed contributors (all eligible), and EN
be the number of non-contributors that should be eligible. Then the number of eligibles is

second job (62.2 percent overall). The 1993 CPS asks for the reason why a respondent
is eligible, but not included. Only one-quarter of the respondents indicated that they
chose not to contribute, which would suggest nonparticipation in a 401(k). Instead, parttime status and lack of tenure with the employer were the most frequently cited reasons
for exclusion from an employer’s pension plan. These other surveys suggest that some
of cases assumed to be 401(k) eligibles in the HRS are instead persons not covered by
their employer’s DB plan.
Page 47

EE = EC + EN . From the Form 5500 data, the ratio of contributors to eligibles is EC/EE =
0.82 . The number of additional eligibles among the HRS non-contributors is then EN =
EC(1/.82 – 1). Thus, the proportion of non-contributors that should be eligible is P =
(1/0.82 – 1)(EC/NN), where NN is the total number of non-contributors.
These calculations suggest that the percentage of non-contributors predicted to be
eligible to contribute to a 401(k) in the HRS is equal to P percent of all observed noncontributors. Of this P percent, the Form 5500 data indicate that 55.7 percent have a DB
plan on their current job and 44.3 percent do not. Thus we randomly reassign .557 x P
percent of 401(k) non-contributors with a DB plan in the HRS to be non-contributing
eligibles. We also randomly reassign .443 x P percent of 401(k) non-contributors without a
DB plan to be non-contributing eligibles. This approach assures that the DB coverage rate
of the respondents added to the eligibility pool is the same as the DB coverage rate of the
respondents already in the pool.
Unfortunately, the Form 5500 benchmark data is not available by age or by income.
The 55.7 percent dual coverage rate that we use is undoubtedly a low estimate for the
HRS respondents (age 51 to 61 in 1992) because it applies to all ages, and we know from
the cohort data above that older persons are more likely to have a DB plan. The other
surveys also show that the percent with a DB plan increases with age.
We have adopted a similar assignment convention for missing and ambiguous
responses to pension questions in the HRS. If a respondent is “included” in a pension
then the respondent is asked for the plan type--DB or DC. The respondent is asked to
indicate the type of pension for up to three pensions. The available choices include: “DB”,
“DC”, or “both.” A significant number of respondents did not provide a response. We use
Page 48

these conventions: (1) Respondents answering “DB” were coded as having a DB plan. (2)
Respondents answering “DC” were then asked about the type of DC plan. The choices
“thrift or saving” or “401K/403B/SRA” or any combination involving these two choices were
coded as 401(k) plans. The other choices offered pertain to non-401(k) DC plans. For
respondents indicating that they have a DC plan, but did not provide the type of DC plan,
we randomly assign the plan as 401(k) or not 401(k) in proportion to the number of valid
responses indicating that they had 401(k) and non-401(k) DC plans. (3) Persons
indicating “both” as the type of pension were coded as having a DB plan and a DC plan.
For these respondents the DC plan is randomly assigned to be a 401(k) plan based on the
ratio of 401(k) plans to all DC plans among completed responses. (4) Finally, a significant
number of respondents who indicated they were included in a pension plan did not provide
the type. These persons were randomly assigned as having a DB plan or a 401(k) plan in
the same proportions as completed responses.
All of the calculations above are done at the level of the respondent. After these
assignments are made, we combine the individual data to obtain assignments on a family
basis. The asset data is reported on a family basis. A family is a 401(k) contributor, or
401(k) eligible, if either partner is a contributor, or is eligible.
Table 8 presents results comparing the assets of persons eligible and not eligible
for a 401(k) plan.20 The key results are in the panel labeled “total retirement assets.” Total
retirement assets are substantially higher (and the difference is statistically significant for
20

These are the results of weighted median regressions for 4895 households.
Each household had to have at least one member working and not self-employed.
Covariates include marital status and the age and education of the head. Conditional
median asset balances are evaluated at the sample means of the covariates.
Page 49

all but the lowest income interval) for the 401(k) eligible group. The panel just above
shows that retirement assets other than 401(k) assets do not differ much by eligibility
status, except for the two highest income intervals. In these top intervals, the assets of
eligibles are higher than the assets of non-eligibles. Thus these estimates suggest that
the accumulation of 401(k) assets was not offset by a reduction in the DB assets of the
HRS respondents. Non-retirement financial assets do not differ much by eligibility status.
Some of the cells show zeros because fewer than half of the observations have non-zero
values and thus the median is zero.
As explained above, the HRS data–even after our assignment assumptions–are
likely to exaggerate the proportion of 401(k) non-eligibles with a DB plan, relative to the
proportion of eligibles with a DB plan. After assignment of eligibility, the proportion of
401(k) eligibles households with DB plans is 59.3 percent and the proportion for ineligibles
is 47 percent. The ratio is 1.26, which is still much lower than the ratio reported in other
surveys. The coverage percent by income interval is reported in the bottom panel of Table
8. The SIPP-based ratios reported in Table 6 exceed 2, when averaged over all income
groups. Thus we believe that the calculations in Table 8 underestimate the addition to
pension wealth of families eligible for a 401(k) plan.

6. CONCLUSIONS
The way Americans save for retirement has changed dramatically in the last two
decades. In 1980, 92 percent of private retirement saving contributions were to employerbased plans and 64 percent of these contributions, or 59 percent of all contributions, were
to DB plans. In 1999, about 85 percent of private contributions went to accounts directed
Page 50

largely by individuals. In this paper we have analyzed a broad range of aggregate and
household data to understand the implications of this change.
The aggregate data show that assets in retirement plans have increased five-fold,
relative to wage and salary earnings, over the past two decades. The increase in these
assets to support retirement will likely mean very large increases in the assets of future
retirees. The increase in DC assets has been so large that it is unlikely that a significant
fraction of the growth in DC assets occurred at the expense of reduced DB assets.
In addition, over the past two decades, the annual retirement plan contribution rate
has been over 5 percent, as a proportion of NIPA personal income, and over 8 percent
relative to NIPA wage and salary earnings. Both are much higher than the NIPA personal
saving rate, which is now close to zero. The treatment of retirement plan contributions and
payouts in the national income accounts contributes to the very low measured personal
saving rate.
Retirement saving today would likely be substantially greater if Congress had not
enacted legislation in the late 1980s to limit firm contributions to DB pension plans. In the
absence of this legislation, and the favorable asset market returns during the 1990s that
reduced the need for employers to contribute to their DB plans, the retirement plan
contribution rate would have been at least 1 percentage point higher in the late 1990s than
it actually was. It is also likely that the retirement plan contribution rate would be much
higher today if it were not for the retrenchment of the IRA program after 1986.
On average, the contribution per active participant to 401(k) plans has been about
twice as large as contributions to DB plans, suggesting much higher wealth accumulation
under 401(k) than under DB plans. In addition, differences in the pattern of saving by age
Page 51

can have an important effect on retirement asset accumulation under the two plans. From
the employee perspective, “retirement saving” through a DB or DC plan each year can be
thought of as the increase in the financial support that each plan will provide in retirement.
Employee retirement saving under a DC plan is quite transparent to the employee, while
annual employee saving under a DB plan is quite opaque and unlikely to be clearly
understood. The pattern of saving by age is much different under DB and 401(k) plans, as
we show using a hypothetical DB plan. The pattern of pension wealth accrual in the DB
plan typically provides large incentive to retire early. As a consequence, DB employees
will typically accumulate assets over fewer years that DC employees. Taken together, the
higher contribution rate under DC plans and the greater number of years over which
assets accumulate are likely to increase very substantially the asset accumulation in DC
plans relative to DB plans.
Our analysis of household-level data on retirement saving yields a number of
findings that complement the conclusions from the aggregate analysis. Dual coverage
under both 401(k) and DB plans is common, but it has declined over time as more
employees without a prior DB plan have been offered 401(k)s. Over 80 percent of 401(k)
eligibles had a DB plan in 1984 and about 43 percent had one in 1997. Few 401(k)
participants covered by a DB plan--only about one percent each year--subsequently lose
DB coverage. Our estimates suggest that between 1984 and 1997, total contributions to
all pension plans of persons with a 401(k) plan were three times as great as what
contributions to defined benefit plans would have been in the absence of the 401(k)
program. The displacement of DB plan contributions was probably less than 11 percent of
the total plan contributions of 401(k) participants.
Page 52

Based on our prior independent projections, the mean 401(k) balances of persons
who will reach retirement age in 2035 will be 1.4 to 4.5 times as great, depending on asset
market returns, as mean DB balances, assuming no decline in DB coverage. Cohort
analysis shows a decline in DB coverage for successively younger cohorts, but no withincohort reduction in DB coverage as 401(k) coverage increased.
The HRS data suggest that accumulation of 401(k) assets substantially increased
the total retirement assets of persons approaching retirement in 1992. We find no
evidence of substitution of 401(k) assets for DB assets for persons in the HRS age group.

Page 53

REFERENCES
Benjamin, Daniel J., “Does 401(k) Eligibility Increase Savings?,” mimeo, October 2000.
Bernheim, B. Douglas and John Shoven. “Pension Funding and Saving.” In Z. Bodie, J.
Shoven, and D. Wise, eds., Pensions in the U.S. Economy, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1988, 85-111.
Burtless, Gary and Joseph F. Quinn. “Retirement Trends and Policies to Encourage Work
Among Older Americans,” mimeo, Boston College, 2000.
Coile, Courtney and Jonathan Gruber. “Social Security and Retirement.” NBER Working
Paper No. 7830, 2000.
Engelhardt, Gary, “Have 401(k)s Raised Household Saving? Evidence from the Health
and Retirement Survey,” mimeo, Syracuse University, 2000.
Engen, Eric and William Gale. “The Effects of 401(k) Plans on Household Wealth:
Differences Across Earnings Groups,” mimeo, Federal Reserve Board of
Governors, 2000.
Engen, Eric, William Gale and John Karl Scholz. “Do Saving Incentives Work?” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity. Vol. 1. 1994. P. 85-179.
Friedberg, Leora and Anthony Webb. “The Impact of 401(k) Plans on Retirement.”
University of California, San Diego Discussion Paper 2000-30, November 2000.
Gale, William, and John Sabelhaus. “Perspectives on the Household Saving Rate.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1999:1, 181-224.
Gruber, Jonathan and David A. Wise. “Social Security and Retirement: An International
Perspective,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 1998.
_________________. Social Security and Retirement Around the World, University of
Page 54

Chicago Press, 1999.
Gustman, Alan and Thomas Steinmeier, “An Analysis of Pension Benefit Formulas,
Pension Wealth, and Incentives From Pensions.” Research in Labor Economics,
vol. 10, 1989, p. 53-106.
_________________. “The Stampede Towards Defined Contribution Plans: Fact or
Fiction?”, Industrial Relations, vol. 31 no. 2, Spring 1992, 361-369.
_________________. “Employer Provided Pension Data in the NLS Mature Women’s
Survey and in the Health and Retirement Study,” in Solomon Polachek (ed.),
Worker Well-Being, Elsevier Science, NY, 2000a, p. 215-252.
_________________. “What People Don’t Know About Their Pensions and Social
Security: An Analysis Using Linked Data From the Health and Retirement Study,”
Mimeograph, Dartmouth College, 2000b.
Ippolito, Richard, “Toward Explaining the Growth of Defined Contribution Plans,” Industrial
Relations, vol. 34 no. 1, January 1995, p. 1-19.
Ippolito, Richard, “Reversion Taxes, Contingent Benefits, and the Decline in Pension
Funding,” Journal of Law and Economics, 44 (April 2001).
Ippolito, Richard A. and John Thompson, “The Survival Rate of Defined Benefit Pension
Plans, 1987-1995,” Industrial Relations 39 (April 2000), 228-245.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and David A. Wise. "The Incentive Effect of Private Pension Plans,"
in Zvi Bodie, John Shoven, and David A. Wise (eds.) Issues in Pension Economics,
University of Chicago Press, 1987.
_________________. "Pension Backloading, Wage Taxes, and Work Disincentives," in L.
Summers (ed.) Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 2, MIT Press, 1988.
Page 55

_________________. "Employee Retirement and a Firm's Pension Plan," in David A.
Wise (ed.) Economics of Aging, University of Chicago Press, 1989a.
_________________. The Wage Carrot and the Pension Stick, W.E. Upjohn Institute for
Employment Research, 1989b.
Katona, George, Private Pensions and Individual Saving, Ann Arbor: Institute for Social
Research, University of Michigan, 1965.
Lazear, Edward. “Incentive Effects of Pensions,” in D. A. Wise, ed., Pensions, Labor, and
Individual Choice (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985), 253-282.
LeBlanc, Pierre. “The Tradeoff Between Pensions and RRSP Contributions.” Working
Paper. October 2001.
Lumsdaine, Robin L., James H. Stock, and David A. Wise. "Efficient Windows and Labor
Force Reduction," Journal of Public Economics 43, 1990: 131-159.
_________________. "Three Models of Retirement: Computational Complexity Versus
Predictive Validity," in David A. Wise (ed.), Topics in the Economics of Aging,
University of Chicago Press, 1992.
_________________. "Pension Plan Provisions and Retirement: Men & Women,
Medicare, and Models," in David A. Wise (ed.) Studies in the Economics of Aging,
University of Chicago Press, 1994.
_________________. "Retirement Incentives: The Interaction Between EmployerProvided Pension Plans, Social Security, and Retiree Health Benefits," in M. Hurd
and N. Yashiro,(eds.) , The Economic Effects of Aging in the United States and
Japan, University of Chicago Press, 1997.
Lusardi, Annamarie, Jonathan Skinner, and Steven Venti. “Saving Puzzles and Saving
Page 56

Policies in the United States,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy , vol. 17 no. 1,
(Spring 2001), 95-115.
Papke, Leslie. “Are 401(k) Plans Replacing Other Employer-Provided Pensions?
Evidence from Panel Data,” Journal of Human Resources 34 (1999), 346-368.
Papke, Leslie, Mitchell Petersen, and James Poterba, “Do 401(k) Plans Replace Other
Employer Provided Pensions?,” in D. Wise, ed., Advances in the Economics of
Aging, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996, 219-236.
Pence, Karen, “401(k)s and Household Saving: New Evidence from the Survey of
Consumer Finances,” mimeo, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, September
2001.
Poterba, James M. and Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise. “Do 401(k) Contributions
Crowd Out Other Private Saving?” Journal of Public Economics 58 (1995),
1-32.
__________________. “How Retirement Saving Programs Increase Saving,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, Fall 1996.
__________________. “Personal Retirement Savings Programs and Asset Accumulation:
Reconciling the Evidence,” in D. Wise, ed., Frontiers in the Economics of Aging,
University of Chicago Press, 1998a.
__________________. “Implications of Rising Personal Retirement Saving,” in D. Wise,
ed., Frontiers in the Economics of Aging, University of Chicago Press, 1998b.
__________________. "Pre-retirement Cashouts and Foregone Retirement Saving:
Implications for 401(k) Asset Accumulation,” forthcoming in D. Wise, ed., Themes in
the Economics of Aging, University of Chicago Press, forthcoming 2001.
Page 57

Reinsdorf, Marshall and Maria Perozek. “Alternative Measures of Personal Saving and
Measures of Change in Personal Wealth,” mimeo, Federal Reserve Board of
Governors, 2000.
Samwick, Andrew, “New Evidence on Pensions, Social Security, and the Timing of
Retirement,” Journal of Public Economics, vol. 70, Nov. 1998, p. 207-236.
Samwick, Andrew and Jonathan Skinner, “How Will Defined Contribution Pension Plans
Affect Retirement Income?,” NBER Working Paper 6645, July 1998.
Samwick, Andrew and David A. Wise, “Pension Benefits and Retirement: Using HRS
Data,” Working Paper, March 2001.
Schieber, Sylvester and John Shoven. “The Consequences of Population Aging on
Private Pension Fund Saving and Asset Markets,” in Michael Hurd and Naohiro
Yashiro, eds., The Economic Effects of Aging in the United States and Japan.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997, 111-130.
Stock, James H. and David A. Wise, "Pensions, the Option Value of Work, and
Retirement," Econometrica 58, 5, September 1990a: 1151-1180.
__________________. "The Pension Inducement to Retire: An Option Value Analysis,"
in David A. Wise (ed.), Issues in the Economics of Aging, University of Chicago
Press, 1990b.
U.S. Department of Labor, Private Pension Plan Bulletin: Abstract of 1996 Form 5500
Annual Reports. Washington: Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration,
Number 9, Winter 1999-2000.

Page 58

Appendix 1: Data Sources
Figure 1. Private retirement assets are the sum of DB, DC pension reserves from the
Flow of Funds Accounts (FFA) and IRA assets from Sabelhaus (2000). Total retirement
assets also include state, local and federal pension reserves from the FFA. Wage and
salary disbursements are from Table 2.1 of the NIPA. Pension assets held by life
insurance companies are excluded.
Figure 2. DB and DC assets for 1985-99 are from the FFA. For the years 1975-1984
estimates are obtained by applying the ratio of DB to DC assets from Form 5500 filings to
total assets from the FFA. IRA assets are from Sabelhaus (2000). The figure excludes
private pension assets held by life insurance companies.
Figure 3. All series from the FFA.
Figure 4. Housing equity if rom the FFA. Other assets are total net worth (from the FFA)
less housing equity less private retirement assets as defined in note to figure 1a. Personal
disposable income from Table 2.1 of the NIPA.
Figure 5a. DB and DC contributions are from Form 5500 reports. The data for 1998 and
1999 are authors estimates. IRA and Keogh contributions are from the IRS Statistics of
Income. The IRA contributions pertain to tax-deductible contributions only.
Figure 5b. Private pension contributions are the sum of the components described in
figure 5a. State and local and federal contributions are from the NIPA.
Figure 6a. Private pension contributions are the sum of the components described in
figure 5a. Total pension contributions are the sum of the components described in Figure
5b. Personal disposable income is from NIPA.

Page 59

Figure 6b.

Private pension contributions are the sum of the components described in

figure 5a. Total pension contributions are the sum of the components described in Figure
5b. Wage and salary earnings (disbursements) are from the NIPA.
Figure 7, 8a. All series except IRA and Keogh participants are from the Form 5500. IRA
and Keogh participants are from SOI. 401(k) data for 1982, 1983 are authors’ estimates.
Figure 8b. The 401(k) series is from the Form 5500. 401(k) data for 1982 and 1983 are
authors’ estimates. The IRA data are from the IRS Statistics of Income.
Figure 8c. The Keogh data are from the IRS Statistics of Income.
Figures 9, 10, 11. All DB and DC plan data are from the Form 5500, while Keogh data are
from the IRS Statistics of Income.
Figure 12. Actual pension contributions are the same as in Figure 6b. The DB adjusted
series is as described in the text. Data to calculate this series are not available after 1996.
Wage and salary earnings (disbursements) are from the NIPA.
Figure 13. All data are from the form 5500.
Figure 14. IRA contributions are from the IRS Statistics of Income. The IRA contributions
pertain to tax-deductible contributions only. IRA benefits are from Sabelhaus (2000).
Figures 15-17. Authors’ calculations as described in the text.
Figure 18. DB, DC, and 401(k) participants are from the Form 5500. IRA and Keogh
participants are from the IRS Statistics of Income. Wage and Salary employment from the
DOL web page.
Figure 19. Authors’ calculations from the SIPP.

Page 60

Appendix: The DB Loss Ratio from Dual Coverage Participants
The first panel of Appendix Table A-1 shows the raw data, calculated from Form
5500 filings, that we use to estimate the DB loss ratio. The second panel (third column)
determines the additions to existing plans. The number of additional participants to new
plans from years t to t+1 is simply the increase in total participants, less the participants in
plans just started that year. The identity governing its evolution is:
Number in 401(k) with a DB in year t+1 = Number in 401(k) with a DB in year t +
Number in new 401(k) with a DB in year t+1 +
[(Number in 401(k) with DB in t)+(DB coverage additions to existing 401(k)s)]*(DB loss rate)

The DB loss rate is the proportion of persons with a DB who drop (or lose) the DB plan.
We assume that among the additional participants in existing 401(k) plans, the percent
with a DB plan is the same as the percent with a DB in existing plans in the prior year.
The components of the loss ratio calculations are shown in the last section of the table.
DB denotes the number of workers with DB plans, N denotes the number in existing plans,
P the proportion in existing 401(k) plans with a DB plan, n the number of workers in new
plans, p the proportion in new plans with a DB plan,A the number of additions to
participants in existing plans, P the proportion of additions with a DB, I the proportion of
those with a DB who drop the plan, and t the year. The formula for the loss ratio is then:

(

)

DBt + 1 = N t Pt + nt pt + nt + 1 pt + 1 + ( N t Pt + nt pt + At + 1 Pt )l

l=

(

DBt + 1 − N t Pt + nt pt + nt + 1 pt1

( N t Pt + nt pt + At + 1 Pt )

)

Page 61

Appendix Table 1. Calculation DB Plan Loss Ratio
Year

All plans

1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997

active
participants
T
20365592
21129557
24064248
25576318
27241793
30803020
33854427
37716368

% with
DB plan
t
61.8
58.2
55.7
52.9
51.0
46.9
45.8
42.4

1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997

Exist Plans
with DB
NP
12229001
11973202
13099674
13245514
13629904
14160527
15164783
15680225

New Plans
with DB
np
365080
322912
301075
282225
268551
287604
344202
309935

From Form 5500 Filings
Plans in 1st year
active
participants
n
1113387
1237212
1587113
1232422
817009
1028994
873167
1377491

% with
DB plan
p
32.8
26.1
19.0
22.9
32.9
28.0
39.4
22.5

Additions
NP + np
12594080
12296115
13400750
13527738
13898454
14448131
15508986
15990161

A(t+1)
-473247
1347578
279648
848466
2532233
2178240
2484450

Pre-existing plans
active
participants
N
19252205
19892345
22477135
24343896
26424784
29774026
32981260
36338877

% with
DB plan
P
63.5
60.2
58.3
54.4
51.6
47.6
46.0
43.2

Determination of Loss Ratio
Additions with
DB
DB(t+1)
A(t+1)P(t)
12295289
13401380
13527315
13898763
14446616
15508713
15987968

Page 62

-300606
811107
162979
461650
1306126
1035971
1142350
4,619,577

Additions to Existing Plans
Participant
Participants
Additions to
Increase All
From
Existing Plans
Plans
New Plans
T(t+1)-T(t)
T(t)+n(t+1)-T(t+1)
763965
2934691
1512070
1665475
3561227
3051407
3861941
17,350,776

1237212
1587113
1232422
817009
1028994
873167
1377491
8,153,408

Loss
Ratio
l

Participants
losing
DB plans

-0.051
0.061
-0.011
0.007
0.017
0.046
0.010

-612973
837105
-156999
105307
281570
769228
182672
1,405,910

-473247
1347578
279648
848466
2532233
2178240
2484450
9,197,368

Table 1. Illustration of saving under DB and 401(k) plans.
(1)

(2)

Age Wage

25
29
30
35
40
45
50
54
55
60
64

9229
11991
12754
16983
21784
26908
31998
35757
36623
40330
42363

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Saving / Wage Saving in Dollars

(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Saving as Increment to Wealth at
Retirement
401(k)
401(k) 401(k)
DB
To 65
To 55
To 60

DB

401(k)

DB

401(k)

0
0.053
0.016
0.029
0.049
0.078
0.119
0.162
-0.046
-0.118
-0.189

0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09

0
636
207
494
1063
2097
3809
5782
-1672
-4765
-8016

831
1079
1148
1528
1961
2422
2880
3218
3296
3630
3813

0
5973
1640
2539
3552
4554
5376
5782
-1672
-4765
-8016

26089
24012
23433
20279
16906
13572
10490
8304
7803
5585
4156

11020
10143
9898
8566
7141
5733
4431
3508
3296
---

16956
15606
15230
13180
10988
8821
6818
5397
5071
3630
--

0.09

111

2425

--

14768

--

--

0.09

1730

2025

3549

--

7535

--

102911
142139
181458

--575970

Average,
0.017
ages 25-64
Average,
0.062
ages 25-54
Total pension wealth if
retire at age:
55
60
65

Page 63

221182
-362205
---

Table 2. Change in DB Plan Annual Accrued Liability per Active Employee, and
401(k) Plan Contribution per Participant.
Year

DB Change in Accrued
Liability per Active
Employee

401(k)
Contribution
per
Participant

Ratio
401(k) to DB
Saving

1990

961

2507

2.61

1991

976

2694

2.76

1992

1110

2872

2.59

1993

1252

2996

2.39

1994

1315

3010

2.29

1995

1359

3115

2.29

1996

--

3371

1.69

1997

1784

3065

1.72

Note: DB data are authors’ calculations from Form 5500 data. To eliminate apparent
data entry errors, plans with change in accrued liability greater than $10,000 per
employee have been deleted. Essentially the same results are obtained if plans with a
change greater than $20,000 per employee are eliminated.

Page 64

Table 3. 401(k) Plans: Percent with DB and Participation Rate
Plans in First Year of
Coverage
Percent of 401(k) Participants with a DB Plan

Year

All 401(k) Plans

1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997

82.4
78.0
75.3
69.7
67.8
65.3
61.8
58.2
55.7
52.9
51.0
46.9
45.8
42.4

Pre-existing Plans

69.3
47.5
66.8
46.0
63.5
32.8
60.2
26.1
58.3
19.0
54.4
22.9
51.6
32.9
47.6
28.0
46.0
39.4
43.2
22.5
401(k) Participation Rate Given Eligibility
1990
83.4
83.7
77.3
1991
81.5
82.2
70.4
1992
81.4
82.0
72.8
1993
80.0
80.6
68.7
1994
79.9
80.4
63.0
1995
77.5
78.3
54.4
1996
77.0
77.1
63.6
1997
75.8
76.0
71.4
Percent of All Plans (Participants)
1988
100.0
86.3 (93.0)
13.7 (7.0)
1989
100.0
85.9 (92.7)
14.1 (7.3)
1990
100.0
87.7 (94.5)
12.3 (5.5)
1991
100.0
89.8 (94.1)
10.2 (5.9)
1992
100.0
89.6 (93.4)
10.4 (6.6)
1993
100.0
89.3 (95.2)
10.7 (4.8)
1994
100.0
94.6 (97.0)
5.4 (3.0)
1995
100.0
95.2 (96.7)
4.8 (3.3)
1996
100.0
95.9 (97.4)
4.1 (2.6)
1997
100.0
95.7 (96.4)
4.3 (3.7)
Source: Authors' calculations from Form 5500 filings.

Page 65

Table 4. 401(k) Contribution and Participation Rate, by DB Coverage
All 401k plans

With a DB plan

Without a DB Plan

Contributions per Active Participant
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997

2394
2433
2594
2718
2744
2896
3001
3056

2586
2700
2916
3075
3154
3417
3429
3615

2082
2061
2188
2310
2315
2435
2638
2645

Participation Rate Given Eligible
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997

83.4
81.5
81.4
80.0
79.9
77.5
77.0
75.8

83.4
83.3
83.9
82.4
82.3
80.4
80.5
78.4

Source: Authors' calculations from Form 5500 filings.

Page 66

83.3
79.0
78.2
77.3
77.3
74.9
74.1
74.0

Table 5. Contributions of Current 401(k) Participants With & Without 401(k) Program
DB
401(k)
Partici- Partici- % with
DB Contribution
401(k) Contribution
Year pants pants DB Plan Without
With 401(k)
Without DB
With DB
401(k)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
1984 30172 7579
0.824
1332
1640
2202
2411
1985 29024 10352
0.78
1350
1350
1866
2605
1986 28670 11573
0.753
1516
1382
2194
2841
1987 28432 13163
0.697
1287
1250
2312
2796
1988 28081 15424
0.678
1481
1279
2148
2775
1989 27304 18449
0.653
1385
1067
2176
2728
1990 26344 20366
0.618
1143
695
2082
2586
1991 25747 21130
0.582
1270
1018
2061
2700
1992 25362 24064
0.557
1355
1338
2188
2916
1993 25127 25576
0.529
1538
2333
2310
3075
1994 24615 27242
0.51
1576
1540
2315
3154
1995 23531 30803
0.469
1809
2094
2435
3417
1996 23262 33854
0.458
1886
1484
2638
3429
1997 22866 37716
0.424
1979
2247
2645
3615

1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997

Contributions
Persons with a 401(k)
If all 401(k) DB Displacement = Decline
Participants
in DB Plans
With a DB Plan Without a Total
DB
Lost DB
Had a DB
DB Plan
Plan Instead Participants Contributions
DB
401(k)
Displaced
(9) (10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
10242 15057
2937
28236
10095
0
0
10901 21034
4250
36185
13975
1148
1550
12043 24758
6272
43073
17545
1502
2277
11468 25652
9221
46341
16941
1740
2239
13375 29019
10668
53062
22843
2091
3097
12854 32865
13930
59649
25552
2868
3972
8747 32548
16198
57493
23278
3828
4375
12519 33204
18203
63926
26835
4425
5620
17934 39085
23325
80344
32607
4810
6518
31565 41604
27827 100996
39336
5045
7759
21396 43820
30902
96118
42933
5557
8758
30251 49364
39828 119443
55723
6641
12014
23010 53167
48404 124581
63849
6910
13032
35933 57810
57461 151204
74640
7306
14459

Total 252238 498987 309426 1060651

Page 67

466152

53871

85669

Table 6. Percent of 401(k) Eligibles and Ineligibles with a DB Pension, by Survey
Survey and Year

Eligibles

Ineligibles

Ratio

1992 HRS

40.8

43.6

0.94

Form 5500

55.7

-

1993 CPS

53.9

25.4

2.12

1991 SIPP

69.5

28.4

2.45

1995 SCF

38.3

17.2

2.23

Table 7. HRS 1992 Reported 401(k) Contributor Data and Illustrative Inferred 401(k)
Eligibility
DB
Reported in the HRS
Inferred from External Sources
Coverage
401(k) Contributor
401(k) Eligible
Yes
No
All
Yes
No
Number:
DB
622
1699
2321
919
2321
1402
No DB
729
2376
3105
729
2376
3105
All
4075
5426
1648
3778
5426
1351
Percent:
DB
No DB
All

46.0%
54.0%
100.0%

41.7%
58.3%
100.0%

42.8%
57.2%
100.0%

Page 68

55.8%
44.2%
100.0%

37.1%
62.9%
100.0%

42.8%
57.2%
100.0%

Table 8. HRS Conditional Median Assets by 401(k) Eligibility Status (With Eligibility
Determined by Our Random Assignment Method)
Asset Category
and Eligibility
Status

< $20,000

20,00030,000

Income Interval
30,00040,00040,000
50,000

50,00075,000

> 75,000

Net Non-Retirement Financial Assets
Eligible
3069
3862
Ineligible
2897
3069
Difference
172
793

5614
6310
-697

8983
6250
2733

14672
13966
707

33155
23690
9466*

Retirement assets other than 401(k)
Eligible
18634
24539
Ineligible
15326
22738
Difference
3308
1801

40746
37827
2919

46996
50338
-3342

83533
73270
10263*

180000
146859
33141*

Total retirement assets
Eligible
20701
Ineligible
14580
Difference
6120

34170
22909
11261*

50492
37862
12631*

60263
50748
9515

101524
73814
27709*

240902
145626
95276*

Net housing equity
Eligible
Ineligible
Difference

35135
21596
13539*

37248
32854
4393

45641
45233
409

42496
48861
-6365

59043
55350
3693

83409
79517
3891

0.29
0.2

0.42
0.35

0.5
0.53

0.53
0.54

0.66
0.63

0.74
0.61

DB coverage
Eligible
Ineligible

Page 69

Figure 1. Ratio of Private and Total Retirement Assets
to Wage and Salary Earnings
3

2.5

2
Ratio

Total Retirement Assets
1.5
Private Retirement Assets

1

0.5

0
1975

1977

1979

1981

1983

1985

1987
Year

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

Figure 2. Private Retirement Assets
8000
7000

Assets in Billions

6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
1975

1977

1979

1981

1983

1985

1987

1989

1991

Year
All DC

DB

IRA

1993

1995

1997

1999

Figure 3. Public and Private Retirement Assets
14000
12000

Assets in Billions

10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0
1975

1977

1979

1981

1983

1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

Year
Private

State & Local

Federal

Life Insurance Co.

1999

Figure 4. Ratio of Home Equity and Other Assets
to Disposable Income
4
3.5
Other Assets

3

Ratio

2.5
2
1.5
Home Equity

1
0.5
0
1975

1977

1979

1981

1983

1985

1987
Year

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

Figure 5a. Private Pension Contributions
250

Assets in Billions

200

150

100

50

0
1975

1977

1979

1981

1983

1985

1987

1989

1991

Year
DB

DC

IRA

Keogh

1993

1995

1997

1999

Figure 5b. All Pension Contributions
400
350

Assets in Billions

300
250
200
150
100
50
0
1975

1977

1979

1981

1983

1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

Year
Private

State & Local

Federal

1995

1997

1999

Figure 6a. Ratio of Private and Total Pension Contributions
to Disposable Income
0.08
0.07
0.06

Ratio

0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
1975

1977

1979

1981

1983

1985

1987

1989

Year
Private

Total

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

Figure 6b. Ratio of Private and Total Pension Contributions
to Wage and Salary Earnings
0.12
0.1

Ratio

0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
1975

1977

1979

1981

1983

1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

Year
Private Contributions/Private W&S

Total Contributions/Total W&S

1999

Figure 7. Active Participants in Private Pension Plans
(with double counting)
90000

Participants in Thousands

80000
70000
60000
50000
40000
30000
20000
10000
0
1975

1977
DB

1979

1981
401(k)

1983

1985 1987
Year
Non-401(k) DC

1989

1991
IRA

1993

1995
Keogh

1997

Figure 8a. Contributions per Active Participant
DB, DC, and 401(k)
3500
3000
401(k)

Dollars

2500
2000
Non-401(k) DC
1500
1000

DB

500
0
1975

1977

1979

1981

1983

1985

1987

Year

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

Figure 8b. Contributions per Active Participant
IRA and 401(k)
3500
3000
401(k)

Dollars

2500
2000
IRA

1500
1000
500
0
1975

1977

1979

1981

1983

1985

1987

Year

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

Figure 8c. Contributions per Active Participant
Keogh
9000
8000
7000
Keogh

Dollars

6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
1975

1977

1979

1981

1983

1985

1987

Year

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

Figure 9. Participants and Contributions per
Participant for All Plans
2600

70000

Participants in 000's

Participants

2200

60000

2000
1800

55000

1600

50000

Contributions per Participant

45000

1400
1200

40000

1000
1977

1979

1981

1983

1985

1987
Year

1989

1991

1993

1995

Contributions per Participant ($)

2400

65000

Figure 10. DB Contributions, Participants, and Contributions
per Participant (Index: 1977=1)
2
1.8
Contributions

Index

1.6

Contributions per Participant

1.4
1.2
1
Participants

0.8
0.6
1977

1979

1981

1983

1985

1987
Year

1989

1991

1993

1995

Figure 11. Contributions per Participant
(Index: 1977=1)
3.1

Keogh

2.6

Index

2.1

1.6

Wage and Salary Earnings

DB

1.1
All DC

0.6
1977

1979

1981

1983

1985

1987
Year

1989

1991

1993

1995

Figure 12. Ratio of Private and DB Adjusted Pension
Contributions to Wage and Salary Earnings
0.1
0.09
0.08
0.07
Ratio

0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
1977

1979

1981

1983

1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

Year
Private Contributions/Private W&S

DB Adjusted/Private W&S

1995

Figure 13. DB Contributions and Benefits
140

Amount in Billions

120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1975

1977

1979

1981

1983

1985

1987

1989

Year
Contributions

Benefits

1991

1993

1995

1997

Figure 14. IRA Contributions and Benefits
80
70

Amount in Billions

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1975

1977

1979

1981

1983

1985

1987

1989

1991

Year
Contributions

Benefits

1993

1995

1997

1999

Figure 15. Ratio of DB and 401(k)
Saving to Earnings
0.25
0.20
DB

0.15
401(k)

Ratio

0.10
0.05
0.00
-0.05
-0.10
-0.15
-0.20
25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59 61 63
Age

Figure 16. DB and 401(k) Saving
Increment to Wealth (Retirement at Age 55)
12000

10000

401(k)

Dollars

8000

6000
DB

4000

2000

0
25

27

29

31

33

35

37

39

41

Age

43

45

47

49

51

53

55

Figure 17. DB and 401(k) Saving
Increment to Wealth (Retirement at Age 65)
30000

25000

Dollars

20000

401(k)

15000

10000
DB

5000

0
25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59 61 63
Age

Figure 18. Ratio of Plan Participants to Private Wage and
Salary Employment, with Double Counting
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
Ratio

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1975

1977

1979
DB

1981
401(k)

1983

1985 1987
Year
Non401(k) DC

1989

1991
IRA

1993
Keogh

1995

1997

Figure 19. DB Participation and 401(k) Eligibility:
Data for Three Cohorts
0.6
0.5

Rate

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55
Age
C26-DB

C35-DB

C44-DB

C26-401(k)

C35-401(k)

C44-401(k)

