                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      LONG-TERM GLOBAL MARKET CORRELATIONS


                                         William N. Goetzmann
                                               Lingfeng Li
                                         K. Geert Rouwenhorst


                                          Working Paper 8612
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8612


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2001




We thank Ibbotson Associates for providing data. We thank George Hall for suggesting sources of WWI
data. We thank seminar participants at the Stockholm School of Economics and Yale School of Management
for suggestions. We thank the International Center for Finance at Yale for support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by William N. Goetzmann, Lingfeng Li and K. Geert Rouwenhorst. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Long-Term Global Market Correlations
William N. Goetzmann, Lingfeng Li and K. Geert Rouwenhorst
NBER Working Paper No. 8612
November 2001
JEL No. F3, G1



                                              ABSTRACT


        In this paper we examine the correlation structure of the major world equity markets over 150
years. We find that correlations vary considerably through time and are highest during periods of
economic and financial integration such as the late 19th and 20th centuries. Our analysis suggests that the
diversification benefits to global investing are not constant, and that they are currently low compared to
the rest of capital market history. We decompose the diversification benefits into two parts: a component
that is due to variation in the average correlation across markets, and a component that is due to the
variation in the investment opportunity set. There are periods, like the last two decades, in which the
opportunity set expands dramatically, and the benefits to diversification are driven primarily by the
existence of marginal markets. For other periods, such as the two decades following World War II, risk
reduction is due to low correlations among the major national markets. From this, we infer that periods
of globalization have both benefits and drawbacks for international investors. They expand the
opportunity set, but diversification relies increasingly on investment in emerging markets.




William N. Goetzmann
Yale School of Management
and NBER
william.goetzmann@yale.edu

Lingfeng Li
Yale University

K. Geert Rouwenhorst
Yale School of Management
I. Introduction

           There is considerable academic research that documents the benefits of
international diversification. Grubel (1968) finds that between 1959 and 1966, U.S.
investors could have achieved better risk and return opportunities by investing part of
their portfolio in foreign equity markets. Levy and Sarnat (1970) analyze international
correlations in the 1951-1967 period, and show the diversification benefits from investing
in both developed and developing equity markets. Grubel and Fadner (1971) show that
between 1965 and 1967 industry correlations within countries exceed industry
correlations across countries. These early studies marked the beginning of an extensive
literature in financial economics on international diversification. However, the benefits to
international diversification have actually been well-known in the investment community
for much longer.          The 18th century development of mutual funds in Holland was
predicated on the benefits of diversification through holding equal proportions of
international securities.1 The quantitative analysis of international diversification dates at
least to Henry Lowenfeld’s (1909) study of equal-weighted, industry-neutral, risk-
adjusted, international diversification strategies, using price data from the global
securities trading on the London Exchange around the turn of the century. His book, The
Geographical Distribution of Capital is illustrated with graphs documenting the
imperfect co-movement of securities from various countries. Based on these, he argues
that superior investment performance can be obtained by spreading capital in equal
proportion across a number of geographical sectors and carefully re-balancing back to
these proportions on a regular basis.

                    It is significant to see how entirely all the rest of the
           Geographically Distributed stocks differ in their price movements from
           the British stock. It is this individuality of movement on the part of each
           security, included in a well-distributed Investment List, which ensures the
           first great essential of successful investment, namely, Capital Stability.2

1
  For example, the 1774 “Negotiatie onder de Zinspreuk EENDRAGT MAAKT MAGT” organized by
Abraham van Ketwich, obliged the manager to hold as close as possible an equal-weight portfolio of bonds
from the Bank of Vienna, Russian government bonds, government loans from Mecklenburg and Saxony,
Spanish Canal loans, English colonial securities, South American Plantation loans and securities from
various Danish American ventures, all of which were traded in the Amsterdam market at the time.
2
    Lowenfeld, Henry, 1909, Investment an Exact Science, The Financial Review of Reviews, London. p. 49.


                                                     1
       Considering the widespread belief in the benefits to international diversification
over the past 100 to 200 years, and the current importance of diversification for research
and practice in international finance, we believe that it is important to examine how
international diversification has actually fared -- not just over the last 30 years since the
beginnings of academic research, but over much longer intervals of world market history.
In this paper, we use long-term historical data to ask whether the global diversification
strategies developed by Henry Lowenfeld and his predecessors actually served investors
well over the last century and a half. In addition, we consider the long-term lessons of
capital market history with regard to the potential for international diversification looking
forward.
       The first contribution of our paper is to document the correlation structure of
world equity market over the period from 1850 to the present using the largest available
sample of time-series data we can assemble. Stock market data over such long stretches
are inevitably messy and incomplete. Despite the limitations of our data, we find that
international equity correlations change dramatically through time, with peaks in the late
19th century, the Great Depression and the late 20th Century. Thus, the diversification
benefits to global investing are not constant. Perhaps most important to the investor of
the early 21st Century is that the international diversification potential today is very low
compared to the rest of capital market history. Recent history bears a close resemblance
to the turn of the 19th century, when capital was relatively free to flow across
international borders. While capital market integration does embed a prediction about the
correlations between markets, we find that periods of free capital flows are associated
with high correlations.
       One important question to ask of this data is whether diversification works when
it is most needed.    This issue has been of interest in recent years due to the high
correlations in global markets conditional upon negative shocks. Evidence from capital
market history suggests that periods of poor market performance, most notably the Great
Depression, were associated with high correlations, rather than low correlations.      Wars
were associated with high benefits to diversification, however these are precisely the
periods in which international ownership claims may be abrogated, and international



                                             2
investing in general may be difficult. Indeed, investors in the past who have apparently
relied upon diversification to protect them against extreme swings of the market have
been occasionally disappointed. In 1929, the chairman of Alliance Trust Company,
whose value proposition plainly relied upon providing diversification to the average
investor lamented:


        “Trust companies…have reckoned that by a wide spreading of their investment
        risk, a stable revenue position could be maintained, as it was not to be expected
        that all the world would go wrong at the same time. But the unexpected has
        happened, and every part of the civilized world is in trouble…”3

        The Crash of 1929 thus not only surprised investors by its magnitude, but also by
its international breadth. As we show in this paper, the Great Crash was associated with a
structural change in not only the volatility of world markets, but in the international
correlations as well. Average correlations went up and reached a peak in the 1930’s that
has been unequaled until the modern era. Although global investing in the pre-War era, as
now, was facilitated by relatively open capital markets and cross-border listing of
securities, the ability to spread risk across many different markets was less of a benefit
than it might have at first appeared.
         The second contribution of our paper is that we providea decomposition of the
benefits of international diversification. To examine the interplay between global market
liberalization and co-movement, we focus our analysis on two related sources of the
benefits to diversification, both of which have affected investor risk throughout the last
150 years. The first source is the variation in the average correlation in equity markets
through time. The second source is the variation in the investment opportunity set. This
decomposition is a useful framework for understanding the benefits of global investing –
markets come and go in the world economy, and the menu of investment choices at any
given time may have an important effect on diversification. For example, in the last two
decades, the opportunity set expanded dramatically at the same time correlations of the
major markets has increased. As a result, the benefits to international diversification have

3
 Quoted in Bullock, Hugh, 1959, The Stork of Investment Companies, Columbia University Press, New
York.



                                                 3
recently been driven by the existence of emerging capital markets – smaller markets on
the margin of the world economy where the costs and risks of international investing are
potentially high. For other periods, such as the two decades following the era of World
War II, risk reduction derived from low correlations among the major national markets.
From this, we infer that periods of globalization have both benefits and drawbacks for the
international investor. They expand the opportunity set, but the diversification benefits of
cross-border investing during these periods relies increasingly on investment in emerging
markets.
       A third contribution of this paper is the development of an econometric
framework for testing hypotheses about shifts in the correlation among markets through
time. We construct tests about not only the change in the correlation matrix between time
periods, but about the change in the average correlation across markets. Bootstrap studies
of the robustness of these tests show they work well as a basis for distinguishing among
periods of differing asset correlations. The results of our tests show that we convincingly
reject the constancy of the global correlation structure between various periods in world
economic history in our sample.
       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section reviews the
literature on capital market correlations. Section III contains a description of our data.
The fourth section presents our empirical results including our decomposition of the
benefits of diversification, followed by our conclusions in Section V.




II. History and Prior Research


       The theoretical and statistical evidence on international diversification, market
integration, and the correlation between markets, beginning with the early empirical
studies cited above, is legion. Because we take a longer temporal perspective, however,
the historical framework is important as well. Recent contributions in economic history
have been useful in comparing and contrasting the recent period of international cross-
border investing to earlier periods in world history.       Bordo, Eichengreen and Kim
(1998), for example, use historical data to argue for a period of market integration in the



                                             4
pre-1914 era. Prakash and Taylor (1999) uses the experience of the pre-World War I era
as a guide to understand current global financial flows and crises. Obstfeld and Taylor
(2001) further document the relation between the integration of global capital flows and
relate this directly to the temporal variation in the average correlation of world equity
markets. Goetzmann, Ukhov and Zhu (2001) document parallels to China’s encounter
with the global markets at the turn of the 19th and the turn of the 20th centuries. The broad
implication of these and related studies is that the modern era of global investing has
parallels to the pre-WWI era. Indeed, the period from 1870 to 1913 was, in some ways,
the golden era of global capitalism. As Rajan and Zingales (2001) convincingly show,
the sheer magnitude of the equity capital listed on the world’s stock markets in 1913
rivaled the equity listings today in per capital terms. Following this peak, the only
constant is change. The sequence of World War I, hyperinflation, Great Depression,
World War II, the rise of Stalinist socialism and the de-colonialization of much of the
world had various and combined effects on global investing, affecting not only the
structural relationship across the major markets such as U.S., U.K., France, Germany and
Japan, but also affecting the access by less developed countries to world capital. While
world market correlations of the major markets affect the volatility of a balanced
international equity portfolio, at least as important to the international investor of the
twentieth century is the number, range and variety of markets that emerged or re-emerged
in the last quarter of the 20th Century following the reconstruction of global capitalism on
post-colonial foundations.
       In addition to studies in economic and financial history, there is considerable
literature attempting to understand shifts in the correlation structure of world equity
markets and the reasons for their low correlations in the late 20th century. Longin and
Solnik (1995) study the shifts in global correlations from the 1960 to 1990. This analysis
leads to the rejection of the hypothesis of a constant conditional correlation structure.
Their more recent study Longin and Solnik (2001), focusing on the correlation during
extreme months, find evidence of positive international equity market correlation shifts
conditional upon market drops over the past 38 years.
       To address the underlying reason for international market correlations, Roll
(1992), proposes a compelling Ricardian explanation based upon country specialization.



                                             5
However Heston and Rouwenhorst (1994) show that industry differences and country
specializations by industry cannot explain the degree to which country stock markets co-
move. They find that country effects -- whether due to fiscal, monetary, legal, cultural or
language differences -- dominate industrial explanations. Other authors have investigated
the possibility that international market co-movements are due to co-variation in
fundamental economic variables such as interest rates and dividend yields. Campbell and
Hamao (1992) show how these fundamentals drive co-movement between Japan and the
U.S. Bracker, Docking and Koch (1999) propose bi-lateral trade and its macro-economic
and linguistic determinants as a cause of international stock market co-movement. These
studies, however, are limited to the most recent time-period of capital market history.
       A lack of market integration has also been proposed as an explanation for low co-
movement. Chen and Knez (1995) and Korajczyk (1996), for example, tested
international market integration using asset-pricing tests that consider the international
variation in the price of risk. This approach is based upon the presumption that the
market price of systematic risk factors may differ across markets due to informational
barriers, transactions barriers and costs of trade, but it is silent on the root cause of risk-
price differences and the determinants of market co-movement.
       Yet another strand of literature about the co-movement of equity markets focuses
on the econometric estimation of parametric models of markets that allow first, second
and third moments to co-vary depending upon institutional structures that facilitate
international investor access to markets. Bekaert and Harvey (1995) show how market
liberalizations change the co-movement of stock market returns with the global market
factor. The implication is that evolution from a segmented to an integrated market
fundamentally changes the co-movement with other markets as well.




                                              6
III. Historical Data


       Because the benefits of diversification depend critically on both the number and
the performance of international capital markets, our analysis uses cross-sectional, time
series information about the returns to the world’s stock markets. In this study, we draw
from four data sources: Global Financial Data [GFD], the Jorion and Goetzmann (1999)
[JG] sample of equity markets, The Ibbotson Associates database of international markets
[IA] and the IFC database of emerging markets. These recent efforts to assemble global
financial data have vastly improved the information available for research. Nevertheless,
our analysis is still hampered by an incomplete measure of the international investor
opportunity set over the 150-year period. Our combined sample includes markets from
Eastern and Western Europe, North and South America, South and East Asia, Africa and
Australasia, however there are notable holes. In particular, no index exists for the Russian
market over the one hundred years of its existence, nor are continuous data available for
such potentially interesting markets such as Shanghai Stock Exchange from the 1890’s to
the 1940’s and The Teheran Stock Exchange in the 1970’s. As a consequence, our
analysis is confined to a sub-set of the markets that were available, and in all probability,
to sub-periods of the duration over which one might trade in them. There are essentially
two general data problems confronting our analysis. The first is that there may have been
markets that existed and were investable in past periods that we have no record of, and
are thus not a part of this study. For example, the origins of the Dutch market date back to
the early 1600’s, but we do not have a market index for The Netherlands until 1919. The
second is that we have historical time-series data from markets that existed, but were not
investable, or that the surviving data provides a misleading measurement of the returns to
measurement. To get a better sense of these two classes of problems, we collected what
information we could on the known equity markets of the world. This data is represented
in tabular form in Figure 1. There are more than eighty markets that appear to have
existed at some time currently or in the past. As a guide to future potential data
collection, we have represented what we believe to be the periods in which these markets
operated and for which printed price data might be available. Colored bars indicate
periods in which markets were open and closed, and periods described as crises. The



                                             7
broad coverage of this data table suggests the surprising age of equity markets of the
world, as well as the extent to which markets closed as well as opened. Finally it
suggests that the current empirical work in finance relies on just a very small sample of
markets.
        Table 1 reports the dates and summary information for the data we actually used
in the analysis. It contains substantially less than the larger potential data set shown in
Figure 1. As such we believe our analysis may be a conservative picture of the potential
for international diversification, if indeed all extant market were available to all the
world’s investor sat each point in time. Of course, constraints – particularly in times of
war – likely hampered global diversification. Table 1 also lists current historical stock
markets of the world with information about their founding dates. This provides some
measure of the time-series and cross sectional coverage of our data. Table 2 provides
annualized summary statistics for a set of eight representative countries that extended
through most of the period of the sample.
    The Global Financial Data compiled by Bryan Taylor contains monthly financial and
economic data series from about 100 countries, covering equity markets, bonds markets
and industrial sectors. Nevertheless, since the historical development of capital markets
varies a great deal among these countries, they are not comparable in quality to the
international equity index data we now enjoy. Some country indices such as U.K., U.S,
France and Germany extend from the early 19th century, but their composition varies with
the availability of securities data in different historical time periods. Beginning in the
1920’s however, the League of Nations began to compile international equity indices
with some standardization across countries, and these indices form the basis for the GFD
series, as well as the JG analysis. The United Nations and then IFC apparently maintained
the basic methodology of international index construction through the middle of the 20th
Century. International data from the last three decades has become more widely
available, via the Ibbotson database that provides MSCI and FTSE equity series’ as well
as the IFC emerging markets data.
       In order to maintain comparability across countries, we have converted monthly
return series’ to monthly dollar-returns. Where available, we use total return series, but
for many countries dividend data is unavailable. We have found that correlation estimates



                                            8
using total returns vary little from those using capital appreciation series, and thus for
several countries we use only capital appreciation converted to dollar returns. In total, we
have been able to identify 50 total return or capital appreciation series’, which we are
then able to convert into dollar-valued returns.
       In many countries, there are short periods during which markets were closed or
data were simply not recorded. For instance, during World War I, the U.S. and U.K.
markets closed briefly, and for other countries, there were even larger data gaps. The
GFD is missing a block of returns for several European markets during the First World
War. Fortunately, we are able to fill this gap with data collected by the Young
Commission, which was formed by the US Congress to study the possibility of returning
to Gold standard during the post WWI era. In some cases it is necessary for us to omit
the months of closure from our correlation calculations.




IV. The Benefits of International Diversification

       One of the most well known results in finance is the decrease in portfolio risk that
occurs with the sequential addition of stocks to a portfolio. Initially, the portfolio
variance decreases rapidly as the number of the securities increases, but levels off when
the number of securities becomes large. Statman (1987) argues that most of the variance
reduction is achieved when the number of stocks in a portfolio reaches 30. The intuition
is that, while individual security variance matters for portfolios with few stocks, portfolio
variance is driven primarily by the average covariance when the number of securities
becomes large. The lower the covariance between securities, the smaller the variance of a
diversified portfolio becomes, relative to the variance of the securities that make up the
portfolio. The primary motive for international diversification has been to take advantage
of the low correlation between stocks in different national markets. Solnik (1976), for
example, shows that an internationally diversified portfolio has only half the risk of a
diversified portfolio of U.S. Stocks. In his study, the variance of a diversified portfolio of
U.S. stocks approaches 27 percent of the variance of a typical security, as compared to
11.7 percent for a globally diversified portfolio.



                                              9
         Unfortunately, the lack of individual stock return data for more than the last few
decades precludes us from studying the benefits of international diversification at the
asset level. But given that these benefits are largely driven by the correlation across
markets, a simple analogue can be constructed by comparing the variance of a portfolio
of country indices relative to the variance of portfolios that invest only in a single
country. This will provide a gauge to compare the incremental benefits of diversifying
internationally rather than investing in a single domestic market. Figure 2 shows the
variance of a portfolio of country returns as a fraction of the variance of individual
markets. The full sample is divided into seven sub-periods following Basu and Taylor
(1999): I. early integration (1875-1889); II. Turn of the century (1890-1914); III. WWI
(1915-1918); IV. Between the wars (1919-1939); IV. WWII (1940-1945); VI. The Bretton
Woods Era (1946-1971); VII. Present (1972-2000). Across sub-samples, the variance of
an internationally diversified portfolio ranges from less than 10% to more than 30% of
the variance of an individual market. Countries are equal-weighted in these portfolios and
all returns are measured in dollars at the monthly frequency.
         Figure 2 illustrates the two main factors that drive the benefits of international
diversification. The first factor is the average covariance – or correlation – between
markets. A lower covariance rotates the diversification-curve downwards. The second
important factor is the number of markets that are available to investors. An increase in
the available markets allows investors to move down along a given diversification-curve.
This factor is important for a study of the long-term benefits of international
diversification, because the number of available markets has varied a great deal over the
past 150 years. The steady increase in the number of equity markets over the past century
has provided additional diversification opportunities to investors. In the next two sections
we attempt to separately measure the effects of changes in correlation and changes in the
investment opportunity set. Most studies in the literature have concentrated only on the
first effect and argued that globalization of equity markets has led to increased
correlations among markets, thereby reducing the benefits of diversification. In addition
to studying these correlations over the past 150 years, we pose the question in this paper
to what extent a gradual increase in the investment opportunity set has been an offsetting
force.



                                             10
IV.1. Equity market correlations over the last 150 years.


       Table 3 gives the correlations of the four major markets for which we have total
return data available since 1872 – France, Germany, the United Kingdom, and the United
States, organized by the sub-periods suggested by Basu and Taylor (1999). The average
pair-wise correlation among the four major markets ranges from –0.067 during WWI to
0.400 to the most recent period between 1971 and 2000. The correlation between the U.S.
and the U.K. varies from near zero to over 50 percent, and the correlation between
Germany and France ranges from –0.357 during WWII – correlations are expected to be
negative among battling neighbors – to 0.598 during the most recent period. The Table
does not provide standard errors, however in the Appendix, we outline and implement a
formal test that shows that these differences are indeed statistically significant. For now it
is sufficient to conclude that there seems to be important variation in the correlation
structure of major markets.
       Figure 3 plots the average cross-country rolling correlations of the capital
appreciation return series for the entire set of countries available at each period of time.
Rolling correlations are calculated over a backward-looking window of 60 months. This
figure illustrates a similar pattern to Table 3, namely that correlations have changed
dramatically over the last 150 years. Peaks in the correlations occur during the period
following the 1929 Crash and the period leading up to the present. The period beginning
in the late 19th and up to WWII, which marked the beginning of renewed segmentation,
and the postwar period up to the present, both show gradual increases in the average
correlations between countries. During the latter period, the increase in correlation
appears initially less pronounced due to the fact that many submerged markets re-
emerged, and “new” markets emerged for the first time.
       This “U” shape in the correlation structure is noted by Obstfeld and Taylor (2001)
for its close analogue to the pattern of global capital market flows over the same time
period. For example, the authors present compelling evidence on the scale of cross-border
capital flows during the height of the European colonial era, suggesting that global
economic and financial integration around the beginning of 20th century achieved a level



                                             11
comparable to what we have today. Bordo, Eichengreen and Irwin (1999) examine this
hypothesis and claim that, despite these comparable integration levels, today’s integration
is much deeper and broader than what had happened in history. The implication of this
clear historical structure is that the liberalization of global capital flows cuts two ways. It
allows investors to diversify across borders, but it also reduces the attractiveness of doing
so. In Section IV.3, we will separate the effects of correlation and variation in the
investment opportunity set. The next section provides a formal test of changes in the
correlation between markets over time.


IV.2 Testing constancy of equity market correlations


           Are the temporal variations in the correlation structure statistically significant? To
address this issue we develop a test based on the asymptotic distribution of correlation
matrix derived in Browne and Shapiro (1986) and Neudecker and Wesselman (1990).
They show that, under certain regularity conditions, a vectorized correlation matrix is
asymptotically normally distributed. Asymptotic distributions of correlation matrices are
not as well known than those of the covariance matrix. Kaplanis (1988) and Longin and
Solnik (1995) both find that tests about the correlation matrix require some strong
assumptions. Our test is a refinement of the tests developed by previous authors. We
derive an asymptotic distribution for the correlation matrix, which allows us to relax
restrictive assumptions about the correlation matrices, and to derive test statistics in the
spirit of the classical Wald test4. Our test has certain advantages over covariance-matrix
based alternatives such as multivariate GARCH tests, in that it works directly with the
correlation matrices and can be easily modified according to different hypotheses. Unlike
GARCH-based tests it is not computationally intensive and is less prone to model
misspecifications.
           We test two null hypotheses. The first is that the correlation matrices from two
periods are equal element-by-element. This is equivalent to a joint hypothesis that the
correlation coefficients of any two countries are the same in the two periods of interest.


4
    See the Appendix for details.



                                                12
The second hypothesis is that the average of the cross-country correlation coefficients are
the same in two periods. In most cases, the second hypothesis is a weaker version of the
first. In the Appendix we discuss he details of the test and address issues of the size and
power.
         One major issue in the literature on tests about correlations is the problem of
testing conditional correlation versus testing unconditional correlation. Boyer, Gibson
and Loretan (1997) first show that if the measured (conditional) variance is different from
the true (unconditional) variance, then the measured (conditional) correlation will also be
different from the true (unconditional) correlation. Using a simple example, Longin and
Solnik (2001) show that two series’ with same unconditional correlation coefficient will
have a greater sample correlation coefficient, conditional upon large observations.5                       Our
test is not subject to this criticism because we choose the periods strictly according to the
existing literature and historical events – had we focused on high-variance vs. low
variance periods, our tests would be biased towards rejection.
         We conduct the tests on correlation matrices of dollar-valued total returns to the
equity markets of four “core” countries: U.K., U.S., France and Germany. We show the
p-value of the test statistics in Table 4. The first two sub-tables report results for the
entire correlation matrix and on the average level of correlation respectively, using the
asymptotic test. Because we have little guidance about the performance of the test in
small sample, the other two sub-tables summarize the test statistics based on
bootstrapping, in which the bootstrap randomly assigns dates to the respective time
periods being tested.          We also calculate the sample means and variances of the
bootstrapped empirical distributions. If the asymptotic chi-squared distribution worked
perfectly in this case, then the mean of the test mean would be 6, which is the number of
upper off-diagonal elements in a 4 by 4 matrix, and the variance would equal 12. In the
second test, the mean and variance should equal 1 and 2 respectively. The close match

5
  Corsetti, Pericoli and Sbracia (2001) show that the discrepancy between conditional and unconditional
correlation coefficients actually occurs only if the ratio of the conditional variances of two series, not
necessary the level, is different from that of the unconditional variances. Intuitively, as long as the relative
dispersion of two time series across periods is stable, the correlation coefficient computed for a given
period should be close to its population value. Therefore, if the shape of distribution of the times-series
changes dramatically across periods, it can be a sign of violation of this rule. We plot the histograms of the
return series to check the distributions. We find that only Germany and, to a lesser extent, France, have ill-




                                                      13
between the asymptotic test results and those from the bootstrapped values suggests that
the asymptotic test performs well in small sample and can be relied upon for tests of
structural changes in correlations.
        The results in Table 4 suggest that the historical definition of eras in global
finance also define significant differences in correlation structure. Starred values indicate
rejection at the 5% level and double-starred values represent rejection at the 1% level.
The 1972-2000 period stands out as the most unusual -- all tests reject element-by-
element equality and means equality with other time periods. Thus, while historically the
current era has many features in common with the golden age of finance around the turn
of the last century, we are able to reject the hypothesis that the modern correlation
structure and correlation average of the capital markets resembles that of a century ago.
This supports the findings of Bordo, Eichengreen and Kim (1998) and Bordo,
Eichengreen and Irwin (1999).            These authors argue that, due to less information
asymmetry, reduced transaction costs, better institutional arrangements, and more
complete international standards, “integration today is deeper and broader than 100 years
ago.”    The period 1919-1939 is the second most unusual, with pair-wise rejections of
equality with respect to five other periods. This is not surprising, given that this era
encompasses the period of hyperinflation in Germany, and Great Depression – the latter
being, by most accounts, the most significant global economic event in the sample period.
        As pointed out earlier, financial theory does not predict changes in correlations
based on integration of segmentation of markets. However, if we compare the average
correlation during periods of relatively high integration (1870-1913 and 1972-2000) to
the periods of relatively low integration (1914-1971), we overwhelmingly reject equality.
        Similarities as well as differences are interesting in the table. It is tempting, for
example, to interpret the rejection failure for the correlation matrices of the two pre-WWI
periods – during which the gold standard prevailed – and the Bretton Woods period
(1946-1971) as evidence that the gold standard and the Bretton Woods exchange rate
system effectively achieved similar goals and resulted in a similar correlation structure




shaped return distributions during WWI and WWII. We include these two periods in the test only for
reference purposes.


                                                  14
for equity markets. This must remain only a conjecture, however, given that we have not
proposed an economic mechanism by which such similarity would be achieved.
       In sum, our tests indicate that stock returns for these four key countries were once
closely correlated around the beginning of 20th century, during the Great Depression,
under the Bretton Woods system and at Present period. However, except for two brief
periods – Early Integration and World War I -- the correlation structures differ a great
deal. In fact, the era from 1972 to the present is virtually unique in terms of structure
and level of market co-movements.


IV.3 Decomposition of the Benefits of International Diversification


       Important though it may be, the correlation among markets is only one variable
determining the benefits of international diversification. Another important factor is the
number of investable markets that are available to foreign investors. Having said this, it is
difficult to precisely measure which markets were accessible to U.S. investors at each
point in time during the past 150 years, or the costs that were associated with cross-
border investing, for that matter. While we have been able to collect considerable time-
series information on returns, it is almost certainly incomplete. Figure 4 plots the number
of markets for which we have return data available. The bottom line in the Figure plots
the availability of the return data for the four countries for which we have the longest
return histories – France, Germany, the United Kingdom and the United States.
Occasionally the line drops below four, because of the closing of these markets during
war. The top line presents the total number of countries that are included in our sample at
each point of time. The figure shows the dramatic increase in the investment opportunity
set during the last century. At the beginning of the 20th century we have only 5 markets,
and at the end of the century around 50. Not all countries that enter the sample have a
complete return history. For example, Czechoslovakia drops out of the sample shortly
before WWII, but re-emerges towards the end of the century. Of course it then splits into
two countries – only one of which is represented in our data. This submergence and re-
emergence of markets is captured by the middle line in Figure 4, which represents the
number of countries that are in the sample, for which we also have return data available.



                                             15
The important message of Figures 3 and 4 is that the past century has experienced large
variation in both the number of markets around the world, as well as the return
correlations among these markets, and the middle of the 20th century was, in some ways,
a reversal of the trends at the beginning and the end of the sample period.
         Contemporary investment manuals give us some sense of the number and range of
international markets we are missing. Lowenfeld (1909) lists forty countries with stock
markets open to British investors, however many of these securities were investable via
the London Stock Exchange listings, and thus may reflect strategies open only to U.K.
investors.6 Rudolph Taüber’s 1911 survey of the world’s stock markets provides a useful
overview of the world of international investing before the First World War.                            He
describes bourses in more than thirty countries around the world available to the German
investor.7 These two surveys, written to provide concrete advice to British and German
investors in the first and second decade of the 20th Century suggest that if anything, our
analysis vastly understates the international diversification possibilities of European
investors a century ago.          Of course,      other investors at that time might have had
considerably reduced access. Because of this issue, it is important to be able to separate
the effects of average correlation from the effects of increasing numbers of markets.
         We attempt to measure the separate influence of these two components by
returning to our earlier graphs, which we used to illustrate the benefits of international
diversification. Algebraically, the ratio of the variance of an equally-weighted portfolio
to average variance of a single market is given by:




         6
           Great Britain, India, Canada, Australia, Tasmania, New Zealand, Straits Settlements (Singapore),
Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Holland, Norway, Russia, Sweden, Switzerland, Austria, Bulgaria, France,
Greece, Italy, Hungary, Portugal, Roumania, Spain, Serbia, Turkey, Japan (Tokio and Yokohama), China
(Shanghai and Hong Kong), Cape Colony, Natal, Transvaal, Egypt, New York, Mexico, Argentine, Brazil,
Chile, Peru and Uruguay.
         7
          These include Germany, Austria, Switzerland, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Denmark,
Russia, Serbia, Greece, Rumania, Turkey, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Belgium, France, Great Britain, Ireland,
New York, Haiti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Brasil, Peru, Argentina, Uruguay, Chile, Columbia,
Venezuela, Japan, South Africa, Natal, Egypt and Australia.


                                                    16
                                                                  Cov(xi , x j )
                         n           1 n                 1 n
                    Var ∑ xi / n 
                         i=1     =
                                           ∑ i n2 ∑
                                       n 2 i=1
                                               Var( x  )
                                                             i≠ j
                         n
                                                         +
                     1                 1 n                  1 n
                       ∑Var(xi )
                     n i =1
                                          ∑ i
                                       n i =1
                                              Var( x  )       ∑Var(xi )
                                                            n i =1


Using upper bars to indicate averages, this can be written as:


                                  1  n − 1  Cov (xi , x j )
                                   +       ×
                                  n  n  Var (xi )


As the number of markets (n) becomes large, this simply converges to the ratio of the
average covariance among markets to the average variance. If the correlations among
individual markets were zero, virtually all risk would be diversifiable by holding a
portfolio that combined a large number of countries. By contrast, in times of high
correlations, even a large portfolio of country indices would experience considerable
volatility. With a limited number of international markets in which to invest, however, n
may be small.
       In order to separate the effects of changes in correlations and the secular increase
of the investment opportunity set, we compute the above equation using 5-year rolling
windows under three different scenarios.
   1. Our base case is the 4 major markets with the longest return history (France,
       Germany, UK, US).
   2. Next, we evaluate the equation for n=4, averaged over all combinations of 4
       countries that are available at a given time.
   3. Finally, we evaluate the expression using all countries that have available return
       histories in at a given point in our sample (n=maximum available).
The first scenario isolates the effect of changes in correlations if the investment
opportunity set were limited to these four countries. In the second scenario we track the
evolution of the diversification benefits of the “average” portfolio of four countries over
time, not only those for which we have the longest return history. Because new markets
have a different covariance structure than our base set, the difference between scenario
(1) and (2) measures the influence that additional markets have on the covariance


                                               17
structure. Note that this influence can either be positive or negative, depending on
whether the additional markets increase or decrease the average among markets. The
final scenario gives the benefits of diversification for the full set of available countries at
each point in time. Since the same variances and covariances are used to evaluate the
equation in scenarios (2) and (3), the effect of increasing the number of markets always
leads to an improvement of the diversification opportunities. The decomposition
therefore isolates the effect that additional markets have on the correlation structure and
the effect on the investment opportunity set.
       Figure 5 illustrates the results of our decomposition. The top line labeled “Four
with Limited Diversification” gives the diversification ratio driven by the correlation
between the four base countries – France, Germany, UK and the US. The line reaches a
peak at the end of our sample period, which indicates that the diversification
opportunities among these major markets have reached a 150-year low. Even the during
the Crash of 1929 and the ensuing Great Depression these markets provided better
opportunities for risk spreading than they do today. Fortunately for investors, additional
markets have become available to offset this increase. First, the deterioration of the
benefits of diversification has been unusually pronounced relative to the other markets
that have been available. The portfolio representing the average across all combinations
of four randomly markets, labeled “Four With Unlimited Diversification,” has also seen
a recent deterioration in diversification opportunities, but to a level that does not exceed
levels that were common during the early part of the 19th century. Compared to the major
four markets, which currently provide risk reduction of only 30 per cent, the average
four-country portfolio will eliminate about half of the variance that investors experience
by concentrating on a single market. A second way in which the development of new
markets has helped investors to alleviate the increase in correlations among the major
markets is through their number. The bottom line, labeled “All With Unlimited
Diversification,” shows that a portfolio that is equally diversified across all available
markets can currently reduce portfolio risk to about 35 percent of the volatility of a
single market. We conclude that about half of the total contribution of emerging markets
to the current benefits of international diversification occurs through offering lower
correlations, and half through expansion of the investment opportunity set.



                                              18
       Figure 5 also shows how the emergence of new markets has allowed investors to
enjoy the benefits of international diversification during much of the post-War era --
even more so than in the era of capital market integration of a century ago. The gradual
increase of the bottom-most line in Figure 5 suggests that good times may be coming to
an end for modern investors. While a portfolio of country indices could achieve a 90
percent risk reduction in 1950, this has now fallen to about 65 percent at the turn of the
new millennium.


IV.4 The Benefits of International Diversification in Equilibrium
       One serious concern about the analysis thus far is that it cannot reflect equilibrium
conditions. Although the benefits to an equal-weighted portfolio of international equity
markets reduced risk historically (albeit less so in recent years) it is not possible for all
investors in the economy to hold that portfolio. Since all assets need to be held in
equilibrium, the average investor will have to hold the value-weighted world market
portfolio. Therefore, in an equilibrium framework, the relevant benchmark for
diversification is the capital-weighted portfolio. Given that the U.S. – or any of four of
our core markets – represents a large proportion of the capitalization of the world equity
markets, it is immediately clear that the capital-weighted portfolio will provide less
diversification than an equal-weighted portfolio. And because many emerging markets
are small, their contribution to the diversification benefits is likely to be overstated on an
equally-weighted analysis.
       In order to address this issue, we collected market capitalization for the equity
indices of 45 countries, from 1973 to the present. Unfortunately, long-term data on
market capitalization is unavailable, so our analysis is necessarily limited to the last
decades of our sample. As is well-known, some countries have cross-holdings that may
cause market capitalization to be overstated, and our analysis makes no correction for this
issue. In our sample period, the U.S. ranged from roughly 60% to roughly 30% of the
world market.
       Figure 7 compares the diversification ratio on the core 4 markets to the ratio
computed from all entire markets since the 1970’s, where each market is weighted by its
relative capitalization. The figure confirms our previous intuition that, from a value-



                                             19
weight perspective, the benefits of diversification are generally lower. At the turn of the
century a value-weighted portfolio of our core markets achieved a 20% risk reduction
relative to the volatility of individual markets. This is somewhat less than in our equally-
weighted analysis where we reported a risk reduction of 30%. A value-weighted portfolio
of all markets achieved a risk reduction of 45%, compared to 70% found in our equal-
weight analysis. What is similar in both weighting schemes is that the risk reduction from
diversifying across all markets is more than double the risk reduction that can be
achieved by diversifying across the core markets only.
       One striking feature of Figure 7 is that, in contrast to our previous results, the
diversification benefits are not dramatically less in the 1990’s than they are in the 1970s.
This suggests that, while the average correlations among the average markets has
increased over the past decade, many of these correlations are only marginally important
in equilibrium. This evidence is consistent with the trends documented by Bekaert and
Harvey (1995) of increasing global market integration who find that the “marginal”
markets have been coming into the fold of the global financial system and increasing
their correlations as a result.   The figure suggests that this affects capital-weighted
investors les than might be expected.


V. Conclusion


       Long-term investing depends upon meaningful long-term inputs to the asset
allocation decisions. One approach to developing such inputs is to collect data from
historical time periods. In this paper, we collect information from 150 years of global
equity market history in order to evaluate the stationarity of the equity correlation matrix
through time. Our tests suggest that the structure of global correlations shifts
considerably through time. It is currently near an historical high – approaching levels of
correlation last experienced during the Great Depression. Unlike the 1930’s however, the
late 1990’s were a period of prosperity for world markets.      The time-series of average
correlations show a pattern consistent with the “U” shaped hypothesis about the
globalization at the two ends of the 20th century. Decomposing the pattern of correlation
through time, however, we find that roughly half the benefits of diversification available



                                            20
today to the international investor are due to the increasing number of world markets and
available to the investor, and half is due lower average correlation among the available
markets. An analysis of the capital-weighted portfolio suggests that benefits are less than
the equal-weighted strategy, but that the proportionate risk reduction by adding in
emerging markets has actually been roughly the same over the past 25 years.




                                            21
Appendix: Testing for Changes in Correlation
         In this appendix, we describe our test for a structural change in the correlation
matrix, and in the mean of the off-diagonal elements of the correlation matrix. In this
section, we introduce an asymptotic test of the null of no structural change in the
correlation matrix. This test provides a statistical framework under which structural
changes in correlation matrices can be tested with a fairly general class of data generating
processes.
         Jennrich (1970) derive a χ 2 test for the equality of two correlation matrices,
assuming observation vectors are normally distributed.              Since Jennrich does not derive
the asymptotic distribution of the correlation matrix, the consistency of his test statistics
crucially replies on the assumption of the normal distribution of the data. To construct
our test, we utilize the asymptotic distribution of the correlation matrix developed in
Browne and Shapiro (1986) and Neudecker and Wesselman (1990). Let P be the true
correlation matrix, then the sample correlation matrix P̂ has the following asymptotic
distribution:


          (
  n • vec Pˆ − P )
                 →
                  d
                    N (0, Ω )                                                              (B1)
Where n is sample size and
                              (              )(                )
Ω = [I − M s (I ⊗ P )M d ] Λ−1 / 2 ⊗ Λ−1 / 2 V Λ−1 / 2 ⊗ Λ−1 / 2 [I − M d (I ⊗ P )M s ]    (B2)
This validity of the asymptotic distribution requires that the observation vectors are
independently and identically distributed according to a multivariate distribution with
finite fourth moments.
       Suppose we want to test whether the correlations structure of two periods are
different.    Period I has n1 observations and period II has n 2 observations, which are

assumed to be independent. According to (A1), their sample correlation matrices, P̂1 and

P̂2 should have the following asymptotic distributions for certain P1 , P2 , Ω 1 , Ω 2 :


            ( )
  n1 • vec Pˆ1 − P1 
                    →
                     d
                       N (0, Ω1 )                                                          (B1’)

  n2   • vec(Pˆ − P )
              2      → N (0, Ω
                      2
                          d
                                     2   )                                                 (B1’’)
Test 1 -- An element by element test


       To test whether these two correlation matrices are statistically different, we can
impose the following hypothesis:
H 0 : P1 = P2 = P and Ω1 = Ω 2 = Ω
H 1 : P1 ≠ P2 or Ω1 ≠ Ω 2
Under H0, the difference between two sample correlation matrices has the following
asymptotic distribution:



   (        )
vec Pˆ1 − Pˆ2 
              →
               d
                     1
                 N  0,  +
                              1            
                                          Ω 
                                                                                                      (B3)
                      n1 n 2              

similar to a Wald Test, we can derive the following χ 2 test:
                                         −1

   [ (
⇒ vec Pˆ1 − Pˆ2   )]  T    1  1  
                           + Ω          [vec(Pˆ − Pˆ )]→ χ
                                                     1   2
                                                                 d       2
                                                                             (rk (Ω ))                 (B4)
                           n1 n2  
Since P is a symmetric matrix with 1 on the diagonal, we perform the test on the upper
off-diagonal part of P rather than on the entire matrix.                                 This way, we not only
significantly reduce computation but also avoid the singularity problem arising from
inverting such matrices. From this point on, vec(P ) is interpreted as the vector of upper
off diagonal elements of the correlation matrix.


Test 2: Test about the average correlation
        The test can be easily modified to allow more general restrictions. For instance,
we can test changes in the average correlation as opposed to the element-by-element
correlation shown above:
H 0 : P1 = P2 = P and Ω1 = Ω 2 = Ω
H 1 : P1 ≠ P2 or Ω1 ≠ Ω 2

Suppose vec(P ) has k elements and i = (1,1,...,1)1xk vector. Then the test statistic is:
                                                −1

       (          )
                    1  1  i i'   i
                                                             (       )
                   T
i                                               ˆ ˆ  →
         ˆ    ˆ
 k vec P1 − P2   n + n  k Ω k   k vec P1 − P2  
                                                             d
                                                               χ 2 (1)                                 (B4’)
                      1   2        


                                                         23
One may think that hypothesis 2 is a more lenient version of hypothesis 1 and therefore
will be more difficult to reject. This, though generally true, may not always be the case.
If correlation coefficients change, but in opposite different directions, then test 1 fails to
reject more frequently than does test 2. However, if correlation coefficients move in the
same direction, then, due to Jensen’s Inequality, the reverse will be the case.


Heteroskedasticity and serial correlation issues

        The heteroskedasticity and serial correlation of stock market returns are well
documented. However, heteroskedasticity does necessarily pose a problem to our tests
because we are only interested in correlation, which is scale-free. We simply treat the
correlation matrices as if they were computed from returns series’ with unit variance.
        On the other hand, serial correlation potentially poses a more serious challenge,
and is not necessarily susceptible to a closed-form solution. As an empirical matter, the
unit root hypothesis is strongly rejected for the returns series’ used in this paper, and the
monthly autoregression coefficients are mostly insignificant. Unfortunately, this does not
mean that others using this test on different data. may ignore the effects of serial
correlation.

Bootstrap validation

        The bootstrap allows us to study the crucial issue of test statistic performance in
small-sample. The idea of the bootstrap is to bootstrapping under the null hypothesis that
the correlation matrix is no different between the periods. To do this, we pool the
standardized observations from the two periods and randomly draw n1 + n2 cross-
sectional return vectors with replacement from the combined dates in the pooled sample.
We then divide them into two samples of appropriate size and perform the test. After
repeating this process a number of times, we have an empirical distribution for test
statistics under the joint null hypotheses of equality of correlation, homoskedasticity, and
and i.i.d. returns in time-series


Power of the test


                                             24
       We performed simulations to examine the stability of asymptotic distribution and
the power of the proposed test. Simulation results show that our test is invariant to
sample size, difference in mean return and variance, and non-normality in the data. We
examine the power the test by looking at how the test is able to differentiate the samples
generated by the following two correlation matrices:


     1 a12 a13 a14                     1 b12      b13   b14 
           1 a 23 a 24                   1       b23   b24 
A=                            and     B=
                1 a34                               1   b34 
                                                             
                      1                                  1
bij = aij * factor for i ≠ j

       Here we allow A and B to differ by a factor of .99, .95, .9, .7, .5 respectively and
then compute the power function, which is shown in Figure 8. Ideally, we would hope
that, if A and B are the same, i.e., under H0, the power function is a 45 degree line so that
the probability of statistically accepting the equality hypothesis perfectly reflects our
confidence level. Alternatively, if A differs from B, we would hope that the power
function is as flat as possible so that the probability of falsely accepting the null
hypothesis is minimal. From Figure 8 we can see that our test is relatively powerful. If
A and B are very close, with a factor of .95 and .99, the power function is almost a 45
degree straight line. It starts to deviate significantly when A and B differ by a factor of
.9, and the null hypothesis is less likely to be accepted. If A and B differ by a factor of
.5, our test almost completely rejects the null hypothesis of equality in all simulations.
Although in this example, the setup of the alternative hypothesis is arbitrary, it still
indicates that this test has decent power.


Asymptotic distribution of the correlation matrix

       Let x be the p × 1 random vector of interest. Suppose that moments up to the
fourth are finite. The first moment and the second centralized moment, i.e., the mean and
the variance of x are:




                                             25
µ = E (x )                   Σ = E (x − µ )(x − µ )'
Let Λ = diag (Σ ) , then the correlation matrix corresponding to Σ is
            1        1
        −        −
P = Λ ΣΛ    2        2


With a sample n independently and identically distributed observations {xi , i = 1...n}, we
can obtain the following set of sample analogues:
       1 n                       1 n
µ̂ =     ∑ xi                Σˆ = ∑ (xi − µˆ )(xi − µˆ )'
       n i =1                    n i =1

                ()
                                       1       1
                                   −       −
ˆ = diag Σˆ
Λ                            Pˆ = Λ
                                  ˆ 2 Σˆ Λ
                                         ˆ     2


                     p
Let, M d = ∑ (Eii ⊗ Eii ) , Eij is a p × p matrix with 1 on (i, j ) and 0 elsewhere.
                 i =1



            K = ∑∑ (Eij ⊗ Eij ') and Ms =                    (           )
                         p    p
                                                            1
                                                              I 2 2 +K
                     i =1 j =1                              2 p Xp

            V = E ((x − µ )(x − µ )'⊗(x − µ )(x − µ )') − (vec(Σ ))(vec(Σ ))


Browne and Shapiro (1986) and Neudecker and Wesselman (1990) prove the following
asymptotic distributions:


        (
  nvec Σˆ − Σ →
               D
                     )
                  N (0,V )

                                                                                                    
        (                )                       −1     −   −          − 
                                                          1          1     1

  nvec Pˆ − P →
               D
                  N  0, [I − M s (I ⊗ P )M d ] Λ 2 ⊗ Λ 2 V  Λ 2 ⊗ Λ 2 [I − M d (I ⊗ P )M s ]
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                




                                                                 26
References:

Basu, Susanto, and Alan M. Taylor, 1999, Business Cycles in International Historical
Perspective, Journal of Economic Perspectives 13(2), 45-68.

Bekaert, Geert, and Campbell R. Harvey, 2000, Foreign Speculators and Emerging
Equity Markets, Journal of Finance 55(2), 565-613.

Bekaert, Geert, and Campbell R. Harvey, 1995, Time-Varying World Market Integration,
Journal of Finance 50(2), 403-44.

Bordo, Michael D., Barry Eichengreen and Jongwoo Kim, 1998, Was There Really an
Earlier Period Of International Financial Integration Comparable to Today? NBER
Working Paper No.W6738.

Bordo, Michael D., Barry Eichengreen and Douglas Irwin, 1999, Is Globalization Today
Really Different than Globalization a Hundred Years Ago? NBER Working Paper No.
W7195.

Boudoukh, Jacob And Matthew Richardson, 1993, Stock Returns and Inflation: A
Long-Horizon Perspective”, American Economic Review 83(5), 1346-55.

Boyer, Brian H., Michael S. Gibson and Mico Loretan, 1997, Pitfalls in Tests for
Changes in Correlations, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
International Finance Discussion Papers: 597

Bracker, Kevin, Diane Docking and Paul D. Koch, 1999, Economic Determinants of
Evolution in International Stock Market Integration, Journal of Empirical Finance 6(1),
1-27.

Browne, M.W., and A. Shapiro, 1986, The Asymptotic Covariance Matrix of Sample
Correlation Coefficients under General Conditions, Linear Algebra and Its Applications
82, 169-76.

Campbell, John Y. and Yasushi Hamao, 1992, Predictable Stock Returns in the United
States and Japan: A Study of Long-Term Capital Market Integration, Journal of Finance
47(1), 43-69

Chen, Zhiwu. and Peter J. Knez, 1995, Measurement of Market Integration and
Arbitrage, Review Of Financial Studies 8(2), 287-325.

Choe, Hyuk, Bong Chan Kho and Rene M. Stulz, 1999, Do Foreign Investors Destabilize
Stock Markets? The Korean Experience in 1997, Journal of Financial Economics 54(2),
227-64.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Marcello Pericoli and Massimo Sbracia, 2001, Correlation Analysis
of Contagion: What One Should Know before Running A Test, Working Paper.

Grinblatt, Mark and Matti Keloharju, 2000, The Investment Behavior and Performance of
Various Investor Types: A Study of Finland's Unique Data Set, Journal of Financial
Economics 55(1), 43-67

Grauer, Robert R., and Nils H. Hakansson, 1987, Gains from International
Diversification: 1968-1985 Returns on Portfolio of Stocks and Bonds, Journal of Finance
42(3), 721-739.

Grubel, Herbert G.,1968, Internationally Diversified Portfolios, American Economic
Review 68, 1299-1314

Goetzmann,William, Andrey Ukhov and Ning Zhu, 2001, “China and the World
Financial Markets 1870-1930: Modern Lessons from Historical Globalization,” Yale
School of Management Working Paper.

Grubel, Herbert G. and Kenneth Fadner, 1971, The Interdependence of International
Equity Markets, Journal of Finance 26(1), 89-94.

Heston, Steven L., K. Geert Rouwenhorst, 1994, Does Industrial Structure Explain the
Benefits of International Diversification? Journal of Financial Economics 36(1), 3-27.

Jennrich, Robert I., 1970, An Asymptotic Chi-square Test for the Equity of Two
Correlation Matrices, Journal of the American Statistical Association 65, 904-12

Jorion, Philippe and William N. Goetzmann, 1999, Global Stock Markets in the
Twentieth Century, Journal of Finance 54(3), pages 953-80.

Kaplanis, Evi C.,1988, Stability and Forecasting of the Comovement Measures of
International Stock Market Returns, Journal of International Money and Finance 7(1), 63-
75.

Korajczyk, Roert A., 1996, Measure Of Stock Market Integration for Developed and
Emerging Markets, World Bank Economic Review 10(2), 267-89.

Levy, Haim and Marshall Sarnat, 1970, International Diversification of Investment
Portfolios, American Economic Review 60(4), 668-75.

Longin, Francois and Bruno Solnik, 1995, Is the Correlation in International Equity
Returns Constant: 1960 – 1990? Journal of International Money and Finance
14(February), 3-26.

Longin, Francois and Bruno Solnik, 2001, Extreme Correlation of International Equity
Markets, Journal of Finance 56(2) 649-675.



                                          28
Neudecker, H. and A.M. Wesselman, 1990, The Asymptotic Covariance of Sample
Correlation Matrix, Linear Algebra and Its Applications 127, 589-99.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan M. Taylor, 2001, Globalization and Capital Markets, NBER
Working Paper.

Prakash, Gauri and Alan M. Taylor, 1997, Measuring Market Integration: A Model of
Arbitrage with an Econometric Application to the Gold Standard, 1879-1913, NBER
Working Paper, No. W6073.

Rajan, Raghuam and Luigi Zingales, 2001, The Great Reversals: The Politics of
Financial Development in the 20th Century, NBER Working Paper, No. W8178.

Roll, Richard, 1992, Industrial Structure and the Comparative Behavior of International
Stock Market Indices, Journal of Finance 47(1), 3-41.

Solnik, Bruno, 1976, Why not diversify internationally rather than domestically?,
Financial Analyst Journal, July.

Statman, Meir, 1987, How many stocks make a diversified portfolio?, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis, September




                                          29
                                                     Table 1: Summary of Global Equity Markets

This table summarizes information about the indices used in the analysis. Indices are monthly total return or capital appreciation return series’ for the country, or
leading market in the country, as reported in secondary sources. All returns are adjusted to dollar terms at prevailing rates of exchange. Secondary sources for
the data are noted in the text. Primary sources for the data are various. Data availability depends not only on the availability of the equity series’ but also on the
availability of exchange rate data. Information about founding dates and trading dates is from Conner & Smith (1991), Park and Agtmael (1993) or from self-
reported historical information by the exchange itself, on the web. Two portals to world stock exchanges used to access this information are:
http://www.minemarket.com/stock.htm and http://dmoz.org/Business/Investing/Stocks_and_Bonds/Exchanges/ . Countries with no historical information are
simply those with a current web-site for a stock exchange.

                                                                                       Sub-period      Sub-period      Sub-period
                       Date by which equity                    Ending date              geometric      arithmetic       standard
                    trading is known or date of Beginning date  for data                   mean           mean          deviation      Correlation to
                     founding of exchange or     for data used   used in                  (% per         (% per          (% per        equal-weighted Number
     Country                    both.               in study      study                  annum)         annum)           annum)           portfolio   of Months
      Argentina (1)       1872 founding            Apr-1947     Jul-1965                   -23.4          -17.1            41.4            0.409         220
      Argentina (2)                                Dec-1975     Dec-2000                    17.3           48.4            86.9            0.298         301
         Australia           1828,1871             Feb-1875     Dec-2000                    4.1             5.3            15.9            0.506         1511
           Austria        1771 founding            Feb-1925     Dec-2000                    4.4            6.6             21.0            0.368         911
           Bahrain        1987 founding
          Belgium            1723,1771             Feb-1919     Dec-2000                    1.1            4.6             25.0              0.455            983
             Brazil       1877 founding            Feb-1961     Dec-2000                    3.8            17.4            52.7              0.297            479
         Botswana         1989 founding
          Bulgaria
           Canada           1817, 1874             Feb-1914     Dec-2000                    4.8             6.2            17.0              0.550           1043
             Chile        1892 founding            Feb-1927     Dec-2000                    5.7            13.5            37.3              0.231            887
             China           1891,1904
             China        1991 founding
         Colombia          1929 trading            Nov-1936     Dec-2000                   -2.2             0.6            24.6              0.207            770
           Croatia
              Cuba         1861 trading
         Czech (1)        1871 founding            Aug-1919     Apr-1945                   1.6              4.2            22.6              0.502            309
         Czech (2)                                 Jan-1995     Dec-2000                   -3.7             1.7            33.0              0.460            72
           Cyprus
         Denmark          1808 founding            Aug-1914     Dec-2000                    3.9             5.6            19.3              0.411           1037




                                                                                 30
                                                                        Sub-period   Sub-period   Sub-period
                     Date by which equity                 Ending date    geometric   arithmetic    standard
                  trading is known or date Beginning date  for data         mean        mean       deviation   Correlation to
                 of founding of exchange or for data used   used in        (% per      (% per       (% per     equal-weighted Number
Country                      both.             in study      study        annum)      annum)        annum)        portfolio   of Months
     Ecuador                 1970
    Egypt (1)           1883 founding         Aug-1950     Sep-1962        -1.6         -0.2         17.3          0.402         146
    Egypt (2)            1993 trading          Jan-1995    Dec-2000        -3.7         -0.0         28.4          0.218         72
       Estonia
      Finland             1865, 1912          Feb-1922     Dec-2000        8.4          10.9         23.0          0.362        947
        France          1720 founding         Feb-1856     Dec-2000         2.4          4.9         21.2          0.467        1739
 Germany (1)             1750 trading         Feb-1856     Aug-1914        0.4          0.9           9.9          0.588        703
 Germany (2)                                  Dec-1917     Dec-1943        -1.4          6.5         42.0          0.417        313
 Germany (3)                                   Jan-1946    Dec-2000        10.3         14.6         31.2          0.362        660
        Ghana           1990 founding
   Greece (1)           1892 founding         Aug-1929     Sep-1940        -8.8         -6.1         25.2          0.369         134
   Greece (2)                                  Jan-1988    Dec-2000        12.8         19.1         39.5          0.421         156
  Hong Kong               1866, 1891           Jan-1970    Dec-2000        14.1         20.8         39.4          0.538         372
 Hungary (1)            1864 founding         Feb-1925     Jun-1941        9.2          12.3         26.7          0.430         197
 Hungary (2)                                   Jan-1995    Dec-2000        14.9         23.1         43.2          0.670          72
       Iceland          1985 founding
          India           1830, 1877          Aug-1920     Dec-2000        1.6          3.9          21.8          0.287        965
    Indonesia           1912 founding          Jan-1988    Dec-2000        -1.9         14.1         60.4          0.510        156
            Iran        1968 founding
       Ireland       1790, 1799 founding      Feb-1934     Dec-2000        5.0          6.3          16.8          0.376        803
         Israel         1953 founding         Mar-1957     Dec-2000        8.3          11.2         24.8          0.304         526
           Italy        1808 founding         Oct-1905     Dec-2000        0.2          5.1          33.8          0.407        1143
      Jamaica           1968 founding
    Japan (1)           1878 founding         Aug-1914     Aug-1945        -0.6         0.8          16.5          0.261         373
    Japan (2)                                 May-1946     Dec-2000        10.3         14.8         28.9          0.335         656
        Jordan          1978 founding          Jan-1988    Dec-2000        -4.7         -3.5         16.0          0.129         156
        Kenya           1954 founding
         Korea          1911 founding          Jan-1976    Dec-2000        8.9          15.7         39.0          0.304         300
       Kuwait           1962 founding
        Latvia
     Lebanon            1920 founding
     Lituania




                                                                  31
                                                                       Sub-period   Sub-period   Sub-period
                    Date by which equity                 Ending date    geometric   arithmetic    standard
                 trading is known or date Beginning date  for data         mean        mean       deviation   Correlation to
                of founding of exchange or for data used   used in        (% per      (% per       (% per     equal-weighted Number
 Country                    both.             in study      study        annum)      annum)        annum)        portfolio   of Months
  Luxembourg           1929 founding          Jan-1988    Dec-2000         13.3        15.5          24.7         0.456         156
    Macedonia
        Malawi         1995 founding
      Malaysia         1930 founding          Jan-1988    Dec-2000        3.7          10.0         36.2          0.613         156
          Malta         1996 trading
     Mauritius         1988 founding
        Mexico         1894 founding         Dec-1934     Dec-2000        6.3          10.8         29.6          0.444         793
      Morocco          1929 founding
      Namibia          1992 founding
Netherlands (1)        1611 founding         Feb-1919     Aug-1944        0.2          1.7          17.4          0.649         307
Netherlands (2)                               Jan-1946    Dec-2000        7.7          9.1          18.1          0.562         660
  New Zealand          1872 founding         Feb-1931     Dec-2000        2.4          3.7          16.2          0.529         839
     Nicaragua
        Nigeria        1960 founding
       Norway          1881 founding         Feb-1918     Dec-2000        2.3          3.9          17.7          0.563        995
       Pakistan        1934 founding         Aug-1960     Dec-2000        -0.8         2.1          22.8          0.231        485
       Panama
       Peru (1)     1861 founding, 1890      Apr-1941     Jan-1953        -5.5         -2.9         20.9          0.082         142
                          equities
       Peru (2)                               Jan-1957    Dec-1977        -7.4         -6.6         13.6         -0.018        252
       Peru (3)                              Dec-1988     Dec-2000        25.2         44.3         73.7          0.213        145
    Philippines        1927 founding         Aug-1954     Dec-2000        -3.0          2.9         39.2          0.392        557
    Poland (1)      1811 founding, 1938      Feb-1921     Jun-1939        -4.3         16.7         71.5          0.466        221
                          equities
    Poland (2)                               Dec-1992     Dec-2000        21.5         36.6         64.4          0.542        96
   Portugal (1)        1901 founding          Jan-1931    Apr-1974        5.0          9.3          44.0          0.231        520
   Portugal (2)                              Apr-1977     Dec-2000        11.5         18.9         44.1          0.444        285
     Roumania          1929 founding
         Russia         1836 trading
     Singapore         1890 founding          Jan-1970    Dec-2000        10.4         14.6         30.6          0.595         372
      Slovakia         1991 founding




                                                                 32
                                                                            Sub-period   Sub-period   Sub-period
                         Date by which equity                 Ending date    geometric   arithmetic    standard
                      trading is known or date Beginning date  for data         mean        mean       deviation   Correlation to
                     of founding of exchange or for data used   used in        (% per      (% per       (% per     equal-weighted Number
   Country                       both.             in study      study        annum)      annum)        annum)        portfolio   of Months
         Slovenia           1924 founding
     South Africa           1887 founding         Feb-1910     Dec-2000        4.3          6.6          21.8          0.391        1091
            Spain             1729, 1860           Jan-1915    Dec-2000        2.1          5.3          28.4          0.404        1032
        Sri Lanka           1900 founding          Jan-1993    Dec-2000       -11.6         -6.9         32.8          0.515         96
       Swaziland            1990 founding
          Sweden              1776 , 1863         Feb-1913     Dec-2000        2.3          5.1          25.6          0.480        1055
      Switzerland         17th century, 1850      Feb-1910     Dec-2000         4.8          6.0         16.4          0.511        1091
          Taiwan            1960 founding          Jan-1985    Dec-2000        12.6         21.9         45.8          0.437         192
         Thailand           1975 founding          Jan-1976    Dec-2000         6.7         12.7         35.3          0.515         300
        Tanzania            1998 founding
 Trinidad-Tobago            1981 founding
          Turkey            1866 founding          Jan-1987    Dec-2000        18.8         38.6         68.6          0.397        168
          Tunisia           1969 founding
              UK         1698, 1773 exchange       Jan-1800    Dec-2000        2.0          3.1          15.2          0.623        2411
         Uruguay              1895, 1926
             USA            1790 founding          Jan-1800    Dec-2000        3.2          4.3          15.0          0.489        2411

       Venezuela            1805, 1893           Nov-1937      Dec-2000        -0.1         4.6          30.2          0.147        758
Yugoslavian states         1894 founding
          Zambia           1994 founding
       Zimbabwe            1896 founding         Jan-1976      Dec-2000        5.2          11.9         36.7          0.269         300




                                                                      33
Table 2. Sample Statistics of Stock Market Total Returns

This table provides mean and standard deviation of stock total returns of major countries. All returns are converted into dollar-denominated.

                  UK           US            France         Germany             Australia          Switzerland         Japan              Italy
1872-1889
Mean              5.3%         7.0%         7.1%            6.9%
SD                5.2%         13.0%        7.2%            12.5%
1890-1914
Mean              2.0%         6.7%         4.7%            4.6%
SD                6.1%         15.6%        6.9%            7.4%
1915-1918
Mean              1.2%         10.0%        10.8%           -23.5%              6.0%
SD                8.0%         14.9%        13.7%           30.6%               9.1%
1919-1939
Mean              4.7%         10.4%        0.4%            -56.0%              11.3%              6.3%
SD                14.5%        26.9%        24.0%           74.2%               14.2%              16.4%
1940-1945
Mean              5.4%         15.1%        15.9%           -1.1%               3.0%               16.1%               -9.1%              16.6%
SD                24.2%        15.9%        57.4%           42.8%               18.6%              16.6%               42.7%              96.0%
1946-1971
Mean              13.3%        11.6%        14.3%           16.4%               13.3%              8.5%                25.6%              14.9%
SD                15.5%        13.4%        23.3%           32.6%               14.2%              14.5%               35.9%              25.4%
1972-2000
Mean              14.8%        13.8%        16.4%           14.7%               13.4%              14.2%               10.9%              11.6%
SD                24.4%        15.6%        20.9%           20.3%               23.7%              18.9%               22.1%              26.2%




                                                                                34
Table 3. Correlation Matrices of Core Markets in Sub-Periods

This table provides the correlation matrices of monthly equity returns (in US Dollars) of the four
core countries (UK, US, France, and Germany) during seven sub-periods, as well as the correlation
matrices during periods of integration and segmentation.

                                           US               France            Germany
                        1872-1889                  Average correlation = 0.102
                              UK          0.103               0.140             0.030
                              US                              0.166             0.161
                        FRANCE                                                  0.012
                        1890-1914                  Average correlation = 0.155
                              UK          0.078             0.1878              0.084
                              US                              0.141             0.204
                        FRANCE                                                  0.235
                        1915-1918                  Average correlation = -0.073
                              UK          -0.009              0.140             -0.166
                              US                             -0.284             0.057
                        FRANCE                                                  -0.175
                        1919-1939                  Average correlation = 0.228
                              UK          0.289               0.431             0.188
                              US                              0.260             0.020
                        FRANCE                                                  0.183
                        1940-1945                  Average correlation = 0.0460
                              UK          0.049               0.453             -0.075
                              US                              0.017             -0.281
                        FRANCE                                                  0.113
                        1946-1971               Average correlation = 0.111
                              UK          0.182           0.112             0.039
                              US                         -0.020             0.222
                              FR                                            0.132
                        1972-2000                  Average correlation =0.475
                              UK          0.508             0.499             0.429
                              US                            0.414             0.378
                        FRANCE                                                0.620




                                                                                                     35
                                     Table 3 (Continued)

                  Correlation in Integration vs. Segmentation Periods
Note that the Integration and Segmentation periods are not endogenously defined, but specified as
indicated in the text by historical events.


                                           US               France             Germany
                      Full Sample:
                                                  Average correlation = 0.199
                        1872-2000
                              UK          0.265              0.351               0.143
                               US                            0.163               0.083
                         FRANCE                                                  0.189

                     Integration:
                                                  Average correlation = 0.381
             1872-1913 1972-2000
                              UK          0.345              0.467               0.369
                              US                             0.301               0.284
                       FRANCE                                                    0.520

                    Segmentation:
                                                  Average correlation = 0.146
                       1914-1971
                              UK          0.193              0.311               0.097
                              US                             0.101               0.041
                        FRANCE                                                   0.135




                                                                                              36
                      Table 4. Testing Equality of Correlation Structure

This table provides probability values for test statistics for the null hypothesis that the corresponding two
periods have the same correlation matrices. Correlation matrices are computed using stock total returns of
US, UK, France and Germany. Tests are performed on the entire correlation matrix (Panel A and B) and
mean correlation coefficients (Panel C and D). Asymptotics-based tests (Panel A and C) are validated with
bootstrapping-based tests (Panel B and D). Single stars indicate rejection at the 5% level, double stars
indicate rejection at the 1% level.

Panel A: Asymptotics Based Test of Correlation Matrices
          1890-1914 1915-1918 1919-1939 1940-1945                               1946-1971      1972-2000
1870-1889 0.279      0.046*        0.004**     0.038*                           0.093          0.000**
1890-1914            0.012*        0.002**     0.091                            0.331          0.000**
1915-1918                          0.001**     0.145                            0.265          0.000**
1919-1939                                      0.052                            0.000**        0.000**
1940-1945                                                                       0.066          0.003**
1946-1971                                                                                      0.000**

Panel B: Asymptotics Based Test of Mean Correlation Coefficients
          1890-1914 1915-1918 1919-1939 1940-1945 1946-1971                                    1972-2000
1870-1889 0.238      0.019*        0.016*     0.377         0.865                              0.000**
1890-1914            0.003**       0.114      0.087         0.368                              0.000**
1915-1918                          0.001**    0.053         0.052                              0.000**
1919-1939                                     0.017*        0.039*                             0.000**
1940-1945                                                   0.428                              0.000**
1946-1971                                                                                      0.000**




                                                                                                       37
              Table 4. Testing Equality of Correlation Structure --- Continued

This table provides probability levels of test statistics for the null hypothesis that the corresponding two
periods have the same correlation matrices. Correlation matrices are computed using stock total returns of
US, UK, France and Germany. Tests are performed on the entire correlation matrix (Panel A and B) and
mean correlation coefficients (Panel C and D). Asymptotics-based tests (Panel A and C) are validated with
Bootstrapping based tests (Panel B and D). Single stars indicate rejection at the 5% level, double stars
indicate rejection at the 1% level.


Panel C: Bootstrapping Based Test of Correlation Matrices
          1890-1914 1915-1918 1919-1939 1940-1945                                 1946-1971      1972-2000
1870-1889 0.325      0.093        0.009**       0.104                             0.119          0.000**
1890-1914            0.026*       0.003**       0.189                             0.379          0.000**
1915-1918                         0.005**       0.522                             0.327          0.000**
1919-1939                                       0.125                             0.000**        0.000**
1940-1945                                                                         0.114          0.011*
1946-1971                                                                                        0.000**
             Mean8            Variance
             6.150            12.601

Panel D: Bootstrapping Based Test of Mean Correlation Coefficients
          1890-1914 1915-1918 1919-1939 1940-1945 1946-1971                                      1972-2000
1870-1889 0.251      0.033*       0.019*      0.392         0.870                                0.000**
1890-1914            0.002**      0.136       0.108         0.386                                0.000**
1915-1918                         0.000**     0.111         0.060                                0.000**
1919-1939                                     0.027*        0.037*                               0.000**
1940-1945                                                   0.446                                0.000**
1946-1971                                                                                        0.000**
             Mean             Variance
             1.028            2.055




8
 These are the sample mean and variance of bootstrapped test statistics. If bootstrapped test statistics
perfectly conform to Chi-squared distribution, as suggested by asymptotics theory, then test on correlation
matrices should have mean of 6 and variance of 12, while test on mean correlation coefficients should
have mean of 1 and variance of 2.




                                                                                                         38
Figure 1: Table of Market Openings, Failures and Data Availability

This chart reports the best information available to the authors on 84 different equity markets of the world. The columns represent
years, with the first few columns compressing fifty-year time periods. If the date of the founding of the market is documented on its
web-site or in one of the sources cited in Table 1, that date is recorded at the beginning of the colored bar indicating the market
starting date. Cells are coded by color. Yellow indicates that the market was founded, but we have no historical information
confirming that equity securities were traded. Green indicates that there is some evidence that equity securities were traded after that
date in the market. Blue indicates that price data exists in paper and/or electronic form. Red indicates the presumption of a market
closure. Gray indicates market suspension or closure. Pink indicates a market crisis noted in the sources.




                                                                                                                                           39
               17
               17 0
               18 0
               18 0
               18 0
               18 0
               18 0
               18 0
               19 0
               19 0
               19 1
               19 2
               19 3
               19 4
               19 5
               19 6
               19 7
               19 8
               19 9
               19 0
               19 1
               19 2
               19 3
               19 4
               19 5
               19 6
               19 7
               19 8
               19 9
               19 0
               19 1
               19 2
               19 3
               19 4
               19 5
               19 6
               19 7
               19 8
               19
               19 0
               19 1
               19 2
               19 3
               19 4
               19
               19 6
               19 7
               19 8
               19 9
               19 0
               19 1
               19 2
               19 3
               19 4
               19 5
               19 6
             Year




                 0
                 5
                 0
                 5
                 6
                 7
                 8
                 9
                 0
                 0
                 0
                 0
                 0
                 0
                 0
                 0
                 0
                 0
                 1
                 1
                 1
                 1
                 1
                 1
                 1
                 1
                 1
                 1
                 2
                 2
                 2
                 2
                 2
                 2
                 2
                 2
                 2
                 29
                 3
                 3
                 3
                 3
                 3
                 35
                 3
                 3
                 3
                 3
                 4
                 4
                 4
                 4
                 4
                 4
                 4
                 47
     Argentina                         1872
      Australia                    1828 1871
        Austria          `1771
        Bahrain
       Belgium              `1801
           Brazil                       `1877
     Botswana
       Bulgaria
       Canada             1817          1874
            Chile                               1892
          China                                 1891
     Colombia
        Croatia
           Cuba                  1861
Czech Republic                      1871
        Cyprus
      Denmark               1808
       Ecuador
           Egypt
        Estonia
        Finland                    1865                #
        France       ?
      Germany            Late 18th Century
         Ghana
        Greece                             1892
    Hong Kong                      1866
      Hungary                       1864
        Iceland
            India               1830    1877
     Indonesia
             Iran
         Ireland         1799
           Israel
             Italy               1808
       Jamaica
          Japan                         1878
         Jordan
          Kenya
          Korea
         Kuwait
          Latvia
      Lebanon
      Lithuania
   Luxembourg
    Macedonia
         Malawi




                                                           40
          17
          17 0
          18 0
          18 0
          18 0
          18 0
          18 0
          18 0
          19 0
          19 0
          19 1
          19 2
          19 3
          19 4
          19 5
          19 6
          19
          19 8
          19 9
          19 0
          19 1
          19 2
          19 3
          19 4
          19 5
          19 6
          19 7
          19
          19 9
          19 0
          19 1
          19 2
          19 3
          19 4
          19 5
          19
          19 7
          19 8
          19 9
          19 0
          19 1
          19
          19 3
          19 4
          19 5
          19 6
          19 7
          19 8
          19 9
          19
          19 1
          19 2
          19 3
          19 4
          19 5
          19 6
        Year




             0
             5
             0
             5
             6
             7
             8
             9
             0
             0
             0
             0
             0
             0
             0
             07
             0
             0
            1
            1
            1
             1
             1
             1
             1
             1
             18
             1
             2
             2
             2
             2
             2
             2
             26
             2
             2
            2
            3
            3
            32
            3
            3
            3
            3
            3
            3
            3
            40
            4
            4
            4
            4
            4
            4
            47
    Malaysia
        Malta
   Mauritius
      Mexico                           1894
    Morocco                                         1929
    Namibia
 Netherlands 1611
New Zealand                    1872
  Nicaragua
      Nigeria
     Norway                      1881                             9/1/1941   1/1/1945
    Pakistan                                               1934
    Panama
         Peru
  Philippines
       Poland                  1871
    Portugal                             1901
    Romania                                     ?
      Russia         1836
  Singapore                           1890
    Slovakia
    Slovenia
South Africa                     1887
        Spain     1796
  Swaziland
    SriLanka
     Sweden       1776
 Switzerland          1850
      Taiwan
    Thailand
   Tanzania
    Trinidad
       Turkey                  1866
      Tunisia
          UK # 1700
    Uruguay
         USA      1792
  Venezuela           18 821           1893
  Yugoslavia                           1894




                                                                                        41
             19
             19 8
             19 9
             19 0
             19 1
             19 2
             19 3
             19 4
             19 5
             19 6
             19 7
             19 8
             19 9
             19 0
             19 1
             19 2
             19 3
             19 4
             19 5
             19 6
             19 7
             19 8
             19 9
             19 0
             19 1
             19 2
             19 3
             19 4
             19 5
             19 6
             19 7
             19 8
             19 9
             19 0
             19 1
             19 2
             19 3
             19 4
             19
             19 6
             19 7
             19 8
             19 9
             19 0
             19 1
             19 2
             19 3
             19 4
             19 5
             19 6
             19 7
             19 8
             20 9
             20
           Year




               4
               4
               5
               5
               5
               5
               5
               5
               5
               5
               5
               5
               6
               6
               6
               6
               6
               6
               6
               6
               6
               6
               7
               7
               7
               7
               7
               7
               7
               7
               7
               7
               8
               8
               8
               8
               8
               85
               8
               8
               8
               8
               9
               9
               9
               9
               9
               9
               9
               9
               9
               9
               00
               01
     Argentina "Long period of decline"
      Australia
        Austria
        Bahrain
       Belgium
           Brazil
     Botswana
       Bulgaria
       Canada
            Chile                            ?   ?
          China
     Colombia
        Croatia
           Cuba
Czech Republic
        Cyprus
      Denmark
       Ecuador
           Egypt
        Estonia
        Finland
        France
      Germany
         Ghana
        Greece
    Hong Kong
      Hungary
        Iceland
            India
     Indonesia
             Iran
         Ireland
           Israel
             Italy
       Jamaica                            1968
          Japan
         Jordan
          Kenya
          Korea
         Kuwait
          Latvia
      Lebanon
      Lithuania
   Luxembourg
    Macedonia
         Malawi




                                                     42
          19
          19 8
          19 9
          19 0
          19 1
          19 2
          19 3
          19
          19 5
          19 6
          19 7
          19 8
          19 9
          19 0
          19 1
          19 2
          19 3
          19 4
          19
          19 6
          19 7
          19 8
          19 9
          19 0
          19
          19 2
          19 3
          19
          19 5
          19
          19 7
          19 8
          19 9
          19 0
          19 1
          19 2
          19 3
          19 4
          19
          19 6
          19
          19 8
          19 9
          19
          19 1
          19
          19 3
          19 4
          19 5
          19 6
          19 7
          19
          20 9
          20 0
       Year




            4
            4
            5
            5
            5
            5
            54
            5
            5
            5
            5
            5
            6
            6
            6
            6
             6
             65
             6
             6
             6
             6
             7
             71
             7
             7
             74
             7
             76
             7
             7
             7
             8
             8
             8
             8
             8
             85
             8
             87
             8
             8
             90
             9
             92
             9
             9
             9
             9
             9
             98
             9
             0
             01
    Malaysia
        Malta
    Mauritius       1988
      Mexico
    Morocco
     Namibia               1992
 Netherlands
New Zealand
  Nicaragua
      Nigeria
      Norway
    Pakistan 1947
     Panama
         Peru
  Philippines
      Poland
     Portugal
    Romania
      Russia
   Singapore
     Slovakia
     Slovenia
South Africa
        Spain
   Swaziland
    SriLanka
     Sweden
 Switzerland
      Taiwan
    Thailand
    Tanzania
     Trinidad
       Turkey
      Tunisia
          UK
    Uruguay
         USA
  Venezuela
  Yugoslavia




                                  43
Figure 2: Risk Reduction from International Diversification: Selected Periods

This figure shows the ratio of variance of the equally weighted portfolio of country indices scaled by the average variance of the
country indices, as a function of the number of countries in the portfolio. The ratio is computed as:
     n          1 n             1  n − 1  Cov (x i , x j )
Var  ∑ x i / n  /  ∑ Var (x i ) = +      •                 . All returns are measure capital appreciation and exclude dividends, converted to US
     i =1        n i =1         n  n  Var (x i )

dollars.

                          1.0



                          0.9



                          0.8



                          0.7
  Diversification Ratio




                          0.6



                          0.5



                          0.4



                          0.3



                          0.2                                                                                                  1972-2000, 1891-1914

                                                                                                                               1872-1890, 1919-1939
                          0.1                                                                                                  1915-1958
                                                                                                                               1946-1971
                                                                                                                               1940-1945
                          0.0
                                1   6                   11                      16                      21




                                                                                                                                                      44
Figure 3: Average Correlation of Capital Appreciation Returns for all Available Markets

This figure shows the time-series of the average off-diagonal correlation of dollar-valued capital appreciation returns for all available
markets. A rolling window of 60 months is used.


                        0.5




                        0.4
  Average Correlation




                        0.3




                        0.2




                        0.1




                        0.0
                          1860   1880   1900             1920              1940             1960             1980             2000




                                                                                                                                      45
Figure 4: Number of Countries

This figure shows total number of countries that have appeared in our sample, the surviving countries, and the surviving core
countries at each point in time. Core countries are: Germany, France, U.S. and U.K. Germany and Japan dropped out the global
markets for short periods due to wartime. Some Eastern European countries dropped out of the global markets during the war and
then re-joined as emerging markets in the early 1990s.


                                60




                                50




                                40
                                                                    All Markets
          Number of Countries




                                30
                                                                                         Available Markets




                                20




                                10
                                                                 Core Markets



                                0
                                 1860   1880   1900   1920          1940          1960         1980          2000




                                                                                                                            46
Figure 5: Decomposition of the Diversification Effects Due to Average Correlation and the Number of Markets

This figure shows the diversification benefits to hypothetical portfolios of country indices, under three sets of assumptions.. The first
portfolio is defined by the constraint that that the investor hold an equal-weighed portfolio of four countries, Germany, France, U.S.
and U.K. It is labeled “Four With Limited Diversification.” The second portfolio relaxes the constraint that there are only four
markets with average correlations of the core countries. In this sense it is entirely hypothetical – it assumes that an there are an
unlimited number of country indices available so that all idiosyncratic risk can be diversified away. It is labeled “Four With
Unlimited Diversification.” The third portfolio assumes an investor holds an equal-weighted portfolio across all countries in the
sample at any given point in time. It is labeled “All with Unlimited Diversification.”

                               1.0



                               0.9



                               0.8



                               0.7

                                                                                      Four with Limited Diversification
       Diversification Ratio




                               0.6



                               0.5



                               0.4



                               0.3
                                                                                         Four with Unlimited Diversification


                               0.2



                               0.1
                                                                                    All with Unlimited Diversification

                               0.0
                                 1860   1880   1900      1920           1940             1960                 1980             2000
                                                                                                                                      47
Figure 6: Diversification Benefits and the Variance of the Equal-Weight Portfolio

This figure shows the diversification ratio and the variance of the equal-weighted portfolio of all available markets. The
diversification ratio is explained in Figure 5. A rolling window of 120 months is used. Returns are exponentially weighted with a
half-life of 60 months so that more recent observations receive higher weights.

                          1.0                                                                                   0.35%



                          0.9
                                                                                                                0.30%

                          0.8


                                                                                                                0.25%
                          0.7
  Diversification Ratio




                          0.6




                                                                                                                        Variance (monthly)
                                   All with Unlimited                                                           0.20%
                                    Diversification                                      Variance of
                                                                                        EW Portfolio
                          0.5

                                                                                                                0.15%
                          0.4



                          0.3
                                                                                                                0.10%


                          0.2

                                                                                                                0.05%
                          0.1



                          0.0                                                                                   0.00%
                            1860       1880             1900   1920   1940      1960          1980          2000


                                                                                                                                             48
Figure 7: Diversification with Capital Market Weights

This figure shows the diversification ratio of for the capital-weighted portfolios of 45 country indices andthe diversification ratio of
the four core countries . A rolling window of 120 months is used. Returns are exponentially weighted with a half time of 60 months.


            1



          0.9
                                  Four Countries, Limited
                                  Diversification
          0.8



          0.7



          0.6



          0.5



          0.4

                                    All Countries, Unlimited
          0.3                       Diversification


          0.2



          0.1



            0
                   1975                1980                 1985                1990                 1995                2000


                                                                                                                                     49
Figure 8: Power of the Test For Differences in Correlation Matrices.

This figure presents simulated power function of test for correlation matrix equality. It shows, for each significant level on the X axis,
how likely the equality hypothesis will fail to be rejected by the test. The two simulated correlation matrices that are tested differ by a
factor of .5, .7, .9, .95, .99,1.0 respectively, with 1 being identical and .5 being furthest apart.

                                                  1.0


                                                  0.9


                                                  0.8
         Prob. of Accepting Equality Hypothesis




                                                  0.7


                                                  0.6


                                                  0.5


                                                  0.4


                                                  0.3


                                                  0.2


                                                  0.1


                                                  0.0
                                                        0   0.1   0.2          0.3      0.4           0.5           0.6          0.7     0.8    0.9   1
                                                                                               Significant Level

                                                                        0.50     0.70   0.80      0.90       0.95         0.98    0.99   1.00




                                                                                                                                                          50
