NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE TRANSMISSION MECHANISM AND THE
ROLE OF ASSET PRICES IN MONETARY POLICY
Frederic S. Mishkin
Working Paper 8617
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8617
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2001

Prepared for the Oesterrische Nationalbank conference on "The Monetary Transmission Mechanism,"
November 9, 2001. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2001 by Frederic S. Mishkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

The Transmission Mechanism and the Role of
Asset Prices in Monetary Policy
Frederic S. Mishkin
NBER Working Paper No. 8617
December 2001
JEL No. E52, E40

ABSTRACT
This paper surveys the transmission mechanisms of monetary policy beyond the standard interest
rate channel by focusing on how monetary policy affects the economy through other asset prices. It
outlines how the monetary transmission mechanisms operating through stock prices, real estate prices,
and exchange rates affect which affect investment and consumption decisions of both firms and
households. Given the role that asset prices play on the transmission mechanism, central banks have been
often tempted to use them as targets of monetary policy. This paper shows that despite the significance
of asset prices in the conduct of monetary policy, targeting asset prices by central banks is likely to lead
to worse economic outcomes and might even erode the support for their independence.

Frederic S. Mishkin
Graduate School of Business
Uris Hall 619
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
fsm3@columbia.edu

Although the instrument set by monetary policymakers is typically an interest rate,
monetary policy affects the economy through other asset prices besides those on debt
instruments. Thus, movements in these other asset prices are likely to play an important role in
how monetary policy is conducted. But what is the appropriate role for them to play?

This

paper answers this question by first surveying the monetary transmission mechanism through
these other asset prices and then discusses their role in the conduct of monetary policy.

I.
Asset Prices in the Monetary Transmission Mechanism
In the literature on the monetary transmission mechanism, there are three categories of
asset prices besides those on debt instruments that are viewed as providing important channels
through which monetary policy affects the economy: 1) stock market prices, 2) real estate prices,
and 3) exchange rates.

Stock Market Prices
Fluctuations of the stock market, which are influenced by monetary policy, have
important impacts on the aggregate economy. Transmission mechanisms involving the stock
market are of three types: 1) stock market effects on investment, 2) firm balance-sheet effects, 3)
household wealth effects and 4) household liquidity effects.

Stock Market Effects on Investment. Tobin's q-theory (Tobin, 1969) provides an
important mechanism for how movements in stock prices can affect the economy. Tobin's q is
defined as the market value of firms divided by the replacement cost of capital. If q is high, the
market price of firms is high relative to the replacement cost of capital, and new plant and
equipment capital is cheap relative to the market value of firms. Companies can then issue stock
and get a high price for it relative to the cost of the facilities and equipment they are buying.

1

monetary policymakers incorporate movements of these asset prices into their decisions about the
conduct of monetary policy?
In looking at the role of asset prices in monetary policy, it is worth separating the
discussion into how central banks might respond to exchange rates and how they might respond
to fluctuations in stock market and real estate prices.

Exchange Rates
The asset price that typically receives the most attention in discussions of monetary policy
is the exchange rate. Central bank's clearly care about the value of the domestic currency for
several reasons. Changes in the exchange rate can have a major impact on inflation, particularly
in small, open economies. For example, depreciations lead to a rise in inflation as a result of the
pass-through from higher import prices and greater demand for net exports, as discussed in the
previous section. In addition, the public and politicians pay attention to the exchange rate and
this puts pressure on the central bank to alter monetary policy. An appreciation of the domestic
currency can make domestic businesses uncompetitive, while a depreciation is often seen as a
failure of the central bank, as has recently been the case for the European Central Bank, which
has been blamed, I think unfairly, for the euro's decline.
Emerging market countries, quite correctly, have an even greater concern about exchange
rate movements. Not only can a real appreciation make domestic industries less competitive, but
it can lead to large current account deficits which might make the country more vulnerable to
currency crisis if capital inflows turn to outflows. Depreciations in emerging market countries
are particularly dangerous because they can be contractionary, as described in the previous
section, and can trigger a financial crisis along the lines suggested in Mishkin (1996, 1999).
Concern about exchange rate fluctuations might lead countries to choose to peg their
exchange rates to that of another country. In other work, I have discussed the pros and cons of
pegging exchange rates as a monetary policy strategy and I will not discuss this issue further.
9

See Mishkin (1999b) and Mishkin and Savastano (2001).

10

9

However, if a country decides that it wants to have its own independent monetary policy, then
with open capital markets it has to allow the exchange rate to fluctuate. However, the fact that
exchange rate fluctuations are a major concern in so many countries raises the danger that
monetary policy may put too much focus on limiting exchange rate movements. This indeed was
a problem for Israel in the early stages of its inflation targeting regime. As part of this regime,
Israel had an intermediate target of an exchange rate band around a crawling peg, whose rate of
crawl was set in a forward-looking manner by deriving it from the inflation target for the coming
year. Even though the Bank of Israel downplayed the exchange rate target relative to the
inflation target over time, it did slow the Bank's effort to win support for disinflation and
lowering of the inflation targets (e.g., see Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin and Posen, 1999.)
The second problem from a focus on limiting exchange rate fluctuations is that it can
induce the wrong policy response when a country if faced with real shocks such as a terms of
trade shock. Two graphic examples occurred in New Zealand and Chile in the late 1990s.
Because of the direct impact of exchange rates on inflation, the Reserve Bank of New
Zealand tended to focus on the exchange rate as an indicator of the monetary policy stance. By
early 1997, the Reserve Bank institutionalized this focus by adopting as its primary indicator of
monetary policy a Monetary Conditions Index (MCI) similar to that developed by the Bank of
Canada. The idea behind the MCI, which is a weighted average of the exchange rate and a shortterm interest rate, is that both interest rates and exchange rates on average have offsetting impacts
on inflation. When the exchange rate falls, this usually leads to higher inflation in the future, and
so interest rates need to rise to offset the upward pressure on inflation. However, the offsetting
effects of interest rates and exchange rates on inflation depend on the nature of the shocks to the
exchange rates. If the exchange rate depreciation comes from portfolio considerations, then it
does lead to higher inflation and the optimal response is an interest rate rise. However, if the
reason for the exchange rate depreciation is a real shock such as a negative terms of trade shock
which decreases the demand for a country's exports, then the situation is entirely different. The
negative terms of trade shock reduces aggregate demand and is thus likely to be deflationary.
The correct interest rate response is then a decline in interest rates, not a rise as the MCI suggests.
With the negative terms of trade shock in 1997, the adoption of the MCI in 1997 led to

11

exactly the wrong monetary policy response to East Asian crisis. With depreciation setting in
after the crisis began in July 1997 after the devaluation of the Thai baht, the MCI began a sharp
decline, indicating that the Reserve Bank needed to raise interest rates, which it did by over 200
basis points. The result was very tight monetary policy, with the overnight cash rate exceeding
9% by June of 1998. Because the depreciation was due to a substantial, negative terms of trade
shock which decreased aggregate demand, the tightening of monetary policy, not surprisingly,
lead to a severe recession and an undershoot of the inflation target range with actual deflation
10

occurring in 1999.

The Reserve Bank of New Zealand did eventually realize its mistake and

reversed course, sharply lowering interest rates beginning in July 1998 after the economy had
entered a recession, but by then it was too late. It also recognized the problems with using an
MCI as an indicator of monetary policy and abandoned it in 1999. Now the Reserve Bank
operates monetary policy in a more conventional way, using the overnight cash rate as its policy
instrument, with far less emphasis on the exchange rate in its monetary policy decisions.
Chile, which also adopted inflation targeting in the early 1990s, also included a focus on
limiting exchange rate fluctuations by having an exchange rate band with a crawling peg which
was (loosely) tied to lagged domestic inflation.

11

This focus on the exchange rate induced a

serious policy mistake in 1998 because the central bank was afraid it might lose credibility in the
face of the financial turmoil if it allowed the exchange rate to depreciate after what had taken
place in financial markets after the East Asian crisis and the Russian meltdown, Thus instead of
easing monetary policy in the face of the negative terms of trade shock, the central bank raised
interest rates sharply and even narrowed its exchange rate band. In hindsight, these decisions
appear to have been a mistake: the inflation target was undershot and the economy entered a
recession for the first time in the 1990s. With this outcome, the central bank came under strong
10

The terms of trade shock, however, was not the only negative shock the New Zealand
economy faced during that period. Its farm sector experienced a severe drought which also hurt
the economy. Thus, a mistake in monetary policy was not the only source of the recession. Bad
luck played a role too. See Drew and Orr (1999) and Brash (2000).
11

See Landerretche, Morandé and Schmidt-Hebbel (1999), and Mishkin and Savastano
(2001).

12

criticism for the first time since it had adopted its inflation targeting regime in 1990, weakening
support for the independence of the central bank and its inflation targeting regime. During 1999,
the central bank did reverse course, easing monetary policy by lowering interest rates and
allowing the peso to decline.
The contrast of the experience of New Zealand and Chile during this period with that of
Australia, another small open economy with an inflation targeting regime is striking. Prior to
adoption of their inflation targeting regime in 1994, the Reserve Bank of Australia had adopted a
policy of allowing the exchange rate to fluctuate without interference, particularly if the source of
the exchange rate change was a real shock, like a terms of trade shock. Thus when faced with the
devaluation in Thailand in July 1997, the Reserve Bank recognized that it would face a
substantial negative terms of trade shock because of the large component of its foreign trade
conducted with the Asian region and thus decided that it would not fight the depreciation of the
12

Thus in contrast to New Zealand, it immediately

Australian dollar that would inevitably result.

lowered the overnight cash rate by 50 basis points to 5% and kept it near at this level until the
end of 1998, when it was lowered again by another 25 basis points.
Indeed, the adoption of the inflation targeting regime probably helped the Reserve Bank
of Australia to be even more aggressive in its easing in response to the East Asian crisis and
helps explain why their response was so rapid. The Reserve Bank was able to make clear that
easing was exactly what inflation targeting called for in order to prevent an undershooting of the
target, so that the easing was unlikely to have an adverse effect on inflation expectations. The
outcome of the Reserve Bank's policy actions was extremely favorable. In contrast to New
Zealand and Chile, real output growth remained strong throughout this period. Furthermore,
there were no negative consequences for inflation despite the substantial depreciation of the
Australian dollar against the U.S. dollar by close to 20%: inflation remained under control,
actually falling during this period to end up slightly under the target range of 2 to 3%.
The analysis above and the recent experiences of countries like New Zealand, Chile and
Australia strongly suggest that central banks' concerns about the exchange rate is not a reason for
12

See MacFarlane (1999) and Stevens (1999).

13

them to stop keeping their eyes on the inflation ball.
Is a focus on achieving the inflation goal inconsistent wth central banks paying some
attention to the exchange rate? Of course not. As we have seen in the previous section, an
important transmission mechanism for monetary policy is the exchange rate and its level has
important effects on inflation and aggregate demand depending on the nature of the shocks,
particularly in small, open economies. Therefore, central banks will closely monitor exchange
rate developments and factor them into its decisions on setting monetary policy instruments. A
depreciation of the exchange rate due to portfolio shocks like terms of trade shocks requires a
tightening of monetary policy in order to keep inflation from rising. On the other hand, a
depreciation when there is a negative terms of trade shock requires a different response, an easing
of monetary policy as Australia did in 1997.
Does the avoidance of a target for the exchange rate imply a policy of benign neglect of
exchange rates. This issue is particularly relevant for emerging market countries as is
emphasized in Mishkin (2000) and Mishkin and Savastano (2001). For the reasons discussed
earlier, emerging market countries with a lot of foreign-denominated debt may not be able to
afford sharp depreciations of their currencies which can destroy balance sheets and trigger a
sharp fall in aggregate demand. Central banks in these countries may thus have to smooth
"excessive" exchange rate fluctuations, while making it clear to the public that they will not
preclude the exchange rate from reaching its market-determined level over longer horizons. The
stated rationale for exchange rate smoothing is similar to that of interest-rate smoothing, which is
practiced by most central banks, even those engaged in inflation targeting: the policy is not
aimed at resisting market-determined movements in an asset price, but at mitigating potentially
destabilizing effects of abrupt changes in that price.

Stock and Real Estate Prices
With the bursting of the stock market and real estate bubble in Japan at the beginning of
the 1990s and the recent stock market boom (and partial reversal) in the United States, there has

14

been a growing debate about how the monetary authorities might best react to stock market and
13

real estate fluctuations.

This section will argue that the reaction to these asset prices raises

similar issues to the reaction to exchange rate fluctuations. Improved economic performance will
result if the policy response depends on the nature of the shocks, while the central bank is not be
perceived as having a target for any asset price, whether it is an exchange rate, or stock market or
real estate prices.
The discussion of the monetary transmission mechanism in the previous section indicates
that real estate and stock price movement do have an important impact on aggregate demand and
thus must be followed closely to evaluate the stance of monetary policy. Indeed, with a standard
loss function in which the central bank minimizes a weighted average of squared deviations of
inflation from its target level and output from potential output, optimal monetary policy will react
to changes in real estate and stock market prices. However, depending on the nature of the shock
to these prices, and depending on whether the shock is considered to be temporary or permanent,
the optimal response of monetary policy would differ. Thus, just as targets for exchange rates
would be problematic, so too would targets for real estate and stock prices.
But this still begs the question of whether monetary authorities can improve their
performance by trying to prick asset price bubbles, because subsequent collapses of these asset
prices might be highly damaging to the economy, as they were in Japan in the 1990s. Cecchetti,
Genburg, Lipsky and Wadhwani (1999), for example, argue that central banks should at times
target asset prices in order to stop bubbles from getting too far out of hand. However, there as
serious flaws in their argument. First is that it is very hard for monetary authorities to identify
that a bubble has actually developed. To assume that they can is to assume that the monetary
authorities have better information and predictive ability than the private sector. If the central
bank has no informational advantage, then if it knows that a bubble has developed that will
eventually crash, then the market knows this too and then the bubble would unravel and thus
would be unlikely to develop. Without an informational advantage, the central bank is as likely
13

For example, see Cecchetti, Genburg, Lipsky and Wadwani (1999) and Bernanke and
Gertler (1999).

15

to mispredict the presence of a bubble as the private market and thus will frequently be mistaken,
thus frequently pursuing the wrong monetary policy. Cecchetti, Genburg, Lipski and Wadhwani
(1999) find favorable results in their simulations when the central bank conducts policy to prick
asset price bubble because they assume that the central bank knows the bubble is in progress.
This assumption is highly dubious because it is hard to believe that the central bank has this kind
of informational advantage over private markets. Indeed, the view that government officials
know better than the markets has been proved wrong over and over again.
A second problem with the central bank targeting stock prices is that it is likely to make
the central bank look foolish. The linkage between monetary policy and stock prices, although
an important part of the transmission mechanism, is still nevertheless, a weak one. Most
fluctuations in stock prices occur for reasons unrelated to monetary policy, either reflecting real
fundamentals or animal spirits. The loose link between monetary policy and stock prices
therefore means that the ability of the central bank to control stock prices is very limited. Thus,
if the central bank indicates that it wants stock prices to change in a particular direction, it is
likely to find that stock prices may move in the opposite direction, thus making the central bank
look inept. Recall that when Alan Greenspan made his speech in 1997 suggesting that the stock
market might be exhibiting "irrational exuberance", the Dow Jones average was around 6500.
This didn't stop the market from rising, with the Dow subsequently climbing to above 11000.
An additional problem with targeting asset prices is that it may weaken support for a
central bank because it looks like it is trying to control too many elements of the economy. Part
of the recent successes of central banks throughout the world has been that they have narrowed
their focus and have more actively communicated what they can and cannot do. Specifically,
central banks have argued that they are less capable of managing short-run business cycle
fluctuation and should therefore focus more on price stability as their primary goal. A key
element of the success of the Bundesbank's monetary targeting regime was that it did not focus
on short-run output fluctuation in setting its monetary policy instruments.

14

This communication

strategy for the Bundesbank has been very successful, as pointed out in Bernanke, Laubach,
14

See Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin and Posen (1999).

16

Mishkin and Posen (1999), has been adopted as a key element in inflation targeting, a monetary
regime that has been gaining in popularity in recent years. By narrowing their focus, central
15

banks in recent years have been able to increase public support for their independence.

Extending their focus to asset prices has the potential to weaken public support for central banks
and may even cause the public to worry that the central bank is too powerful, having undue
influence over all aspects of the economy.

III.
Conclusions
The discussion in this paper shows that other asset prices, and not just interest rates, are
important elements of the monetary transmission mechanism. This provides a rationale for why
monetary authorities pay a lot of attention to these other asset prices in the conduct of monetary
policy. However, this paper has also argued that targeting other asset prices, whether they are
exchange rates, real estate or stock market prices, is likely to worsen the performance of
monetary policy. This is because the response of monetary policy to asset price fluctuations
depends on the nature of the shocks to asset prices and the degree of permanence of the shocks.
Furthermore, targeting asset prices is likely to erode support for the independence of central
banks because control of these asset prices is beyond central banks' capabilities.

15

See Mishkin (1999b) and Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin and Posen (1999).

17

References
Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas. Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen, 1999, Inflation
Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler, 1995. "Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of
Monetary Policy Transmission," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall, 9, 27-48.
Bernanke, Ben S. and Mark Gertler, 1999. "Monetary Policy and Asset Price Volatility," in New
Challenges for Monetary Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City: Kansas City.
Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler and Simon Gilchrist, 1999. "The Financial Accelerator in a
Quantitative Business Cycle Framework," in John Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds.,
Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 10 (Elsevier: Amsterdam): 1341-1393.
Bernanke, B.S. and C. Lown. 1991. "The Credit Crunch," Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 2, pp. 205-39.
Bosworth, Barry, 1975. "The Stock Market and the Economy," Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 2, 257-90.
Brash, Donald T. 2000. "Inflation Targeting in New Zealand, 1988-2000," Speech to the TransTasman Business Cycle, Melbourne, February 9.
Cecchetti, Stephen G., 1995. "Distinguishing Theories of the Monetary Transmission
Mechanism," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, May/June, 77, 83-97.
Cecchetti, Stephen G., Hans Genburg, John Lipski and Sushil Wadhwani, 2000. Asset Prices and

18

Central Bank Policy, Geneva Reports on the World Economy (International Center for Monetary
and Banking Studies and Centre for Economic Policy Research, London).
Drew, Aaron and Adrian Orr, 1999. "The Reserve Bank's Role in the Recent Business Cycle:
Actions and Evolution," Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 62, No. 1.
Gertler, Mark and Simon Gilchrist, 1994. "Monetary Policy, Business Cycles and the Behavior of
Small Manufacturing Firms," Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 309-340.
Hayashi, Fumio, 1982. "Tobin's Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical Interpretation,"
Econometrica, vol. 50, #1: 213-24.
Hubbard, R. Glenn, 1995. "Is There a "Credit Channel" for Monetary Policy?", Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis Review, May/June, 77, 63-74.
Hubbard, R. Glenn, 2001, "Capital Market Imperfections, Investment, and the Monetary
Transmission Mechanism," in Deutsche Bundesbank, ed., Investing Today for the World of
Tomorrow (Springer-Verlag: New York): 165-194.
Kashyap, Anil K. and Jeremy C. Stein. 1994. "Monetary Policy and Bank Lending," in N.G.
Mankiw, ed., Monetary Policy (University of Chicago Press; Chicago).
Landerretche, O., F. Morandé and K. Schmidt-Hebbel, 1999, "Inflation Targets and Stabilization
in Chile," Central Bank of Chile, Working Paper 55, December
Lettau, Martin, Ludvigson, Sydney and Charles Steindel, 2001. "Monetary Policy Transmission
Through the Consumption-Wealth Channel," forthcoming in Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, Economic Policy Review, Conference on Financial Innovation and Monetary
Transmission.

19

Macfarlane, Ian J. 1999. "Statement to Parliamentary Committee," in Reserve Bank of Australia
Bulletin, January: 16-20.
McCarthy, Jonathan and Richard W. Peach, 2001. "Monetary Policy Transmission to Residential
Investment," forthcoming in Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review,
Conference on Financial Innovation and Monetary Transmission.
Mishkin, Frederic S. 1976. "Illiquidity, Consumer Durable Expenditure, and Monetary Policy,"
American Economic Review, 66 No. 4 (September): 642-654.
Mishkin, Frederic S. 1977. "What Depressed the Consumer? The Household Balance-Sheet and
the 1973-75 Recession," Brookings Paper on Economic Activity 1: 123-164.
Mishkin, Frederic S., 1996. "Understanding Financial Crises: A Developing Country
Perspective," in Michael Bruno and Boris Pleskovic, eds., Annual World Bank Conference on
Development Economics, World Bank, Washington D.C.: 29-62.
Mishkin, Frederic S., 1999a. "Lessons from the Asian Crisis," Journal of International Money
and Finance, 18, 4: 709-723.
Mishkin, Frederic S. 1999b. "International Experiences with Different Monetary Policy
Regimes," Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 43, #3: 579-606.
Mishkin, Frederic S. 2000. "Inflation Targeting in Emerging Market Countries," American
Economic Review (May), Vol. 90, #2.
Mishkin, F. and M. Savastano, 2001. "Monetary Policy Strategies for Latin America," Journal of
Development Economics, forthcoming October.

20

Franco Modigliani, 1971. "Monetary Policy and Consumption," in Consumer Spending and
Monetary Policy: The Linkages, Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 9-84.
Stevens, Glenn R. 1999. "Six Years of Inflation Targeting," Reserve Bank of Australia Bulletin,
May: 46-61.
James Tobin, 1969. "A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory," Journal of Money,
Credit, and Banking, February, 1, 15-29.

21

