                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         TAXES, REGULATIONS, AND ASSET PRICES


                                         Ellen R. McGrattan
                                         Edward C. Prescott


                                         Working Paper 8623
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w8623


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2001




We wish to thank seminar participants at Wharton, Northwestern, Yale, Columbia, UCLA, the University
of Chicago, the Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis and Richmond, the NBER, and the SED for their
helpful comments and suggestions. We especially thank Andy Abel, Alan Auerbach, John Cochrane, Bob
Hall, Ravi Jagannathan, Urban Jermann, Narayana Kocherlakota, Jim Poterba, and Bob Shiller. Prescott
thanks the National Science Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis or the Federal Reserve System.


© 2001 by Ellen R. McGrattan and Edward C. Prescott. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Taxes, Regulations, and Asset Prices
Ellen R. McGrattan and Edward C. Prescott
NBER Working Paper No. 8623
December 2001
JEL No. G12, H30, E13



                                               ABSTRACT


        U.S. stock prices have increased much faster than gross domestic product (GDP) in the postwar
period. Between 1962 and 2000, corporate equity value relative to GDP nearly doubled. In this paper, we
determine what standard growth theory says the equity value should be in 1962 and 2000, the two years
for which our steady-state assumption is a reasonable one. We find that the actual valuations were close
to the theoretical predictions in both years. The reason for the large run-up in equity value relative to GDP
is that the average tax rate on dividends fell dramatically between 1962 and 2000. We also find that, given
legal constraints that effectively prohibited the holding of stocks as reserves for pension plans, there is
no equity premium puzzle in the postwar period. The average returns on debt and equity are as theory
predicts.




Ellen R. McGrattan                                                 Edward C. Prescott
Research Department                                                Department of Economics
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis                                University of Minnesota
90 Hennepin Avenue                                                 271 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55480                                              Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER                                                           and NBER
(612) 204-5523                                                     (612) 204-5520
erm@ellen.mpls.frb.fed.us                                          prescott@econ.umn.edu
1. Introduction

       U.S. stock prices have increased much faster than gross domestic product (GDP) in

the postwar period. Between 1962 and 2000, corporate equity value relative to GDP nearly

doubled. (See Figure 1.) Stock market analysts view this as puzzling because there has been

little or no change in market fundamentals. The increase in equity values is not the result

of a decrease in the importance of debt financing; in both periods, debt was a little over 3

percent of the value of corporate equity. The increase is not due to an increase in the value

of productive tangible assets owned by corporations relative to GDP; the corporate capital-

output ratio has stayed remarkably constant. The increase is not the result of an increase in

the after-tax corporate profits share of GDP; this share is approximately the same now as it

was in the early 1960s.

       There is another important factor that aﬀects the value of corporate equity, however.

This factor is the U.S. tax system, which changed and changed a lot. Once the change in tax

system is taken into account, we find that the value of corporate equity is very close to the

predictions of theory in both 1962 and 2000.

       The key feature of the tax system that aﬀects the value of corporate equity is the

average tax rate on dividends. This rate has fallen from 44 percent in the 1955—1962 period

to 18 percent in the 1987—2000 period. There are two reasons for the big decline in this rate.

First, there were three important cuts in individual income tax rates between 1962 and 1987.

The first was the 1964 Kennedy tax cut that reduced the highest marginal income tax rate

from 91 percent to 70 percent. Next, there was the 1981 Reagan tax cut that reduced the

highest rate to 50 percent. Finally, there was the 1986 Tax Reform Act that reduced the

highest rate to 33 percent.

       Second, and more importantly, there was a dramatic increase in the share of corporate


                                               1
equity held by non-tax-paying entities. The percentage of corporate equity held by these

entities — namely pension funds, individual retirement accounts, and nonprofit organizations

— increased from a few percent in 1962 to around 50 percent in 2000.

       In the early 1960s virtually no equity was held in non-taxed retirement accounts, in

large part because of strict regulations on fiduciaries. Regulations governing investment by

pension funds were changed in 1974 with the passage of the Employment Retirement Income

Security Act (ERISA).1 Prior to 1974, fiduciaries managing a pension fund portfolio were

liable if the portfolio included equity and the value of this equity fell.2 With ERISA, pension

funds became regulated intermediaries; if regulators approved investments, then the fiduciary

managing the portfolio was not liable for losses. During the period following the change in

law, there was a significant increase in pension fund equity holdings.

       Beginning with ERISA and continuing into the early 1980s, there were major changes

in tax law that fostered individual retirement accounts (IRAs) and defined contribution pen-

sion plans. The funds in these retirement plans are invested in individual accounts, with

the individual typically having considerable latitude in how these funds will be invested. A

consequence of these tax law changes is that these plans grew rapidly in the 1980s and 1990s

with a large share of assets being corporate equity.

       Contributions to most retirement accounts are not taxed and grow tax-free until they

are withdrawn for consumption. Although these funds are taxed upon withdrawal, this tax

is in eﬀect a consumption tax, not a dividend tax. Consequently, the marginal tax rates on

these distributions have no consequence for the steady-state value of corporate equity relative

to GDP.

       Using the basic growth model, we derive a formula for the value of equity. The value

of equity is diﬀerent from the value of corporate productive capital because of taxes. Given


                                              2
U.S. tax policy, the most important tax for pricing equity is the tax on dividend income. In

theory, a decrease in the marginal rate on dividends should increase the price of capital used

in the corporate sector, but leave the quantity of capital unaﬀected. This is exactly what

we observed: prices of equities rose between 1962 and 2000, while the capital-output ratio

remained roughly constant. Furthermore, if the capital-output ratio does not change, then we

would not expect a rise in after-tax corporate earnings as a share of GDP unless the corporate

tax rate fell. Over the postwar period, the corporate tax rate did not fall significantly, and

after-tax earnings remained roughly constant as a share of GDP.

       Another implication of the theory is that the real before-tax return on the stock

market should have been about 8 percent on average, as it was. The real before-tax return

on equity is the sum of three returns: the income return, the anticipated capital gain, and

the unanticipated capital gain. The income return is the ratio of dividend to price. This

ratio has been high, over 3 percent, for much of the postwar period because high tax rates

have implied a low price of equity. Recently it has come way down and is now a little over 1

percent.

       The anticipated capital gain is equal to the growth rate of productive assets, which

was roughly 3.5 percent per year and is now down to around 3.3 percent. The unanticipated

capital gain is the growth in the price of equity due to unanticipated changes in tax rates.

This growth rate has changed, falling from the range of 1 to 2 percent to 0 percent. Adding

these rates, we would expect an 8 percent (e.g., 3+3.5+1.5) real before-tax stock return in

the early postwar period and, barring any further unexpected changes in tax rates, a return

in the future that is a little over 4 percent (e.g., 1+3.3+0).

       This raises the question, why was debt held if equity earned such a high return? In the

early 1960s, over one-third of the 1.1 GDP of debt held directly or indirectly by households


                                               3
was held as pension and life insurance reserves. At that time, almost all of the assets held

in these reserves were debt assets. The reason is that there were legal constraints imposed

on fiduciaries to ensure suﬃcient liquidity for timely distributions and to ensure prudent

investing. A large amount of debt assets were also held directly by households for liquidity

purposes. For some households in the early postwar period, debt assets were their main avenue

for saving because transaction costs made holding a diversified stock portfolio infeasible.

       An important corollary of our findings is that there is no equity premium puzzle in

the postwar period. Mehra and Prescott (1985) found that the high return on equity relative

to debt was puzzling because theory says that the premium for bearing non-diversifiable

risk is small. Their finding lead many to conclude that growth theory cannot account for the

historical facts concerning asset prices and returns, unless a fundamentally diﬀerent preference

ordering is assumed.3 We find that this is not the case once we take into account observed

changes in taxes and regulations.4

       In Section 2, we describe the basic growth model that we use for our analysis. We start

with a version of the model that highlights our main results. We then extend the analysis to

include many features of the U.S. economy. In Section 3, we describe the U.S. data that we

use. In Section 4, we compare the model’s predictions for corporate equity values with the

actual market valuations. Finally, in Section 5, we discuss the implications for asset returns.


2. Theory

       In this section, we derive a formula that relates the value of corporate equity to the

value of the productive assets in the corporate sector.5 We use the value of the productive

assets of U.S. corporations to estimate what the value of their equity should be. If the value

of a firm’s productive assets is lower than the market value of its shares, then we would say



                                               4
that its equity is overvalued. Conversely, if the value of its productive assets is higher than

the market value of its shares, then its equity is undervalued.

       We first present a simple model that highlights our key theoretical results. We include

only personal income taxes and corporate income taxes. We also assume that the economy

has only one sector, a corporate sector. This is all that we need to show how taxes aﬀect the

relation between the value of corporate assets and the value of corporate equity. In the second

step, we extend the analysis to include suﬃcient details of the U.S. economy — especially in

relation to the tax code — to allow us to take the theory to the data. We match the model

up with national income and product account (NIPA) capital stock data from the Survey

of Current Business (SCB) and tax data from the Internal Revenue Service’s Statistics of

Income (SOI). The result is a prediction for the value of corporate equity that does not rely

on any financial data. This prediction can then be compared to the actual stock market

valuation.


A. Income Taxation and the Value of Corporate Equity

       Consider the following model economy. The economy is inhabited by infinitely lived

households with preferences ordered by

             ∞
             X
       max         β t U (ct , `t )                                                        (1)
             t=0


where t indexes time, c is per-capita consumption, and ` is the fraction of productive time

allocated to nonmarket activities. The fraction of time allocated by households to market

activities is denoted by n = 1 − `.6




                                              5
       Each household chooses sequences of consumption and leisure to maximize utility

subject to its budget constraint,

       X                                  X
            pt {ct + Vt (st+1 − st )} =         pt {(1 − τ pers )(dt st + wt nt ) + ξ t }.          (2)
        t                                   t


This constraint says that the present discounted value of expenditures must be less than or

equal to the present discounted value of after-tax income. Expenditures of the household

are consumption and purchases of shares in stocks, Vt (st+1 − st ), where st is the number of

shares held in period t and Vt is the price per share. Income for the households is from three

sources: dividends, wages, and government transfers. We denote dividends per share by d,

the wage rate by w, and government transfers by ξ. The households pay personal taxes on

dividend and wage income. The tax rate is equal to τ pers .

       Firms have capital and hire labor to produce output with a constant-returns-to-scale

production technology,7


       yt = f (km,t , ku,t , zt nt ).                                                               (3)


This specification assumes that firms use both tangible assets, which are measured, km , and

intangible assets, which are unmeasured, ku . Tangible assets include structures, equipment,

inventories, and land. Intangible assets include brand names, patents, and forms of organi-

zational capital. In addition to capital, labor services n are required. The zt ’s are technology

parameters, which are assumed to grow at rate γ.

       Firms choose capital and labor to maximize:


        ∞
        X
               pt {f (km,t , ku,t , zt nt ) − wt nt − xm,t − xu,t
        t=0
                        −τ corp [f(kmt , kut , zt nt ) − wt nt − δ m km,t − xu,t ] }(1 − τ pers )   (4)

                                                          6
        s.t.       km,t+1 = (1 − δ m )km,t + xm,t                                                     (5)

                   ku,t+1 = (1 − δu )ku,t + xu,t                                                      (6)



where xm is new investment in measured tangible capital and xu is new investment in un-

measured intangible capital.

        We are interested in the competitive equilibrium for this economy. A requirement for

equilibrium is that all markets clear. Labor markets clear if `t + nt = 1. The goods market

clears if


        ct + xm,t + xu,t = f (km,t , ku,t , zt nt ).                                                  (7)


Finally, dividends of the household are equal to what firms have after paying wages, paying

taxes, and making new investments; that is,


        dt = (1 − τ corp ) [f (km,t , ku,t , zt nt ) − wt nt − δ m km,t − xu,t ] − km,t+1 + km,t .    (8)


The number of shares outstanding is one so equity markets clear if st = 1.

        In a competitive equilibrium, the following relations hold:



                pt    Vt+1 + (1 − τ pers )dt+1
                    =                                                                                 (9)
               pt+1             Vt
                pt
                    = (1 − τ corp )(f1 (km,t+1 , ku,t+1 , zt+1 nt+1 ) − δ m ) + 1                    (10)
               pt+1
                pt
                    = f2 (km,t+1 , ku,t+1 , zt+1 nt+1 ) − δ u + 1.                                   (11)
               pt+1



Conditions (10) and (11) say, among other things, that the returns to stocks and the two

types of capital must be equal.

                                                         7
Proposition 1. In equilibrium, the value of corporate equity is


       Vt = (1 − τ pers ) [km,t+1 + (1 − τ corp )ku,t+1 ] .                                    (12)


Proof: This follows from the definition of dividends in (8) and relations (9)-(11).

       The price of tangible capital for the shareholders is (1 − τ pers ), not one. It is less than

one because a dollar reinvested is not taxed, but a dollar distributed is taxed. The price of

intangible capital is (1 − τ pers )(1 − τ corp ). Thus, intangible capital is cheaper than tangible

capital when there is a tax on corporate income. The reason is that investments in intangible

capital are expensed and reduce taxable corporate income.

       We note that our formula in (12) is not the standard formula in the public finance

literature.8 The standard formula for the price of measured capital is (1 − τ pers )/(1 − τ cg ),

where τ cg is a tax on accrued capital gains. In the U.S. tax system, however, capital gains

are taxed upon realization. The price of measured capital is (1 − τ pers ) if corporations make

distributions to households by paying dividends, and it is (1 − τ cg ) if corporations make

distributions by buying back shares. If a combination of the two is used, the price will be

intermediate to these two prices.

       If we divide both sides of (12) by output, we have a relation between the ratio of

corporate equity relative to GDP, V /y, and the capital-output ratios. In the United States,

there was a large increase in the ratio of corporate equity to GDP, but little change in the

capital-output ratios. We argue that these observations are consistent with theory. The large

increase in equity values is the result of a dramatic decline in personal income tax rates. As

we show in the next proposition, a decline in tax rates has an eﬀect on the price of equity

but not the capital-output ratios.


Proposition 2. Steady-state ratios km /y and ku /y do not change with a change in τ pers .

                                                      8
Proof: To see why, we need only consider equations (10) and (11). By our assumption that f

is a constant-returns-to-scale technology, we can rewrite its derivatives f1 and f2 as functions

of km /y and ku /y only. The left-hand sides of these equations, both given by pt /pt+1 , can be

written in terms of the growth rate γ, the discount factor β, and the parameters of U (·, ·).

This yields two equations in the two unknown capital-output ratios. The equations do not

depend on the personal income tax rate τ pers . They do depend on the corporate income tax

rate τ corp .

         In this economy, to get a large rise in the value of equities with little change in capital-

output ratios, we would need a large fall in the personal tax rate and little or no change in

the corporate tax rate.


B. The U.S. Tax System and the Value of Corporate Equity

         We now extend the model to include details relevant to the U.S. economy. There are

two main extensions. First, we allow for two sectors — corporate and noncorporate. Even

though our primary focus is on corporate equity, the corporate sector accounts for less than

60 percent of U.S. value added and has only one-third of tangible assets. Second, we include

the primary sources of U.S. tax revenues. We include taxes on consumption, taxes on labor

income, taxes on dividend income, taxes on corporate income, and taxes on property.9 We

will show that the basic pricing formula does not change for this more general model economy.

         We will denote the corporate sector as sector 1 and the noncorporate sector as sector

2. The outputs of these two sectors are inputs in production of a composite good that can

be used for consumption and investment,


         ct + gt + x1m,t + x1u,t + x2,t ≤ yt = F (y1,t , y2,t )                                 (13)


where t indexes time, c is private consumption, g is government consumption, x1m is gross

                                                      9
investment in tangible capital in the corporate sector (sector 1), x1u is gross investment in

intangible capital in the corporate sector, x2 is gross investment in the noncorporate sector

(sector 2), and F (y1 , y2 ) is total output.

       We assume that the only inputs used in the noncorporate sector are tangible capital

and labor. R&D takes place in the pharmaceutical company but not at the corner drugstore.

The noncorporate production technology is therefore simpler:


       y2,t ≤ f nc (k2,t , zt n2,t ).                                                                            (14)


Here y2 is sector output, k2 is capital services, n2 is labor services, and z is a technology

parameter that grows at the rate γ. With two sectors, output in the corporate sector is now

denoted


       y1,t ≤ f c (k1m,t , k1u,t , zt n1,t ).                                                                    (15)


Here y1 is the output of sector 1, k1m is capital services for measured tangible capital, k1u is

capital services for unmeasured intangible capital, n1 is labor services, and z is a technology

parameter which is assumed to be the same in the two sectors.

       As before, corporate firms choose capital and labor sequences to maximize


        ∞
        X
              pt {p1,t y1,t − wt n1,t − x1m,t − x1u,t                                                            (16)
        t=0
                      −τ 1 [p1,t y1,t − wt n1,t − δ̂ 1m k̂1m,t − τ 1k k1m,t − x1u,t ] − τ 1k k1m,t }(1 − τ d )



subject to constraints (15) and



       k1m,t+1 = [(1 − δ 1m )k1m,t + x1m,t ]/(1 + η)                                                             (17)

                                                         10
       k̂1m,t+1 = [(1 − δ̂ 1m )k̂1m,t + x1m,t ]/(1 + η)                                      (18)

       k1u,t+1 = [(1 − δ 1u )k1u,t + x1u,t ]/(1 + η)                                         (19)



where p1 is the price of corporate goods, w is the wage rate, τ 1 is the corporate tax rate,

τ 1k is the tax rate on corporate property, k1m is the actual tangible capital stock, and k̂1m

is the book value of tangible capital.10 The right side of the capital accumulation equations

(17)-(19) are divided by the growth in population, (1 + η), because stocks and investments

are in per capita units.

       In writing the corporate firm’s problem, we have distinguished depreciation used in the

firm’s calculation of corporate income tax, δ̂ 1m k̂1m , and true economic depreciation, δ1m k1m .

These values are also distinguished in the U.S. national accounts.

       Noncorporate firms solve a similar problem but face a diﬀerent set of taxes. The

problem that they solve is

             ∞
             X
       max         pt {p2,t y2,t − wt n2,t − x2,t − τ 2k k2,t }(1 − τ 2 )                    (20)
             t=0


subject to the production technology (14) and


       k2,t+1 = [(1 − δ 2 )k2,t + x2,t ]/(1 + η)                                             (21)


where p2 is the price of noncorporate goods, τ 2 is the tax rate on noncorporate income, and

τ 2k is the tax rate on property in the noncorporate sector.

       Firms make distributions to households, who are the shareholders in the case of corpo-

rate firms, or proprietors, in the case of noncorporate firms. The household maximizes utility




                                                        11
subject to its budget constraint,


                ∞
                X
       max            β t U(ct , `t )Nt                                                                      (22)
                t=0
                X∞
         s.t.         pt {(1 + τ c )ct + V1s,t (s1,t+1 − s1,t ) + V2s,t (s2,t+1 − s2,t ) + Vb,t bt+1 }
                t=0
                                  ∞
                                  X
                              ≤         pt {(1 − τ d )d1,t s1,t + d2,t s2,t + bt + (1 − τ n )wt nt + ξ t }   (23)
                                  t=0




with nt + `t = 1 and bt ≥ b̄t . In this version of the problem, we also allow for population

growth. We assume that there are Nt = (1 + η)t household members in period t. Per capita

distributions from corporate and noncorporate firms are denoted d1,t and d2,t , respectively.

The values of shares held in corporate and noncorporate firms are V1s,t s1,t and V2s,t s2,t , re-

spectively, where V is the price and s is the number of shares held. The total number of

shares outstanding is normalized to 1 in each sector. Government bonds are also held and

denoted by b.11 The price of these bonds is Vb . Taxes are paid on corporate dividends at

rate τ d . Taxes are also paid on wage income at rate τ n . Earlier we assumed that these rates

were the same. But, in comparing this model to the U.S. economy, we want to allow for

the fact that the marginal rate paid on dividend income is higher than that paid on labor

income since it is paid on average by households in higher income brackets. Transfers of the

government in (23) are denoted by ξ.

       The constraint on debt in (23) is a reduced-form way to capture certain restrictions

that historically were imposed on U.S. fiduciaries. Pension fund managers face stiﬀ penalties

for imprudence and misconduct. Prior to the ERISA in 1974, there were few guidelines on

what constituted imprudent behavior. Fiduciary breaches were dealt with in the U.S. courts,

case by case. During this period, pension fund portfolios were primarily debt assets. Penalties

were likely to be avoidable if pension fund managers simply chose debt assets with diﬀerent

                                                          12
maturities. This choice would facilitate the timing of distributions and would avoid large

movements in asset returns. ERISA clarified fiduciary responsibilities and thus encouraged

greater investment in equity assets. We think of this change in the law as a change in the

constraints on debt holdings.12

       If debt constraints are not binding, then the equilibrium return on debt is equal to the

interest rate, which is pinned down by preference parameters. If the constraints are binding,

however, then the equilibrium return on debt falls below the interest rate.

       Government production is included in the noncorporate sector. Government purchases

and transfers are financed by tax receipts and debt issues. The period t government budget

constraint must be satisfied each period and is given by



       gt + ξ t + bt ≤ Vb,t bt+1

                       − τ 1 [p1,t y1,t − wt n1,t − δ 1m k1m,t − τ 1k k1m,t − x1u,t ] − τ 1k k1m,t

                       − τ 2 [p2,t y2,t − wt n2,t − δ 2 k2,t − τ 2k k2,t ] − τ 2k k2,t

                       + τ c ct + τ d d1,t s1,t + τ n wt nt .



Note that tax rates are constant and proportional in our model economy.


Proposition 3. The total value of corporate equity, Vt ≡ V1s,t Nt , is


       Vt = (1 − τ d ) [(1 − τ δ )K1m,t+1 + (1 − τ 1 )K1u,t+1 ]                                      (24)


where capital letters denote aggregates,

                   τ 1 δ̂ 1m (δ̂ 1m − δ 1m )
       τδ =                                                                                          (25)
              (δ̂ 1m + i)(δ̂ 1m + γ + η)

                                                        13
and i is equal to the after-tax real return on the steady-state balanced growth path.


Proof: See Appendix A.


       If the rate of depreciation allowed by the IRS is equal to the true rate of depreciation,

the formula in (24) is the same as that derived earlier in (12). This follows from the fact

that τ d is the personal income tax on dividends and τ 1 is the corporate income tax. It is

important to note that no other tax rates aﬀect the corporate equity value.

       In most years, depreciation allowances for corporate tax filers exceed true economic

depreciation. In other words, corporations can subtract δ̂ 1m k̂1m from their profits when com-

puting their taxable income, where δ̂ 1m k̂1m > δ1m k1m . The more generous the depreciation

allowances, the lower the consumption cost of tangible capital.


Proposition 4. k1m /y and k1u /y do not change with a change in τ d .


Proof: See Appendix A.


       We find, as in the simpler model with only income taxes, that the steady state capital-

output ratio does not change if we change the tax rate on personal dividend income, τ d . In

fact, if the eﬀective tax rate on labor income (τ n ) does not change when we change τ d and

if tax payments are lump-sum rebated, then we find that the levels of capital and output do

not change. This says that a change in the tax rate on dividend income aﬀects only the price

of corporate equity and nothing else. This will be important when we consider the U.S. data.


3. U.S. Tax Rates and Capital Stocks

       We analyze two time periods: the period after the Korean War and before the Kennedy

tax cuts and the period after the Tax Reform Act of 1986. The specific years that we use

                                              14
are 1955 through 1962 and 1987 through 2000. During these periods, there were no major

changes in tax policy or regulations concerning asset markets. Thus, we view these periods

as stable and suitable for steady-state analysis. We also think that it is reasonable to assume

that individuals in the early 1960s did not anticipate the large tax and regulatory changes

that would come later.

       For this analysis, we need measures of U.S. tax rates and U.S. capital stocks. We use

these measures in our key formula, equation (24).


A. Tax Rates

       There are three rates that we need to estimate in order to calculate our predicted

equity value. The first and quantitatively most important rate is the tax rate on dividend

income, τ d . Dividends are taxed as ordinary income, and individual income tax rates —

especially for the top income brackets — have changed dramatically since World War II. The

top marginal rate in 1947 was 91 percent; it remained at this level until 1962, except for a

slight increase to 92 percent in 1952 and 1953. The Kennedy tax cut reduced the top rate to

70 percent. The Reagan administration further decreased it, first to 50 percent in 1981 and

then to 33 percent after 1986. Under Clinton, the top rate rose to 39.6 percent.


Tax Rate on Dividend Income

       For our purposes, the relevant tax rate is the marginal rate paid on an additional

dollar of dividend income. An empirical issue is how to estimate this rate given there are

many types of taxpayers in the U.S. economy and only one type in our model. Using taxable

incomes reported to the IRS, we compute a marginal rate for each type of filer reported in the

Statistics of Income and then weight each rate by the fraction of dividend income that this

group earned. In eﬀect, we compute an average marginal rate with the weights conditional

                                              15
on the amount of dividend income earned. Thus, if the only group that earned dividend

income was the highest income group, then the tax rate we would compute would be the top

marginal rate.

      We use both 1040 returns filed by individuals and 1041 returns filed by fiduciaries. For

individuals, we can compute marginal rates by adjusted income class and by marital status.

For fiduciaries, we compute tax rates by income class. In Appendix B, Table B1, we report

the marginal rates for the 1040 filers and 1041 filers for each year and provide more details

on our computation.

      The average marginal rates for 1040 filers fell in the range of 45 to 48 percent during

the early period that we consider. The average rate was 46.6 percent. It is important to note

that the rates remain roughly constant. Our analysis is only appropriate for stable policy

regimes. In the later years, for which we have data through 1997, we see rates in the range

of 24 to 29 percent with the average equal to 26.3. Again, we see that the rates stay roughly

constant — but at a much lower level than in the 1950s and 1960s. To compute an overall

rate, we average the estimates for 1040 and 1041 forms, again using the dividend incomes

earned as weights. Quantitatively, the averaged rates are close to the rates from the 1040

forms since most dividend income is earned directly by individuals.

      The IRS forms 1040 and 1041 cover personal income taxes paid to the federal gov-

ernment. There has been a shift over time with federal income tax receipts falling and state

and local income tax receipts rising. So that we do not bias our estimates, we adjust the

rates to account for state and local taxation. In doing so, we assume that the tax schedules

are similarly sloped. Thus, we can simply multiply the rates by the ratio of total personal

income tax receipts to federal personal income tax receipts. In 1955—1962, state and local

tax receipts were roughly 5 percent of all personal receipts. In 1987—1997, this average grew


                                             16
to 19 percent.

        We make a second adjustment to our rates. We multiply our average marginal rates

in each year by the fraction of corporate equity outside of nontaxed accounts. Income from

equity held by pension funds, individual retirement accounts, and nonprofit organizations

is not taxed. In Appendix B, Table B2, we report the fraction of equity held in nontaxed

accounts by category. As is clear from the table, there was little equity sheltered in these

types of accounts in the late 1950s and early 1960s. More recently, we see that a lot of

equity is tax-sheltered. The total in the period 1987—1997 is close to 50 percent. Thus, it is

quantitatively important in the later period.

        We should note that the tax rate on dividends in the case of tax-deferred retirement

accounts is zero even though the contributions are taxed when they are withdrawn. Because

wage income is reduced by the amount of the contribution, one dollar invested in the equity

fund of the retirement account costs (1 − τ pers )V , where τ pers is the personal income tax rate.

When d of it is withdrawn, the household keeps (1 − τ pers )d. In terms of pricing equity, these

taxes have no eﬀect. Eﬀectively, the tax on the withdrawn income is a tax on consumption

and is like τ c .

        Our estimate for the average marginal tax rate on dividend income is 45.4 percent

over the period 1955—1962 and 44.2 percent in 1962. (See Table B1 in Appendix B.) Our

estimate in the period 1987—1997 is 16.9 percent on average and 18.2 percent in 1997. We

may be overstating the rates in the later period because we have not taken into account the

eﬀect of tax-managed funds. In McGrattan and Prescott (2000), we assumed the current rate

on dividends is eﬀectively zero because individuals can avoid taxes on dividends and capital

gains by managing their portfolios in an eﬃcient way. But it is diﬃcult to estimate how

much more tax-sheltering can and is being done. Thus, we take 18.2 percent as a baseline


                                                17
and discuss later how changes in this estimate aﬀect our results.


Tax Rate on Corporate Income

       The second tax rate that we compute is the corporate income tax rate, τ 1 . Corporate

tax rates are constructed as the ratio of the NIPA corporate profits tax liability to corporate

profits. There has been some decline in this ratio between the early postwar period and today,

but it has not been as dramatic as the decline in dividend tax rates. The rates in 1962 and

2000 are 45.2 percent and 36.2 percent, respectively. Thus, the tax on dividends and the tax

on corporate profits are about the same level in 1962, but are quite diﬀerent in 2000. In 2000,

the tax rate on dividends is half of the corporate income tax rate. If we used average rates,

it would be even more dramatic because the average corporate income tax rate in 1987—2000

was 39.1 percent and the average tax on dividends was 16.9 percent.


Depreciation Allowances

       Finally, we have to make a small adjustment to the price of tangible capital because

of the tax treatment of depreciation. In particular, we need to compute τ δ . (See equation

(25).) In Appendix A, we derived a relation for τ δ ; in Appendix C, we provide details on

our estimation of the rate. It turns out that the adjustments to the price are small. In the

period 1955—62, the price must be multiplied by 1− .002, and in 1987—2000, the price must be

multiplied by 1 − .021. The adjustment has a larger eﬀect on our estimate of the intangible

capital stock.

       We turn next to our estimates of capital stocks.




                                              18
B. Capital Stocks

       Corporate productive capital includes tangible capital — like factories, oﬃce buildings,

and machines — and intangible capital — like patents, brand names, and firm-specific human

and organizational capital. A good measure of the value of these assets must include not

only those owned by U.S. corporations in the United States itself, but also those owned by

U.S. corporations’ foreign subsidiaries. In Appendix C, we describe how we estimate capital

stock values, and in this section, we describe our estimates. The values we describe are the

conventional values, namely resource costs.


Tangible Capital

       Estimates of the value of some corporate assets are reported by the U.S. government.

The Commerce Department’s Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) provides estimates of

the value of tangible corporate assets located in the United States. Adding in land and

inventories, we have an average estimate for K1m of 1.092 times GDP for 1955—1962. In

1987—2000, out estimate is 1.027 times GDP. The fact that these capital-output ratios have

changed little has led many to conclude that the recent rise in equity values is puzzling.


Intangible Capital

       To construct our estimate of V , we also need values for intangible capital. To compute

the value of intangible capital, we exploit the equilibrium conditions that equate after-tax

returns for all assets. (See Appendix A.) This condition along with NIPA corporate profits,

the stock of tangible assets, and the after-tax interest rate obtained from the noncorporate

sector suﬃce to determine the stock of intangible capital. In the calculations, there are

two key adjustments. First, intangible investment must be added to the NIPA concept of

profits. Second, the return to tangible capital has to be adjusted to reflect the fact that IRS

                                              19
depreciation is not equal to true depreciation. (See Appendix C.)

       When we work through these details, we find an estimate for K1u of 0.422 times GDP

in the period 1955—62 and 0.819 times GDP in 1987—2000. These estimates indicate that

there has been a doubling in the stock of intangible capital. We may be overstating the

increase somewhat because it depends crucially on our estimates of the interest rate less the

growth rate. Our empirical estimates imply a decline in the after-tax interest rate less the

growth rate, i − γ − η, from 1.1 percent to 0.8 percent. This is significant given the fact that

we divide profits by this term. But we compute these rates over short time periods and may

have a noisy estimate of the diﬀerence.


U.S. Foreign Subsidiary Capital

       We now have estimates of tangible and intangible capital located in the United States.

We also need to include tangible and intangible capital of foreign subsidiaries because our

measure of the total market value of U.S. corporations includes the value of their foreign

subsidiaries. Thus, there is a mismatch between the BEA capital stock data and the corporate

equity value of the Flow of Funds Accounts.

       To avoid this mismatch, we construct a measure of the capital stock of foreign sub-

sidiaries using data on foreign profits. In measuring foreign profits, the BEA assumes the

same tax treatment for foreign and domestic capital. We do the same. Thus, we make the

assumption that the ratio of after-tax profits to the capital stock is the same for domestic and

foreign operations. Therefore, we can estimate the value of total foreign corporate capital

before taxation of distributions using observations on domestic and foreign after-tax profits

and domestic capital. The result is an after-corporate-tax estimate of value of foreign capital,

which we denote by K ∗ , equal to 0.152 times GDP for the period 1955—62 and 0.437 times



                                              20
GDP for the period 1987—2000. These estimate of foreign capital are then included in our

formula as follows:

                      h                                           i
                                                                ∗
       Vt = (1 − τ d ) (1 − τ δ )K1m,t+1 + (1 − τ 1 )K1u,t+1 + Kt+1 .                      (26)


       We can now add up terms and compare the theoretical predictions for corporate equity

with the actual market valuations.


4. Theory and Data

       In Table 1, we report our main findings. Theory’s prediction for the value of corporate

equity in 1962 is 0.82 times GDP. Theory’s prediction for the value of corporate equity in 2000

is 1.61 times GDP. Thus, our estimates of tax rates and capital stocks imply a doubling of the

value of corporate equity. This is very close to what actually occurred in the United States.

The actual values in 1962 and 2000 were 0.83 times GDP and 1.51 times GDP, respectively.

       We compute the predicted contributions from the three types of capital. The after-tax

value of domestic tangible capital was 0.608 times GDP in the early period but grew to 0.822

times GDP. This increase was due entirely to the drop in dividend tax rates. The value of

domestic intangible capital was 0.129 times GDP and grew to 0.427 times GDP. Close to half

of this increase was due to the fall in tax rates, both the rate on dividend income and the

rate on corporate profits. Finally, there was a significant increase in the value of capital in

foreign subsidiaries from 0.085 to 0.357, but given our data, it is not possible to know for

sure the main source of the change. Our analysis and NIPA measurement assumes that the

tax treatment is the same for both domestic and foreign capital.

       If we use our predictions for corporate equity, we can compute a price-earnings ratio.

We report predicted and actual price-earnings ratios in Table 1. In our calculations, we use

observed after-tax earnings as is done in the finance literature. We estimate a ratio of 14.1 in

                                                21
1962 and 29.8 in 2000. These estimates are very close to the actual ratios of 14.2 and 28.0,

respectively. They are also close to estimates of Campbell and Shiller (2001), who look only

at the S&P 500 companies.


Importance of Decline in Dividend Tax Rate

       Quantitatively, the most important change over the postwar period was the decline

in the dividend tax rate. If the rate had remained at 44.2 percent, our prediction for the

corporate equity value would have been 1.10 times GDP rather than 1.61 times GDP. (See

Appendix C for details.)


Importance of Increase in Intangible Capital

       Hall (2000) has argued that a rise in the stock of intangible capital accounts for the

large increase in equity prices. We estimate that the stock of intangible capital doubled,

and its price rose significantly because of the decline in tax rates. If the stock of intangible

capital had remained at its 1955—1962 average level of 0.422 times GDP, our prediction for

the corporate equity value would have been 1.34 times GDP instead of 1.61 times GDP. Thus,

the change in the stock of intangible capital can account for only a modest part of the large

rise in equity values since the 1960s. It is part of the story, but quantitatively by far the most

important factor is the change in the tax on dividends.


Importance of Increase in Foreign Capital

       The stock of foreign capital nearly tripled, but it is still much smaller than domestic

capital. If the foreign stock had remained at 0.152 times GDP, then our prediction for the

corporate equity value would have been 1.37 times GDP.

       The overall message of Table 1 is that taxation, especially taxation of dividends, can

                                               22
account for the large rise in the value of U.S. corporations.


5. Implications for Asset Returns

       A large change in tax rates on dividends has a significant eﬀect on equity returns.

Note, first, that what is typically reported by organizations like the Center for Research in

Security Prices (CRSP) or Ibbotson Associates is

       Vt+1 + dt+1
                   −1                                                                        (27)
            Vt

whereas the relevant return for households is the post-tax return

       Vt+1 + (1 − τ d )dt+1
                             − 1.                                                            (28)
                Vt

If the theory can account for the large rise in equity values, and if dividends are of the same

order of magnitude as in the data, then theory can account for the high reported returns of

the postwar.

       The change in tax rates on dividends can deliver a large increase in equity values.

Dividends relative to GDP are roughly constant in the United States for much of the postwar

period. The same is true in the model since steady-state values of capital and investment do

not depend on the tax rate on dividends. We need only pick production parameters that give

roughly the right capital-output ratios.

       What then is our prediction for pre-tax returns, namely (27), reported by CRSP?

This return is the sum of capital gains, Vt+1 /Vt − 1, and dividend yields, dt+1 /Vt . The capital

gains has two components: the anticipated gain and the unanticipated gain. The anticipated

capital gain is the trend growth rate of productive assets. In the 1950s and early 1960s, we

estimated this growth to be about 3.5 percent per year. It is currently a bit lower at 3.3

percent.

                                               23
       The unanticipated capital gain is the growth in the price of equity due to unanticipated

changes in tax rates. Most of this gain was due to the decline in tax rates on dividend income,

but there was also a decline due to the fall in corporate income tax rates. Furthermore, part

of the increase in foreign subsidiary capital might also have been due to the lowering of trade

barriers, which increases the price of equity.

       As a baseline, consider the decline in the marginal rate on dividend income alone. It

fell from 44 percent to 18 percent in 40 years. This decline alone implies that the growth

in equity prices will be roughly [(1 − .18)/(1 − .44)]1/40 or 1 percent per year higher than

growth in GDP. If we add in all tax changes and assume a doubling of the price, then the

unanticipated gain is 21/40 or 1.8 percent per year higher than growth in GDP.

       The last component of the return is the dividend yield. In the early 1960s, the dividend

yield was about 3 percent. It is currently a little over 1 percent. Most of this change is due

to the rise in equity prices, not to a decline in dividend income relative to GDP, which is

consistent with our theory. Adding the dividend yield to the capital gains, we would expect

an average pre-tax return after prices started falling in the range of 7.5 to 8.3 percent. These

predictions are consistent with the estimates of CRSP.

       Eventually, the equity returns have to come down as the dividend yield falls and the

tax rates level out. Our prediction for future returns is a little over 4 percent.

       If we additionally assume that households had a liquidity motive for holding debt and

constraints on their retirement assets, we predict low bond returns and large equity premia.13

In the first half of the postwar period, pension funds and life insurance reserves were almost

entirely debt. There are good reasons for this. There were no clear guidelines for fiduciaries,

who could be penalized for imprudent investments. In 1974, ERISA was passed and fiduciary

responsibilities and liabilities were specified very clearly. Before 1970, less than 10 percent of


                                                 24
retirement assets were equity assets. Today, they are close to 50 percent. There has been a

significant shift over the postwar period.


6. Conclusions

         With the large reduction in individual income tax rates, the increased opportunities

to hold equity in nontaxed pension plans, and the increases in intangible and foreign capital,

theory predicts a large increase in equity prices between 1962 and 2000. In fact, theory

predicts a doubling of the value of equity relative to GDP and a doubling of the price-earnings

ratio.

         A corollary of this finding is that there is no equity premium puzzle in the postwar

period. Mehra and Prescott (1985) found that the high return on equity relative to debt was

not due to a premium for bearing non-diversifiable risk. This led them to label the diﬀerence

in average returns a puzzle. They did not consider changes in tax and regulatory policies

or institutions aﬀecting asset markets. We do, and we find that the data — at least over the

postwar period — are not puzzling.




                                              25
                              Appendix A. Proofs of Propositions


        In this appendix, we provide proofs for propositions 3 and 4 of Section 2.

Proof of Proposition 3. Use (17) and (19) to replace x1m,t and x1u,t , respectively, in the

corporate firm’s problem (16). The maximization problem then is to maximize (16) subject

to


        (1 + η)k1m,t+1 − (1 − δ 1m )k1m,t = (1 + η)k̂1m,t+1 − (1 − δ̂ 1m )k̂1m,t .             (A1)


The first-order conditions for the firm with respect to k1m,t+1 , k̂1m,t+1 , and k1u,t+1 are


                                          c
                                                                        Ã            !
                 pt    (1 − τ 1 )(p1,t+1 f1,t+1 − τ 1k )               1 − λt+1
        (1 + η)      =                                   + (1 − δ 1m )                         (A2)
                pt+1                1 − λt                              1 − λt
                 pt    h                            i
        (1 + η)      = λt+1 (1 − δ̂ 1m ) + τ 1 δ̂ 1m /λt                                       (A3)
                pt+1
                 pt            c
        (1 + η)      = p1,t+1 f2,t+1 + 1 − δ 1u                                                (A4)
                pt+1


                                                         c
where λt is the multiplier on (A1) normalized by pt and fj,t is the partial derivative of

f c (k1m,t , k1u,t , zt n1,t ) with respect to its jth argument.

        From the household’s problem, we can derive

         pt    V1s,t+1 + (1 − τ d )d1,t+1
             =                                                                                 (A5)
        pt+1             V1s,t

which relates the inverse of the marginal rate of substitution to the gross return on equity.

        Multiply (A2) by (1 − τ d )(1 − λt )k1m,t+1 , (A3) by (1 − τ d )λt k̂1m,t+1 , and (A4) by

(1 − τ d )(1 − τ 1 )k1u,t+1 . The resulting equation is consistent with (A5) if and only if

                                  h                                                  i
        V1s,t = (1 − τ d )(1 + η) (1 − λt )k1m,t+1 + λt k̂1m,t+1 + (1 − τ 1 )k1u,t+1 .         (A6)

                                                     26
       We now show that on a balanced growth path


       (1 − λ)k1m,t+1 + λk̂1m,t+1 = (1 − τ δ )k1m,t+1                                    (A7)


where τ δ is defined in (25). On a balanced growth path, the net interest rate, which we

denote as i, is equal to (1 + η)pt /pt+1 − 1. Using (A3), we have

             τ 1 δ̂ 1m
       λ=              .                                                                 (A8)
            i + δ̂ 1m

Using (A1), we have

                    Ã                             !
                        (1 + η)(1 + γ) − 1 + δ 1m
       k̂1m,t+1 =                                  k1m,t+1 .                             (A9)
                        (1 + η)(1 + γ) − 1 + δ̂ 1m

Substituting (A8) and (A9) into the left-hand side of (A7) gives the expression for τ δ .14

Substituting (A7) into (A6) gives us the expression for the equity price that we seek.


Proof of Proposition 4. Since we assume that it is constant, the tax rate on dividend

income, τ d , only aﬀects the household first-order condition relating the marginal rate of

substitution and the return on equity. See (A5). It appears in no other first-order condition

of the households and no first-order conditions of the firms. To compute the steady-state

quantities for this economy, (A5) is not used. Therefore, the capital-output ratios do not

depend on τ d .




                                                      27
                     Appendix B. Tax Rates on Dividend Income


        In this appendix, we describe how we estimate tax rates on dividend income for the

periods 1955—1962 and 1987—1997. The data for 1997 are the latest available.15 The sources

of our data in this exercise are the Internal Revenue Service’s (IRS) Statistics of Income

(SOI), the Bureau of Economic Analysis’ national income and product accounts (NIPA) in

the Survey of Current Business (SCB), the Federal Reserve Board’s Flow of Funds Accounts

of the United States, and the Investment Company Institute’s Mutual Fund Fact Book.

        Personal taxes on dividend income are paid by individuals who file the 1040 form with

the IRS and by fiduciaries who file the 1041 form. The IRS compiles information from these

tax forms in its Statistics of Income. It reports sources of income and taxable income from

the filed returns for many income categories. In the case of individual returns (1040), the IRS

also reports information by marital status: married filing jointly, married filing separately,

single, surviving spouse, or head of household.

        From the SOI data, we can construct the marginal tax rate paid by a typical filer

in each income and marital category. For each group, we take reported taxable income for

a typical filer, and we use the IRS tax schedule relevant to this group. To compute an

average marginal rate in a given year, we weight the rate for each income-marital group by

the fraction of dividend income earned by this group.16 In the case of nontaxable returns,

we use a marginal tax rate of 0 and the dividend income these filers report. In Table B1, we

report the results of these computations for the years 1955 through 1962 and 1987 through

1997.

        For fiduciary returns, we have much less data available. We have statistics for even

years in the early period and for 1997 only in the later period. For the tax rates in the early

odd years, we use the tax rates in the subsequent year. For example, for the tax rate in 1955,

                                              28
we use our estimate from 1956. In the later period, we use the 1997 tax rate in all years.

       To construct a single rate for both types of returns, we use the fraction of dividend

income reported on the 1040s and the 1041s to weight the respective tax rates. We have to

estimate the taxable dividend income on the 1041s because part of the income is distributed

to individuals (who then report it on their Form 1040). We know the total amount of income

distributed. We assume that all types of income (dividends, interest, etc.) are distributed

proportionally. Taxable dividend income for a particular 1041 filer is therefore assumed to

be total dividend income multiplied by the fraction of income that is not distributed. The

average of the 1040 rates and 1041 rates is reported under “average marginal rate for both

1040 and 1041.”

       Income taxes are also paid to state and local governments. To adjust for state and

local taxes in a particular year, we multiply our estimate of the average marginal rate in

that year by the ratio of total personal income tax receipts to federal personal income tax

receipts. Data on receipts are taken from SCB NIPA Tables 3.2 and 3.3. This is a reasonable

procedure for adjusting the rates if federal, state, and local tax schedules have similar slopes.

       To get our final estimates, we make one final adjustment. We multiply the marginal

rates by the fraction of equity held outside of tax-sheltered accounts. In Table B2, we report

fractions of total equity held in sheltered pension funds, IRAs, and portfolios of tax-exempt

nonprofit organizations.

       Data on non-IRA pension funds are taken from the Flow of Funds Accounts. To

estimate the equity holdings in these funds, we add corporate equities of private pension

funds (FOF Table L.119), state and local government employee retirement funds (FOF Table

L.120), and tax-exempt life insurance reserves (FOF Table B.100e).

       Some corporate equity in the pension funds are held in the form of mutual funds. We

                                               29
estimate the equity fraction of mutual fund holding by taking the ratio of all mutual fund

equity to total mutual fund assets (FOF Tables B.100 and B.100e).

       To estimate equity holdings of IRA accounts, we use data reported in the Investment

Company Institute’s Mutual Fund Fact Book. It reports total IRA asset holdings back to

1981. Our estimate of the share of equity holdings is 77 percent, which is the actual share

the Institute reports for 2000.

       The third category of nontaxed equity is equity held by nonprofit organizations. These

data are reported in the Flow of Funds Accounts for the years 1987—1997. Adding the retire-

ment equity and the nonprofit equity, we get our estimate of the fraction of equity that is

tax-sheltered. We use this estimate to adjust our marginal tax rate. This is how we get the

last column of Table B1.




                                             30
          Table B1. Derivation of the Tax Rates on Dividend Income, 1955-62 and 1987-97

                                Average Marginal Rate                  Average Marginal Adjustment for             Adjustment for
                                                                        Rate for Both   State and Local            Tax-Sheltered
        Year                Form 1040             Form 1041a            1040 & 1041 b
                                                                                         Income Taxes                Accounts

        1955                   47.9                   34.4                   46.5                  48.5                   46.8
        1956                   47.8                   34.4                   46.4                  48.6                   46.9
        1957                   46.7                   29.5                   44.9                  47.1                   45.2
        1958                   46.1                   29.5                   44.3                  46.6                   44.6
        1959                   47.7                   31.7                   46.1                  48.7                   46.4
        1960                   45.1                   31.7                   43.7                  46.3                   43.8
        1961                   46.0                   33.6                   44.7                  47.7                   44.9
        1962                   45.1                   33.6                   43.9                  47.0                   44.2
       Avg. 1955-62            46.6                   32.3                   45.1                  47.5                   45.4

        1987                   28.3                   36.3                   28.9                  35.2                   18.5
        1988                   24.9                   36.3                   25.8                  31.5                   17.2
        1989                   24.3                   36.3                   25.2                  31.0                   16.7
        1990                   24.3                   36.3                   25.2                  31.0                   15.2
        1991                   24.7                   36.3                   25.6                  31.8                   16.6
        1992                   24.8                   36.3                   25.7                  32.2                   16.7
        1993                   26.5                   36.3                   27.3                  34.1                   17.0
        1994                   26.7                   36.3                   27.4                  34.2                   15.8
        1995                   27.4                   36.3                   28.1                  34.9                   16.8
        1996                   28.9                   36.3                   29.5                  36.3                   17.5
        1997                   29.0                   36.3                   29.6                  36.2                   18.2
       Avg. 1987-97            26.3                   36.3                   27.1                  33.5                   16.9
a
  Data on fiduciary returns are only available for years 1956, 1958, 1960, 1962, and 1997. Our estimate for the tax rates in 1955, 1957,
  1959, and 1961 is the tax rate in each subsequent year. Our estimate of tax rates in years 1987 through 1996 is the 1997 estimate.
b
  For years 1955, 1957, 1959, and 1961, we assume that the ratio of 1040 dividend income to 1041 dividend income is the same as in
  each subsequent year. For years 1987 through 1996, we assume that the ratio of 1040 dividend income to 1041 dividend income is
  the same as in 1997.

                                                                  31
                      Table B2. Fraction of Equity Held in Retirement Accounts and
                              by Nonprofit Organizations, 1955-62 and 1987-97

            Year                     Pensions                    IRAs                   Nonprofitsa                     Total

            1955                         3.5                           0                     NA                          3.5
            1956                         3.5                           0                     NA                          3.5
            1957                         4.0                           0                     NA                          4.0
            1958                         4.3                           0                     NA                          4.3
            1959                         4.8                           0                     NA                          4.8
            1960                         5.3                           0                     NA                          5.3
            1961                         5.8                           0                     NA                          5.8
            1962                         5.8                           0                     NA                          5.8
           Avg. 1955-62                  4.6                           0                     NA                          4.6

            1987                       30.2                       11.9                       5.3                        47.4
            1988                       27.9                       12.2                       5.2                        45.4
            1989                       28.1                       12.0                       6.0                        46.1
            1990                       29.6                       15.1                       6.3                        51.0
            1991                       29.3                       13.4                       5.0                        47.7
            1992                       29.6                       13.4                       5.0                        48.0
            1993                       31.4                       13.7                       5.0                        50.0
            1994                       33.4                       14.7                       5.7                        53.8
            1995                       33.1                       13.2                       5.5                        51.8
            1996                       33.7                       12.6                       5.7                        51.0
            1997                       33.0                       11.4                       5.4                        49.8
           Avg. 1987-97                30.8                       13.1                       5.5                        49.4

a
    Data on nonprofit equity holdings are only available for the period 1987-1997. See the Flow of Funds for details.



                                                                  32
                   Appendix C. Derivation of Corporate Equity Value


       In this appendix, we describe how we estimate the corporate equity value using data

from the Bureau of Economic Analysis’ (BEA) Survey of Current Business (SCB), the Federal

Reserve Board’s Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States (FOF), and our estimates of

tax rates on dividend income. (See Appendix B.) Data from the SCB include the national

income and product accounts (NIPA) and their estimates of fixed assets (FA).

       We first show how we organize the national accounts to be consistent with our theory.

In Table C1, we report average values of domestic income for the United States for the periods

1955—1962 and 1987—2000. All values are relative to GDP (SCB NIPA Table 1.1).

       We split income into “corporate” and “noncorporate,” where noncorporate income is

the diﬀerence between total domestic income and the domestic income of corporate business.

Values for corporate income are taken from NIPA Table 1.16 in SCB. Values for noncorporate

capital consumptions are the diﬀerence between the total (SCB NIPA Table 1.9) and corpo-

rate capital consumption (SCB NIPA Table 1.16). Values for other noncorporate income are

taken from SCB NIPA Tables 1.14 and 1.15.

       The middle column of Table C1 relates the NIPA system of accounts to the model

system of accounts. The notation is consistent with our model of Section 2B. We have

introduced notation for the rental rates on capital. These rates are r1m = p1 ∂f c /∂k1m ,

r1u = p1 ∂f c /∂k1u , and r2 = p2 ∂f nc /∂k2 .

       The gross domestic income (line 19) shows the relation between the model’s concept

of income and the NIPA concept of income. There are four diﬀerences. First, NIPA income

includes sales and excise taxes. These taxes are consumption taxes in the model and are

excluded from both income and product. Second, NIPA income does not include intangible


                                                 33
investment. U.S. corporations can expense intangible investment, but we treat it as an invest-

ment in our model. We therefore add it to our model’s corporate income and to investment.

Third, NIPA income excludes capital consumption of durable goods. Purchases of durable

goods are treated as consumption in NIPA and investment in our model. We therefore must

include capital consumption on durable goods in our income concept. We denote this by

δ 2 kcd , where kcd is the stock of consumer durables. Fourth, NIPA does not impute services

to durable goods or to government investment goods. These are investments in our model,

and we therefore impute services to them. We denote the after-tax return by i and the stock

of government capital by kg .

       In Table C2, we report the product side of the NIPA accounts, values for domestic

capital stocks, and net foreign profits. Values for domestic product are taken from SCB NIPA

Table 1.1. The measures of corporate and noncorporate investment are taken from the Flow

of Funds Accounts, Table F6. In both the model and NIPA accounts, incomes and products

must equal. In line 7, we show that the diﬀerence between model and data incomes is equal

to the diﬀerence between model and data products.

       The Survey of Current Business also reports estimates of capital stocks (or, fixed

assets) which we use for our estimation of corporate equity. In Table C2, we report ra-

tios of corporate and noncorporate stocks to GDP. Our measured corporate capital includes

structures, plant and equipment, inventories, and land. Structures and plant and equipment

account for most of the capital; with nonresidential and residential included, the average

value of these stocks as measured by the BEA was 0.816 times GDP in 1955—1962 and 0.829

times GDP in 1987—2000 (SCB FA Tables 7KCU and 9KCU). We include inventories taken

from the national accounts (SCB NIPA Table 5.12) in our measure of corporate capital. The

value of inventories was 0.242 times GDP in 1955—1962 and 0.165 times GDP in 1987—2000.



                                             34
The BEA reports estimates for the structures but not for the land they are on. To get an

estimate of the value of corporate land, we took values from corporate tax returns. In both

periods, we found similar estimates, namely 0.034 times GDP in 1955—1962 and 0.033 in

1987—2000.

       We need estimates for the value of noncorporate capital because we use them to

estimate interest rates in our two periods. In Table C2, we report BEA estimates for total

noncorporate capital and show how much of this is government capital and consumer durables.

As noted above, we use capital stocks for government capital and consumer durables to adjust

the national accounts.

       We do not include land values in our noncorporate capital stock measure because most

of the return on land over the postwar period was due to capital gains, which are diﬃcult to

estimate. Since these gains are not included in the noncorporate profits measure of the SCB,

we exclude land from our noncorporate capital measure.

       The only capital stock measures that we have from the BEA are for capital stocks

located in the United States. Many corporations have capital in foreign subsidiaries, and

foreign production aﬀects their stock values. In order to estimate the capital stocks of foreign

subsidiaries we capitalize their profit flows. In Table C2, we report net after-tax foreign

profits (SCB NIPA Table 6.16).

       We use net after-tax profits from abroad because shares for firms like Toyota are issued

through the parent company in Japan and trade on the New York Stock Exchange as issues

of American Depository Receipts (ADR). These ADRs are not included in the Flow of Funds

market value of domestic corporations. They appear separately as “rest of the world” issues.

(See FOF Table L.213.) Therefore, we need to net out the profits of these corporations when

computing our capital stocks.


                                              35
       Table C3 shows how we use the SCB and SOI data to construct our estimate of

corporate equity values. We first compute the growth rate of real GDP. We then compute

tax rates on corporate income and income distributed to households. The corporate tax rate

is derived from the income side of the national accounts, which reports before- and after-tax

profits. The distribution tax derivation is described in Appendix B.

       In order to compute service flows for our accounts and to compute our intangible

capital, we need an estimate for the after-tax real interest rate. We use noncorporate profits

and capital for this calculation. To make the model and NIPA accounts consistent, we have to

make two adjustments to noncorporate profits. First, we add imputed services to consumer

durables and to government capital, which is equal to i(kcd +kg ). Notice that this depends on

i so we are in eﬀect solving a fixed point problem. Second, we subtract intermediate financial

services that are not included in our model accounts. These services are primarily the interest

received by households who lend to financial institutions issuing mortgages. They are equal

to roughly half of the net interest reported in noncorporate income. The remainder includes

forgone interest of individuals holding currency and checking accounts.17

       Next, we need to make adjustments to the return and price of tangible capital because

the IRS allowable depreciation is diﬀerent from the true economic depreciation reported in

the Survey of Current Business. In Table C1 (line 7), there is an adjustment to profits that

is the estimate of the diﬀerence between IRS depreciation and economic depreciation. We

use this term along with observed tangible capital to estimate the book value of capital and

the depreciation rate used by the IRS. These estimates can be used to determine the needed

adjustments to the price of capital and the return to corporate measured capital. The price

of capital is adjusted by 1 − τ δ . The after-tax return on tangible capital is also adjusted

by î − i. These terms are equal to 0 if the depreciation allowed is equal to true economic



                                              36
depreciation.

       To compute intangible capital, we assume that after-tax real returns to all assets,

namely corporate measured capital, corporate unmeasured capital, and noncorporate capital

are the same. The expression for intangible capital requires some algebra, but the main

steps are as follows. First, note that for the model in equilibrium, (r1m − δ 1m − τ 1k )k1m =

îk1m /(1 − τ 1 ), which are before-tax profits accruing to tangible capital. Second note that

r1u k1u − x1u = (i − γ − η)k1u , which are before-tax profits accruing to intangible capital less

intangible investment. The sum of these two is what NIPA reports for corporate profits (after

adjustments for depreciation). If we add them, we can use our estimates of î, k1m , τ 1 , i, and

γ +η, along with the NIPA profits to estimate k1u . Note that this calculation does not require

us to know the rate of depreciation of intangible capital.

       With measures of domestic tangible corporate capital and domestic intangible cor-

porate capital, we can construct a measure of the value of total domestic corporate capital

before taxation of distributions, k. The prices of tangible and intangible capital are not

the same because they are taxed diﬀerently. The total value of domestic capital is equal to

(1 − τ δ )k1m + (1 − τ 1 )k1u . The τ δ term is the adjustment to the price of corporate measured

capital due to depreciation allowances described above. The price of intangible is one minus

the corporate tax rate because of the fact that intangible investment can be expensed and

therefore avoids income taxation.

       For foreign subsidiaries, we observe only profit flows. We make the assumption that the

ratio of after-tax profits to the capital stock is the same for domestic and foreign operations.

Therefore, we can estimate the value of total foreign corporate capital before taxation of

distributions, k ∗ , using observations on domestic and foreign after-tax profits and domestic

capital.


                                               37
      To compute our predicted value of corporate equity, we multiply k +k ∗ by 1−τ d , where

τ d is the tax rate on dividend income described in Appendix B. To compute the price-earnings

ratio, we divide the total value by measured after-tax earnings. We use measured after-tax

earnings because this is what is reported in other studies. (See, for example, Campbell and

Shiller 2001.) The results are reported in the last two rows of Table C3.




                                             38
                                        Table C1. U.S. Domestic Income, 1955:1962 and 1987:2000

                                                                                                                              Averages fora
                                                             Model Expression                                               1955-62 1987-00
           Corporate Domestic Income
    1       Capital consumption                              δ1m k1m                                                          0.046   0.069
    2       IBT+transfers−subsidiesc                         τ1k k1m + ω1 τc c                                                0.054   0.057
    3       Compensation                                     wn1                                                              0.357   0.380
    4       Profits                                          (r1m −δ1m −τ1k )k1m +r1u k1u −x1u                                0.097   0.071
    5         Profits tax liability                          τ1 [(r1m −τ1k )k1m − δ̂1m k̂1m +r1u k1u −x1u ]                   0.045   0.026
    6         Profits after tax                              (1 − τ1 )[(r1m −τ1k )k1m − δ̂1m k̂1m +r1u k1u −x1u ]             0.052   0.042
    7         Adjustments to profits                         δ̂1m k̂1m − δ1m k1m                                              0.000   0.003
    8       Net Interestb                                                                                                    -0.001   0.018
           Noncorporate Domestic Income
    9       Capital consumption                              δ2 (k2 − kcd )                                                   0.062   0.054
    10      IBT+transfers−subsidiesc                         τ2k k2 + ω2 τc c                                                 0.030   0.023
    11      Compensation                                     wn2                                                              0.282   0.246
    12        Wages and salaries                                                                                              0.199   0.192
    13        80% of proprietor’s income                                                                                      0.083   0.054
    14      Profits                                          r2 k2 − δ2 k2 − τ2k k2 − i(kcd + kg )                            0.070   0.080
    15        20% of proprietor’s income                                                                                      0.021   0.014
    16        Rental income                                                                                                   0.030   0.012
    17        Net interestb                                                                                                   0.019   0.054
    18     Statistical Discrepancy                                                                                            0.001   0.002
    19     Gross Domestic Incomeb                            r k +r k +r k +wn + τc c−x1u −δ2 kcd −i(kcd +kg )                1.000   1.000
                                                             |1m 1m 1u {z1u 2 2 } |           {z            }
                                                                      Model income               NIPA income−Model income

a
        All values are relative to gross domestic product.
b
    This category includes intermediate financial services which are not included in our model concept.
c
    Fraction ωi of sales and excise taxes are included in sector i’s indirect business tax.


                                                                                39
         Table C2. U.S. Domestic Product, Capital Stocks, and Foreign Profit, 1955:1962 and 1987:2000

                                                                                                        Averages fora
                                        Model Expression                                              1955-62 1987-00
       Domestic Product
 1      Private consumptionb            c(1 + τc ) −δ2 kcd − ikcd                                       0.542   0.585
 2      Govt. consumption               g                                                               0.164   0.157
 3      Investment                                                                                      0.294   0.258
 4        Corporate
 5          Measured                    x1m                                                             0.073   0.100
 6        Noncorporate                  x2                                                              0.221   0.158
 7        Gross Domestic Productb       c + x1m + x1u + x2 + g + τc c − x1u − δ2 kcd − i(kcd + kg )     1.000   1.000
                                        |         {z         } |                 {z              }
                                              Model product          NIPA product−Model product

       Domestic Capital Stocks
        Corporate
 8        Measured                      k1m                                                             1.092   1.027
 9      Noncorporate                    k2                                                              2.363   2.176
 10       Government                    kg                                                              0.720   0.598
 11       Consumer durables             kcd                                                             0.332   0.290
 12       Other                                                                                         1.310   1.288

 13    Foreign After-tax Profits        ik∗ − (1 − τ1 )x∗1u                                             0.006   0.012
a,b
      See footnotes for Table C1.




                                                          40
                     Table C3. Calculations for Corporate Equity Value, 1955:1962 and 1987:2000

                                                     Model Expression and Calculation                          1955-62 1987-00
     Average Growth in Real GDP                      100 (γ + η)                                                 3.523    3.312
     Corporate Tax Ratesa
      Income tax                                     τ1 = (Table C1, line 5)/(Table C1, line 5 + line 6)         0.452    0.362
      Distribution taxb                              τd                                                          0.442    0.182
     Interest Rate (%)                               i = r2 − δ2 − τ2k                                           4.630    4.120
       Noncorporate profits                          Table C1, line 14                                           0.070    0.080
       Plus: imputed capital services                i (Table C2, line 10 + line 11)                             0.049    0.037
       Less: intermediate financial services         1/2 (Table C1, line 17)                                     0.009    0.027
       Divided by: capital stock                     Table C2, line 9                                            2.363    2.176
     Depreciation Adjustments
      Corporate measured capital                     k1m = Table C2, line 8                                      1.092    1.027
      Book capital                                   k̂1m = k1m − (Table C1, line 7)/ (γ + η)                    1.103    0.942
      Economic depreciation                          δ1m = (Table C1, line 1)/ k1m                               0.042    0.067
      Depreciation allowance                         δ̂1m = (Table C1, line 1 + line 7) / k̂1m                   0.043    0.077
      Capital price adjustment                       τδ = τ1 δ̂1m (δ̂1m − δ1m )/[(γ + η + δ̂1m )(i + δ̂1m )]     0.002    0.021
      Corporate return adjustment (%)                î   = i + τ1 [δ1m − δ̂1m (i + δ1m )/(i + δ̂1m )]           4.642    4.005
     Intangible Capital                              k1u = [Table C1, line 4 −îk1m /(1 − τ1 )]/(i − γ − η)      0.422    0.819
     Domestic Capital                                k    = (1 − τδ )k1m + (1 − τ1 )k1u                          1.321    1.528
     Foreign Subsidiary Capital                      k∗   = k (Table C2, line 13)/(Table C1, line 6)             0.152    0.437


     Corporate Equity Value                          V    = (1 − τd )[k + k∗ ]                                   0.822    1.608
     Price-Earnings Ratio                            V / (Table C1, line 6 + Table C2, line 13)                 14.118   29.823
a
    Rates in last year of period.
b
    See Appendix B for details on the distribution tax.


                                                                        41
                                               Notes


      1
          Here pension funds include annuities provided by life insurance companies.
      2
          One exception was CREF, whose creation required a special New York State law.
      3
          See, for example, Abel (1990), Boldrin, Christiano, and Fisher (2000), Constan-
tinides (1990), Campbell and Cochrane (1999), Epstein and Zin (1989,1991), Gali (1994),
Hansen, Sargent, and Tallarini (1999), and Jermann (1998). See also Kocherlakota (1996)
for an excellent survey of the literature.
      4
          New theories emphasizing risk premia have largely ignored an older literature that
emphasizes the interaction of public finance and finance. See, for example, Feldstein (1980a,
1980b) and Feldstein and Green (1983).
      5
          We abstract from corporate debt because corporations were close to 100 percent equity-
financed in the time periods we consider.
      6
          Here, we abstract from all forms of heterogeneity in individuals. We view this as
a first step toward understanding the interaction of stock values and the U.S. tax system.
Obvious extensions would allow for individuals of diﬀerent ages, incomes, and abilities. See,
for example, the work of Alvarez and Jermann (2000), Constantinides, Donaldson, and Mehra
(2000), and Heaton and Lucas (1996).
      7
          Because of our emphasis on taxation as a key factor for postwar asset prices, we
analyze a production economy. See also Boldrin, Christiano, and Fisher (2000), Cochrane
(1991), Hall (1999), and Jermann (1998), who study asset pricing in production economies.
      8
          See for example, King (1977), Auerbach (1979), Summers (1981), and Summers and
Poterba (1985).
      9
          We have not included investment tax credits or accelerated depreciation in this analysis
because they were not a factor during the periods we consider. However, increased invest-
ment credits and accelerated depreciation do aﬀect the price of capital, both make investing
cheaper. Part of the fall in equity prices during the 1970s and 1980s can be attributed to
increased investment tax credits and accelerated depreciation allowances.
     10
          In writing the corporate firm’s problem, we have ignored debt financing. In both the
1960s and the 1990s debt-equity ratios were very low. There is a good theoretical explanation


                                                 42
for the 1960s. If τ d > τ 1 , then the firm would choose only equity financing because the
household has a heavy tax burden when initially shifting from equity to debt and this cost
is not outweighed by future benefits from tax deductions of interest payments. In the 1990s,
τ d < τ 1 , which would imply that debt financing should dominate equity financing. The
fact that firms did not debt-finance in this case is not really well understood. See Auerbach
(2000).
     11
          U.S. households also have net holdings of corporate and foreign debt, but the value of
these holdings is quantitatively small. To avoid cumbersome notation, we do not explicitly
introduce them.
     12
          See Employee Benefits Law (1991) and Primer on ERISA Fiduciary Duties (1994) for
more details on the history of benefits law.
     13
          Our model abstracts from factors giving rise to a liquidity demand for debt assets.
See Bansal and Coleman (1996) who introduce a wedge between cash and debt assets held
for pure investment purposes.
     14
          Here and elsewhere we ignore the term γη since it is too small to aﬀect any of our
estimates.
     15
          In the early period that we consider, most distributions were made by issuing dividends
rather than by buying back shares. Any pro rata redemptions were considered equivalent to
a taxable dividend. In the later period, capital gains were taxed as ordinary income so there
was no advantage to buy-backs. See Chapter 9 of Bittker and Eustice (2000).
     16
          In the years 1987—1997, the IRS reports dividend income by adjusted income class
only for all returns. We compute a marginal rate for each marital class by using taxable
income from all returns along with that marital class’ tax schedule. We weight the results
using total dividend income earned by that marital group.
     17
          See McGrattan and Prescott (2000) for more details on estimation of intermediate
financial services.




                                                43
References


Abel, A.B., (1990), “Asset Prices Under Habit Formation and Catching Up With the Jone-

      ses,” American Economic Review, 80(2), 38-42.

Alvarez, F. and U. Jermann, (2000), “Quantitative Asset Pricing Implications of Endogenous

      Solvency Constraints,” mimeo, University of Chicago.

Auerbach, Alan J., (1979), “Wealth Maximization and the Cost of Capital,” Quarterly Jour-

      nal of Economics, Vol. XCIII(3), 433-446.

Auerbach, Alan J., (2000), “Taxation and Corporate Financial Policy,” in Handbook of Public

      Economics, forthcoming.

Bansal R. and W.J. Coleman, (1996), “A Monetary Explanation of the Equity Premium,

      Term Premium, and Risk-Free Rate Puzzles” Journal of Political Economy, 104(6):

      1135-1171.

Bittker, B.I. and J.S. Eustice, (2000), Federal Income Taxation of Corporations and Share-

      holders, 7th edition, (Valhalla, NY: Warren, Gorham, and Lamont).

Boldrin, M., L.J. Christiano, and J. Fischer, (2000), “Asset Pricing Lessons for Modeling

      Business Cycles,” Working paper, forthcoming AER.

Campbell J. and J. Cochrane, (1999), “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation

      of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 107(2), 205-51.

Campbell J. and R. Shiller, (2001), “Valuation Ratios and the Long-run Stock Market Out-

      look: An Update,” NBER Working paper 8221.

Cochrane, J. H. (1991), “Production-Based Asset Pricing and the Link between Stock Returns

      and Economic Fluctuations,” Journal of Finance 46: 209-237.

Constantinides, G. M. (1990), “Habit Formation: A Resolution of the Equity Premium Puz-

      zle,” Journal of Political Economy, 98(3), 519-43.


                                            44
Constantinides, G. M., J. B. Donaldson, and R. Mehra, (2000), “Junior Can’t Borrow: A

      New Perspective on the Equity Premium Puzzle,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,

      forthcoming.

Epstein L.G. and S.E. Zin, (1989), “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior

      of Consumption Growth and Asset Returns I: The Theoretical Framework,” Econo-

      metrica, 57(4), 937-69.

Epstein L.G. and S.E. Zin, (1991), “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior

      of Consumption Growth and Asset Returns I: An Empirical Analysis,” Journal of

      Political Economy, 99(2), 263-86.

Feldstein, M., (1980a), “Inflation and the Stock Market” American Economic Review, 70(5),

      839-47.

Feldstein, M., (1980b), “Inflation, Tax Rules, and the Stock Market,” Journal of Monetary

      Economics, 6(3), 309-31.

Feldstein, M. and J. Green, (1983), “Why Do Companies Pay Dividends?” American Eco-

      nomic Review, 73(1), 17-30.

Gali, J., (1994), “Keeping Up With the Joneses: Consumption Externalities,” Journal of

      Money, Credit, and Banking, 26(1): 1-8.

Hall, R. E., (1999), “The Stock Market and Capital Accumulation,” NBER Working paper

      7180.

Hall, R. E., (2000), “e-Capital,” Hoover Institution working paper.

Hansen, L.P., T.J. Sargent, and T.D. Tallarini Jr., (1999), “Robust Permanent Income and

      Pricing” Review of Economic Studies, 66(4), 873-907.

Heaton, J. and D.J. Lucas, (1996), “Evaluating the Eﬀects of Incomplete Markets on Risk

      Sharing and Asset Pricing” Journal of Political Economy, 104(3), 443-87.

Investment Company Institute, (1997—2001) Mutual Fund Fact Book, www.ici.org.


                                            45
Jermann, U., (1998), “Asset Pricing in Production Economies,” Journal of Monetary Eco-

      nomics, 41: 257-276.

King, M., (1977), Public Policy and the Corporation, (London: Chapman and Hall).

Kocherlakota, N. R., (1996), “The Equity Premium Is Still a Puzzle,” Journal of Economic

      Literature, 34: 42-71.

McGrattan, E.R. and E.C. Prescott, (2000), “Is the Stock Market Overvalued?” Federal

      Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 24 (Fall): 20-40.

Mehra, R. and E.C. Prescott, (1985), “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle,” Journal of Monetary

      Economics, 15: 145-161.

Summers, L., (1981), “Taxation and Corporate Investment: A q-theory Approach,” Brookings

      Papers on Economic Activity, 1: 67-127.

Summers, L. and J. Poterba, (1985), “The Economic Eﬀects of Dividend Taxation,” in Recent

      Advances in Corporate Finance.

U.S. Bureau of National Aﬀairs, (1991), Employee Benefits Law, (Washington DC: BNA

      Books).

U.S. Bureau of National Aﬀairs, (1994), Primer on ERISA Fiduciary Duties, (Washington

      DC: BNA Books).

U.S. Department of Commerce, (1955—2000), Survey of Current Business, (Washington DC:

      U.S. Government Printing Oﬃce).

U.S. Federal Reserve Board, (1945—2000), Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States,

      (Washington DC: Federal Reserve Board).

U.S. Treasury Department, (1955—1997), Statistics of Income, (Washington DC: U.S. Gov-

      ernment Printing Oﬃce).




                                           46
                   2




                  1.5
                                                           Total value
Relative to GDP




                   1




                  0.5
                                                        Equity value



                   0
                   1950   1960       1970        1980        1990        2000




                          Figure 1. Value of U.S. Corporations




                                            47
    Table 1. Corporate Equity Value and Price Earnings Ratio

                                                           1955-1962         1987-2000
    Corporate Equity Valuea,b
          Predicted contribution from
               Domestic tangible capital                       .608              .822
               Domestic intangible capital                     .129              .427
               Foreign capital                                 .085              .357
          Predicted Total                                      .822              1.61
          Actual                                               .828              1.51

    Price-Earnings Ratiob
        Predicted                                              14.1              29.8
          Actual                                               14.2              28.0

a
    Corporate equity values are relative to the value of gross domestic product.
b
    Capital stocks and earnings are averaged over the periods, and corporate equity values
    are end-of-period.




                                           48
