                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         INTERMEDIA SUBSTITUTABILITY AND
                      MARKET DEMAND BY NATIONAL ADVERTISERS


                                              Alvin J. Silk
                                              Lisa R. Klein
                                             Ernst R. Berndt


                                          Working Paper 8624
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8624


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2001




We are indebted to Sam Chun, Tom Eisenmann, Rajiv Lal, David Montgomery, and John Quelch for helpful
comments. We thank Robert Coen for assistance with data sources. Research support from the Division of
Research, Harvard Business School and the MIT Sloan School of Management is gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.


© 2001 by Alvin J. Silk, Lisa R. Klein and Ernst R. Berndt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Intermedia Substitutability and Market Demand by National Advertisers
Alvin J. Silk, Lisa R. Klein and Ernst R. Berndt
NBER Working Paper No. 8624
December 2001
JEL No. D0, L8, M3



                                             ABSTRACT


        We assess substitutable and complementary relationships among eight national advertising media
classes, as well as the magnitude of their own-price elasticities. We use a translog demand model, whose
parameters we estimate by three-stage least squares, based on 1960-94 annual U.S. data.We find
aggregate demand by national advertisers for each of the eight media is own-price inelastic, and that
cross-price elasticities suggest slightly more substitute than complementary relationships, although both
are rather weak. These patterns are consistent with long prevailing institutional arrangements and media
selection practices.




Alvin J. Silk                                           Lisa R. Klein
Lincoln Filene Professor                                Assistant Professor of Marketing
Graduate School of Business Administration              Jones Graduate School of Management
Harvard University                                      Rice University
Soldiers Field                                          Houston, TX 77005-1892
Boston, MA 02163                                        Tel.: 713-285-5473
Tel.: 617-495-6036                                      Fax: 713-348-5351
Fax: 617-495-8736                                       lklein@rice.edu
asilk@hbs.edu

Ernst R. Berndt
Louis B. Seley Professor of Applied Economics
Sloan School of Management
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
Tel.: 617-253-2665
Fax: 617-258-6055
and NBER
eberndt@mit.edu
                INTERMEDIA SUBSTITUTABILITY AND MARKET DEMAND
                         BY NATIONAL ADVERTISERS


                              Alvin J. Silk, Lisa R. Klein, and Ernst R. Berndt

                                           I.      INTRODUCTION


          The U.S. advertising market can be decomposed into two segments, based on the
      geographical scope of advertisers’ operations. National advertisers consisting of
      firms that market their products and services on a national or broad regional basis
      constitute the largest segment, accounting for about 58% of total U.S. advertising
      expenditures in the 1990’s.1 National advertisers employ a variety of media,
      including direct mail, magazines, newspapers, outdoor, radio (network and spot),
      and television (network and spot). Local advertisers, accounting for the other 48% of
      total U.S. advertising outlays, are primarily retailers that serve geographically
      limited markets. Local advertisers also utilize many classes of media but certain
      media used by national advertisers, such as network radio and network television,
      are not suitable for local advertisers because the market areas the latter serve
      constitute only a fraction of the total nationwide audience reached by those mass
      media.
          In this paper we examine national advertisers’ aggregate demand for different
types of media. We address two questions: (1) To what extent do the major categories
of mass media substitute for or complement one another as modes of advertising
communication; and (2) How price-sensitive is national advertisers’ aggregate demand
for each of the major categories of mass media? The two questions are, of course, related
since we know from economic theory that for any input, the sum of its own-price
elasticity plus all its cross-price elasticities with respect to other inputs is zero (cf.,
Henderson and Quandt 1980).




1   On the distinction between national and local advertisers, see Owen and Wildman (1992, pp. 12-14)


                                                     3
       A priori, it is unclear whether any particular pair of media employed by national
advertisers are substitutes or complements. While substitutability is certainly plausible,
complementary relations may be expected as well since advertisers often use more than
one class of media in a given campaign. Indeed, integrated use of different media, in
order to exploit interactions among them (Rossiter and Danaher 1998), is often
considered as the hallmark of effective planning of marketing communications
campaigns (Schultz, Tannenbaum, and Lauterborn 1993).

       Intermedia substitutability is also an implicit consideration in the formulation of
regulatory policies involving advertising. To prohibit tobacco and liquor advertising on
radio and television, but not in print (cf., Duffy 1996), would appear, for example, to
presume weak intermedia substitutability or complementarity. Restrictions on cross
ownership of broadcasting and newspaper establishments in the same geographic
market were historically rationalized on grounds of extensive intermedia
substitutability (Picard 1989), although recently the Federal Communications
Commission announced that a review of these policies would be undertaken (Dreazen
2001). Finally, the evolution of the World Wide Web as an advertising medium raises
questions about its potential as a substitute or complement for existing media (Bank
1996; Silk, Klein, and Berndt 2001).

       While measurement of the price elasticity of market demand for advertising in
different media and intermedia substitutability/complementarity are clearly important,
to date empirical both of these matters in general is relatively sparse. Moreover, as will
be shown below, the handful of existing studies have produced some seemingly
inconsistent conclusions. Upon closer scrutiny, it becomes apparent that a variety of
approaches have been taken with respect to aggregating data across different types of
advertisers (national vs. local) and various classes of media in different ways, thereby
undermining the comparability of the results.

   Here we build on this literature in several ways. First, we focus only on national
advertisers, since there is evidence that local and national advertising markets exhibit
quite different sensitivities to cyclical and secular forces (Blank 1962; Schmalensee 1972;

                                             4
and Yang 1964).2 Second, we disaggregate national advertisers’ expenditures into eight
distinct media categories, and then test whether the aggregation of these categories into
fewer, more global, media classes is supported by our data. Third, instead of a log-log
demand model used in some earlier studies that imposes constant cross-price elasticities
(Eklund, Ford, and Jackson 1999, 2000), following Seldon and Jung (1993) we utilize an
extension of the translog functional form that allows cross-price elasticities to vary
along with prices and expenditure shares. Our formulation also includes a number of
non-price factors that affect national advertisers’ media shares. Finally, we employ
annual data on national advertisers’ expenditures for the period 1960 through 1994.
Terminating the time series at the latter date avoids the potential confounding effect of
any disequilibria associated with the introduction of the Internet as an advertising
medium in the mid-1990’s, as well as changes in the concentration of media suppliers
following in the wake of the Telecommunications Act of 1996.

    The paper is organized as follows. In Section II we advance two propositions
bearing on the magnitudes of own-price and cross-price elasticities of market demands
for media time and space by national advertisers. Section III presents our model
specification and estimation methods. Section IV discusses the data employed and
estimation results, while Section V reports our estimates of own and cross-price
elasticities for eight media categories. In Section VI we relate our findings to industry
media selection practices and institutional arrangements, discuss implications of
market-level elasticity estimates for the demand elasticity faced by individual vehicles
within a given media category, and then review factors that differentiate media
substitutes and complements. Section VII summarizes our principal findings and
conclusions.



2 Several factors suggest differences between national and local advertisers with respect to price elasticity
and intermedia substitutability of the market demands for media time and space. Whereas national
advertisers generally undertake campaigns for brand-building purposes and assign media planning and
buying to advertising agencies, local advertisers are more likely to focus on availability, price, and
temporary promotions and often deal directly with media suppliers. Media offering flexible contractual
terms, such as newspapers, represent a larger share of local than national advertising expenditures.


                                                      5
II. MARKET DEMAND BY NATIONAL ADVERTISERS FOR MEDIA SPACE AND
     TIME

          We begin by considering theoretical arguments and empirical evidence that leads
us to advance two propositions concerning the likely size of own and cross-price
elasticities of national advertisers’ demand for media space and time.

          P1. Intermedia price substitutability and complementarity among the major
          classes of media employed by national advertisers will tend to be relatively
          weak.

          P2. Market demand by national advertisers for the major classes of media will
          tend to be relatively price inelastic.
       From the perspective of the economics of information, national advertisers’ demand
for media space and time is derived from consumers’ demand for information about the
goods and services sold by national advertisers (Ehrlich and Fisher 1982; Nelson 1974).
In Section II.1 we examine what the theory of derived demand implies about the price
elasticity of market demand for media advertising and the empirical evidence bearing
on the factors influencing it, including intermedia substitutability (P1). Against this
background, in Section II.2 we review the available empirical evidence relating to the
price sensitivity of demand for advertising in various media (P2).
II.1      Derived Demand for Media Advertising
       The theoretical framework we employ is a very simple but elegant one governing
the derived demand for factors of production, originally enunciated by Marshall (1922)
as four “laws” of demand.3 Adapted to the present context, these laws imply that the
derived demand by sellers of goods and services for advertising in a medium will be
more price inelastic: (i) the weaker is the substitutability with other media; (ii) the more
inelastic is consumer demand for information about products and services; (iii) the
more inelastic is the supply of other advertising media; and (iv) the smaller is the share

3   See Friedman (1976) and Stigler (1986) for further discussion of Marshall’s laws of demand.


                                                      6
of total costs accounted for expenditures on the advertising medium. Below we review
the available evidence bearing on these four factors.
II.1.A Intermedia Substitutability and Complementarity
      There are relatively few empirical studies examining national advertisers’ demand
for media time and space and fewer still that have attempted estimate to own or cross-
price elasticities. Most of the available evidence has been motivated by regulatory
concerns. Although early analyses of intermedia competition has frequently depicted
network and spot television as being fairly close substitutes, typically the underlying
evidence was been drawn from examinations of bivariate price correlations rather than
from multivariate econometric estimates of demand cross elasticities.4 Among such
bivariate studies are one by the U.S. Federal Communications Commission (1980) which
compared transactions prices for network and spot television (adjusted for differences
in audience size and composition) and another due to Peterman (1979) which showed
that the costs of reaching equivalent audiences via network and spot television were
roughly the same.
                                       INSERT TABLE 1
      Table 1 summarizes four recent econometric studies of market demand for media
advertising and intermedia substitutability/complementarity. Some degree of substitutability
was reported in all four investigations, with only Seldon and Jung (1993) finding indications of
complementarity between their global “Print” and “Broadcast” categories in four years of their
time series of thirty-seven annual observations. In interpreting these findings, one should note
that the data underlying three of the four studies are either unknown mixes of national and
local advertisers (Ekelund, Ford, and Jackson 1999,2000) or the sum of expenditures by national
and local advertisers (Seldon and Jung 1993). As noted in Section I, there are grounds for
expecting differences between national and local advertisers with respect to the cross-
elasticities for various media and hence aggregating their market demands may camouflage
different patterns and levels of intermedia substitutability/complementarity among more




4   See Owen and Wildman (1992, Chapter 5), for further discussion.


                                                     7
finely disaggregated components. This is an empirical issue on which we provide evidence
below. 5
        Of the four studies summarized in Table 1, only McCullough and Waldon (1998)
focussed exclusively on national advertisers and disaggregated media classes (network
and spot tv). The medians of the pairs of annual cross-elasticities reported for these two
media were 0.106 (effect of change in network tv price on spot tv demand) and 0.079
(effect of changes in spot tv prices on network tv demand), where the own-elasticity
estimates indicated inelastic market demands for both media the median estimates
being –0.777 and –0.342 for network and spot tv, respectively. Thus in accord with P1,
we conclude that the evidence reviewed above suggests that while media substitutes
exist, they tend not to be “close” substitutes.
II.1.B Consumer Demand for Information
        Marshall’s second law, adapted to the demand for advertising, is that the derived
demand for advertising will be more inelastic, other things equal, when consumers’
demand for information about products and services is more inelastic. The economic
theory of advertising as information emphasizes the role of advertising in reducing the
time consumers expend on search and hence their total (purchase price plus search
costs) acquisition cost (Ehrlich and Fisher 1982; Nelson 1974,1975). Despite the potential
of media advertising to reduce search costs, to the extent that consumer demand for
information is insensitive to the time cost of search, sellers’ derived demand for
advertising will tend to be inelastic with respect to media prices.
    The only research estimating the elasticity of consumer demand for information of
which we are aware is that by Moorthy, Ratchford, and Talukdar, hereafter MRT (1997)
who report “A puzzling but consistent empirical finding is that consumers exhibit very
limited pre-purchase information-search activity” (p. 263).6 MRT argue that advertising

5The only study of firm-level demand for advertising in different media we have encountered is that due
to Seldon, Jewell, and O’Brien (2000). Based on data for six beer firms, they report positive cross-price
elasticities between two global media categories (“print” and “radio”) but negative cross-price elastiicies
between “television” and “print.” However, intermedia substitutabilty/complementarity at the firm-level
may be expected to differ from that at the market-level for reasons discussed later in Section VI.3

6Previous reviews of research on consumer search have drawn essentially the same conclusion. See: Alba,
Hutchinson, and Lynch (1991) and Andreason (1991).
                                                    8
plays a critical role not only in reducing the time cost of search but also in influencing
consumers’ prior beliefs about choice alternatives, thereby affecting the order in which
alternatives are searched. This helps explain why consumers engage in seemingly low
levels of external search, even when their product class involvement is high and their
search costs are low.

      Based on their field study, MRT found that the total amount of external search
consumers reported undertaking for new automobiles was inelastic with respect to
consumers’ perceived search costs. MRT’s work represents the only estimate of the
elasticity of consumer demand for information uncovered in the literature known to the
present authors. In the case of low involvement packaged goods where consumers
appear to rely relatively more on internal (memory-based) as opposed to external
search (Alba, Hutchinson, and Lynch 1991), we conjecture that consumer demand for
information for such products and services will also tend to be inelastic. Although the
empirical evidence presently available is very limited, it is plausible to postulate that
consumers’ demand for information is inelastic, thereby rendering more inelastic the
derived demand for advertising. Obviously, more empirical research on this topic is
needed.

II.1.C Elasticity of Supply of Media Advertising

      Marshall argued that the demand for an input was more price inelastic, ceteris
paribus, the more price inelastic is the supply of other inputs. While the long-run supply
of advertising time and/or space can be presumed to be highly elastic for all the major
media, there are good reasons for expecting that the short-run elasticity of supply varies
considerably by medium.7               Bowman (1976) estimated the elasticity of supply for
network television commercials to be 0.15 using monthly observations for the 1964-69
period.        This relatively inelastic estimate of the short-run supply of television
advertising may reflect the fixed number of commercial slots available in the short-run



7   Jung and Seldon (1995) estimated the long-run elasticity of supply of total advertising (national and
    local) to be infinite.


                                                       9
for any program and/or viewing period. In contrast, such binding constraints are less
likely to be operative for other media and thus for a medium like direct mail, we would
expect the short-run elasticity of supply to be substantial.
   More generally, we conjecture that for broadcast media and outdoor advertising,
short-run supply elasticities will tend to be relatively small but for print media, they
will be considerably larger. We discuss intermedia differences in the elasticity of short-
run supply further in Section VI.2 below.
II.1.D Advertising’s Share of Total Costs
       Marshall’s fourth law of demand, often dubbed “the importance of being
unimportant,” posits that the demand for an input is more price inelastic, ceteris paribus,
the smaller is its share of total costs. In the current context, we use advertising-to-sales
(A/S) dollars ratios as a proxy for advertising’s share of total costs. In 1994, national
advertising represented 1.3% of Gross Domestic Product while local advertising
represented 0.9%. A/S ratios are known to vary markedly across firms and industries,
e.g., being greater for experience goods than for search goods (Nelson 1974) and higher
for new products than for established ones (Farris and Albion 1981). Data on A/S ratios
for the 200 four-digit SIC industries with the largest advertising expenditures in 1994
show that the median ratio was 2.4%, with a range from 0.2% to 16.4% (Advertising Age
1994). The distribution of A/S ratios across industries is markedly skewed but only
13.5% of the industries had A/S ratios between 5% and 10% and just 5% of the
industries had A/S ratios in excess of 10%. This suggests that instances where outlays
for media advertising account for a substantial share of total costs are more likely to be
the exception rather than the rule. As a consequence, we expect generally low A/S
ratios to contribute to the inelasticity of market demand for an advertising medium.


II.2 Empirical Evidence on the Own-Price Elasticity of Demand for Media Advertising
   With the insights from Marshall’s four laws of demands adapted to national
advertisers’ demand for media time and space as background, we now briefly
summarize the available empirical literature reporting own-price elasticity estimates for
various advertising media.

                                             10
   The earliest study of which we are aware is that by Bowman (1976), who estimated a
simultaneous equations model using monthly data for the period 1964-69. He reported
an estimated price elasticity of market demand by national advertisers in all three
networks of -0.73 (the 95% confidence interval ranged from -0.35 to -1.12). A later
study by Busterna (1987) employed a series of single equation demand models and
1971-1985 annual data and reported an own-price elasticity estimate of -0.8 for
newspaper advertising. Jung and Seldon (1995) investigated demand for total
advertising using annual data for 1972-87 which aggregated expenditures in all media
by both national and local advertisers. Their estimate of own-price elasticity of –0.17
indicated that demand for total advertising was quite price inelastic.

    Own-elasticity estimates were also reported in the four more recent studies of
market demand for media advertising summarized in Table 1. The estimates reported
by Seldon and Jung (1993) and McCullough and Waldon (1998) indicated inelastic
market demand for all the media categories investigated in those studies. Specifically,
for a representative year (1969) from their time series, Seldon and Jung reported own-
elasticity estimates of -0.4 for the aggregate “broadcast” category, -0.4 for another
aggregate category, “print,” -0.7 for direct mail, and about -0.8 for the residual “other”
category. McCullough and Waldon estimated the own-elasticities for network and spot
television to be –0.776 and –0.384, respectively for the mid-point (1977) of their time
series.

   The other two studies included in Table 1 due to Ekelund, Ford, and Jackson (1999,
2000) both found evidence of elastic demand. Their estimates of –2 .1 for the own-price
elasticity of demand for spot radio and –4.3 for spot television are by far the largest we
have uncovered in the literature. Note however, that whereas both of these estimates
are based on data for a cross section of the largest regional media markets, the
observations used by Seldon and Jung and McCullough and Waldon were for the total

U.S.

       The only study of demand for different media at the level of the firm (rather than
the market) known to us is that due to Seldon, Jewell, and O’Brien (2000). Their analysis
                                             11
utilized a time series (1983-1994) of quarterly expenditures for six major brewers in
three global media classes. The own-price elasticity estimates at the mean of the
observations indicated that demand for “print” (magazines, newspapers, and outdoor)
and “radio” (network and spot) were both elastic (–1.70 and –7.7, respectively) while
that for “television” (network and spot) was inelastic (-0.248). For reasons discussed
later in Section VI.3, the elasticities of demand for media time and space by individual
firms would be expected to differ from those for the market as a whole.

       Finally, using data on “advertising expenses” reported in corporate tax returns
over the period 1947-1969, Ehrlich and Fisher (1982) found own-price elasticities greater
than unity (in absolute terms) for several industry sectors roughly corresponding to
one- and two-digit SIC classifications. It is difficult to interpret these estimates since
what is reported in Statistics of Income as “advertising expense” represents the
combined total of deductible expenses for promotions (consumer and trade), sampling
and publicity in addition to that for media advertising (cf. Rogers and Tockle 1995).

   Overall then, we conclude that the bulk of the available empirical evidence is
consistent with P2, i.e., market demand by national advertisers for the major classes of
media tends to be price inelastic.

                     III.    ECONOMETRIC MODEL AND METHODS

III.1 Model Specification

   As noted above, existing studies of demand for media advertising have typically
investigated an unspecified mix of local and national advertisers or the sum of the two.
Since there are good reasons to expect differences in price elasticities of demand for
national and local advertisers, here we focus our attention only on national advertisers,
and leave the analysis of local advertisers for future research. Moreover, we
disaggregate expenditures by national advertisers into eight media categories, the
largest number for which we can obtain consistent annual data from 1960 onward.

   Numerous mathematical functional forms can be employed for empirical
implementation. A rather common formulation in empirical econometrics is the

                                              12
translog (transcendental logarithmic) model, which can be interpreted as a second order
Taylor’s series approximation in logarithms to an arbitrary homogeneous cost

function.8 The translog advertising cost function can be written as follows:
                         N
       lnC
           A
             = ln α + ∑ α ln P + α ln A + 1 α
                    0         i     i     A           AA
                                                         (ln A)2
                       i =1                       2
          K                   K K
       + ∑ α ln Z + 1 ∑ ∑ β ln Z ln Z                                              (1)
               zk     k 2                 kl    k     l
        k =1                 k = 1l = 1
          N K                             N N
       + ∑ ∑ β ln P ln Z + 1 ∑ ∑ β ln P i ln P
                   ik      i     k 2               ij          j
        i = 1k = 1                      i =1 j =1

where the α’s and β’s (βij =βji) are unknown parameters to be estimated; the Pi are
media prices per unit of exposure; A is the total output quantity (in exposure units) of
advertising effort employed; the Zk are non-price exogenous variables affecting choices
among advertising media discussed below; Ca is total advertising expenditures and
equal to ∑ PiAi, where the Ai denotes the quantity of exposures for the various media.
          Following Shepard (1970), cost-minimizing demand equations for the various
advertising media cost share equations can be obtained by logarithmically
differentiating Eq. (1) with respect to the various media prices, thereby yielding media-
specific share equations, each of the form:


       ∂ lnC a Pi ∂C a Pi Ai               N
              =       =      ≡ S i =α i + ∑ β ij ln Pj + β iz ln Z .         (2)
       ∂ ln Pi C a ∂Pi C a                j =1

      There exists a variety of measures of substitution possibilities among the inputs.

With the translog function, the common own-price elasticity Eii of demand can be

shown to be:



                  ∂ ln A i                 β ii + S 2i − S i
           E ii ≡                        =                   ,     i = 1, K, N           (3)
                  ∂ ln Pi A, Z, Pj fixed         Si
                               j≠ i

8   See Christensen, Jorgenson, and Lau (1973).


                                                         13
while the cross-price elasticity of demand equals:


                ∂ ln Ai                   β ij + S i S j
       E ij ≡                           =                , i, j =1,..., N   (4)
                ∂ ln Pj A, Z , Pi fixed        Si
                              j≠i
where the Si and Sj are the shares of total advertising expenditures realized by media i
and media j, respectively. Curvature restrictions imply that the Eii ≤ 0; hence when Eij >
0 then Ai and Aj are price substitutes, and if Eij < 0, then Ai and Aj are price
complements.



III.2 Exogenous Influences on the Demand for Media Advertising


   A review of the advertising literature suggests two categories of factors besides
relative prices that are hypothesized to have influenced media shares during the period
1960-1994. The first comprises the following consumer economic and demographic
characteristics that the economic theory of advertising as information suggests affect the
attractiveness of audiences delivered by the mass media as target groups for national
advertisers’ products and services: (a) components of personal consumption
expenditures; (b) female labor force participation rates; and (c) the purchasing power of
family households. Factor (a) captures the distinction between search and experience
goods which differ in advertising intensity (Nelson 1974) while factors (b) and (c) are
proxies for influences on consumer search costs (Pashigian and Bowen 1994).
   For the second category, namely, technological and regulatory influences, we
utilized measures of three variables: (a) expenditures on computer technology; (b)
growth of cable and syndicated television as an advertising medium; and (c) the 1971
ban on tobacco advertising in broadcast media. Details pertaining to variable definitions
and data sources are presented in Table 2.


III.3 Estimation Procedure




                                                             14
            Our theoretical model consists of the eight share equations (see Eq. (2)) derived
from the translog cost function. Since the share equations sum to unity at each annual
observation, only seven of the eight equations are linearly independent. We add a
normal disturbance term to each of the seven equations and specify that the resulting
random disturbance vector is identically distributed. Following Berndt and Savin
(1975), we allow for first order autocorrelation of this disturbance vector; provided that
the autocovariance matrix is diagonal with equal diagonal elements, the resulting
estimates are numerically invariant to the choice of which equation is deleted. We
arbitrarily choose to delete the direct mail media share and estimate directly the
remaining seven equations. Since “adding up” of the share equations implies that
∑ α i = 1, ∑ β ij = 0, ∑ β ik = 0 ; i, j = 1,...,8, estimates of α1, β1j and β1k can be obtained
     i         j           i


indirectly by manipulating the parameters directly established.9
         Although media prices may well be exogenous at the level of the individual
vehicles, for the market as a whole, prices and quantities of the various media are likely
to be jointly determined. To allow for possible simultaneous equations bias, we treat
media prices as endogenous and utilize data series for a number of other exogenous
variables as instruments in the iterative, three-stage least squares estimation process.10
We test for exogeneity of price using a Hausman (1978) specification test. We also
investigated a more restrictive grouping of the media into a set of composite categories
similar to those employed by Seldon and Jung (1993), namely print (magazines plus
newspapers), broadcast (network plus spot for both radio and television), direct mail,




9   With 34 generalized first difference observations in each of the 7 linearly independent share
    equations, there is a total of 238 observations. In the 7 share equations, there are 7 different constant
    terms, 28 distinct parameters on the price variables, and 56 distinct parameters on the non-price
    variables, for a total of 91 distinct parameters; this leaves 147 residual degrees of freedom (238-147=91).
    Note that the number of parameters appearing in each equation is 16 (though many cross-equation
    restictions occur), much less than the 34 annual time series observations.

10We employed as instruments data on: broadcast industry earnings; cost of materials for the publishing
industry; a price index for newsprint; postal rates; the number of magazines and newspapers per capita;
and the number of television and radio stations. Definitions and sources of these data series along with
parameter estimates and fit measures are given in Appendix B.


                                                       15
and a residual “other” category. We then test for the empirical validity of the
parameter restrictions implied by Seldon and Jung’s grouping procedure.11

                       IV. DATA BASE AND ECONOMETRIC RESULTS
     We investigated intermedia substitutability by national advertisers among a cross-
section of eight basic classes of media: direct mail, magazines, newspapers, network
radio, spot radio, network television, spot television, and outdoor. Each medium’s
annual share of total national advertising expenditures was computed using national
advertisers’ annual expenditures (in current dollars) for each medium. The time series
analyzed comprised 35 annual observations covering the period 1960-1994 which
encompasses six business cycles as defined by the National Bureau of Economic
Research’s dating of turning points (Boldin 1994).
     Table 1 contains operational definitions and data sources for the share and price
variables employed, together with measures of exogenous variables considered in the
analysis. Here, we begin by reviewing the pattern of changes in media shares and prices
observed over the 1960-1994 period. Then we discuss estimation results for our media
share model, including specification checks. Finally, we summarize the estimates
obtained for the price parameters that are used to calculate the elasticity estimates, per
Eq. (3) and (4) above and briefly discuss the effects of the exogenous variables.
                                          INSERT TABLE 2 HERE

IV.1 Trends in Media Shares and Prices: 1960-1994
        Figure 1 present a time series plot for the shares of national advertising
expenditures realized annually by each of the five largest media for the 35 year period
1960-94. As can be seen, direct mail predominated throughout the period, maintaining
its share relatively stable at about 34% from 1960 until the late 1970s. From 1980
onward, its share grew steadily, reaching the 46% level by the early 1990s.

                                 INSERT FIGURES 1 and 2 HERE



11These restrictions are also known as separability restrictions. See Berndt (1991, Chapter 9) for further
 discussion.


                                                     16
       Magazines and newspapers, in contrast, experienced more or less steady declines
in their shares. Magazines’ share dropped from 17% to 12-13%, while newspapers’
share decreased by nearly half, from 14% in the early 1960s to 6-7% in the early 1990s.

Network and spot television exhibited similar patterns of substantial growth
throughout the 1960s. The 1971 ban on tobacco advertising in broadcast media
precipitated an immediate drop in their shares. Both TV and radio recovered their pre-
tobacco ban share levels — 20% in the case of network television and 14-15% for spot
television — by the mid-1970s. Whereas spot television’s share subsequently remained
relatively flat until the early 1990s, network television’s share continued its upward
trend throughout the 1970s, peaking at 22-23% in early 1980s. The latter’s share
subsequently entered a period of continued decline from 1985 onward, falling to
around 17% in 1994.

       The shares of the three smallest media are plotted in Figure 2. Network radio’s
share remained flat throughout the 1960-1994 period, never representing as much as 1%
of total national advertising expenditures. Both spot radio and outdoor experienced
slow, long-term declines in share, spot radio’s dropping from approximately 4% in 1960
to around 3% in the early 1990s, and outdoors’ share declining from roughly 2% to 1%
over the same period.

       The behavior of media prices is plotted in Figure 3, which presents mean annual
percentage changes in the cost per thousand exposures (CPM) price indices for the eight
media over the period 1960-1994. As a summary measure, we constructed a Divisia
price index (Diewart 1981) for all eight media combined. Figure 3 also plots mean
changes in the eight media index, together with comparable figures for the Producer
Price Index, Finished Consumer Goods (PPIFCG) and Consumer Price Index (CPI). The
CPI is believed by many to overstate the rate of inflation, particularly for the 1970s and
1980s (Gordon 1987, pp. 53-54).

                                   INSERT FIGURE 3 HERE




                                            17
       From 1961 to 1994, advertising prices for six of the eight media rose, on average,
at a more rapid rate than did PPIFCG (the exceptions being the two small share radio
media). Moreover, for five of the eight media (network and spot television, direct mail,
newspapers, and outdoor), mean CPM increases exceeded growth in the CPI.

The relative volatility of changes in advertising rates is evident from the values of the
coefficients of variation for annual changes in the media CPM indices reported in Figure
3. The standard deviation of the percent changes in CPMs exceeded the mean value for
all four broadcast media (network and spot television and radio). The marked
variability in advertising prices for all of the media over the period of analysis is
reflected in the difference between the minimum and maximum values of the eight
coefficients of variation, 0.58 (for direct mail) and 2.01 (for network television),
respectively. This heterogeneity among media with respect to the rates at which prices
have changed over time suggests that an econometric analysis of cross-price effects
might well be informative in generating relatively precise elasticity estimate.

IV.2 Specification Checks and Estimation Results

   A Hausman (1978) test for exogeneity suggests that media prices are jointly rather
than exogenously determined; the χ2 test statistic is 236.92, with the .01 critical value
being 83.49. As a check on model specification, we also grouped the media into a set of
composite categories similar to those employed by Seldon and Jung (1993), namely,
print, broadcast, and direct mail. This grouping implies restrictions, decisively rejected
when subjected to a nested model specification test, on parameters in the share
equations of our eight-equation model (Deaton and Muellbauer 1980, Ch. 5). Finally, to
ensure that the own-price elasticities of demand for the two media with the smallest
shares were non-positive, we constrained the values of βii for network radio and
outdoor. Three-stage least square estimates of the model’s parameters are given in
Appenidx A (Tables A1 and A2). Summary statistics pertaining to the model’s fit are
presented in Table A3.

   The model fits the data quite well; the R2 value for the share equations ranges from
0.753 to .986, exceeding .9 for six of the eight media. The estimate of ρ, the
                                             18
autocorrelation coefficient, is -0.371 and statistically significant (t = 5.63). We interpret
this somewhat unusual finding as a reflection of the oscillating cycle of political
elections in the United States, which as Coen (1994) has pointed out, has a significant
biannual fluctuating impact on the level and composition of media advertising
expenditures.

IV.3 Price Parameters

     Iterative, three-stage least squares estimates of the translog parameters that relate to
price sensitivity are shown in Table A1 of Appendix A. Recall from (2) that the direct
interpretation of these symmetric (βij =βji) translog parameters is the change in the
expenditure share of media i given a 1% change in the price of media j, ceteris paribus.12
Of the six estimated “own-price” effects, four estimated βii‘s are positive (three
statistically significant) and two negative (but not statistically significant). Thus, in
most cases, media price increases translate into expenditure share increases for that
medium, indicating limited substitution. Estimates of the βij parameters were
subsequently used in (3) and (4) to generate estimates of own- and cross-price
elasticities.

     Examining estimates of cross price effect parameters for individual media, we find
that 20 of the 28 estimated βij (i≠j) parameters in Table A1 are statistically significant at
the 5% level or beyond. For magazines, network television, and outdoor, six of the
seven, and for direct mail, newspaper, and network radio, five of the seven, βij (i≠j)
parameters are statistically significant. The relative frequency of statistically significant
parameters is smaller for spot radio and spot television.

IV.4 Effects of Exogenous Variables

        Our media share demand equations depend on various exogenous influences as
well as media prices and we include a number of demand shifting variables in the share



12Note that from (5), the dependent variable is expenditure share (not quantity share) and hence the
parameters, β ii and β ij, reflect the net effects on revenues of changes in both quantities and prices.


                                                  19
model.13 The effects of these variables on advertising media shares can be directly
inferred by examining the parameter estimates in Table A2 of Appendix A, subject to
the constraints imposed by the system of share equations, to wit: all parameter
estimates for a given exogenous variable must sum to one. General patterns can
nonetheless be recognized.

        With the ban on broadcast advertising for tobacco products, media shares
increased for direct mail and newspapers and, as expected, decreased for network
television and spot television (each of the four corresponding estimated coefficients is
statistically significant at the 5% level). Similarly, consumers’ spending for non-
durables correlates negatively and substantially with the media share for direct mail,
but positively with the media shares of magazines, newspapers, spot radio, network,
and spot television and outdoor (seven of the eight estimated coefficients for consumer
non-durable spending are statistically significant). These findings are not unexpected,
manufacturers of non-durables (e.g., packaged goods) have traditionally emphasized
the use of mass media over direct consumer communication. Consumer outlays for
services, on the other hand, are (significantly) negatively correlated with the media
shares of newspapers, spot radio, and outdoor (four of the eight estimated coefficients
are statistically significant at the 5% level).

        The observed pattern of consumer expenditure effects on media shares is
interesting for two reasons. First, the media that have benefited most by the recent
growth of the service sector as a proportion of the U.S. economy are network radio and
television and direct mail. In contrast, the more “regional” media traditionally
dominated by local advertisers (i.e., the retail sector) have benefited least. (Our
measures of advertising expenditures cover only national advertisers and all advertising
activity by local service businesses usually associated with local/regional media is
excluded.) Second, deregulation of the airline and telecommunications industries


 A dummy variable for Olympics/U.S. presidential election years and a measure of the installed base of
13

VCRs were initially included as exogenous variables, both turned out to be statistically insignificant and
were subsequently deleted.


                                                   20
which includes some of the largest national advertisers in the service sector, has exerted
a significant impact on advertising spending as competition in these industries
increasingly revolves around escalating advertising. Consumer spending on durables,
on the other hand, exhibits no clear pattern of effects on media shares (only two of the
eight estimated coefficients being statistically significant).

       Increased female participation in the labor force correlated ceteris paribus with
increases in the media shares of newspapers, spot radio, and outdoor and with
decreases in the shares of direct mail, network radio, and spot television (the impact on
the latter media being only marginally significant statistically). Our magazines’ share
variable may be too aggregated to reflect the influences of such major trends. Very
likely, for example, increased female participation in the labor force participation had a
substantially negative impact on traditional women’s magazines (e.g., those related to
home and cooking), but a largely positive impact on news weeklies and business-
related magazines. Extrapolating, we might intuitively conjecture a positive effect on
newspapers, reflecting working women’s heightened interest in news events, and, with
respect to outdoor and spot radio, that working and commuting are more likely than
carpooling to occasion women’s viewing of billboards and listening to car or portable
radios.

       Expenditures on information technology exerted a large positive impact on
direct mail and a large negative impact on network television. Direct marketers tended
to benefit most from technological advances that afforded increasingly sophisticated
and cost-effective ways to target consumers and track advertising response. For
television, benefits from advances in computer technology were outweighed by relative
increases in the attractiveness of alternative media, as suggested by the positive signs of
the parameter estimates for all other media save network and spot television.

       Parameter estimates for cable and syndicated televisions (CTV) suggest that
growth of this alternative medium has most adversely affected network television.
That the signs of the parameters for five of the other six media are also negative
suggests that national advertisers have employed cable and syndicated television as a

                                              21
substitute for virtually all other media (negative coefficients for direct mail and
magazines, as well as for network television, were statistically significant). The positive
(and statistically significant) parameter estimate for newspapers, the single exception to
this pattern of negative coefficients, implies a complementary relationship between that
medium and cable and syndicated television.

           Increases in the purchasing power of households headed by 25-44 year-olds
affected positively (and statistically significantly), only direct mail, which might be
construed to reflect increasing time sensitivity, an effect likely to be especially prevalent
among dual career and single parent households.14 Such households’ use of direct mail
to reduce search costs would seem to account for the negative relationship between
their increased purchasing power and the media shares of magazines, network
television and (less statistically significantly) network radio.

                        IV.    ELASTICITY ESTIMATES

     Estimates of own- and cross-price demand elasticities reflect, ceteris paribus, the
percent change in quantity of advertising demanded from a medium, given a small
(say, 1%) change in the price of a medium. Because they depend on the estimated βij
parameters and time-varying values of the shares (Eqs. (3) and (4), Section 3), these
demand elasticities are not constant over time. Four important conclusions emerge
from our analysis of the mean values of the 34 annual own- and cross-price elasticities
estimated for the period 1961-1994 and presented in Table 3.



                                 INSERT TABLE 3 HERE

     (i)      Mean own-price elasticity estimates in Table 3 suggest that national
              advertisers’ demand for seven of the eight media is price inelastic.
              Newspaper advertising has an approximately unit mean demand elasticity
              (-1.06). Mean demand elasticities for four of the other media are significantly
              less than zero (p < .01) at -0.75 for direct mail, -0.69 for network television,

14See Pashigian and Bowen (1994) for an analysis of the effects of two-earner households and women’s
earnings on search and shopping time.


                                                22
               -0.41 for outdoor, and -0.25 for network radio. Inelastic demand is indicated
               for the remaining media, but the estimates were insufficiently precise to differ
               significantly from zero at the 1% level, although two of the three were
               significant at the 5% level (magazines at -0.32 and spot radio at -0.25). The
               mean estimated elasticity for spot television (-0.26) exceeded its estimated
               mean standard error but failed to achieve significance at even the 10% level.

       (ii)    Mean cross-price elasticity estimates suggest that intermedia substitutability
               is slightly more prevalent than intermedia complementarity.15 Of the 28 pairs
               of mean cross-price elasticities, (off-diagonal entries in Table 3), 57% (16/28)
               indicate substitute relations, by virtue of the positive signs of the estimated
               values.16 Moreover, the precision of the estimates tended to be greater for
               substitute than for complementary relationships; about two-thirds (22/32) of
               the positive mean cross-price elasticities were statistically significant (as
               judged by a two tail test, p < .05), compared to half (12/24) of the negative
               cross-price elasticities.

       (iii)   The magnitude of cross-price effects, whether substitutes or complements,
               tends to be limited, as can be seen from the size of the mean cross-price
               elasticities in Table 3.17 The median value of the 32 positive mean cross-price
               elasticities (substitutes) is 0.27 (range: 0.01 to 1.23) and only four exceed unity.
               The median value of the 24 negative cross-price elasticities (complements) is -
               0.20 (range: -0.01 to -1.63), with only two less than minus one.

       (iv)    Whereas direct mail and newspapers tend to be related to the alternative
               media primarily as substitutes, cross-price elasticities indicate a balance
               between substitutability and complementarity for the other six
               media. Substitution holds for six of the seven cross-price elasticities
               involving direct mail and for five of the seven involving newspapers. For the
               other six media, three or four of the seven price interdependencies are




15 Note that the translog model yields pairs of cross-elasticities that are symmetric with respect to sign
(since β ij = β ji), but asymmetric in magnitude (since in general, Si ≠ Sj).


16For all 28 pairwise relationships, the cross-price elasticities estimated for each annual observation
remained sign-invariant over the entire 1961-1994 period.


17   This conclusion is also supported by an analysis of the Morishima elasticies of substitution reported in
     Appendix C.


                                                       23
            complements.18

                                                   VI. DISCUSSION

     VI.1 Media Selection Practices and Institutional Factors
     The results reported in Section V indicate that national advertisers’ demands for
time and space in the major media tend to be price inelastic, while interdependencies
among market demands for the separate media involve substitute and complementary
relationships, both characteristically weak. These demand conditions are consistent not
only with our two propositions about the derived demand by national advertisers’ for
media time and space (discussed in Section II), but also with media selection practices
and institutional arrangements that have long prevailed in the U.S. advertising
industry.

     Observers of media planning practices typically describe the process as a sequential
one and emphasize the differences between intermedia and intramedia decisions.
Intermedia choices are often effectively preempted by judgments about the fit between
message strategy and alternative media exercised in the early stages of a campaign’s
development and prices are frequently a secondary consideration (Jones 1992). To the
extent that intermedia comparisons are undertaken at all, they are likely to be made
informally on the basis of criteria of uncertain validity. Data to support intermedia
comparisons are lacking (Raymond 1976, Stewart and Ward 1994). As a result, the
application of optimization methods to media planning is primarily concerned with
intramedia decisions (vehicle selection and scheduling) rather than supporting
intermedia choices (Ha 1995, Rust 1986).

     An additional factor contributing to the relative price insensitivity of national
advertisers’ choice of media mix is the existence of a classic principal-agent incentive

18 The signs of the cross elasticities for network and spot television shown in Table 3 are negative
implying complementarity. This would appear to be an anomolous result in light of the evidence
discussed in Section II.1.A that these two media are substitutes. It also bears noting that the cross-
elasticity estimates for network and spot television just achieve significance at the .05 level and the
estimate of the own-elasticity for spot television, while having the expected sign, lacks precision, with its
t-ratio being only 1.42.


                                                     24
problem which arises from the role “full service” advertising agencies traditionally
played in media selection. Media planning and placement are but one component of the
bundle of services full service agencies typically perform for national advertisers. An
advertising agency, when compensated by a fixed percentage of a client’s media
expenditures, has relatively little incentive, at least in the short run, to seek out the least
cost combination of media. Fixed media commission rates were the dominant mode of
agency compensation until the mid-1980’s when studies conducted among large
national advertisers began to detect a shift away from reliance on the traditional 15%
media commission rate (Lundin and Jones 1998). Thus, both the nature of media
selection practices and the vertical structure of the advertising industry might be
expected to render market demand for media advertising price inelastic and intermedia
price substitutability weak.

   VI.2 Implications of Aggregate Media Cross-Price Elasticities

   Our estimates of relatively weak substitute/complement relationships between the
eight media classes imply correspondingly small cross-price elasticities between
vehicles within the various media classes. Specifically, for illustrative purposes, assume
there are two media classes, medium A and medium B, the former comprised of
vehicles i and j and the latter vehicles k and l. Defining the cross-price elasticities as in
Eq. (3) above, Berndt and Christensen (1973) have shown that aggregating vehicle i and
j into a composite medium A and similarly aggregating vehicles k and l into a
composite medium B, is equivalent to assuming the following equality restrictions on
the cross-price elasticities:

                                E ik = Ejk = EAk

                                E il = E jl = E Al                (5)

                                E ki = E li = E Bi

                                E kj = E lj = E Bj

       These equality relationships imply that the relatively small estimated values of
the cross-price elasticities among the major media classes reported here will be

                                                25
accompanied by cross-price elasticities between two vehicles in two different media
classes that are also correspondingly small. Because the required data are not available,
we have by necessity assumed the existence of eight aggregate media classes and have
not been able to test this assumption empirically. However, because we decisively
rejected parameter restrictions implied by Seldon and Jung’s (1993) aggregation
procedure in which our eight classes were combined into four, implicitly we rejected
the cross-price elasticity equality restrictions, analogous to those in Eq. (5) above, that
are implied by Seldon and Jung’s approach.

           In particular, whereas Seldon and Jung’s aggregation procedure assumes that
network radio and network television have equal cross-elasticities with magazines, our
estimate of these elasticities is signficantly negative and significantly positive,
respectively (see Table 3).

VI.3 Intermedia vs. Intramedia Price Sensitivity
       Our findings of inelastic market demands and weak cross-media price effects are
also congruent with descriptions of media planning as a multistage decision process in
which intermedia choices are made on strategic and creative grounds, with price playing
a more important role in subsequent intramedia comparisons. Consider how the
elasticity of demand faced by particular advertising vehicles within some media
category relates to the market demand for the medium as a whole, when the latter is
comprised of F identical vehicle suppliers.19 This relationship takes the form
                         F 
       ev = Eii F − η s                                            (6)
                         F −1

where ev denotes the price elasticity of demand for advertising vehicle v (ev ≤ 0); Eii is
the market (own) price elasticity for medium i (Eii ≤ 0); F is the number of identical firms
comprising the medium/industry (F>1); and ηs is the elasticity of supply for the F-1
other firms (ηs ≥0).



19   See Carlton and Perloff (1990, pp. 79-81) for the derivation.


                                                        26
        Thus, it may be seen from (6) that the demand elasticity associated with a
particular vehicle depends not only on the elasticity of market demand for the medium,
but also on the market structure of the medium/industry (i.e., the number and size
distribution of vehicles within the same media category) and the elasticity of the supply
of the medium (i.e., responsiveness of capacity to changes in price).20 In general, (6)
implies that the elasticity of demand at the vehicle level is greater (in absolute value)
than that at the market level. This distinction is in line with Coen’s (1983) observation
that the process whereby media plans are adjusted to shifts in intermedia price
differentials is phased or hierarchical, wherein intramedia changes are expected to
precede a realignment of intermedia allocations.

        When applied to media advertising, a further implication of (6) is that, although
own-price elasticities may vary little across media at the market demand level, there is
likely to be considerable variation in the elasticity of demand for individual vehicles
across media categories, particularly in the short run because of intermedia differences
in market structure and the elasticity of supply.

        Table 4 cross-classifies the eight major classes of advertising media by market
structure and short-run elasticity of supply. There being practically no published
empirical estimates of supply elasticities for advertising media, we adopt a simple
dichotomous classification of the eight media for this construct. The vertical ordering of
the media reflects the level of concentration within each of the eight categories as
indicated by prior studies and empirical evidence. A detailed explanation of the bases
used for the classification in Table 3 is provided in Appendix D.

                                        INSERT TABLE 4 HERE




20The relationship between the elasticity of demand for a specific supplier (vehicle) and that for the
industry (medium) as whole depicted in (6) assumes the special case of identical suppliers. Of course, the
nature of that relationship will vary with changes in the assumption made about the market structure
(number and size distribution) of suppliers (vehicles) comprising the industry (medium). For an analysis
of the case where the market structure consists of a dominant firm and a competitive fringe, see Carlton
an Perloff (1990, pp. 205-207).


                                                   27
    Relating the classification in Table 4 to (6), we see that network television and direct
mail are polar opposites with respect to both market structure and short-run elasticity
of supply. Whereas there were only three television networks from 1960-1990, the
number of firms supplying direct mail advertising services grew from fewer than a
thousand to nearly four thousand over the same period, the four firm concentration
ratio being only 19%. Similarly, in the short-run, say one quarter, a network’s supply of
slots for some program or viewing period is essentially fixed, the elasticity of supply
approaching its lower bound of zero. 21 Direct mail campaigns, in contrast, are readily
expanded or contracted over short periods of time, and we would expect this short-run
elasticity of supply to be substantial. Hence, even though market demands for both
media appears similarly inelastic (-0.69 and -0.75 in Table 2), differences in market
structure and supply conditions tend to make the demand faced by a supplier of direct
mail services much more price elastic than that faced by a television network.

VI.4 Distinguishing Between Intermedia Substitutes and Complements
    The estimates of cross-price elasticities (summarized in Table 2) reveal a persistent
pattern of interdependencies among the eight media classes over the 1961-94 period
consisting of an almost equally balanced mix of substitutive and complementary
relations. This pattern of pairwise interrelationships among the media raises a more
fundamental question: What determines whether a pair of media is substitutes or
complements? Are our estimates consistent with what one might expect a priori?

    Elsewhere, we (Silk, Klein, and Berndt 2001) proposed the following hypotheses
pertaining to underlying media characteristics which serves to differentiate between
substitutes and complements:

    A pair of media are more likely to be substitutes than complements when they offer
    national advertisers: (H1) similar levels of audience addressability (Porter 1976); (H2)
    dissimilar levels of audience control over attention to advertising (Owen 1999)); and (H3)
    dissimilar levels of flexibility with respect to contractual requirements (Yang 1962a,b).

21 Bowman (1976) estimated the elasticity of market supply for network television commercials to be 0.15

using quarterly data.


                                                   28
        These hypotheses were supported in a preliminary test conducted using the
cross-elasticities reported in Table 1.22 Thus, our estimates of the patterns of
substitutability and complementary relationships among the eight advertising media
are consistent with a priori expectations.



                             VII.    SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

     Our econometric analysis of national advertisers’ demand for media advertising has
yielded two main conclusions: market demand for seven of the eight major mass
advertising media is price inelastic23; and interdependencies among these demands
involve a balanced mix of substitute and complementary relationships, both
characteristically weak.

     Inelastic market demand for the major categories of media advertising is congruent
with the treatment of national advertisers’ demand for media time and space as being
derived from consumers’ demand for information about the goods and services sold by
national advertisers. In the case of media advertising, the factors which theory
identifies to be basic determinants of the elasticity of derived demand would appear to
operate in the case of media advertising so as to generate inelastic market demand —
although our knowledge of the relevant underlying parameters affecting advertising is
quite primitive.

     The demand conditions revealed here also appear to be consistent with the nature of
institutional arrangements and media selection practices that have long prevailed in the
United States. Inelastic market demand and weak cross-media effects are congruent


22 An ordered probit was estimated where the 28 cross-elasticities reported in Table 2 were as a
trichotomized dependent variable (substitute vs. independent vs. compliment) and related to the
similarity/dissimilarity of the media pairs with respect to each of the three hypothesized media factors.
The signs of the coefficients for all three factors were in the hypothesized direction with the ratios of the
estimated coefficients to their standard errors being 2.3 and 1.7 for audience addressability and
contractual flexibility, respectively, but only 1.1 for audience control. See Silk, Klein, and Berndt (2001) for
details.
23 As may be seen from Table 2, the exception is newspapers for which the own-elasticity estimate was

   -1.06, indicating a slightly elastic demand, the estimate being within one standard error of the inelastic
  region.
                                                      29
with industry practices in which media planning is conducted as a multistage decision
process, with intermedia choices made primarily on strategic and creative grounds,
followed by price-sensitive intramedia comparisons of alternative vehicles. Full-service
advertising agencies have historically played a critical role in media selection, and their
reliance on media commissions as the basis for agency compensation may have served
to mitigate price sensitivity in media buying decisions.

       Finally, there is evidence that the pattern of substitution and complementary
relationships among media classes reported here is associated with three basic
attributes which differentiate the media from one another, namely the addressability or
divisibility of audience reached by a medium; the amount of control a medium’s
audience can exercise over exposure to advertising messages carried in that medium;
and the degree of flexibility with respect to the contractual arrangements required by
the medium.

   Driven by the rapid diffusion of digital technology, changing macroeconomic
conditions, and shifts in regulatory policy, interest in research on the economics
underlying the evolution of the demand and supply of media advertising is likely to
increase. Elsewhere we have argued that the traditional pattern of inelastic demand and
weak substitutability/complementarity reported here can be expected to change
substantially in the future under the growing new technology threat of direct and
indirect substitutes and rising demands by national advertisers for efficiency and
accountability in media selection (Silk, Klein, and Berndt 1999).




                                            30
                                      REFERENCES
  ________(1994), “1994 Advertising to Sales Ratios for the 200 Largest Ad Spending
                   Industries,” Advertising Age, 65 (August 8), 38.

Alba, Joseph W., J. Wesley Hutchinson, and John G. Lynch, Jr. (1991), “Memory and
Decision Making,” in Thomas S. Robertson and Harold H. Kassarjian, eds., Handbook
of Consumer Behavior. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1-49.

Andreason, Alan R. (1991), “Consumer Behavior Research and Social Policy,” in
Thomas S. Robertson and Harold H. Kassarjian, eds., Handbook of Consumer Behavior.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 459-506.

Bank, (1996) “How Net is Becoming More Like Television,” Wall Street Journal,
(December 13) A1 and A8.
Berndt, Ernst R. (1991), The Practice of Econometrics: Classic and Contemporary.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
______________ and N. Eugene Savin (1975), “Estimation and Hypothesis Testing in
Singular Equation Systems with Autoregressive Disturbances, Econometrica, 43, No. 5-
6, (September/November), 937-957.
______________and Lauris R. Christensen (1973), “The Translog Function and the
Substitution of Equipment, Structure, and Labor in U.S. Manufacturing, 1929-1968,”
Journal of Econometrics, 1, 81-114.
Blackorby, Charles and R. Robert Russell (1981), “The Morishima Elasticity of
Substitution: Symmetry, Constancy, Separability, and Its Relationship to the Hicks and
Allen Elasticities,” Review of Economic Studies, 48, 147-158.
_____________________________________(1989), “Will the Real Elasticity of Substitution
Please Stand Up,” American Economic Review, 79 (September), 882-888.
Blank, David M. (1962), “Cyclical Behavior of National Advertising,” Journal of
Business, 35 (January), 14-27.
Boldin, Michael D. (1994), “Dating Turning Points in the Business Cycle,” Journal of
Business, 67 (January), 97-131.
Bowman, Gary W. (1976), “Demand and Supply of Network Television Advertising,”
Bell Journal of Economics, 7 (Spring), 258-267.
Busterna, John C. (1987), “The Cross Elasticity of Demand for National Newspaper
Advertising,” Journalism Quarterly, 64 (Summer-Autumn), 346-351.
Carlton, Dennis W. and Jeffrey M. Perloff (1990), Modern Industrial Organization.
Glenview, Ill.: Scott Foreman Little Brown.
Christensen, Lauritis R., Dale W. Jorgenson, and Lawrence J. Lau (1973),
“Transcendental Logarithmic Production Functions,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 55 (February), 28-45.
                                           31
Coen, Robert J. (1994), “Look for Bid Up of Desirable Media,” Advertising Age, 65
(November 7), S20-22.
_____________ (1983), “The Implications of Changing Media Cost Relationships,”
Transcript Proceedings: Intermedia Comparisons, The State of the Art. New York:
Advertising Research Foundation, 33-41.
Deaton, Angus and John Muellbauer (1980), Economics and Consumer Behavior. New
York: Cambridge University Press.


Diewert, W. Erwin (1981), “The Economic Theory of Index Numbers: A Survey,” in
Angus Deaton, ed., Essays in the Theory and Measurement of Consumer Behavior in
Honor of Sir Richard Stone. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 163-208.
Dreazen, Yochi J. (2001), “Regulations on Media Ownership To Undergo FCC Review in
May,” Wall Street Journal, (March 30), B5.
Duffy, Martyn (1996), “Econometric Studies of Advertising, Advertising Restrictions,
and Cigarette Demand,” International Journal of Advertising, 15, 1-23.
Ekelund, Robert B., Jr., George S. Ford, and John D. Jackson (2000), “Are Local TV
Markets Separate Markets,” International Journal of the Economics of Business 7 , 79-97.
 ______________________________________________________(1999), “Is Radio a Distinct
Local Market? An Empirical Analysis,” Review of Industrial Organization, 14 (May
1999), 239-256.
Ehrlich, Isaac and Lawrence Fisher (1982), “The Derived Demand for Advertising: A
Theoretical and Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review, 72 (June), 366-
388.

Farris, Paul and Mark S. Albion (1981), “Determinants of Advertising-to-Sales Ratios,”
Journal of Advertising Research, 21 (February), 19-27.

Friedman, Milton (1976), Price Theory. Chicago: Aldine.

Gomery, Douglas (1993), “Who Owns the Media,” in Alison Alexander, James Owens,
and Rod Carveth, eds., Media Economics. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 47-70.
Gordon, Robert J. (1987), Macroeconomics, 4th ed. Boston: Little, Brown.
Ha, Louisa (1995), “Media Models and Advertising Effects: Conceptualization and
Theoretical Implications,” Journal of Current Issues and Research in Advertising, 17
(Fall), 1-14.
Hausman, Jerry (1978) “Specification Tests in Econometrics,” Econometrica, 46
(November), 1251-1272.
Henderson, James J. and Richard E. Quandt (1980), Microeconomic Theory. New York:
McGraw-Hill.


                                           32
Jones, John Philip (1992), How Much Is Enough? New York: Lexington Books.

Jung, Chulho and Barry J. Seldon (1995), “The Degree of Competition in the Advertising
Industry,” Review of Industrial Organization, 10 (February), 41-52.
Lundin, Robert H. and Charles B. Jones (1998), Trends in Agency Compensation. New
York:Association of National Advertisers.

Marshall, A. (1922), Principles of Economics, London: Macmillan, Book V, Chapter 6. S

McCullough, B. D. and Tracy Waldon (1998), “The Substitutability of Network and
National Spot Television,” Quarterly Journal of Business and Economics, 37 (Spring), 3-
15.

McDonough, John (1995), “Radio: A 75 Year Roller Coaster Ride,” Advertising Age, 66
(September 4), 22-24.

Moorthy, Sridhar, Brian T. Ratchford, and Debabrata Talukdar (1997), “Consumer
Information Search Revisited: Theory and Empirical Analysis,” Journal of Consumer
Research, 23 (March), 263-277.

Nelson, Philip (1974), “Advertising as Information,” Journal of Political Economy, 82
(July/August), 729-754.

_____________ (1975), “The Economic Consequences of Advertising,” Journal of Business, 48
(April), 213-241.

Neuman, W. Russell (1991), The Future of the Mass Audience. New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Noam, Eli M. (1996), “Media Concentration in the United States,” Unpublished Paper, Institute
for Tele-Information, Columbia University.

Owen, Bruce M. (1999), The Internet Challenge to Television. Cambridge, MA Harvard
University Press.

________________ and Steven S. Wildman (1992), Video Economics. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.
Pashigian, Peter and Brian Bowen (1994), “The Rising Cost of Time of Females, The
Growth of National Brands and the Supply of Retail Services,” Economic Inquiry, 32
(January), 33-65.
Peterman, John L. (1979), “Difference Between the Levels of Spot and National
Television Advertising Rates,” Journal of Business, 52 (October), 549-561.
Picard, Robert G. (1989), Media Economics. Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage.




                                              33
________________(1993), “Economics of the Daily Newspaper Industry,” in Alison
Alexander, James Owens, and Rod Carveth, eds., Media Economics. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum, 182-203.
Porter, Michael E. (1976), “Interbrand Choice, Media Mix, and Market Performance,”
American Economic Review, 66 (May), 398-406.

Raymond, Charles (1976), Advertising Research: The State of the Art. New York:
Advertising Research Foundation.

Rogers, Richard T. and Robert J. Tokle (1995), “The Economics of Advertising: Where’s
the Data?” Review of Industrial Organization, 10 (December), 675-687.
Rust, Roland T. (1986), Advertising Media Models. Lexington, Mass.: D.C. Heath.
Rossiter, John R. and Peter J. Danaher (1998), Advanced Media Planning. Boston:
Kluwer.
Schmalensee, Richard (1972), The Economics of Advertising. New York: North-Holland.
Schultz, Don E., Stanley I. Tannenbaum, and Robert E. Lauterborn (1993), Integrated
Marketing Communications. Chicago: NTC Business Books.
Seldon, Barry J. and Chulho Jung (1993), “Derived Demand for Advertising Messages
and Substitutability Among the Media,” Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance,
33 (Spring), 71-86.
_____________, R. Todd Jewell, and Daniel M. O’Brien (2000), “Media Substitutability
and Economies of Scale in Advertising,” International Journal of Industrial
Organization, 18 (December), 1153-1180.
Shepard, Ron (1970), The Theory of Cost and Production. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Silk, Alvin J., Lisa R. Klein and Ernst R. Berndt (2001), “The Emerging Position of the
Internet as an Advertising Medium,” Netnomics, 3, (September), 129-148.
__________________________________________(1999) “Restructuring in the U.S.
Advertising Media Industry: the Influence of Economic and Technological Factors,”
Working Paper 99-126, Graduate School of Business Administration, Harvard
University, March.
Stewart, David W. and Scott Ward (1994), “Media Effects on Advertising,” in J. Bryant
and D. Zillman, eds., Media Effects: Advances in Theory and Research. Hillsdale, N.J.:
Erlbaum, 1994, 315-363.

Stigler, George J. (1986) The Theory of Price, New York: MacMillan Publishing Company.

Teinowitz, Ira (1995), “First Smoke, Then Fire,” Advertising Age, Special Edition: Fifty Years of
Television Advertising, 66 (Spring), 30.



                                               34
U.S. Federal Communications Commission, Network Inquiry Special Staff (1980), “The
Market for Television Advertising,” Preliminary Report.
Yang, Chales (1964), “Variations in the Cyclical Behavior of Advertising,” Journal of
Marketing, 28 (April), 25-30.


_____________ (1962a), “A Theoretical and Empirical Investigation of Advertising
Cycles,” Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Graduate School of Business Administration,
New York University.
_____________ (1962b), “Study Shows How Advertising Lags Behind Business Cycles,”
Advertising Age, 33 (October 15), 105-114.




                                           35
                                                                                            Figure 1

                             Shares of National Advertising Expenditures
50%1960
                               for Major Media: 1960-1994 (Current $)

45%



40%



35%



30%                                                                                                                                     Direct Mail
                                                                                                                                        Magazines
                                                                                                                                        Newspapers
                                                                                                                                        Network TV
25%
                                                                                                                                        Spot TV


20%



15%



10%



 5%



 0%




                                                                                            Figure 2

                                   Shares of National Advertising Expenditures
                                    for Smallest Media: 1960-1994 (Current $)
5.0%



4.5%



4.0%



3.5%


                                                                                                                                                  Spot Radio
3.0%                                                                                                                                              Outdoor
                                                                                                                                                  Network Radio

2.5%



2.0%



1.5%



1.0%



0.5%



0.0%
       1960


              1962

                     1964

                            1966

                                    1968

                                           1970

                                                  1972

                                                         1974

                                                                1976

                                                                       1978

                                                                              1980

                                                                                     1982

                                                                                             1984

                                                                                                     1986

                                                                                                            1988

                                                                                                                   1990

                                                                                                                          1992

                                                                                                                                 1994




                                                                                                    36
                                                                                   Figure 3



                           Annual Percentage Change in Media Price Indices
                            Means and Coefficients of Variation, 1961-1994
           6.0   5.59           5.55            5.47
                                                                5.28                                                                   5.21
           5.0                                                                 4.77
                                                                                             4.49
                                                                                                                                                    CPI (4.59)
           4.0                                                                                                          3.79                        PPIFG (4.05)
                                                                                                             3.32
% Change




           3.0

                                                                                                                 2.01
           2.0

                       1.07                                           1.01                                                  1.07
                                                                                     0.76            0.81                                    0.60
           1.0                          0.58           0.66


           0.0
                                                                                  Outdoor
                                                                  Spot TV




                                                                                                                          Spot Radio
                                                                                                 Magazines


                                                                                                              Network
                                                  Newspapers




                                                                                                                                        All Eight
                   Network TV




                                                                                                               Radio




                                                                                                                                          Media
                                  Direct Mail




                                                               Mean         Coefficient of Variation




                                                                                            37
                                           Table 1
SUMMARY OF RECENT ECONOMETRIC STUDIES OF MARKET DEMAND FOR MEDIA ADVERTISING AND INTERMEDIA
                                      SUBSTITUTABILITY

Reference                                                                                                                   Findings
                                                           STUDY DETAILS

                   Type of             Classes of Media     Unit of Observation   Data Base         Demand     Own-Elast.        Cross-Elast.
                   Advertiser                                                                       Model
Seldon & Jung      Total of National   Four                 Total U.S.            Annual time       Translog   All four          Varying degrees
(1993)             plus Local          aggregate                                  series of                    aggregate         of substitution
                                       categories:                                expend.,                     categories        among all 4
                                       Broadcast, Print,                          1950-87                      inelastic         media, except for
                                       Direct Mail, All                                                                          complementarity
                                       Other                                                                                     between
                                                                                                                                 Broadcast &
                                                                                                                                 Print, 1951-54
McCullough &       National            Network (Net)        Total U.S.            Annual time       Translog   Both Net TV &     Net TV & Spot
Waldon (1998)                          TV,                                        series of                    Spot TV           TV substitute
                                       Spot TV                                    expend.,                     inelastic         for one another
                                                                                  1960-94
Ekelund, Ford, &   Unspecified mix     Newspaper, Spot      Regional market       1995 adv.         Log-log    Spot Radio        Newspaper &
Jackson (1999)     of National &       Radio,               area                  rev. for cross-              elastic           Spot TV
                   Local               Spot TV                                    section of 110                                 substitute for
                                                                                  of the largest                                 Spot Radio
                                                                                  200 radio
                                                                                  mkts.
Ekelund, Ford, &   Unspecified mix     Newspaper, Spot      Regional market       1995 adv.         Log-log    Spot TV elastic   Newspaper &
Jackson            of National &       Radio, Spot TV       area                  rev. for cross-                                Spot Radio
(2000)             Local                                                          section of 101                                 substitute for
                                                                                  of the largest                                 Spot TV
                                                                                  200 TV mkts.




                                                                         38
                                                               Table 2
                                                  VARIABLE DEFINITIONS
Abbreviation                                         Definition
SHRit          Medium i’s share of total expenditures (current dollars) made by U.S. national
               advertisers in year t, i = 1,...,8; t = 1960,...,1994, where:
                                 8

                               ∑ SHR
                                i =1
                                          i   = 1, for all t


CPMit          A price index reflecting the cost per thousand exposures in medium i during year t
               (Cit, current dollars), relative to the cost in the base period (Ci0 for 1982-84), i.e.,
               CPMit = (Cit/Ci0)∗100

PCEkt          Personal consumption expenditures in category k in year t (billions of constant 1982
               dollars), where k =1,2,3, denotes durable goods, nondurable goods, and services,
               respectively

FLPt           Civilian female labor force as a percentage of female civilian noninstitutionalized
               population age 16 and over

HPPt           Purchasing power of family households (millions of constant 1992 dollars) with
               heads of household aged 25-44 in year t—calculated by multiplying the median
               income (constant 1982 dollars) by the number of households for this age cohort

CSEt           Expenditures on computer software and services (millions of constant 1987 dollars)
               in year t—calculated by deflating these expenditures in current dollars with the
               Producer Price Index Finished Goods (1987=100). This series begins in 1965 and
               hence for t prior to that, CSE = 0.

CTVt           Index of share of total national advertising expenditures in cable network and
               syndication television in year t, relative to that share for 1980 — where CTV = 0 for t
               = 1960,...,1979; CTV = 1 for 1980 and CTV > 0, thereafter.

BANt           Index to represent the effect of the ban on tobacco advertising in broadcast media
               initiated on January 2, 1971. We hypothesized the effect to be greatest in 1971 but
               gradually diminishing thereafter as media mixes were adjusted (Teinowitz 1995).
               Thus, the index is defined as BANt = 0 for t = 1960,...,1970, and BANt = 1/y+1,
               thereafter, where y = 1 for t = 1971 and y is increased by 1 in each subsequent year.

Data Sources: Annual expenditures by medium for national and local advertising are regularly reported in Advertising Age (e.g.,
Vol. 64, May 3, 1993, p. 4) and the extended time series are published in the Statistical Abstract of the United States (e.g., 114 ed.,
1994, p.580). The indices of cost per thousand exposures are found in “McCann-Erickson Cost Indices,” (unpublished paper,
November,1995), available from Robert Coen, Senior Vice-President and Director of Forecasting, Universal McCann, New York.

             Recent data on PCE and FLP are taken from Statisical Abstract, 1995. Earlier data for these two series are reported in
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, National Income and Product Accounts, Vol. 2, 1959-88 and U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics,
Bulletin 2307 and annual editions of Employment and Earnings. HPP was constructed from data reported in U.S. Bureau of the
Census, Current Population Reports, Series P-20. Expenditures on computer software and services are published annually by the
Computer and Business Equipment Manufacturers Association (CBEMA) in CBEMA Industry Marketing Data Book.


                                                                 39
                                            Table 3

         MEAN VALUE OF ESTIMATES OF ANNUAL OWN- (Eii) AND CROSS-PRICE
                   ELASTICITIES (Eij) OVER THE PERIOD 1961-94

   (Mean Ratio of Annual Elasticity to Annual Asymptotic Standard Error in Parentheses)

                 Mag-      Net-      Out-           Spot     Net-      Spot     News-     Direct
                 azine     work      door           Radio    work      TV       paper     Mail
                           TV                                Radio

   Magazine        -0.32    +0.75      -0.06        +0.02     -0.10     -0.15    -0.27    +0.11
                  (1.75)    (5.40)    (1.64)        (0.44)   (3.38)    (1.09)    (2.14)   (0.88)


   Network TV     +0.55      -0.69     -0.10         -0.12   +0.02a     -0.19    -0.05    +0.58
                  (5.40)    (4.77)    (4.26)        (3.38)   (0. 97)   (1.65)    (0.61)   (4.86)

   Outdoor         -0.51     -1.19     -0.41         -0.45   +0.57      -0.24   +1.00     +1.23
                  (1.64)    (4.25)   (40.74)        (2.60)   (7.28)    (0.90)   (3.32)    (5.69)

   Spot Radio     +0.09      -0.66     -0.20         -0.25    -0.14    +0.27    +0.49     +0.40
                  (0.44)    (3.37)    (2.60)        (1.88)   (2.29)    (1.56)   (2.63)    (2.27)

   Network         -1.63    +0.39     +1.10          -0.61    -0.25    +1.19    +0.15      -0.33
   Radio          (3.37)    (0.97)    (7.17)        (2.28)   (12.28)   (3.24)   (0.35)     (1.07)

   Spot TV         -0.15     -0.26     -0.03        +0.07    +0.07      -0.26   +0.26     +0.30
                  (1.09)    (1.64)    (0.90)        (1.56)   (3.24)    (1.42)   (2.52)    (2.44)

   Newspapers      -0.42     -0.11    +0.17         +0.19    +0.01     +0.39     -1.06    +0.83
                  (2.14)    (0.61)    (3.32)        (2.63)   (0.35)    (2.52)    (5.12)   (5.23)

   Direct Mail    +0.04     +0.31     +0.05         +0.04     -0.01    +0.11    +0.21      -0.75
                  (0.88)    (4.86)    (5.70)        (2.27)   (1.08)    (2.44)   (5.23)     (7.78)



aRead: Cross-elasticity of demand for Network Radio (Column variable) with respect to
the price of Network TV (Row variable). Own-price elasticities are unshaded.
Substitutive relations are lightly shaded and complimentary relations are darkly
shaded.




                                               40
                                    Table 4
CLASSIFYING NATIONAL ADVERTISING MEDIA BT MARKET STRUCTURE AND
THE SHORT-RUN ELASTICITY OF SUPPLY
                                          Short-Run Elasticity of Supply
     Market Structure
                                        Low                          High


                                                          Newspaper (22%)b
                              Network TV (99%)
   High Concentrationa
                              Network Radio (95%)


                              Outdoor (31%)               Magazine (26%)

                              Spot TV (25%)
                                                          Direct Mail (19%)

    Low Concentration         Spot Radio (12%)


a Estimate   of four firm concentration ratios for 1995 in parentheses—see Appendix C for
details.
b Thisnumber represents the four firm percentage of total (circulation plus local and
national advertising) revenues.




                                              41
                                   APPENDIX A
                                     Table A1

THREE STAGE LEAST SQUARES ESTIMATES OF PRICE PARAMETERS FOR MEDIA
                                SHARE MODEL
    (Ratio of Parameter Estimate to Asymptotic Standard Error in Parentheses)


Parameter     Estimate        Parameter     Estimate           Parameter      Estimate

α1             -1.39      β 22                    0.08     β 44                  0.03
               (1.56)                            (2.92)                         (4.92)
α2              0.49      β 23                   -0.05     β 45                 -0.03
               (1.13)                            (2.94)                         (4.42)
α3              1.47      β 24                   -1.69e3   β 46                 -0.01
               (5.27)                            (0.21)                         (2.42)
α4              0.11      β 25                    0.08     β 47                  4.61e3
               (0.82)                            (3.99)                         (0.75)
α5              1.24      β 26                   -0.01     β 48                 -0.01
               (2.12)                            (3.69)                         (2.83)
α6              0.04      β 27                   -0.04     β 55                  0.02
               (0.71)                            (2.10)                         (0.78)
α7             -1.38      β 28                   -0.01     β 56                  1.60e3
               (3.29)                            (2.13)                         (0.49)
α8              0.41      β 33                   -0.01     β 57                 -0.06
               (5.54)                            (0.72)                         (2.89)
β 11           -0.04      β 34                    0.01     β 58                 -0.02
               (1.26)                            (2.10)                         (5.00)
β 12           -0.04      β 35                   -0.03     β 66                  0.006
               (1.99)                            (1.78)                         (NA)
β 13            0.04      β 36                    0.48e3   β 67                  0.01
               (2.85)                            (0.13)                         (2.87)
β 14            9.97e3    β 37                    0.02     β 68                  0.01
               (0.16)                            (1.61)                         (7.23)
β 15            0.04      β 38                    0.01     β 77                  0.08
               (1.76)                            (2.99)                         (3.24)
β 16           -5.73e3                                     β 78                 -0.01
               (2.31)                                                           (1.45)
β 17           -0.01                                       β 88                   .009
               (0.56)                                                           (NA)
β 18            0.01                                       ρ                    -0.37
               (3.97)                                                           (5.63)

Key:        1 = Direct Mail      2 = Magazines        3 = Newspapers       4 = Spot Radio
            5 = Network TV       6 = Network          7 = Spot TV          8 = Outdoor
                                     Radio

                                            42
Note: NA signifies fixed parameters.




                                       43
                                             Table A2

  THREE STAGE LEAST SQUARES ESTIMATES OF PARAMETERS FOR EXOGENOUS
                 VARIABLES (Biz) IN MEDIA SHARE MODEL

          (Ratio of Parameter Estimate to Asymptotic Standard Error in Parentheses)


                                                  Medium (i)

Exogenous      Direct     Mag-     News-        Spot      Net-     Net-       Spot     Out-
Variable       Mail       azine    papers       Radio     work     work        TV      door
                                                           TV      Radio

PCE-            0.02     -4.33e3    0.01       -0.01     +0.01     -3.55e4   -0.04      0.01
Durables       (0.67)    (0.26)    (0.52)      (1.36)    (0.56)    (0.171)   (2.33)    (3.06)

PCE-           -0.96      0.19      0.12        0.10      0.32     -3.97e3    0.21      0.03
Nondurabl      (5.15)    (2.16)    (2.12)      (3.58)    (2.85)    (0.369)   (2.44)    (1.97)
e
PCE-            0.28     -4.08e3   -0.28       -0.08      0.11      0.01      0.03     -0.07
Services       (1.98)    (0.06)    (6.46)      (3.94)    (1.19)    (1.68)    (0.45)    (6.16)

Tobacco         0.04     -3.48e3    0.02        2.15e3    -.043    -1.17e3   -0.01      1.35e3
Ban            (4.02)    (0.567)   (4.12)      (1.10)    (6.49)    (1.34)    (2.30)    (1.25)

CTV             -.01     -3.07e3    1.20e3     -9.34e5    -.004     -.0000    -.0009    -.000
               (3.96)    (3.75)    (2.12)      (0.367)   (3.42)    (0.462)   (1.105)   (0.854)

CSE             0.74      7.16e7    1.06e7      2.34e8   -8.50e7    3.98e8   -1.65e7    3.29e8
               (2.85)    (0.42)    (0.94)      (0.42)    (4.81)    (1.67)    (1.14)    (1.14)

FLP            -0.29     -0.05      0.29        0.08      0.56     -0.03     -0.15      0.09
               (1.80)    (0.55)    (4.44)      (2.63)    (0.44)    (1.78)    (1.63)    (4.79)

HPP             0.43     -0.12     -0.60e3     -0.01     -0.29     -0.01     -0.27e2   -0.01
               (4.85     (2.80)    (0.02)      (0.51)    (5.40)    (1.77)    (0.07)    (0.79)




                                                 44
                                          Table A3

                      SHARE EQUATION SUMMARY FIT STATISTICS


             Direct    Mag-     News-     Spot       Net-   Net-     Spot     Out-
             Mail      azines   papers    Radio      work   work      TV      door
                                                      TV    Radio


Mean         0.37      0.14      0.09      0.04      0.19   0.01     0.14     0.02
Share

R2           0.96      0.95      0.99      0.95      0.92   0.75     0.89     0.97
(adjusted)

Standard     0.01      0.40e2    0.24e2    0.12e2    0.01   0.44e3   0.38e2   0.58e3
Error of
Estimate
Durbin-      1.31      1.36      2.08      1.15      1.75   1.67     1.25     1.85
Watson




                                             45
                                            APPENDIX B

                          FIRST STAGE MEDIA PRICE EQUATIONS

B1.0 Instruments

       B1.1 Definitions

      Table B1 presents definitions of the variables used as instruments in the first stage
media price equations.

       B1.1 Sources

       Time series for radio and television employee average hourly earnings (BRE) are found
in the Statistical Abstract of the United States: 1960-1995 and regularly published in
Employment and Earnings, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Bulletins 2370 and 2429
Washington, D.C. Data on the number of TV and Radio Stations are published in the Annual
Report of the Federal Communications Commission, Washington, D.C., U.S. Government
Printing Office. Data on the number of newspapers and magazines in circulation (MCAP and
NCAP) are published in the Editor and Publisher International Year Book Annual, Editor and
Publisher Co., New York, NY. The Producer Price Index for Newsprint (PPIN) is obtained from
the U.S. Dept. of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, and also regularly published in Statistical
Abstracts. Third Class Postal Rates (3rd class) were obtained from United States Post Office, as
published in U.S. Domestic Postal Rates 1872-1993, Tables 27-1, 2, 3, 4 and 28-1-6. Cost of
materials for the publishing industry is reported in the Census of Manufactures, series MC87-
1-27A, and the Annual Survey of Manufactures.

B2.0 First Stage Equation Results

       Results from regressions of the prices on the instruments are included in Tables B2 and
B3. All variables measured in dollar terms were converted to constant (1987) dollars and
transformed to natural logarithms. All exogenous variables included in the price regressions
appear in the same form as that used in the media share equations.




                                              46
                                          Table B1

                               INSTRUMENT DEFINITIONS

Abbreviation   Definition

POST           The postage price of a typical direct mail piece weighing 4 oz. sent third-class
               bulk rate.

PPIN           A price index reflecting producer prices for newsprint.

BRE            Average hourly earnings for radio and television employees.

PCOG           Average cost of goods for publishers, including magazines and newspapers

TV             The number of commercial television stations registered in the United States.

AMRST          The number of AM radio stations registered in the United States.

MCAP           The number of magazines published in the United States, divided by the total
               U.S. population.

NCAP           The number of newspapers published in the United States, divided by the total
               U.S. population.




                                              47
                                                 Table B2

          ESTIMATES OF REGRESSION COEFFICIENTS FOR EXOGENOUS VARIABLES IN
                            FIRST STAGE PRICE EQUATIONS

              (Ratio of Parameter Estimate to Asymptotic Standard Error in Parentheses)


                                                            Medium (i)

Exogenous                 Direct    Mag-      News-       Spot      Network Network      Spot      Out-
Variables and             Mail      azines    papers      Radio       TV     Radio        TV       door
Instrumentsa


PCE- Durables              0.11      0.28      0.15        0.15       0.51      0.78      0.55     -0.02
                          (1.28)    (1.23)    (0.91)      (0.64)     (1.87)    (2.21)    (2.74)   (0.11)

PCE- Nondurables           -1.50     2.43      1.47        3.34       3.16      2.75      3.48     1.91
                          (4.07)    (2.52)    (2.09)      (3.28)     (2.75)    (1.85)    (4.07)   (2.01)

PCE- Services              0.60      -2.49    -0.94       -2.36       -2.64    -3.76      -2.63    -0.97
                          (2.86)    (4.55)    (2.37)      (4.08)     (4.04)    (4.45)    (5.40)   (1.80)

BAN                        0.01      0.01      -0.02       -0.06      -0.06    -0.04      -0.06   -0.003
                          (0.70)    (0.26)    (1.45)      (3.01)     (2.96)   (1.250)    (3.95)   (0.19)

CTV                      -9.12e4    -2.73e3   3.30e3      -0.01     -2.76e3   3.70e3    -5.03e4    0.01
                          (0.31)     (0.36)   (0.60)      (1.01)     (0.30)   (0.31)     (.074)   (0.82)

CSE                       6.50e8    3.10e6    1.17e6      1.08e6     2.62e6   1.68e6     1.90e6   -1.09e6
                          (0.13)    (2.42)    (1.25)      (0.80)     (1.72)   (0.85)     (1.67)    (0.86)

FLP                        0.12      0.05     -0.11        0.18       0.94      1.86     -0.62     -0.25
                          (0.43)    (0.07)    (0.20)      (0.24)     (1.11)    (1.69)    (.94)    (0.35)

HPP                       0.373     -0.865    -0.669      -1.111     -1.483    -1.754    -1.433    -0.104
                         (2.440)    (2.170)   (2.300)     (2.640)   (3.110)   (2.850)   (4.040)   (0.264)


a See   Table B1 for definitions of the variables.




                                                     48
                                                 Table B3

                 ESTIMATES OF REGRESSION COEFFICIENTS FOR INSTRUMENTS
                             IN FIRST STAGE PRICE EQUATIONS

              (Ratio of Parameter Estimate to Asymptotic Standard Error in Parentheses)


                                                            Medium (i)

Exogenous                 Direct    Mag-      News-       Spot     Network Network    Spot     Out-
Variables and             Mail      azines    papers      Radio      TV     Radio      TV      door
Instrumentsa
POST                       0.02      -0.05     -0.08       -0.03     -0.08   -0.03     -0.01    -0.08
                          (1.13)    (0.99)    (2.21)      (0.66)    (1.43)   (0.38)   (0.29)   (1.74)

PPIN                       0.01     -0.05      0.15       -0.10      0.13     0.03     0.20     -0.04
                          (0.24)    (0.37)    (1.47)      (0.68)    (0.75)   (0.15)   (1.59)   (0.31)

BRE                        0.08      -0.06     -0.13       0.25      -0.08   -0.01     -0.20    0.11
                          (1.03)    (0.28)    (0.85)      (1.15)    (0.30)   (0.04)   (1.09)   (0.53)

PCOG                       0.10     -0.07     -0.03       -0.08      0.39     0.43     0.22     -0.16
                          (1.43)    (0.34)    (0.21)      (0.40)    (1.85)   (1.57)   (1.42)   (0.89)

TVST                       0.12      -0.02     0.08        0.29      -0.10    -0.28    -0.11    0.01
                          (1.70)    (0.09)    (0.58)      (1.49)    (0.45)   (0.98)   (0.68)   (0.07)

AMRST                      0.21      1.05      -0.03       0.41      0.75     1.48     1.49     -0.32
                          (0.93)    (1.78)    (0.08)      (0.65)    (1.06)   (1.62)   (2.84)   (0.55)

MCAP                      -0.10      0.63      0.36        0.37      0.39     0.85     0.63     0.31
                          (1.58)    (3.81)    (2.99)      (2.12)    (1.96)   (3.34)   (4.32)   (1.93)

NCAP                       0.13      -0.53     -0.23       -0.40     -0.53   -1.06     -0.73    -0.18
                          (2.06)    (3.24)    (1.92)      (2.310    (2.74)   (4.21)   (5.06)   (1.10)


a See   Table B1 for definitions of the variables.




                                                     49
                                        Table B4

                    PRICE EQUATION SUMMARY FIT STATISTICS


             Direct    Mag-     News-      Spot    Net-   Net-    Spot   Out-
             Mail      azines   papers     Radio   work   work     TV    door
                                                    TV    Radio

R2            .99      0.98      0.93       0.98   0.93   0.97    0.95    .89
(adjusted)

Standard      .01       .01       .01        .01    .02    .02     .01    .01
Error of
Estimates
Durbin-      2.10      1.98      1.89       1.82   1.94   2.01    2.49   1.94
Watson




                                              50
                                                              APPENDIX C
ANALYSIS OF MORISHIMA RELATIVE EXPENDITURE SHARE ELASTICITIES

        The magnitudes of own- and cross-price elasticities have implications for the patterns of
influence occurring among a set of media as a result of changes in their relative prices. These
interdependencies were investigated by calculating the Morishima elasticity of substitution for
relative expenditure shares and relative prices, (Mij), defined as (Blackorby and Russell 1981,
1989):


                 ∂ ln (S j / S i )
        M ij ≡                                           = 1 + E ii − E ij                           (C1)
                 ∂ ln (P j / P i )      A, Z and
                                     P j fixed (j ≠ i)

         The Morishima relative share elasticity (Mij) answers the following question: How
sensitive is the share of total advertising expenditures realized by media j relative to the share
obtained by medium i, given a small change in the relative prices due to an action taken by i,
ceteris paribus? It is apparent from (C1) that the sign and magnitude of Mij depend upon the
sign and magnitude of the relevant own- (Eii) and cross-price elasticities (Eij).

        In particular, the value taken by Mij reflects (a) whether demand for medium i is elastic
or inelastic, and (b) whether medium i and j are substitutes or complements. When Mij is zero,
medium j’s share relative to that of i is independent of a change in their relative prices initiated
by i. When i and j are substitutes, non-zero values of Mij indicate that j’s share position relative
to that of i is vulnerable to a change in their relative prices initiated by i. When i and j are
complements, non-zero values of Mij indicate that j’s share position relative to that of i is co-
dependent on changes in their relative prices initiated by i.

         Table C1 presents the possible combinations of inelastic/elastic demand conditions and
substitute/complement relationships as a 2 x 2 matrix. Each of the four cells of Table C1 may
be further split according to whether Mij is greater than or less than zero. When a pair of media
are price substitutes (upper half of Table C1), negative values of Mij denote strong substitutability
in the sense that the magnitude of the cross-price elasticity exceeds the extent of inelasticity
(elasticity), i.e., Eij > (1 + Eii). Positive values of Mij indicate weak substitutability in the sense that
the magnitude of the cross-price elasticity is less than the extent of inelasticity (elasticity), i.e.,
Eij < (1 + Eii). Similarly, for media pairs that are complements (lower half of Table C1), the sign
of Mij distinguishes instances of weak complementarity (Mij > 0) from those of strong
complementarity (Mij < 0).
                                                 ***************
                                           INSERT TABLE C1 HERE
                                                *****************
         Morishima elasticities were estimated for each year of the 1961-1994 study period. Mean
values and the corresponding mean ratios to their asymptotic standard errors are presented
below in Table C2. Table C1 summarizes how the incidence and magnitude of the mean values
of the Morishima elasticities for the various media pairs vary across the combinations of own-
and cross-price elasticity conditions defined by the six relevant cells of the table.


                                                                       51
        Consider first the case of the substitutes in the upper half of Table C1. That weak
substitutability was more prevalent than strong substitutability is indicated by the positive
mean Morishima elasticities for 18 of the 32 pairs. Nine of the fourteen cases of strong
substitutability (Mij < 0) accompanied inelastic demand, which was to be expected, newspapers
being the only medium for which demand was elastic.11 (22 For each instance of strong
substitutability, we tested the null hypothesis that Mij = 0 and found that for only seven of the
fourteen Mij’s, could the latter hypothesis be rejected at the .05 level (one-tail test). These seven
cases of “significant strong substitutability” are listed below in Table C3.

        Given that direct mail and newspapers are the two media that were predominantly
substitutes, it is not surprising that direct mail was the source of influence or “clout” in three of
the seven cases of significant strong substitution, newspapers played a similar role in the other
two cases.

        Table C3 also displays the value of the Morishima elasticity for the reciprocal
relationship (Mji) for each of the seven cases of strong substitutability. A reciprocal substitute
relationship was designated as “independent” when the null hypothesis that Mji = 0 could not
be rejected at the .05 level (one-tail test). The resulting classification of the reciprocal Mji’s is
presented in the last column of Table C3.

       Contrasting the pairwise values of Mij and Mji underscores the asymmetry of intermedia
competition. For each of the seven cases, the reciprocal substitute relationship (Mji) appears
substantially weaker (i.e., either “weak” or “independent”) than that of its strong counterpart
(Mij). Thus, the intermedia relationships identified in Table C3 are situations where one
medium operates at a competitive advantage (disadvantage) relative to the other

       It is apparent from the summary of the Morishima elasticities for cases in which media
pairs are complements (lower half of Table C3) that the weak complementarity condition
predominates (23 of 24 pairs of complements). All but one of the complementary relationships
involved inelastic demand. That the market demand for only one of the eight media
(newspapers) was elastic clearly restricted the possibilities for strong complementarities to be
observed here.

       Although it predominates over intermedia complementarity, intermedia substitutability
tends to be weak as reflected in our analysis of the Morishima elasticities. The few cases of
strong substitutability that were observed, seem to be characterized by asymmetric
competition, the media most often involved being direct mail and newspapers. Weak
complementarity was universally observed; no instances of significant strong complementarity
appeared.



22Quasi-concavity conditions on the advertising cost function (see equation (2) above) imply that Mij ≤ 1.
For the complement/inelastic demand condition shown in Table C1, six of the 22 estimated Mij’s exceeded
unity. However, a one-tail test of the null hypothesis that Mij = 1 could be rejected in only two of the six
cases (at p=.05).




                                                    52
                                  Table C1
  MORISHIMA ELASTICITY OF SUBSTITUTION AS A FUNCTION OF OWN- AND CROSS-PRICE ELASTICITIES (1994 Estimates)
                                                          ∂ ln (S j / S i )
                                                 M ij =                       = 1 + E ii − E ij        (9)
                                                          ∂ ln (p j / p i )


                                                                                          Own-price Elasticity
        Cross-price Elasticity                                     Inelastic                                                 Elastic                    Totals
                                                                  0 > Eii > - 1                                              Eii ≤ - 1
                                                     Mij < 0                        Mij > 0                         Mij < 0              Mij > 0
                                                 (1 + Eii) < Eij                 (1 + Eii) > Eij                 (1 + Eii) < Eij
                                             Strong Substitution              Weak Substitution              Strong Substitution
 Substitutes           Median                         -0.44                          +0.58                            -0.32          Not Applicable
   Eij > 0             (Range)                    (-.05/-0.99)                  (+0.004/+0.73)                   (-0.21/-1.06)
                       Test: (Mij =0 )
                       Do Not Reject         Independent          4           Independent          4         Independent     3             —-             11
                       Rejecta               Vulnerable           5           Vulnerable          14         Vulnerable      2                            21
                       Total No. ij Pairs                         9                               18                         5                            32
                                                   Mij < 0                          Mij > 0                        Mij < 0               Mij > 0
                                                                                 (1 + Eii) > Eij                (1 + Eii) < Eij       (1 + Eii) > Eij
                                                                                     Weak                          Strong                 Weak
                                               Not Applicable                  Complementarity                Complementarity       Complementarity
Complements             Median                                                       +0.88                         (-0.01)               (+0.21)
   Eij <0               (Range)                                                 (+0.43/+2.32)
                        Test: (Mij =0)
                        Do Not Reject                —-                       Independent   0                Independent     1      Independent 1          2
                        Rejecta                                               Co-Dependent 22                Co-Dependent    0      Co-Dependent 0        22
                        Total No. ij Pairs                                                 22                                1                   1        24
                  TOTALS                                          9                        40                                6                   1        56
     aOne tail test, p ≤ .05.




                                                                       53
                                             Table C2

      MEAN VALUE OF ESTIMATES OF ANNUAL MORISHIMA SHARE ELASTICITY OF A
                                    SUBSTITUTION, 1961-1994
       (Mean Ratio of Annual Elasticity to Annual Asymptotic Standard Error in Parentheses)
                                 ∂ln (S j / S i
                          M ij =                Pj fixed but Pi var ies (i ≠ j)
                                 ∂ln (Pj / Pi



                                              Mij where j equals:

Mij where i   Network    Networ      Spot       Spot      News-     Outdoor    Mag-      Direct
equals:         TV       k Radio      TV        Radio     Paper                azine     Mail

Network                  -0.08       0.57       0.97      0.43       1.50     -0.44      0.04
TV                       (0.17)     (2.08)     (3.75)    (1.75)     (5.84)    (2.22)    (0.02)

Network         0.73                 0.68       0.89       0. 73    +0.17       0.84      0.75
Radio         (24.26)              (20.62)    (13.24)    (15.50)    (2.04)    (22.22)   (29.60)

Spot TV        0.93      -0.45                  0.47      0.35       0.98       0.89     0.63
              (3.36)     (1.08)                (2.17)    (1.43)     (2.63)    (13.24)   (3.29)

Spot Radio     0.87       1.36       0.68                 0.56       1.20      0.73      0.71
              (5.74)     (4.83)     (4.44)               (3.61)     (6.21)    (3.90)    (4.68)

Newspaper     -0.01      -0.21      -0.32      -0.55                -1.06      0.21     -0.27
              (0.04)     (0.40)     (1.33)     (2.16)               (6.21)    (0.69)    (1.09)

Outdoor         0.69     -0.51       0.62       0.79      0.42                   .65      0.54
              (25.38)    (3.24)    (18.72)    (10.10)    (7.78)               (17.57)   (31.67)

Magazine       0.14       2.32       0.83       0.59      1.11       1.19                0.64
              (0.63)     (4.93)     (2.89)     (1.65)    (3.30)     (2.86)              (3.38)

Direct Mail   -0.33       0.58      -0.05      -0.15     -0.58      -0.99      0.14
              (1.64)     (1.86)     (0.30)     (1.55)    (2.91      (3.72)    (0.71
                                        Table C3

                    SIGNIFICANT STRONG SUBSTITUTE RELATIONS

                                                             Reciprocal Relation
                                            Mij            Mji
                                          (i-->j)        (j--> i)
          Substitute Relation           Influence i    Influence j
                                        Exerts on j:   Exerts on i
                                          Strong
Inelastic Demand for Medium (i)
Network TV (i) -- Magazine (j)             -0.44        +0.14         Independent
Outdoor (i)      -- Network Radio (j)      -0.51        +0.17         Weak
Direct Mail (i)  --Network TV (j)          -0.33        +0.004        Independent
Direct Mail (i)  -- Newspaper (j)          -0.58        -0.27         Independent
Direct Mail (i)  -- Outdoor (j)            -0.99        +0.54         Weak
Elastic Demand for Medium (i)
Newspaper (i)    -- Spot Radio (j)         -0.55        +0.56         Weak
Newspaper (i)    -- Outdoor (j)            -1.06        +0.42         Weak




                                           55
                                             APPENDIX D
    CLASSIFYING NATIONAL ADVERTISING MEDIA BY MARKET STRUCTURE AND THE
                       SHORT-RUN ELASTICITY OF SUPPLY
       This appendix explains how the classification of media by market structure and short-
run elasticity of supply presented in Table 4 was developed.
D.1 Short-Run Elasticity of Supply
        Given the absence of empirical studies of this quantity, we resorted to a simple
dichotomous categorization of the media based upon judgmental estimates of how expandable
the amount of space or time available to advertisers was in the short-term, say a quarter. The
short-run elasticity of broadcast media tends to be relatively low given that the numbers of
stations and time slots are essentially fixed. Similarly, the supply of outdoor advertising space
cannot be quickly expanded in the near term because of the restricted availability of suitable
locations. In contrast, for print media, the elasticity of supply is comparatively greater since the
amount of advertising space available within an issue or edition can be increased within a
relatively short time frame.
D.2 Market Structure
        We arrayed the eight media in Table 4 according to the levels of concentration
prevailing in each category as indicated by published studies and evidence.* The newspaper
industry is generally characterized as monopolistic, with 90% of the United State’s 1,600 daily
newspapers being the only papers published in their served markets and 85% of these papers
owned by larger publishing or media firms (Picard 1993). However, the percentage of the
industry’s total revenue (circulation plus national and local advertising) accounted for by the
four largest publishing firms was in 1995. Since the division of newspaper company revenues
into circulation and advertising sources is not usually divulged, the four firm concentration
level was calculated using total company and industry revenues as reported by the American
Newspaper Association and Advertising Age. Network television remained a three-firm
oligopoly for four decades until Fox formed a fourth network in 1990 (Owen and Wildman
1992), followed by two additional entries in 1994.
        In contrast, radio networks are more numerous (72 were operating in 1995) and
differentiated. However, concentration in the network radio market is high and increasing. As
of 1996, the top three firms - ABC, CBS, and Westwood One - accounted for over 95% of
network advertising revenues (ABC Network Radio Research). Following the early 1997
merger of Westwood and the CBS Radio Network, the industry will be a virtual duopoly.
Overall, radio derives only about 20% of its advertising revenues from national (as opposed to
local) advertisers. Further, 80% of spending on radio by national advertisers is spot rather than
national (McDonough 1995). Spot radio markets are typically served by dozens of competing
stations and, although the relaxation of regulations on multiple station ownership has been
accompanied by an increase in concentration in recent years, the four largest ownership groups
controlled only 12% of the industry’s total revenue in 1995 (Noam 1996). Similarly, major spot
television markets are generally served by several local television stations and the gradual

*See Gomery (1993) , Neuman (1991), and Picard (1989) for reviews of research on market structures in
the media industries. Discussions of concentration levels in media industries typically rely on audience
size and/or sales revenue as the relevant measure of size or output. Measures of the concentration of
advertising volume and revenue have not been developed.


                                                    56
reduction of limits on nationwide ownership of stations has led to an increase in concentration
over time. By 1995, the four largest ownership groups accounted for about 25% of television
station revenues in the United States (Noam 1996).
       A competitive market structure prevails in the national magazine advertising market,
with 12 thousand titles being published. The largest publishers are diversified media firms; the
four leading magazine publishers accounted for 25.9% of all magazine revenues in 1995
(Endicott 1996). Data from the Census of Service Industries showed that in 1992 outdoor
advertising services were supplied by approximately 1,300 firms and the four firm
concentration ratio was 31.2%. Direct mail services were available from almost 4,000 firms in
1992, with a four firm concentration ratio of 19.1%.




                                              57
