NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ESTIMATION OF A DYNAMIC AUCTION GAME
Mireia Jofre-Bonet
Martin Pesendorfer
Working Paper 8626
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8626
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2001
An earlier version of the paper was circulated under the title "Bidding Behavior in a Repeated Procurement
Auction". We are grateful to two referees and an editor for detailed and helpful comments. We thank Dirk
Bergemann and Ariel Pakes for numerous discussions at early stages of the research, and Lanier Benkard,
Phil Haile, Frode Sten and Jonathan Levin for their useful comments as discussants of this paper. We also
thank seminar participants at Boston University, Brown, Carnegie Mellon, Columbia, Florence, Georgetown,
Harvard, Hebrew University, Michigan, Rochester, Upenn, Yale, Wharton, the 1999 EEA meetings, the 1999
Econometric Society meetings, a Cowles conference at Yale, the 2000 NBER 10 meetings and the 1999
CEPR meetings in Toulouse for helpful comments. Kenneth Chan and Nancy Epling provided excellent
research assistance. Martin Pesendorfer gratefully acknowledges financial support from NSF grant SES
9811134. We are also grateful to the California Department of Transportation for making the data available
to us. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 2001 by Mireia Jofre-Bonet and Martin Pesendorfer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Estimation of a Dynamic Auction Game
Mireia Jofre-Bonet and Martin Pesendorfer
NBER Working Paper No. 8626
December 2001
JEL No. D44, D82

ABSTRACT
This paper proposes an estimation method for a repeated auction game under the presence of
capacity contraints. The estimation strategy is computationally simple as it does not require solving for
the equilibrium of the game. It uses a two stage approach. In the first stage the distribution of bids
conditional on state variables is estimated using data on bids, bidder characteristics and contract
characteristics. In the second stage, an expression of the expected sum of future profits based on the
distribution of bids is obtained, and costs are inferred based on the first order condition of optimal bids.
We apply the estimation method to repeated highway construction procurement auctions in the
state of California between May 1996 and May 1999. In this market, previously won uncompleted
contracts reduce the probability of winning further contracts. We quantify the effect of intertemporal
constraints on bidders' costs and on bids. Due to the intertemporal effect and also to bidder asymmetry,
the auction can be inefficient. Based on the estimates of costs, we quantify efficiency losses.

Mireia Jofre-Bonet
Department of Public Health
Yale University
P.O. Box 208034
New Haven, CT 06520-8034
mireia.jofre-bonet@yale.edu

Martin Pesendorfer
Department of Economics
Yale University
P.O. Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
martin.pesendorfer@yale.edu

1. INTRODUCTION

Most of the literature on empirical estimation of auctions assumes a static auction setting.
Parsch (1992), La ont, Ossard and Vuong (1995), Guerre, Perrigne and Vuong (2000), and
others develop an empirical approach to quantify informational uncertainty in static auction
games. On the contrary, there is little empirical work on dynamic auction games2 or dynamic
oligopoly games.3
This paper proposes an estimation method for dynamic oligopoly games. The method
is computationally simple as it does not require solving for the equilibrium strategies of the
game. We apply the method to estimate a repeated rst-price auction game under the presence
of capacity contraints.
We observe data on bids, contracts' characteristics and bidders' state variables. The
estimation problem is how to infer privately known costs. We propose an estimation method
that infers costs based on the rst order condition of optimal bids of the repeated bidding game.
We assume that observed data is generated by equilibrium play and estimate the distribution
of bids conditional on state variables. Our crucial idea is that the expected discounted sum
of future pro ts, which enter the rst order condition, can be written looking forward and
depending entirely on the distribution of bidders' bid choices.4 In particular, the resulting
expression of the value function can be written as a linear equation system which can be easily
solved numerically. With the value function at hand, costs are inferred based on the rst order
condition.
La ont and Robert (1999) and Donald, Paarsch and Robert (1997) analyze nitely
repeated auctions. La ont and Robert consider a sequence of auctions in which, at each stage,
an identical object is sold. Their model generates complex intra-day dynamics which are
applied to data on eggplant auctions. Donald, Paarsch and Robert consider a model in which
a nite number of objects are sold in a sequence of ascending-price auctions. They estimate
the model using data on the sales of Siberian timber-export permits.
3
Pakes (1994) summarizes the literature on estimation in dynamic games.
4
A related estimation strategy of the value function is employed by Hotz and Miller
(1993). They approximate the value function with discrete choices using estimates of choice
probabilities. Their framework di ers from ours in a number of ways: First, they consider
a single agent dynamic decision problem. Second, they restrict their attention to discrete
actions. Finally, they do not model informational constraints.
2

{1{

Our approach builds partially on the two stage approach that Elyakime, La ont, Loisel
and Vuong (1994), and Guerre, Perrigne and Vuong (2000) develop for static models. These
papers estimate the distribution of equilibrium actions based on bid data. In equilibrium, the
distribution function estimates summarize bidders' beliefs and can be used to infer bidders'
valuations based on the rst order condition of optimal actions. The main contribution of our
paper is to extend the estimation method to dynamic games.
In work in progress, Berry and Pakes (2000) consider a related estimation strategy for
dynamic games. The distinguishing feature of their approach is to consider an alternative
representation of the value function in which the expected sum of future pro ts is replaced
with a sequence of future pro t realizations. In dynamic auction games, this representation
is less attractive because pro ts are not observed and cannot be expressed indirectly, from
observed bids, without knowing the equilibrium bid functions.
We apply our method to repeated procurement auctions for highway paving contracts.
In this setting, previously won uncompleted contracts may a ect the ability to win further
contracts. Two distinct e ects may arise: First, since the duration of highway paving contracts
is a number of months, winning a large contract may commit some of the bidder's machines and
paving resources for the duration of the contract. Although rental of additional equipment is
available, this may increase total cost. Second, an experience e ect may arise, since supplying
services on a large contract may give a bidder the necessary expertise to conduct further
services. The expertise e ect may lower the cost for future contracts.
The results of our estimation using highway procurement data show that capacity constraints do a ect rms' bidding strategies. In particular, the cost of taking on an additional
contract is increasing in backlog. The increase in costs resulting from a larger than average
backlog seems to cancel out any cost-reducing expertise e ects, if they exist. Based on the
estimates of costs, we quantify eÆciency losses.
Our estimation method requires that bidders completely understand the auction environment and that our estimates of winning probabilities correctly measure bidders' perceived
odds of winning. Beyond some general regularity predictions, we are not able to assess the
adequacy of our behavioral assumptions. The main reason is that our data do not contain in{2{

formation about bidders' assessments. In particular, we do not observe bidders' perceived odds
of winning a contract, nor bidders' actual contract costs. More detailed information about ex
post realized outcomes is observed in outer continental shelf auctions studied by Hendricks and
Porter (1988) and Porter (1995) among others. Hendricks and Porter convincingly show that
auction models provide accurate predictions of outcomes and that the behavioral assumptions
of game theoretic models are satis ed.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the bidding model. Section 3 introduces the econometric method. The section addresses several issues: First, how to estimate
the distribution of bids conditional on bidders' state variables and contract characteristics.
Second, how to estimate the expected future discounted payo of bidders based on estimates
of the bid distribution function. Third, how to infer costs using the rst order condition of
optimal bids in the repeated game. Finally, conditions are provided under which the bidding
model's parameters are identi ed.
Section 4 describes the industry and the data. We examine data on highway procurement
contracts in California. The descriptive data analysis suggests the presence of capacity constraints. Estimates of the probability of submitting a bid reveal that bidders with low backlog
levels are about twice as likely to submit a bid than bidders with high backlog levels.
Section 5 presents the estimates of the bidding model. The distribution of costs exhibits
the expected properties of capacity constraints. To illustrate the estimates, we evaluate the
estimated bid and cost distributions at average sample characteristics. The distribution of
bids and costs at low backlog values stochastically dominates (in the rst order sense) the
distribution at high backlog values. Moreover, increasing the backlog appears to monotonically
decrease the discounted sum of future pro ts.
Section 6 reports the e ect of backlog on the expected price paid by the auctioneer and the
e ect of backlog on the expected auction return to individual bidders. In addition, we compare
the observed outcome to a cost minimizing allocation of contracts. We conduct experiments
to assess the magnitude of eÆciency losses. Finally, section 7 provides some discussion and
concludes.
{3{

2. THE BIDDING MODEL

This section describes the bidding model. We begin with a general description of the
game. We describe the sequencing of events in the stage game and the assumptions entering
each event. We then describe the law of motion of the state variables and the payo s to bidders.
We conclude the section with some remarks on the existence of a value function representation
of payo s and the existence of markovian equilibria of the game.
The bidding model that we take to the data has the following features: Time is discrete
with an in nite horizon, t = 0; 1; 2; : : :. There are two types of bidders: regular and fringe
bidders. Fringe bidders have a short life and exit in the period they entered.5 Regular bidders
stay in the game forever. The set of regular bidders is denoted by f1; : : : ; ng and the set of
fringe bidders in period t is denoted by fn + 1; : : : ; ntF g.
The Stage Game: In every period t the buyer o ers a single contract for sale. The sale
can be described by the following sequence of events: First, the characteristics of the contract
are revealed to all bidders. Second, bidders learn their costs privately. Third, bidders may
submit bids. Fourth, the seller awards the contract to the low bidder - ties are resolved with
the ip of a coin. The events in the stage game have the following features:
The contract characteristics, st0 , are drawn independently and identically from the exogenous probability distribution function, F0 (:), with nite support S0 . Future contract characteristics are assumed to be unknown to bidders.6 The contract characteristics, st0, include
the physical attributes of the contract such as the contract size and duration, as well as the
We observe a number of bidders that submit a bid only once, or a small number of times.
On the other hand, we observe a number of bidders that submit bids frequently. To account
for this di erence, we classify rms into two groups: Regular bidders, which are the largest 10
rms in dollar value won and with at least 80 bids submitted; and Fringe bidders which are
the remaining rms.
6
In highway procurement auctions future projects are not known to bidders. Only a short
period in advance do project descriptions become available. The length of the announcement
period ranges between 4 and 10 weeks. Information on the speci cation of immediately upcoming projects could be incorporated into the model by including the information on upcoming
contracts as additional state variables. However, due to the added computational burden of
additional state variables, we decided to ignore this feature of the data, and assume that
contract characteristics become known in the period of the letting.
5

{4{

total number of bidders that are active in the period, ntF , and the xed (non-random) reserve
price of the seller Rt.
Costs: Each bidder i learns her cost for the contract, cti , after the contract characteristics
are revealed. The cost is privately known and independently distributed conditional on state
variables. The cost of a regular bidder i is drawn from the conditional distribution function
F (:jst0 ; sti ; st i ) with support [C (st0 ; sti; st i ); C (st0 ; sti ; st i )], where sti 2 Si , with Si nite, denotes
a vector of state variables for bidder i and st i denotes the vector of other bidders state
variables (st1; : : : ; sti 1; sti+1; : : : ; stn).7 We sometimes use the symbol st to denote the vector of
all regular bidders' state variables with st 2 S and S = ni=1 Si. We sometimes write (sti; st i)
to indicate that the state vector is evaluated from bidder i's perspective. Bidder i's state
vector si includes a list of the sizes of all uncompleted projects that she has won in the past
and the time left to complete each of them. Speci cally, si records the remaining size in dollars
and the number of days left until completion of each project previously won by bidder i. We
assume that both st0 and st are observable to all bidders and to the econometrician. We do
not consider heterogeneity that is known to the bidders but not known to the econometrician.
The distribution of costs has a continuous density function f (:jst0; sti; st i). Similarly, the cost
of a fringe bidder is drawn from a distribution function Ff (:jst0; st) with associated continuous
density function ff (:jst0; st) and support [C (st0; st); Rt]. The support assumption ensures that
fringe bidders submit a bid.
Conditional independence of contract characteristics and cost realizations is the crucial
assumption in the data generating process. It permits us to adopt the framework of markov
dynamic decision processes. The role of conditional independence is discussed further in Rust
7
An alternative two step process in which costs are learned is considered in Hendricks,
Pinske and Porter (2000). Hendricks, Pinske and Porter assume that bidders decide, initially,
whether to acquire private information or not, and only bidders that decide to acquire information will potentially participate in the auction. This approach appears reasonable for
auction environments where it can be rather costly to obtain an estimate about value of the
item. Our data do not contain information on information acquisition decisions that would
allow us to identify such a two step model. In addition, the two step approach appears less
plausible for highway paving jobs in which most bidders have a relatively accurate assessment
about the opportunity cost of using their paving resources. The cost uncertainty in highway
bidding arises because the bidder's opportunity costs are not known to other bidders.
{5{

(1994).

Each bidder may submit a bid, b, which is the price at which the bidder is willing
to provide the service. The bidder with the lowest bid wins the contract and receives her bid.
All agents are risk neutral. Ties are resolved by the ip of a coin. The buyer rejects bids above
the reserve price Rt .
The transition function of the state variable, ! : S0  S  f0; 1; 2; : : : ; max(ntF )g ! S,
is a deterministic function of the contract characteristics, the state variables, and the identity
of the low bidder - where identity 0 indicates that nobody won the auction.8 As described
above, the bidders' state variables include the sizes of all the projects left to do and the time
remaining until their completion. Unfortunately, the data do not include information on the
pattern in which projects are completed over time, but only the contract scheduled completion
date. We assume that, at every point of time, an equal share of the project is completed and
that contracts are completed as planned.9 Let the ith component of the transition function
! measure the sizes and remaining times of all the project left to do for bidder i. It can be
written as:
Bids:

8
<

t

(z0 ; 0; ( jjt 1  zjt ; jt 1)j2Jit ) if j = i
!i (s0 ; s; j ) =
t
: ( j 1  z t ;  t 1)
otherwise,
j 2Jit
j j
jt
where (zjt ; jt)j2Jit 2 sti is a component of bidder ith state vector; Jit denotes the set of previously
won and uncompleted projects of bidder i; zjt denotes the size of project j ; and, jt its remaining
time until completion. Given the linearity assumption regarding the completion of projects,
t
for each project j 2 Jit , the size carried over to next period, zjt+1, equals jjt 1  zjt , and the
remaining time until completion jt+1 equals jt 1. If contract at period t is won by bidder
Note that the identity of the low bidder can be deduced from the vector of submitted
bids. Thus, an equivalent formulation of the state's transition function uses the vector of bids
by all bidders instead of the identity of the low bidder.
9
Section 8-1.07, \Liquidated Damages", of the Standard Speci cations (1999) of the
Department of Transportation of California speci es that unjusti ed delays may come at a
high cost to the contractor. The cost of delays for contracts during our sample period ranges
between hundreds of dollars to thousands of dollars per day.
8

{6{

i,

it is added to the set Jit+1 with the initial size and time until completion taken from the
contract's characteristics (z0 ; 0) 2 s0 .
We introduce a common discount factor parameter, 2 (0; 1), that measures rms'
patience with regard to future pro ts.
We consider subgame perfect equilibria and restrict our attention to symmetric markovian
strategies. Markovian strategies do not depend on time and in the subsequent analysis we omit
the time superscript whenever possible. A strategy for bidder i is a function of bidder i's cost,
the contract's characteristics, and her own and her competitors' states, b(ci ; s0; si; s i). Let
b denote a strategy pro le of other bidders. We assume that the strategy pro le b is such
that the distribution of the low bid submitted by other bidders is continuous.
Payo of a regular bidder: The discounted sum of future expected payo s for bidder i
can be written in value function form as:
i

i

Wi (s; s0 ; ci ; b

i

) = max
[b
b
+

nF
X
j =0

ci ]P r(i
P r (j

wins jb; s0; si; s

winsjb; s0; si; s

i; b

i; b

i

i

)E0

)+
Z

Wi (!(s0 ; s; j ); s00; c0i ; b

i

)

 f (c0i js00 ; !i(s0 ; s; j ); ! i(s0 ; s; j ))dc0i;
where P r(i wins jb; s0; si; s i; b ) denotes the probability that bidder i with state si wins
contract s0 given the strategy b by other bidders and the state s i by other bidders; E0
denotes the expectation operator with respect to the contract characteristic s00; and, j = 0
indicates that nobody won the auction. Notice, that due to the reserve price rule, any bid
exceeding the reserve price will be rejected. Therefore, without loss of generality, we can assume
that bids exceeding the reserve price equal b0 , with b0 > max(Rt ), and restrict attention to
the compact bid space [0; max(Rt )] [ b0 .
Existence of Wi (s; s0 ; ci ; b ) follows from a result in Bhattacharya and Majumdar
(1989). To see this, notice that our assumptions imply that the period payo function,
[b ci ]P r(i wins jb; s0; si; s i; b ), is continuous in b; ci ; s0; si and s i , and bounded by
i

i

i

i

{7{

the maximum reserve price max(Rt ). Moreover, the bid space, [0; max(Rt )] [ b0 , is compact;
the state space, S , and the contract space, S0, are nite; and the cost space [C; C ] is compact.
Furthermore, since P r(j winsjb; s0; si; s i; b ) is continuous in b; s0; si and s i for all j , it
follows that the transition probability !(s0 ; s; j )  P r(j winsjb; s0; si; s i; b ) is weakly continuous in b; s0; si and s i.10 Finally, since the state space is nite, F (:js0; si; s i) is weakly
continuous in s0 ; si and s i . Thus, the in nite-horizon dynamic programming problem of bidder i satis es the necessary conditions of Theorem 3.2. in Bhattacharya and Majumdar (1989),
which guarantees the existence of a unique solution to the value function, Wi (s; s0; ci ; b ).
In the subsequent analysis, we sometimes use the ex ante value function which is de ned
as the value function evaluated before contract characteristics and bidder i's cost are known.
We can write the ex ante value function as:
i

i

i

Vi (s; b

i

) = E0

Z

Wi (s; s0 ; c; b

i

)f (cjs0 ; s)dc;

where E0 denotes the expectation operator with respect to contract characteristics. For the
simplicity of the exposition, from now on we suppress the dependence on the bidding strategies
of other bidders in the value function. The above value function equation leads to the following
recursive equation for Vi(s):
Vi (s) = E0

"Z

nF
X
j =0

Payo of a fringe bidder:

(

maxb [b

P r(j

c]P r(i

wins jb; s0; si; s i)+
)

#

winsjb; s0; si; s i)Vi (!(s0 ; s; j )) f (cjs0 ; si; s i)dc

:

(3:1:)

For a fringe bidder, the ex ante payo equals to the expected current

If D is a metric space, then P(D) denotes the set of all probability measures on the Borel
sigma eld B(D) of D. A function F on a metric space D1 into P(D) is weakly continuous if
the sequence of probability measures F (yn ) converge weakly to F (y) when yn ! y in D1 .
10

{8{

period payo :
E0

"Z

(

maxb [b

c]P r(i

)

fringe wins jb; s0; s)

#

ff (cjs0 ; s)dc :

The role of our earlier assumptions on the behavior of fringe bidders can be illustrated at this
point: Fringe bidders exit in the period they entered and, therefore, they assign no value to
the future. The assumption that the cost of fringe bidders is contained in the interval [C; Rt]
guarantees that fringe bidders nd it pro table to submit a bid in the period they enter. In
contrast, note that our model implies that a regular bidder may not submit a bid in a given
period. This may arise either because the cost realization is above the reserve price, or because
the cost of being constrained in the future outweighs the current period gain of winning the
contract.
Existence of an equilibrium: We restrict attention to monotone and symmetric strategies b(c; s0; si; s i). Existence of an equilibrium follows from recent results on equilibrium
existence in static asymmetric rst price auctions by Lebrun (1996), Maskin and Riley
(2000), Athey (2001) and others. Maskin and Riley consider payo functions of the form
Ui (b; c)  P r(bidder i wins). In our model the payo in period t to bidder i with contract

realization s0, state vector s and cost c can be written as Ui (b; c) = b c + Vi(!(s0 ; s; i)) +

P
P r(j winsjb;s ;si ;s i )
j 6=i P r(i wins jb;s ;si ;s i ) Vi (! (s0 ; s; j ))  P r (i wins jb; s0 ; si ; s i ) + constant, which is of the
same form as in Maskin and Riley. Proposition 5 in Maskin and Riley states that - at a given
period t of any rst price auction game - an equilibrium exists if preferences are monotone,
@Ui
@ Ui
@c < 0, and supermodular, @c@b  0. These two conditions are satis ed in our model for
any state s and for any continuation value Vi (s). Therefore, we can select one equilibrium
strategy pro le for every state vector (s0 ; s). The resulting strategy pro le is markovian and
by construction it is an equilibrium in the repeated game.11
0

0

2

Additionally, Proposition 3 in Maskin and Riley establishes that the distribution of
winning bids is continuous. Thus, our earlier restriction to consider continuous distribution
function of low competitors' bids does not a ect the existence question.
11

{9{

We denote the distribution function of equilibrium bids of
bidder i with state (s0; si; s i) by G(:js0; si; s i), and the associated density by g(:js0; si; s i).
We denote the distribution function of equilibrium bids by a fringe bidder with state (s0 ; s)
by Gf (:js0; s) and the associated density function by gf (:js0; s). We sometimes suppress the f
subscript in the distribution function of fringe bids and instead write G(:js0; s) to economize
on notation. Doing so, the probability P r(i wins jb; s0; si; s i) can be written as Qj6=i[1
G(bjs0 ; sj ; s j )]. The ex-ante probability distribution function of the event that bidder i wins
with a bid less than or equal to b is denoted by G(i)(bjs0; s), and the probability density
function associated with G(i) (bjs0; s) is given by Qj6=i[1 G(bjs0; sj ; s j )]g(bjs0; si; s i).
Bid distribution function:

3. ESTIMATION METHOD

This section describes the estimation method: Subsection 3.1. explains the estimation
approach which is based on the rst order condition of optimally chosen bids. The rst order
condition provides an explicit function of the cost in terms of the submitted bid, the distribution
of bids, and the value function. We show that the value function, which enters the rst order
condition, can be represented in form of a recursive equation involving the equilibrium bid
distribution function. Therefore, with an estimate of the bid distribution function we can infer
costs using the rst order condition of optimal bids. Subsection 3.2 establishes a condition
under which the distribution function of privately known costs is identi ed. Subsection 3.3
describes in detail our parametric speci cation of the bid distribution function.
3.1. ESTIMATION APPROACH

We observe data on bids, contract characteristics and bidders' state variables. Our goal
is to infer privately known costs. We propose a computationally simple estimation method
that does not require solving for the equilibrium bid functions. The method is based on the
necessary rst order condition of optimal bids and requires the assumption that observed bids
are generated by equilibrium play.
Estimation methods based on the rst order condition in static games are well known
in the literature. Elyakime, La ont, Loisel and Vuong (1994) estimate the beliefs about the
{ 10 {

equilibrium play of agents based on data on bids. The cost realization is then inferred from
the rst order condition. We extend the estimation method to dynamic oligopoly models.
First order condition: Let (:) denote the unobserved cost associated with a bid, which
is a function of the bid, b, the contract characteristics, s0, the state vector, s, and the value
function Vi . Let h(:js0; si; s i) = 1 g(G:j(s:js;si;s;si ;si )i ) denote the hazard function of bids submitted
by bidder i when the state equals (s0 ; si; s i). The rst order condition for optimal bids yields
the following equation (see the Appendix for a more detailed description) for privately known
costs, :
0

0

(bjs0 ; si ; s i; h; Vi ) = b

+

P

X

6

j =i

1
+
j 6=i h(bjs0 ; sj ; s j )
h(bjs0 ; sj ; s j )
l6=i h(bjs0 ; sl ; s

P

h
l

)

Vi (!(s0 ; s; i))

i

Vi (!(s0 ; s; j )) :

(3:2:)

Equation (3.2.) provides an explicit expression of the privately known cost that involves the
bid; the hazard function of bids, h; and, the value function, Vi. Equation (3.2.) states that
the cost equals the bid minus a mark-down. The mark-down has two parts: The rst part
accounts for the level of competition in the current period. The second part accounts for the
incremental e ect on the future discounted pro t if rm i wins the contract instead of another
rm. The rst order condition for fringe bids is of the same form as equation (3.2.). However,
fringe bidders assign no value to the future, Vf = 0, and the second term in equation (3.2.)
vanishes for fringe bids.
The rst order condition provides an explicit function of the cost for a submitted bid,
b  R. If a bid is not submitted, b > R, then the monotone relationship (3.2.) implies a lower
bound for the cost, c  (Rjs0; si; s i; h; Vi).
In order to infer the distribution of costs, we need estimators for the functions appearing
in the right hand side of (3.2.). These functions are: The transition function of the state, the
bid hazard function, the discount factor, and the value function. As described before, in our
auction model, the transition function of the state is a given function. An estimator of the bid
{ 11 {

distribution function, and thus of the hazard function, can be directly obtained from the data
on bids, contract characteristics and state variables. We describe the details of our estimator
in section 3.3. The discount factor we choose - and we examine how sensitive the estimates
are to variations in the discount factor. Finally, the de nition of the value function is given
in equation (3.1.). However, observe that the expression of the value function in equation
(3.1.) involves cost variables that are unobserved, and decisions by multiple agents, which are
endogenous. In the next paragraphs, we explain how we overcome the problems posed by this
latter observation and obtain an approximation of the value function.
The Value Function: The key idea of our method is to notice and use the fact that
the distribution of equilibrium bids determines the discounted sum of expected future pro ts.
Thus, there is a representation of the value function in terms of the distribution of bids only.
The following Proposition states that the value function can be represented as a recursive
equation involving the bid distribution function. The proof of Proposition 1 is given in the
Appendix.
Proposition 1.

Vi (s) = E0

(Z

R

P

(:js0; sj ; s j ) dG (:js0; s)+

j =i h

b

6

+

1

Z R
b

(i)

h(:js0 ; si ; s i)
P
l6=i h(:js0 ; sl ; s

nF
X

6

j =0;j =i

#

l

"

P r(j

winsjs0; si; s i)

(j )
) dG (:js0; s)  Vi (!(s0 ; s; j ))

)

:

(3:3:)

The value function representation in Proposition 1 has two parts: The rst part accounts for bidder i's current expected pro ts. The second part accounts for bidder i's sum
of discounted expected future payo s. Notice that the terms in square brackets in (3.3)
can be interpreted as probabilities, as they sum to one, since P r(i winsjs0; si; s i) =
RR
P
P h(:js ;si ;s i ) dG(j ) (:js0 ; s).
j 6=i b
h(:js ;sl ;s l )
l6 i
The proof of the Proposition is based on two observations: First, we may write the
probability of winning as a function of the distribution of bids by other bidders, ignoring
0

=

0

{ 12 {

dependence of other bidders' bids on costs' draws. Thus, each bidder dynamic game is reduced
to a single agent dynamic decision problem where each bidder maximizes the discounted sum
of future payo s taking as given the equilibrium bid distribution associated with other bidders.
Still, this single agent dynamic decision problem does involve bidder i's privately known costs
which are not observed. Our second observation is that the rst order condition of optimal
bids gives an explicit expression of bidder i's unknown costs in terms of her equilibrium bids
and the equilibrium bids distribution. Substituting this expression into the value function
yields an expression involving the distribution and the density of equilibrium bids only.
Approximation of the Value Function: Numerical methods can be used to approximate
the value function based on equation (3.3.), which we describe next. The assumption of a
symmetric markovian strategy space imposes a number of restrictions on the shape of the
value function which facilitates the approximation. In particular, Pakes (1994) shows that
the number of coeÆcients in a J th order polynomial approximation does not increase as the
number of bidders increases. The reason is that symmetric markovian strategies require that
bidders with the same state follow the same bidding strategy. Thus, we can exchange the state
of two competing bidders without a ecting the value of bidder i's expected future payo s. As
has been shown by Pakes, in a J th order polynomial approximation of the value function, the
polynomial coeÆcients associated with the state variable of a competitor j , sj , are identical
for all j 6= i, or, in other words, their identities do not matter. In section 5, we discuss in
detail the variables entering the value function approximation. In our case, the dimensionality
of the approximation is reduced to a four dimensional problem for each bidder.
Numerical methods to approximate the value function based on equation (3.3.) are discussed in more detail in Judd (1998). We brie y summarize the method we use: We select
a grid of state vectors S^ = (s1 ; : : : ; sm) by randomly drawing 200 states from the distribution of observed states. We numerically solve equation (3.3.) for every bidder on this
grid. We restrict the range of the transition function ! to S^ by de ning a transition function !^ (s0 ; s; j ) = fs 2 S^js is closest to !(s0 ; s; j )g. For every point s 2 S^ we calculate the
expectations on the right hand side of equation (3.3.). Speci cally, we numerically evaluate
{ 13 {

the expected current period payo ,
A(s) = E0

nZ

P

o

(:js0; sj ; s j )

j =i h

6

1

dG(i) (:js0 ; s) ;

and the transition probabilities of the events that the states (s1 ; : : : ; sm) are reached when
bidder j wins the contract,
Bj (s) = E0

nZ 

o

1 + P h(:hjs(0:;jssi;; ss ; is) ) dG(j)(:js0; s)  (1f!^ (s ;s;j)=s g ; : : : ; 1f!^ (s ;s;j)=smg ) :
0
l
l
l6=i
0

1

0

In both expressions, the rst expectation is with respect to contract characteristics. We evaluate the expectation with respect to contract characteristics in the following way: We select a
set of contract characteristics, S^0, by randomly drawing 100 contracts from the set of observed
contracts. Contract characteristics' are modeled as independent and identical draws from the
set S^0. The second expectation depends on the bid distribution function. The speci cation
of the bid distribution function is described in the next section. We evaluate the expectation
with respect to the bid distribution function by numerical integration using the estimated
density functions dG^ (i) and dG^ (j). Using the symbol A for current period payo and Bj for
the transition probabilities, the value function is given by the equation,
Vi (s) = A(s) +

X

Bj (s)Vi ;

(3:4)

where Vi denotes the vector (Vi (s1 ); : : : ; Vi(sm ))0 . We can rewrite the value function in matrix
notation as: [I B ]Vi = A; where I denotes the m-dimensional identity matrix, B denotes the transition matrix obtained based on the coeÆcients Bj (s) and A denotes the vector
(A(s1); : : : ; A(sm)). The value function can be expressed as:
Vi = [I

B ] 1 A:

To evaluate the value function for points s 2 S, possibly outside the grid S^, we approximate
the function with a quadratic polynomial.
{ 14 {

With the distribution function of bids at
hand, the parameters of the bidding model can be readily inferred. To see how we infer
the distribution of costs, notice the following: First, there is a relationship between the distribution function of costs and the distribution function of bids given by F (cjs0 ; si; s i) =
G(b(c; s0 ; si ; s i)js0 ; si ; s i ). Second, the inverse of the bid function conditional on state variables, c = (bjs0 ; si; s i), is given in equation (3.2.). Thus, using these two relationships, we
can specify our estimator of the costs' distribution function as:
Estimation of the cost distribution function:

F (cjs0 ; si ; s

i

) = G( 1 (cjs0 ; si; s i)js0; si; s i);

for c  (R(s0 )js0; si; s i). Standard errors of estimates are calculated using the delta method.
A nice feature of the auction model is that the discount factor and the distribution of
costs are the only unknown parameters in the model. However, observe that our estimation
method extends to models in which the per period payo function may depend on additional
parameters. For example the Hotz and Miller (1993) estimator can be applied.12
Next, we examine whether the distribution function of costs can be identi ed.
3.2. IDENTIFICATION

This subsection addresses the question of under which conditions we can infer the parameters of our model. There are two related and somewhat opposing results in the literature:
Guerre, Perrigne and Vuong (2000) have established that, in the static rst price auction, the
distribution of costs is identi ed. On the other hand, Rust (1994) nds that the primitives
in a dynamic decision problem with an unknown per-period payo function are not identi ed.
Proposition 2 establishes that our model lies in between those two extremes. First, observe
that, in our setting, the identi cation problem consists in determining if the two underlying
primitives, which are the distribution of costs F (:j:) and the discount factor , are identi ed
based on expressions (3.1.) and (3.2.), and a suÆcient number of observations (bt; st0; st).
12
Hotz and Miller de ne an iterative procedure for single agent dynamic decision problems
in which the value function is calculated for a given parameter vector at every step of the iteration. A method of moments estimator is de ned which compares the predicted and observed
actions based on the rst order condition. Although Hotz and Miller consider discrete choices,
it can also be applied to continuous choices.
{ 15 {

Proposition 2.

Suppose

is given. Then the cost distribution function F (:j:) is iden-

ti ed on the interval [C (:); (R()j:)].

The Proposition establishes that the truncated distribution of costs is identi ed for a
xed discount factor . The truncation occurs at the point where it is not pro table to submit
a bid, that is for costs exceeding (R(s0 )js0; si; s i). Thus, in contrast to Rust (1994) we
obtain a partially positive answer in our model. A main reason for the apparently opposing
result is that the reward function is known in our auction model, but not known in Rust. As
in Rust (1994), the discount factor is not identi ed and the condition in the Proposition is
necessary. To see this, notice that there can be two discount factors 1 ; 2 , with 1 6= 2 , and
associated distribution functions F1 ; F2, with F1 6= F2 , such that ( 1 ; F1 ) and ( 2 ; F2 ) lead to
the same distribution function G(:j:).
3.3. BID DISTRIBUTION FUNCTIONS

So far we have described the estimation procedure to infer costs and addressed the identi cation question. Thus, what is left to do is to specify our estimator of the distribution
function of bids. This section describes the parametric speci cation of the bid distribution
function of fringe and regular bidders. In addition, we discuss the restrictions on parameters
implied by the bidding model and describe how we impose these restrictions on the estimation
procedure.
At an early stage of the research, we adopted Kernel methods to estimate the bid distribution functions as is proposed by Guerre, Perrigne and Vuong (2000). Our estimation results
are summarized in Jofre-Bonet and Pesendorfer (2000). In this earlier work, we found that
non-parametric approaches reduce greatly the number of covariates we could use, which, in
our case, limited severely the ability of the model to capture the richness of the data. For this
reason we decided to adopt a parametric framework.
The bid distribution function is not a primitive of the model. However, Jofre-Bonet and
Pesendorfer (1999) provide the equilibrium mapping from costs into bids for a particular class
of cost distribution functions. In this paper, we select a parametrization of the bid distribution
function of regular bidders that contains that particular class of costs distribution functions as
{ 16 {

a special case. In other words, the example in Jofre-Bonet and Pesendorfer (1999) illustrates
a class of cost distribution functions that satis es our parametric assumptions.
Density function of regular bidders: We experimented with di erent speci cations for the
density function of bids by regular bidders and we obtained the best t with a Weibull density
function. Speci cally, we de ne the density function of the logarithm of bids by regular bidder
i plus one, ln(b + 1), as a Weibull density function. The lower endpoint of the Weibull density
function is ln(3 + 1). In our speci cation, the parameters of the density are a function of the
state variables and contract characteristics. By suppressing the parameters' dependence on
these variables, we can write the density function as:
g(bj1 ; 2 ; 3 ) =

h

1 [ln(b + 1)

ln(3 + 1)]

2 1
The support of bids for regular bidders is [3 ; 1).13

1

1i

exp

(

ln(b+1) ln(3 +1) 1
)
2

:

The parameters of the distribution function
consist of the constant 1, and two parameters, 2 and 3, that depend on the state variables
as will be explained below.
The density function of bids by fringe bidders is speci ed as a beta density function. We
can write the density function as:
1  b 3  1  R b  1 1 ;
gf (bj3 ; 4 ; 5 ) =
R 3 R 3
R 3
B (4 ; 5 )
where the distributional parameter 4 is a constant; the distributional parameters, 3; 5,
depend on the state variables as will be described below; R denotes the reserve price; the
support of fringe bids is [3 ; R]; and, the function B (4 ; 5) denotes the beta function.14
Estimation procedure: The regularity conditions of maximum likelihood need not hold for
auction models as has been shown by Donald and Paarsch (1993). In our case a non-regularity
arises since one parameter is the boundary of the support of bids. There is a substantial statistics literature including Smith (1985), Harter and Moore (1965) and Smith (1994) studying
13
In principle, it is possible to estimate di erent supports of bid distributions for individual
bidders. However, we restrict the supports to be identical. The main reason is that, empirically,
with a small data sample, it is diÆcult to determine whether bidders have indeed di erent
supports or not. R
14
B (v; w) = 01 uv 1 (1 u)w 1 du.
4

{ 17 {

5

properties of estimation methods of the support and shape parameters for the Weibull and beta
distribution function. Smith (1985) shows that the maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters are consistent and eÆcient provided that 1 ; 4  2.15 For the case 1 ; 4 < 2 Harter
and Moore (1965), Smith (1985)and Smith (1994) describe a two stage estimation procedure:
In the rst stage the lower bound is estimated using the sample minimum. In the second stage
the observation involving the sample minimum is dropped and the shape and scale parameters
are estimated using maximum likelihood. Smith (1994) considers a multi-dimensional lower
bound and proposes a linear program estimator for the lower bound to be used in the rst
stage. Smith (1985) and Smith (1994) establish that the two stage estimation procedure is
consistent for 1 ; 4 > 1, and also asymptotically eÆcient, provided the density does not vanish
too fast at the lower bound, 1  1; 4 < 2. The above results require that 1 and 4 are one
dimensional, and allow 2; 3 and 5 to be multi-dimensional. The asymptotic results do not
readily extend to the case in which 1 and 4 are multi-dimensional.
We estimate the model using both estimation procedures. Under the two stage estimation procedure, we found that 1 and 4 exceed 2. Therefore, only maximum likelihood is
eÆcient. In the following sections, we report the estimation results using maximum likelihood
estimation.
Restrictions on the parameters: As mentioned, some of the distributional parameters are
a function of state variables and contract characteristics. Nevertheless, there are a number of
restrictions on the functional form of the parameters' dependence on the state variables. First,
there are the restrictions that 2 ; 5 > 0, and that 1 ; 4  2. These restrictions ensure that
the conditions for a probability density function are satis ed, that the monotonicity of the bid
hazard functions holds, which is required from the bidding model,16 and that we can apply the
asymptotic eÆciency result in Smith (1985). Moreover, we assume that bids are non-negative.
To impose these restrictions, we de ne j = 2 + exp j for j = 1; 4, and j = exp j for
j = 2; 3; 5.
0

0

For 1 ; 4 < 1, the maximum likelihood estimators may be inconsistent.
For 1; 4 < 1, the hazard of bids can be decreasing, which would violate the condition
that equilibrium bids are monotone increasing in costs.
15

16

{ 18 {

The second restriction is the symmetry of the bidding functions conditional on state
variables. Bidders with the same state follow the same bidding strategy. Thus, the parameter
entering the bid distribution of fringe rms, 03 (s); 05(s), should not be a ected by the order of
elements in the vector s. Similarly, the order of elements in the vector s i does not matter for
parameter 02 either. We consider the following speci cation which incorporates the described
conditional symmetry restrictions:
0j (s0 ; si ; s

i) =

j;0 +

j;1 s0 +

0j (s0 ; s) =

j;0

+

j;2

(si ; s0) +

j;1 s0

+

j;2



j;3 

n
X
l=1

n
X
l=1

(sl ; s0)

for j = 2

(sl ; s0)

for j = 3; 5;

where (si ; s0) is a function that denotes the characteristics of a bidder with state si on
contract s0 . The function (si ; s0) captures the possibility that bidder characteristics may
vary across contracts.
Likelihood function: Finally, in order to estimate the density functions described above,
we have to take into account that the bid data for regular bidders are censored. We only observe
bids that are below the reserve price, Rt . Let oti be a dummy variable that equals one if we observe a bid by bidder i on contract t, and zero otherwise. In an abuse of notation, we abbreviate
the dependence of parameters on the state vector with superscripts, and write the parameter
vector for regular bidders as it where it = (1 ; 2(st0 ; sti; st i); 3 (st0; st)). Similarly, the parameter vector for fringe bidders we abbreviate as t where t denotes (3 (st0 ; st); 4 ; 5(st0; st)).
Doing so, we may write the likelihood of regular and fringe bids as:
L

=

n
YhY
t

[g( j )] [1

i=1

bti

t
it oi

G(R

t

j )]

t
it 1 oi

t

nF
Y
j =n+1

i

( j )

gf btj

t

;

where bti is the bid by regular bidder i on contract t, and btj is the bid by fringe bidder j on
contract t. We assume that the initial state s1 is exogenous. We maximize the logarithm of
{ 19 {

the likelihood function. Billingsley (1961) establishes the asymptotic properties of maximum
likelihood estimators for Markov processes, as the number of auctions T goes to in nity.
The Markovian structure of the observed controlled process (s0; s; b) follows directly from
the assumption that the cost realizations are conditionally independently distributed, the bid
functions are Markovian, and the assumption that the distribution of contract characteristics
is exogenous. A closely related result is Theorem 3.3 in Rust (1994).
The next section describes the data and the industry. Section 5 reports the estimation
results.
4. THE DATA AND INDUSTRY

In this section, we describe some characteristics of the highway construction industry
with emphasis on California. We present our data and describe the awarding process for
contracts. In addition, we report reduced form evidence on the e ect of previously won and
uncompleted contracts on bid submission and bid level decisions.
4.1. THE CALIFORNIA MARKET

According to the 1992 US Census of Construction Industries17 a total of $35.3 billion
were spent during 1992 on highway and street construction activities. In California, the total
amount spent in highway construction was $2.7 billion, 93% of which was done by 896 establishments located in California. Transportation costs play an important role in this industry,
and, therefore, we consider California as a market.
The data: Our data consist of California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) contract awards for highway and street construction made between December 1988 and May
1999.18 Information on bids is available from May 1st, 1996 through May 31st, 1999. During
the latter period, Caltrans advertised 2,566 projects from which 2,207 were nally awarded,
U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration, Bureau of
Census, 1992.
18
We obtained our data from the California Department of Transportation. The OÆce of
Engineers publishes the data on the web: http : ==www:dot:ca:gov=hq=esc=oe=awards=bidsum:
17

{ 20 {

343 cancelled or postponed19 and 16 received no bids.
The bid data contain the following information on every project awarded: Bid Opening Date; Contract Number; Location; Reservation Price; Number of Working Days and the
Engineers' Estimate. Additionally, the data provides the Name, the Address, the Amount of
the Bid and the Rank of the Bid for each of the bidding rms. In order to obtain a measure
of past performance and maximum capacity of the rms active in our period of analysis, we
complement the bid data with the Caltrans Contract Performance database. This source contains information on contracts awarded between December 1988 to May 1999. It provides the
actual dollar amount received for the contract, the contract duration and the identity of the
contractor.
The Awarding Process: Contracts are awarded by the California Department of Transportation subject to Federal Acquisition Regulations and, therefore, is very similar to other
states' procedures. The process can be described in three steps: First, the Caltrans' Headquarters OÆce Engineer announces a project that is going to be let and the invitation to submit
bids starts. This period is called the Advertising period and its length ranges between 4 and
10 weeks, depending on the size or complexity of the project. Occasionally, the Advertising
period will be reduced to expedite project scheduling. Second, potential bidders may collect
bid proposals that explain the plans and speci cations of the work required, i.e., the project's
characteristics, terms and identi cation number. Based on the proposal, bidders may submit
a sealed bid. Bidders do not know who else submits a bid. For each bid, Caltrans checks
that the bidding rm is among the rms that are quali ed to do business with Caltrans.20
According to the Federal Acquisition Regulation, part 14, a contract might be cancelled
before opening if either the project is no longer needed or if the advertised contract characteristics become obsolete or inadequate and have to be revised. Other reasons to cancel are that all
bids are either unreasonable or collusive or both. Cancellation can also occur if all reasonable
bids belong to bidders that can not prove to be responsible. Additionally, the awarding agency
might postpone the opening bids if it believes that a large fraction of bids have been delayed
in the mail or other disruptive circumstances interfered in the regular reception of bids.
20
Prior to the bidding, potential bidders have to qualify for contractual work for the
Department of Transportation. In addition, rms are required to deposit a predetermined
amount of funds that have to be available. Receipt of funds clearance, permit issuance and
local agencies approvals are needed for the bid of a rm to be accepted. A submitted bid can
19

{ 21 {

Third, on the letting day, the bids received are unsealed and ranked. The project is awarded
to the lowest bidder provided it is below the reserve price. The reserve price consists of a xed
non-random dollar amount which is assigned prior to the bidding. Additionally, in order to
win the project, it is required that the lowest bidder ful lls certain responsibility criteria. The
bid is accepted if all computations and cost imputations are considered correct. After each
letting, a list of all bids and their rankings is announced and made accessible to the public.
The winning rm is awarded the project no more than 30 days after the letting date.
The highway paving industry has already been studied by a number of authors. Porter
and Zona (1993) and Feinstein, Block and Nold (1985) study issues of bidder collusion. Bajari
(1997) studies asymmetry between bidders. He estimates a static bidding model based on a
numerical calculation of equilibrium bid functions.
4.2. DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS

Between May 1st of 1996 and May 31st of 1999, the Caltrans awarded 2,207 contracts.
The total value of the contracts was $4,661.73 million.
Contracts are o ered for sale on a frequent and regular basis. Typically, there are several
letting dates per week. According to our data, the average duration between letting dates
equals 2.96 days. Several contracts may be o ered on a given letting date and contracts are
o ered in 11 distinct regions of the state.
(TABLE 1A and TABLE 1B about here)
Table 1A reports that on average there were 4.63 bidders per contract, ranging from 0
to 19 bidders across contracts. A total of 10,289 bids were received for these contracts and 16
contracts received no bids.21 Table 1B reveals that a total of 96 contracts received one bid,
285 contracts received two, 393 contracts received three bidders and so on.
be rejected if either it fails to conform to the essential requirements of the invitation for bids;
or does not conform to the applicable speci cations without having been authorized to do so;
or fails to conform to the delivery schedule or permissible alternates stated in the invitation.
21
A total of 1,466 submitted bids, or 12% of all bid observations, violate the reserve price
requirements. We exclude these bids from the analysis. These bids may have been submitted
erroneously. Alternatively, bidders may have expected that the reserve price rule would not
be enforced. According to conversations with Caltrans, it is indeed possible that the reserve
price is altered ex post. Nevertheless, our data do not include information on bids below the
{ 22 {

Table 1B illustrates that in highway procurement competition and informational asymmetries may be important. As the number of bidders increases, the relative di erence between
the low bid and the Caltrans estimate falls. The low bid is 11% above the estimate when there
is one bidder, and the low bid falls to 14% below the estimate when there are nine or more
bidders.
Money left on the table measures the di erence between the low and second lowest bid.
As expected, the di erence declines as the number of bidders increases. However, it does not
approach zero. When there are nine or more bidders, the money left on the table is about 6%
of the low bid, which suggests that the magnitude of informational asymmetries may be quite
large.
Fringe and regular bidders: In total, more than 500 bidders submit a bid at least once.
Most of these bidders submit a bid only once, or only on a few occasions. For these bidders, the
number of bid observations are too few to make inference about their behavior in a repeated
game setting. We classify these bidders as fringe bidders. On the other hand, there is a small
number of bidders that submit bids regularly and win a substantial fraction of contracts. With
\regular" bidders we denote the set of the largest 10 rms in dollar value won that submit a
bid at least 80 times during the sample period.22 The number of regular bidders per contract
ranges from 0 to 4 and has an average of 0.53. Regular bidders win 25% of the total dollar
value awarded and 17% of all contracts. For these 10 regular bidders, we supplement the data
with information on the locations of their plants. Then, for each rm, we create a variable
called distance that measures the distance between the contract location and the rm's closest
plant.

reserve price being rejected, or bids above the reserve price being accepted. The lack of data
points that fall into either of these two categories, suggests that the probability of these events
is low. In our analysis we assume that the reserve price rule is binding.
22
The estimation results and, in particular, the e ect of backlog, remain very similar as
we vary the de nition of regular bidders.
{ 23 {

4.3. THE EFFECT OF BACKLOG

During our sample period, the average contract duration is 156 days. We de ne backlog
as the amount of work measured in dollars that is left to do from previously won projects.
The backlog variable is constructed in the following way: For every contract previously won,
we calculate the amount of work measured in dollars that is left to do by taking the initial
size of the contract and multiplying it by the fraction of time that is left until the project's
completion date. For contracts that nished prior to the end of the sample period, we use the
actual completion date of the contract. For contracts that did not nish by the end of the
sample period, we use the planned completion date. Based on this calculation, we determine
the total amount of work measured in dollars that is left to do at any given point in time.
We standardize the backlog variable by subtracting the bidder speci c mean (calculated using
daily observations) and dividing this di erence by the bidder speci c standard deviation. The
resulting backlog variable is a number that is comparable across bidders.23 There is substantial
variation in the backlog variable. On average on about 10% of the observations a regular bidder
has almost no capacity committed at the letting day, while on about 5% of the observations,
the rm is about two standard deviations above its average backlog.
The e ect of backlog in a simple dynamic bidding game is described in Jofre-Bonet and
Pesendorfer (1999). Using a theoretical model, they examine the case in which bidders with
above average backlog levels, or capacity constrained bidders, have a higher cost, in the sense
of rst order stochastic dominance, than unconstrained bidders. A prediction from the bidding
model is that constrained bidders bid less frequently and higher than unconstrained bidders.
Alternatively, there may be bene ts to performing several contracts simultaneously which we
may call expertise e ect. Suppose the expertise e ect lowers the cost of additional projects in
the sense of rst order stochastic dominance. In this latter case, a prediction of the bidding
23
We experimented with di erent de nitions of the backlog variable. In particular, we also
used a variable that measures the total backlog from previously won uncompleted contracts
divided by the maximum dollar amount won during the sample period. The estimation results
were very similar. We prefer the described speci cation because we do not have an accurate
estimate of the maximum capacity. We also experimented with regional backlog variables. The
regional e ects appear less important perhaps because capacity and resources can be moved.
Therefore, we report the results of the analysis when only the aggregate backlog level is used.
{ 24 {

model is that bidders with high backlog bid more frequently and lower than bidders with
low backlog. Next, we assess the presence of these opposing intertemporal e ects by using a
reduced form analysis.
(Table 2)
Reduced form estimates: Table 2 reports nine columns of estimation results. The rst
three columns report Probit estimates of the decision to submit a bid. The fourth to sixth
column report Tobit estimates of the bid level decision. The seventh to ninth column report
Heckman estimates of the bid level decision. We observe bids only if they are below the reserve
price. To apply the Tobit and Heckman analysis we consider a transformation of the bid. The
dependent variable equals the reserve price minus the bid and is divided by the engineers'
estimate. The dependent variable is negative if the bid is not observed, and it is positive if the
bid is below the reserve price. Explanatory variables include contract speci c characteristics,
such as the estimate and the number of working days, and bidder speci c characteristics such
as the rm's size, measured as the number of plants in the region, the distance of the bidder's
closest plant to the project location, and the bidder's backlog. For each regression, we report
three sets of estimates: without any rm speci c dummy variables, with a set of rm speci c
xed e ects, and with a set of rm speci c backlog variables.
Backlog has a signi cant e ect in all speci cations. The sign of the coeÆcients suggests
the presence of capacity constraints. The magnitude of the e ect is substantial. An examination of the coeÆcients reveals that, on average, a constrained bidder is 50% less likely to
submit a bid than an unconstrained bidder. An increase of the backlog from 1 to 1 increases
the bid level between 2:5% and 7:6%.24
Asymmetries between bidders accounted for by observable variables are important. In
addition to capacity e ects, asymmetries between bidders due to location and size have signi cant e ects. Distance to the project decreases the probability of submitting a bid and increases
the bid level. The size of the bidder, measured by the number of plants within the region,
increases the probability of submitting a bid. The e ect of size on the bid level decision is
Note that if a rm's backlog changes from -1 to +1, its committed capacity increases
from one standard deviation below its average value to one standard deviation above it.
24

{ 25 {

negative in the Tobit model and not signi cant in the Heckman model.
Bidder heterogeneity not captured by our observables is also present. Firm speci c xed
e ects are included in columns two, ve and eight. In all three speci cations we can reject the
null of no signi cant rm xed e ects.25 A possible explanation is that the paving technology
between rms di ers beyond what our measures of rm size, backlog and location capture.
Ideally, we would like to have additional variables measuring rm heterogeneity.
Bidder heterogeneity not captured by our observables may account for part of the backlog
e ect, which could bias our estimates. We test whether the coeÆcient of the backlog variable
changes as we introduce rm speci c xed e ects. As is evident in the Table, the coeÆcients
do not change signi cantly. Thus, excluding unobserved rm heterogeneity does not a ect the
estimates of the backlog e ect.
As described in section 2, our model requires that bidders behave symmetrically conditional on observables. We can test this assumption by including a set of backlog and bidder
identity interaction terms. We report these results in columns three, six and nine of Table 2.
We nd that the interaction terms are not signi cant for the majority of rms. An examination of individual coeÆcients reveals that 21 out of 27 coeÆcients are not signi cantly di erent
from zero. Although we can reject the null of no signi cant rm speci c backlog e ects for all
rms jointly in all three columns26 , we cannot reject the null that rm speci c backlog e ects
are zero for eight of the ten rms in all three speci cations.27 The backlog variable has the
same e ect for eight of ten bidders. The e ect di ers for two rms: One exception occurs for
Under the null the test statistic is a chi-squared random variable with nine degrees of
freedom in the probit and it equals 366:75. In the Heckman model the test statistic is a chisquared random variable with 18 degrees of freedom and it equals 388:12. For the Tobit model
we constructed an F-test. The test statistic equals 35:35 with (9, 22215) degrees of freedom.
26
Under the null, the test statistic is a chi-squared random variable with nine degrees of
freedom in the probit and it equals 70:99. In the Heckman model, the test statistic is a chisquared random variable with 18 degrees of freedom and it equals 74:0. For the Tobit model,
we constructed an F-test. The test statistic equals 7:42 with (9, 22215) degrees of freedom.
27
Under the null, the test statistic is a chi-squared random variable with seven degrees of
freedom in the probit and it equals 7:48. The test statistic is a chi-squared random variable
with 14 degrees of freedom in the Heckman model and it equals 10:78. For the Tobit model,
we construct an F-test. The test statistic equals 0:95 with (7, 22215) degrees of freedom.
25

{ 26 {

rm ve, where the sign of the backlog e ect is reversed. The other exception occurs for rm
eight, where the e ect of backlog is of larger magnitude. Overall, we interpret this evidence
as partially supportive of our assumption of symmetric behavior conditional on observables.
The estimates in Table 2 provide preliminary support for our dynamic bidding model in
at least three ways: First, capacity constraints appear important. Second, bidders' additional
state variables, location and size, are important. Third, a test of identical backlog e ects
cannot be rejected for the majority of bidders.
5. ESTIMATION RESULTS

This section discusses the estimates of the econometric model. Subsection 5.1 reports
the estimates of the bid distribution functions. We discuss how well the estimates predict the
data. We then illustrate the predicted e ect of selected variables. Subsection 5.2. discusses
the estimates of the value function. Subsection 5.3. discusses the estimates of the bidding
function and inferred costs. The estimates suggest that the e ect of the backlog variable is in
accordance with the expected e ect under the presence of capacity constraints. Moreover, the
e ect is substantial, suggesting that capacity constraints play an important role in highway
bidding.
5.1. ESTIMATES OF THE BID DISTRIBUTION FUNCTIONS

are reported in Table 3. Columns one, two and three report
the parameter estimates for regular bids, for fringe bids and for the lower bound respectively.
Columns four, ve and six report the second set of parameter estimates which include additionally a set of rm identity and backlog interaction variables. The variables entering Table 3 are
bidders' characteristics and contract characteristics. Bidders' characteristics include the standardized backlog from previously won uncompleted projects, the distance between the closest
plant of the bidder to the contract location, and the number of plants within the region of the
contract. The contract characteristics include the engineers' estimated cost of the project, the
number of working days, the reserve price and the number of fringe bids. Some fringe bids and
a small number of regular bids are (substantially) below the engineer's estimate. We believe
that these bids represent erroneous bids by inexperienced bidders, or coding errors and we
The parameter estimates

{ 27 {

omit bid observations that are more than 15% below the engineer's estimate.28 Keeping the
bid outliers in the data reduces the lower bound estimate which ampli es the per period payo
estimates, the value function estimates, and also the e ect of the backlog variable on the cost
estimates. Thus, to the extent that our data selection rule may in uence our estimates, our
results provide a conservative assessment of the backlog e ect.
(Table 3)
As mentioned earlier, we also estimated the bid distribution functions using the consistent
but less eÆcient two stage approach described in Smith (1985). The point estimates are qualitatively similar to the results reported here and are reported in Jofre-Bonet and Pesendorfer
(1999).
Goodness of Fit: As a measure of the goodness of t of the model, we randomly draw bids
from the estimated distribution of bids and compare them to the observed bids. To account for
contract heterogeneity, we normalize bids by dividing them by the reserve price. The estimates
predict well the observed distribution of fringe bids. We draw 10,000 fringe bids. On average,
the predicted fringe bid equals 78.01% of the reserve price with a standard deviation of 11.71%.
The observed fringe bid equals 77.72% of the reserve price with a standard deviation of 11.53%.
The di erence between the two means is not signi cant.
The predicted probability of observing a regular bid equals 5.97%. In the data, the
probability of observing a regular bid equals 5.96%. The di erence between the two numbers
is not signi cant. Conditional on observing a regular bid, the mean predicted bid equals
82.36% of the reserve price with a standard deviation of 12.02%. The observed regular bid
equals 79.03% with a standard deviation of 10.40%. We can reject the null hypotheses of equal
mean and we reject the null of equal variance. Conditional on observing a regular bid, the
predicted bid is, on average, higher and has a higher standard deviation. A closer inspection of
the distribution of regular bids conditional on observing a regular bid reveals that the di erence
between the predicted and observed distribution is attributable to a small fall in the number of
In total we omit 25 regular bids and 273 fringe bids. Low bids occur mostly for small
contracts and low regular bids do not arise on contracts with engineer's estimates exceeding
$1,000,000.
28

{ 28 {

bid observations close to the reserve price. Indeed, a closer t is obtained when we estimate the
bids' distribution function as a product of a Weibull and a Beta distribution functions, instead
of the Weibull distribution function that we use. When using the Weibull-Beta alternative
speci cation, we obtain that, conditional on observing a regular bid, the resulting predicted
mean bid equals 78.81% of the reserve price with a standard deviation of 9.81%. For this
speci cation, the observed mean is not signi cantly di erent from the predicted mean. The
reason for the improvement is that the estimated parameters for the Beta density permit a fall
in density close to the reserve price, which improves the t. But, the Weibull-Beta speci cation
violates the monotonicity assumption of the hazard function which is required by the bidding
model. Thus, we decided to impose the monotonicity condition in the estimation and report
the estimates obtained using the Weibul distribution function.29
The e ect of individual variables can be illustrated by evaluating their e ect on the
probability of submitting a bid at sample average values of explanatory variables. In general,
the predicted e ect con rms the intuition: The probability of submitting a bid decreases
monotonically in backlog, which is consistent with the notion of capacity constraints. An
increase in the number of competing fringe rms has a negative e ect on the bid submission
decision. Distance a ects the probability of bid submission negatively, and the number of
plants in the region has a positive e ect.
The fall in the number of bid observations close to the reserve price has at least two
explanations: First, bidders do not fully understand the reserve price rule. As described before,
about 12% of all bid observations violate the reserve price requirement, which indicates that
at least some bidders did not interpret the reserve price rule correctly. In general, the reserve
price rule is complicated, varying with contract size and equaling a xed dollar amount and
a certain percentage (typically 10%) above the contract's budget. Additionally, a change in
the reserve price rule occurred in the middle of the sample period. Second, Caltrans can use
a secret reserve price in addition to the announced reserve price rule, by rejecting bids (below
the reserve price) that are deemed to high. The data do not substantiate the importance
of the secret reserve price rule, as there are no observed bids below the reserve price that
were rejected. However, the lack of data may re ect that most winning bids are substantially
below the reserve price and does not necessarily indicate the absence of the secret reserve price
rule. Both explanations can account for the fall in observations close to the reserve price.
Unfortunately, the data are not rich enough to explore these explanations further. For these
reasons, we decided to impose the monotonicity requirement in the estimation.
29

{ 29 {

For regular bidders, the backlog variable enters in the scale parameter 2. Our
assumption of symmetric bidding behavior conditional on observables requires that backlog
has the same e ect across bidders. We can test this assumption using our second set of
estimates reported in columns four, ve and six in Table 3. This second set of coeÆcients was
estimated including additionally a set of bidder identity and backlog interaction variables. We
nd that di erences in the backlog e ect between bidders are not signi cant for the majority
of bidders, reinforcing our earlier evidence in Table 2. An examination of bidder identity and
backlog interaction variables reveals that for seven cases out of nine, the bidder speci c backlog
coeÆcients are not signi cantly di erent from zero. The two signi cant e ects are for rms ve
and eight. The null of jointly no bidder speci c backlog e ects is rejected. The test statistic
is a chi-squared random variable with nine degrees of freedom and equals 66:72. However,
taking only those seven rms with backlog e ects not signi cantly di erent for zero, the null
of jointly no signi cant backlog e ects cannot be rejected. The test statistic is a chi-squared
random variable with seven degrees of freedom and equals 7:88.
(Figure 1)
The e ect of the backlog variable on the bid distribution of regular bidders is illustrated
in Figure 1. It shows the distribution function between the lower bound of bids and the
reserve price and evaluated at sample average values of state variables. Two distribution
functions are reported: The solid function assumes a backlog equal to -2 (unconstrained bids)
and the dashed function assumes a backlog equal to 2 (constrained bids). The dotted lines
represent 90% con dence intervals. The con dence interval in Figure 1 (and all subsequent
estimates' standard errors) are calculated using the delta method. The Figure illustrates
that the distribution of constrained bids stochastically dominates, in the rst order sense, the
distribution of unconstrained bids. On average, unconstrained bidders are about twice as likely
to submit a bid than constrained bidders. This nding con rms the importance of capacity
constraints.
Backlog:

{ 30 {

5.2. ESTIMATES OF THE VALUE FUNCTION

As arguments of the value function approximation we include a three-dimensional vector

for each bidder which de nes her state. The three dimensional state variables are the bidder's
backlog, plant locations and number of plants in all regions.
The value function is de ned as the expected sum of future per period payo s, where
expectations are taken over contract characteristics. Per period payo realizations are a function of bidders' state and the contract characteristics and are evaluated after the contract
realization has been observed. The variables entering the per period payo realization are
the variables in Table 3, which include the contract characteristics, bidders' backlogs, bidders'
distances to the contract, and bidders' number of plants in the contract's region. Notice that
the distance measure entering the value function will di er from the distance measure entering
the per period payo function. The per period payo function includes the actual distance to
the contract, while the value function is evaluated before contract characteristics are known.
Thus, plant locations - or the distribution of possible distances induced by the distribution of
contract characteristics- are the distance measure entering the value function instead. The
same distinction applies to the number of plants per region variable.
We approximate a value function for each bidder i separately. Since, bidder i's plant
locations do not change over time and their level e ect is accounted for in the per period
payo function, they do not enter bidder i's value function approximation as an argument.
The same reasoning applies to bidder i's size measure (number of plants in the region). Thus,
the only bidder i's state variable that remains in bidder i's value function approximation is
bidder i's backlog.
Thus, taking into account the observations above, the value function is approximated
using four components: The bidder's own backlog and three state variables per competitor:
Backlog, plant locations, and their number of plants per region. Similarly to bidder i's own
plants and size, competitors' plant locations and number of plants do not have a direct e ect
on the value function. This e ect is already accounted for in the per period payo function.
As explained in section 3, we make use of the symmetry property to simplify the value
function approximation. However, the reduction in dimension by means of the symmetry
{ 31 {

property requires the inclusion of interaction terms between competitor j 's backlog and her
plant locations and size (for all j 6= i). Thus, in bidder i's value function approximation,
there still remains an indirect e ect of the competitor's distribution of possible distances to
contracts and size in the region. This indirect e ect is manifested in the interaction terms
involving the competitor's possible distances and size with backlog, which does change from
period to period. As measures of each competitor's locations and regional size, we include the
average distance to contracts and the average number of plants per region for every competitor.
These averages are calculated using the observed contracts. We assume that these variables
adequately measure the distribution of distances and the distribution of the number of plants
per region.
(Figure 2)
The approximation of the value function for bidder 3 is depicted in Figure 2. We arbitrarily select bidder 3 who is the third largest bidder in dollar value won. We assume the projects
are equally spaced over time and since our data contain on average 709 projects per year this
assumption implies that a project is o ered for sale about every 12 hours.30 We impose an
annual discount factor of 0.80. In the Figure the competitors' three state variables are xed
at their sample averages. The plot illustrates the discounted expected future pro t of bidder
3 by varying the backlog variable of bidder 3 between -1.6 and 1.6. The dotted lines depict
the 90% con dence interval calculated using the delta method.31
The average discounted sum of payo s for bidder 3 equals $15 million. Other regular
bidders discounted sum of payo s ranges between $6 million and $59 million. The assumed
annual discount factor of 0.8 is a conservative measure for the e ect of the future. Increasing
the annual discount factor from 0.8 to 0.9 increases the discounted sum of payo s by a factor
To permit randomness in the timing of projects, a shorter period length could be used
and it could be assumed that with a certain probability no projects is o ered for sale.
31
To calculate the derivative of the value function with respect to the parameter vector,
we take the derivative in equation (3.4) which yields, Vi0 = A0 + P Bj0 Vi + P Bj Vi0 . We
numerically calculate the derivatives A0 and Bj0 and the derivative of Vi0 is then given by
30

Vi0 = [A0 +

P

Bj0 Vi ]=[1

P

Bj ].

{ 32 {

of 2, approximately. The accuracy of the computations depend on the neness of the selected
grid of states. Doubling the number of state points, from 200 to 400, alters the value function
of bidder 3 by a very small amount only. The di erence between the value functions based
on 200 and based on 400 states equals at most 1%, or $180,000, and the di erence equals less
than 0:01% on average which amounts to $7,600.
The e ect of backlog on the value function in Figure 2 is negative, which is in accordance
with the expected e ect under capacity constraints. In Figure 2, backlog reduces the value
function in total by about 30%. Value function estimates for other bidders are of di erent
magnitude, but in general similar shape. An exception is bidder 5 for which the value function
increases initially and then decreases as backlog increases. To illustrate the backlog e ect for
the average bidder we regress the value functions of bidders evaluated at the 200 states on a set
of bidder speci c dummy variables and the state variables. To capture possible non-linearities
we include both, linear and quadratic coeÆcients of variables. We nd that the predicted value
function is about 31% higher at a backlog level of -1 than at a backlog level of 1.
5.3. ESTIMATES OF COSTS

First, we illustrate the equilibrium bid functions. Then, we describe mark-ups and cost
estimates.
(Figure 3)
The equilibrium bid function for bidder 3 is illustrated in Figure 3. The bid function
is estimated using equation (3.2.). The bid function is plotted by xing the state variables
at sample average values for bidder 3 and varying the cost. In addition to the bid function,
the 45 degree line is reported. As is evident in the Figure, the bid increases with the cost.
In addition, the distance between the bid and the cost decreases as the cost increases. The
bid function is of similar shape for other contract characteristics and state variables. In some
instances, the di erence between bids and costs is large in magnitude at the lower end of the
support of bids which can result in a negative cost. We nd negative costs implausible and set
the cost to zero if the inferred cost would be negative.
The mark-up denotes the di erence between the bid and the cost of a bidder. In the
{ 33 {

Figure, the mark-up is the distance between the bid and the 45 degree line. An examination of
all observed bids by bidder 3 reveals that the median estimated mark-up for this bidder equals
17.1% of the bid. The mean mark-up is higher and equals 27.3% of the bid. The estimated
mark-up di ers across bidders. The median mark-up across all observed regular bids equals
33.8% and the mean mark-up equals 40.2%. Although the magnitude of the mark-up may
appear large, it appears in accordance with descriptive evidence in Table 1a and Table 1b.
The di erence between the lowest and second lowest bid is, on average, 9% of the value of the
bid.
A substantial portion of the mark-up of regular bidders is attributable to the loss in
future discounted value due to limited capacity. This loss re ects the cost of winning today
versus winning later. We can measure this loss based on equation (3.2.) which decomposes the
mark-up into two parts: The rst part re ects contemporaneous competition. The second part
measures the loss in value of winning today versus winning later. For bidder 3, on average,
across all observed bids 43.0% of the mark-up is attributable to the second part, which is the
option value of winning today versus winning later. The number varies across bidders. Across
all regular bidders 51.8% of the mark-up is attributable to the second part.
The mark-up estimates depend on the assumed discount factor. As we increase the annual
discount factor, from 0.8 to 0.9, the following changes take place: For bidder 3 the median
estimated mark-up becomes 19.5% of the bid and the mean mark-up increases to 35.3% of
the bid. The median mark-up across all observed regular bids becomes 36.1% and the mean
mark-up equals 45.6%. Finally, when the discount factor is 0.9, the option value for bidder i
accounts for about 52.1% of the mark-up, and across all regular bidders for about 55.5%.
(Figure 4)
Costs' Estimates: Figure 4 depicts the distribution function of costs for bidder 3. Distribution functions are reported for two values of backlog and holding other state variables at
sample average values. The backlog values are -2 and 2. The dotted lines represent 90% con dence intervals which are calculated using the delta method. The estimated cost distribution
functions are truncated at the point at which the equilibrium bid corresponding to the cost
equals the reserve price and are reported for a common range of costs. Figure 4 documents
{ 34 {

that the cost distribution of the constrained bidder stochastically dominates in the rst order
sense the cost distribution of the unconstrained bidder. On average, the probability that the
cost is below a certain threshold is more than twice when the bidder is unconstrained than
when the bidder is constrained. Similar to our earlier evidence in Table 3, we nd that cost
realization depend not only on the bidder's own state variables, but also on other bidders'
state variables. A possible explanation is that shortages of paving workers or shortages of
paving equipment caused by high backlog levels of bidders can increase the contract costs for
all bidders.
6. THE EFFECT OF BACKLOG AND INEFFICIENCIES

This section reports three applications of the estimates: First, we measure the bene ts
to the auctioneer of increasing capacity of all bidders simultaneously. Second, we measure the
short run bene ts of individual bidders to an increase in their capacity. Third, we determine to
what extent the auction rule does not select the low cost bidder due to the presence of capacity
constraints and bidder asymmetries. We quantify the magnitude of resulting ineÆciencies.
6.1. PRICE EFFECT

We have shown that individual regular bids, costs and future pro ts depend on the
backlog level. Next, we report the hypothetical e ect on the price paid for the service by
the auctioneer as the backlog level of all regular bidders is increased simultaneously. We may
interpret the e ect as the bene t to the auctioneer of an increase in capacity of all bidders.
We report the price e ect for a hypothetical contract on which the fringe bidders are absent.
Due to the absence of fringe bidders, the price equals the low regular bid which is the low
bid submitted from the set of regular bids. The reason why we select a contract on which
the fringe bidders are absent is that their dependence on backlog was not modeled, as fringe
bidders' backlog level is not observed in our data.
To compute the price e ect we conduct the following exercise: We select the contract with
an engineers' cost estimate equal to the sample average. For each regular rm, we randomly
draw a bid from the bid distribution under the assumption that their backlog equals -2. Then,
we calculate the price which equals the low bid from this set of regular bids. Similarly, we
{ 35 {

randomly draw bids from the bid distributions of regular bidders under the assumption that
their backlog equals 2. Then, we determine this draw's low regular bid. We repeat this
sampling procedure to obtain 1,000 observations. Finally, we compare the distribution of
prices between both cases.
The price e ect is substantial. When backlog of all regular bidders equals -2, the average
price equals $539,845. When backlog equals 2, the average price increases to $657,016. The
di erence in the mean is signi cant and equals about 18% of the average at the -2 backlog
level.
We repeat the above calculations for backlog levels equal to -1 and 1. The di erence in
the average of the price between backlogs of -1 and +1 is signi cant and equals about 12% of
the average price at a backlog of -1. We also conducted the experiment for other engineers'
cost estimates with similar results.
We can conclude that the bene ts to the auctioneer of an increase in available bidder
capacity is substantial. Next we examine the e ect of available capacity on bidders' returns.
6.2. PERIOD RETURNS

We illustrate the e ect of available capacity on the ex ante expected period return of an
individual regular bidder. The bene ts of an additional unit of capacity is an important part
in the equation that determines the optimal capacity choice as a function of the returns to
capacity and the cost of investing in capacity. The cost of additional capacity in the highway
paving industry is diÆcult to measure and we do not attempt to quantify it. However, our
estimates permit us to assess the short run auction returns due to a reduction in backlog and
holding total bidder capacity xed. We calculate the ex ante expected period auction return
before contract characteristics and costs are observed. We emphasize that the exercise looks
at one auction only. The long run e ect of backlog on bidders' returns were illustrated earlier
in the discussion of the value function estimates in Section 5.2. and exempli ed in Figure 2.
The period returns are de ned as the rst expression on the right hand side in equation
(3.1.). Due to our conditional symmetry assumption, variations in period returns are entirely
determined by variations in the state variables. To assess bidder speci c returns, we take a
{ 36 {

sample of 200 random draws from the observed distribution of states for each regular bidder
and we obtain the short run auction return corresponding to each one of the 200 states, for
each regular bidder. Our calculations indicate that regular bidders expect to receive $9,200
per contract on average, but there is substantial variation in ex ante expected returns for
individual regular bidders ranging between $2,000 and $18,400 across bidders.
The e ect of available capacity on ex ante expected returns can be illustrated by regressing these ex ante period returns on a set of bidder speci c dummy variables and the state
variables. To capture possible non-linearities we include both linear and quadratic coeÆcients
of the state variables. Using the estimated backlog coeÆcient, we conduct counterfactual predictions by varying the backlog level, while holding the other variables constant at sample
average.
We nd that the ex ante expected period payo s are about 127% higher if backlog equals
-2 than if the backlog equals 2, they are about 71% higher if backlog equals -1 than if the
backlog equals 2, they are about 32% higher when backlog equals 0 than if the backlog equals
2, and they are about 8% higher when backlog equals 1 than if the backlog equals 2. If we
compare the e ects to our earlier results on the value function, we can conclude that the e ect
of capacity is of larger magnitude in the short run than in the long run.
The illustration shows that available capacity is important in the bidders calculus of
bidding.
6.3. INEFFICIENCIES

Next, we assess the magnitude of the ineÆciencies. Notice, that due to the presence of
intertemporal e ects and due to bidder heterogeneity, a rst-price auction need not select the
eÆcient rm. The bidder with the lowest bid need not be the bidder with the lowest cost. The
reason is that constrained (or smaller) bidders may bid more aggressively than unconstrained
(or larger) bidders. The strategic bid shading can imply that a constrained rm wins although
it did not have the lowest cost.
To assess the magnitude of ineÆciencies at auction t, we conduct the following experiment: We select the rm that minimizes costs at auction t and take as given that the rst{ 37 {

price auction is used at auction t + 1 and onwards. This selection rule gives us a lower
bound on the eÆciency loss.32 To assess which rm to select, we take into account contemporary and future costs. Contemporary costs are those implied by the observed bids.
The discounted sum of expected future costs, V c, are approximated using the estimates reported in section 5. Speci cally, the discounted sum of expected future costs can be written
R
F
as, V c (s) = Es (:; s0; s)dG(1)(:js0; s) + Pnj=0
Pr( j winsjs0; s)V c (!(s0 ; s; j )) , where
G(1) (:js0; s) denotes the distribution function of the winning bid on contract s0 with state s.
We evaluate V c numerically in the same way as the value function. The low cost rm is the
rm j that minimizes cj + V c(!(s0 ; s; j )).
( Table 4)
Table 4 reports the frequency and the ineÆciencies' dollar amounts associated with the
experiments. We perform the experiment for all observed contract characteristics, except contracts which we omitted in the estimation of the bid distribution functions due to suspiciously
low bids, and using the observed bid data. IneÆciencies are reported as a fraction of the initial
engineers' estimate. On 35% of all experiments, an ineÆcient bidder is selected. We decompose the eÆciency loss into contemporary and future cost e ects. We nd that the ineÆciency
arises because a lower cost rm could have been chosen in auction t. The e ect on future costs
is negligible. The average eÆciency loss across experiments amounts to 18% of the engineers'
estimate. In dollar value, this amounts to $423,060 per experiment, on average. In addition to
the overall results, Table 4 reports eÆciency losses for a range of selected engineers' estimate
values. In general, ineÆciencies arise for small and large contracts. Nevertheless, ineÆciencies,
measured in percent of engineers' estimate, are of larger magnitude for larger contracts. Table
4 also reports eÆciency losses for two subsets of the data: Contracts won by regular bidders
and contracts won by fringe bidders. Table 4 illustrates that the probability of ineÆciencies is
about the same if a contract is won by a regular bidder than when it is won by a fringe bidder.
0

The full cost minimizing problem is a dynamic decision problem involving ten state
variables, one backlog variable for each regular bidder. This problem is too complex for the
computing techniques available.
32

{ 38 {

7. CONCLUSIONS

This paper proposes an estimation method for a repeated auction game under the presence of capacity constraints and bidder asymmetry. We apply the method to highway procurement auctions in California. We characterize costs as a function of state variables and illustrate
the bidding equilibrium. The data suggests the presence of capacity constraints. Bidders that
have a large fraction of their capacity committed have, on average, higher costs than bidders
with little capacity committed. We nd that when all bidders are capacity constrained, the
resulting price paid by the auctioneer is about 18% higher than when all regular bidders are
unconstrained. Moreover, an individual bidder expects to receive about twice as much from
an auction in which the bidder is unconstrained than from an auction in which the bidder is
constrained.
There are at least two policy implications from our analysis: First, scheduling and timing
of contracts o ered for sale in uences the nal price. Preventing that bidders operate close to
the capacity constraint may save costs. Second, due to intertemporal constraints and bidder
heterogeneity, an ineÆcient rm may be chosen. Our experiments indicate that ineÆciencies
may arise on about 35% of all contracts and they may amount to 18% of the expected contract
size. Our estimates suggest that auction rules that cope better with intertemporal e ects and
bidder asymmetry could be a cost saving alternative.
There are two shortcomings of our estimation method: First, possibly the most important assumption in our estimation method is that bidders completely understand the auction
environment and that our estimates of winning probabilities correctly capture bidders' perceived winning odds. While we feel that these assumptions are reasonable in our context, we
emphasize that our data are too limited to test the adequacy of these assumptions beyond
some regularity conditions that our data do satisfy. It may be fruitful to assess the accuracy
of the models' predictions with data on independent and reliable information on the perceived
winning odds and bidders' cost estimates. Second, our estimation method does not identify
the discount factor. The non-identi cation problem of the discount factor is similar to other
dynamic estimation approaches, see Rust (1994).
{ 39 {

APPENDIX

The appendix contains the proofs to all propositions in the text as well as an auxiliary
result.
Subsection 3.1.: Equation (3.2.)

The probability that bidder i assigns to the event that bidder j wins the contract when
R
bidder i bids b, can be written as bb g(xjs0; sj ; s j ) Ql6=i;j [1 G(xjs0; sl; s l)]dx. The rst
order condition of equilibrium bids by a regular bidder is given by:
[b

c] 

X Y

6

6

j =i l=i;j

[1

G(bjs0 ; sl ; s

+ Vi (!(s0 ; s; i))
+

X

6

j =i

g(bjs0 ; sj ; s

j)

Y

6

l=i;j

Y

l

)][ g(bjs0; sj ; s j )] + [1

6

j =i l=i;j

[1

6

j =i

X Y

6

[1

G(bjs0 ; sl ; s

G(bjs0 ; sl ; s

l

c] 

X

6

j =i

1

g(bjs0 ; sj ; s j )
G(bjs0 ; sj ; s j )

+

X

1
j 6=i

+1+

l

j

)]+

)][ g(bjs0; sj ; s j )]+


)]  Vi(!(s0 ; s; j )) = 0:

We can rearrange this expression by dividing by Ql6=i [1
[b

G(bjs0 ; sj ; s

G(bjs0 ; sl ; s

Vi (!(s0 ; s; i))

X

6

j =i

1

l

(A3:1)

)]. This yields:

g(bjs0 ; sj ; s j )
+
G(bjs0 ; sj ; s j )

g(bjs0 ; sj ; s j )
 V (!(s0 ; s; j )) = 0:
G(bjs0 ; sj ; s j ) i

(A3:2)

The hazard function, h(:js0; sj ; s j ) = 1 g(G:j(s:js;s;sj ;sj ;sj )j ) can be substituted into this equation. This substitution yields equation (3.2.).
The rst order condition for optimal bids by a fringe bidder is obtained in analogous
way. In particular, evaluating (A3.2) at Vi = 0, gives the corresponding rst order condition
of a fringe bidder.
0

0

{ 40 {

Proof of Proposition 1:

To establish the claim in the proposition, we show that the value function, de ned in
equation (3.1.), has a representation in terms of the distribution of bids. There are two steps
involved: First, we make use of the rst order condition of optimal bids. This condition
provides us with an explicit expression of the cost in terms of bids and the value function.
Second, we change the range of integration from the cost space to the bid space. The resulting
equation (3.3.) characterizes the value function as an in nite sum.
Note that the probability that bidder i assigns to the event that bidder j wins the contract
R
when bidder i bids b, P r(j winsjb; s0; si; s i), can be written as: bb g(xjs0; sj ; s j ) Ql6=i;j [1
G(xjs0 ; sl ; s l )]dx. In an abuse of notation, we denote by b(c) the equilibrium bid by bidder
i on contract s0 if the state is s. We can substitute the rst order condition for optimal
bids, equation (3.2.), into the value function, equation (3.1.). Notice that we can use the rst
order condition only for costs such that the equilibrium bid is below the reserve price. If the
equilibrium bid equals or exceeds the reserve price, then the bid is rejected and the current
period payo equals zero. We account for this distinction explicitly by including an indicator
function 1A that equals one if event A is true and equals zero, otherwise. Doing so yields:
Vi (s) = E0

nZ h

P

1

(b(c)jsP0 ; sj ; s j )[Vi(!(s0 ; s; i))
j 6=i h(b(c)js0 ; sj ; s j )

j =i h

6

Vi (!(s0 ; s; j ))]



 P r(i wins jb(c); s0; si; s i)1fb(c)R(s )g + 0  1fb(c)>R(s )g
0

+

nF
X
j =0

P r (j

0

i

o

winsjb(c); s0 ; si; s i)Vi (!(s0 ; s; j ))  f (cjs0 ; si; s i)dc

:

R

F
Note that the expression [Pnj=0
P r(j winsjb(c); si ; s i)Vi (!(s0 ; s; j ))f (cjs0 ; si ; s i )dc is the
PnF
ex ante expected value of j=0 P r(j winsjs0; si; s i)Vi(!(s0 ; s; j )), and that the term involving bids above the reserve price, 0  1fb(c)>R(s )g, vanishes. Furthermore, the expression
0

P

6

j

h(b(c) s0 ;sj ;s j )Vi (!(s0 ;s;i))

j =i P

6

j =i

j

h(b(c) s0 ;sj ;s j )

reduces to Vi (!(s0 ; s; i)) and cancels with the second term in{ 41 {

volving Vi(!(s0 ; s; i)). By making these changes, we can write the value function as:
Vi (s) = E0

nZ h

P

1+

6 P (b(c)js0 ; sj ; s j )Vi (!(s0 ; s; j )) i  P r(i
j=
6 i h(b(c)js0 ; sj ; s j )

j =i h

X

 1fb(c)R(s )gf (cjs0 ; si; s i)dc +
0

6

j =i

P r(j

wins jb(c); s0; si; s i)
o

winsjs0; si; s i)Vi (!(s0 ; s; j ))

:

Next consider a change of variable of integration from c to b. Notice that db = @b@c(c) dc. Let
b 1 denote the inverse function of the equilibrium bid function. By assumption the inverse
bidding function exists for bids below the reserve price. The inverse bidding function allows
us to write the distribution function of cost in terms of the distribution functions of bids.
Speci cally, F (b 1 (b)js0; si; s i) = G(bjs0; si; s i). Taking the partial derivative yields a relationship between the density of costs and bids: f (b 1(b)js0; si; s i)  @b @b(b) = g(bjs0; si; s i).
Also, notice that @b @b(b) = @b1c . Finally, the probability that bidder i wins can be written as
Q@c
P r(i wins jb; s0; si ; s i ) = j 6=i [1 G(bjs0 ; sj ; s j )]. Applying the change of variables in the
above equation yields:
1

1

( )

Vi (s) = E0

nZ R

+
+

Q

b

Z R hX
b

X

6

j =i

6

j =i

P r (j

6

G(bjs0 ; sk ; s k )]
g(bjs0 ; si ; s
j 6=i h(bjs0 ; sj ; s j )

k =i

P

[1

h(bjs0 ; sj ; s j )  Vi (!(s0 ; s; j )) i Y
P
[1
l6=i h(bjs0 ; sl ; s l )
k6=i

i

)db
G(bjs0 ; sk ; s

k

)]  g(bjs0; si; s i)db

o

winsjs0; si; s i)Vi(!(s0 ; s; j ))

:

Observe that the expression in the second line of the value function can be rewritten, by
taking the sum Pj6=i outside, multiplying the expression by 11 GG((bbjjss ;s;sii ;s;s ii)) and gg((bbjjss ;s;sjj ;s;s jj )) ,
and rearranging terms, as:
i
XhZ R
h(bjs0 ; si ; s i ) Y
P
[1
G(bjs0 ; sl ; s l )]  g(bjs0 ; sj ; s j )db  Vi (!(s0 ; s; j )):
b(s)
l6=i h(bjs0 ; sl ; s l ) l6=j
j 6=i
{ 42 {

0

0

0

0

Finally, observe that Ql6=j [1 G(bjs0; sl; s l )]g(bjs0; sj ; s j ) is the probability density
function that a bid of bidder j is the low bid, dG(j)(bjs0; s), which yields the expression (3.3.)
in the Proposition.
QED
Suppose there are two cost distribution functions F1 (:j:) and
F2 (:j:) with support [C 1 (st0 ; sti ; st i ); C 1 (st0 ; sti ; st i)] and [C 2 (st0 ; sti ; st i); C 2 (st0 ; sti ; st i )] respectively, such that both distribution lead to the same bid distribution function G(:j:) on the
interval [b(st0; st); Rt ]. By assumption, an equilibrium in monotone strategies exists and the
discount factor is known. The necessary rst order condition of equilibrium bids (3.2.) implies
that:
C 1 (st0 ; sti ; st i) = (b(st0 ; st )jst0 ; sti ; st i ; ; G)
Proof of Proposition 2:

C 2 (st0 ; sti ; st i) = (b(st0 ; st )jst0 ; sti ; st i ; ; G)

and it follows that C 1(st0 ; sti; st i) = C 2 (st0 ; sti; st i).
Furthermore, for any (st0 ; sti; st i) and any
(bjst0 ; sti ; st i ; ; G), and therefore,
F1 (cjst0 ; sti ; st i ) = G(

1

F2 (cjst0 ; sti ; st i) = G(

1

b



Rt ,

equation (3.2.) yields

(cjst0; sti; st i;

; G)jst0; sti ; st i)

(cjst0 ; sti; st i;

; G)jst0 ; sti; st i ):

c

=

It follows that F1 = F2 on the interval [C (:); (Rtj:)].
Q:E:D:

{ 43 {

REFERENCES

Athey, S. (2001): \Single Crossing Properties and the Existence of Pure Strategy Equilibria in
Games of Incomplete Information," Econometrica, Vol. 69, No. 4, 861-889.
Bajari, P. (1997): \Econometrics of the First Price Auction with Asymmetric Bidders," mimeo,
Stanford University.
Bhattacharya, R. N. and Majumdar, M. (1989): \Controlled Semi-Markov Models - The Discounted Case," Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 21, 365-381.
Billingsley, P. (1961): \Statistical Inference for Markov Processes," Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Berry, S. and Pakes, A. (2000): \Using First Order Conditions to Estimate Dynamic Oligopoly
Models," mimeo, Yale University, May 2000.
Donald, S. G. and Paarsch H.J. (1993): \Piecewise Pseudo-Maximum Likelihood Estimation in
Empirical Models of Auctions," International Economics Review, Vol. 34, No. 1, 121-148.
Donald, S. G., Paarsch H.J. and Robert, J. (1997): \Identi cation, Estimation, and Testing in
Empirical Models of Sequential, Ascending-Price Auctions with Multi-Unit Demand: An
Application to Siberian Timber-Export Permits," mimeo, University of Iowa.
Elyakime, B., La ont J.J., Loisel P. and Vuong, Q. (1994): \First-Price Sealed-Bid Auctions
with Secret Reservation Prices," Annales d'Economie et de Statistique, 34, 115-141.
Feinstein, J.S., Block, Michael K. and Nold, Frederick C. (1985): \ Asymmetric Information
and Collusive Behavior in Auction Markets," American Economic Review, Vol. 75, No.
3, 441-460.
Guerre E., Perrigne I. and Vuong, Q. (2000): \Optimal Nonparametric Estimation of FirstPrice Auctions," Econometrica, Vol. 68, No. 3, 525-574.
Harter, H.L. and Moore, A.H. (1965): \Maximum Likelihood estimation of the parameters
of the Gamma and Weibull Populations from Complete and from Censored Samples",
Technometrics, 7, 639-643.
Hendricks, K. and Porter, R. H. (1988): \An Empirical Study of an Auction with Asymmetric
Information," American Economic Review, Vol. 78, 865-883.
Hendricks, K., Pinske, J. and Porter, R. H. (2000): \Empirical Implications of Equilibrium
{ 44 {

Bidding in First-Price, Symmetric, Common Value Auctions," Working Paper No. 0008,
The Center for the Study of Industrial Organization, Northwestern University.
Hotz, C. and Miller R. (1993): \Conditional Choice Probabilities and the Estimation of Dynamic Models" Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 60, No. 3, 497-529..
Jofre-Bonet, M. and Pesendorfer, M. (2000): \Bidding Behavior in a Repeated Procurement
Auction: A Summary," European Economic Review, 44, 1006-1020.
Jofre-Bonet, M. and Pesendorfer, M. (1999): \Bidding Behavior in a Repeated Procurement
Auction," mimeo, Yale University.
Judd, K. (1998): Numerical Methods in Economics. MIT Press.
La ont, J.J., Ossard, H. and Vuong, Q. (1995): \Econometrics of First-Price Auctions," Econometrica, 63(4), 953-980.
La ont, J.J. and Robert, J. (1999): \Intra-Day Dynamics in Sequential Auctions: Theory,"
mimeo, Toulouse.
Lebrun, B. (1996): \Existence of Equilibrium in First-Price Auctions," Economic Theory, 7,
421-443.
Maskin, E. and Riley, J. (2000): \Equilibrium in Sealed High Bid Auctions." Review of Economic Studies, 67, 439-454.
Paarsch, H. (1992): \Deciding between the Common and Private Value Paradigms in Empirical
Models of Auctions," Journal of Econometrics, 51, 191-215.
Pakes, A. (1994): \Dynamic Structural Models, Problems and Prospects: Mixed Continuous
Discrete Controls and Market Interactions," in C. Sims and J. La ont, Advances in
Econometrics, Proceedings of the 1990 Meetings of the Econometric Society, 1994.
Porter, R.H. (1995): \The Role of Information in U.S. O shore Oil and Gas Lease Auctions,"
Econometrica, Vol. 63, No. 1, 1-27.
Porter, R.H. and Zona, J. D. (1993): \Detection of Bid Rigging in Procurement Auctions,"
Journal of Political Economy, 101, pp. 518-538.
Rust, J. (1994): \Structural Estimation of Markov Decision Processes," in Handbook of Econometrics. Vol. 4, Engle, R.F. and McFadden D.L. eds., Elsevier, North-Holland, pages
3081-3143.
{ 45 {

Smith, R. (1985): \Maximum Likelihood Estimation in a Class of Nonregular Cases,"
Biometrika, 72(1), 67-90.
Smith, R. (1994): \Nonregular Regression," Biometrika, 81(1), 173-183.

{ 46 {

Table 1A: Descriptive Statistics of Selected Variables
Number of
Observations
Number of Bidders
Estimate*
(Ranked1**-Estimate)/Estimate
(Ranked2**-Ranked1)/Ranked1
Backlog***

2223
2223
2207
2111
22230

Standard
Mean

4.63
13.41
-0.04
0.09
0.00

Deviation

Minimum

2.46
1.35
0.22
0.12
1.00

*Logarithm of the engineers' estimate.
**Ranked1 and Ranked2 are the winning bid and the bid ranked in second position, respectively.
***Backlog measures the $ value of previously won uncompleted contracts. It is standardized by subtracting
the bidder specific mean and dividing by the bidder specific standard deviation.

0.00
9.47
-0.79
0.00
-3.24

Maximum

19.00
18.31
3.07
2.62
2.97

Table 1B: Descriptive Statistics of Selected Variables by Number of Bidders
Number of bidders:
# Observations:

All
2223

0
16

1
96

2
285

3
393

4
432

5
356

6
237

7-8
251

9-19
157

Estimate*
Mean
Standard Deviation
(Ranked1**-Estimate)/Estimate
Mean
Standard Deviation
(Ranked2**-Ranked1)/Ranked1
Mean
Standard Deviation

13.41
1.35

13.14
1.04

13.47
1.27

13.49
1.33

13.32
1.29

13.42
1.35

13.55
1.59

13.48
1.47

13.12
1.19

-0.04
0.22

0.11
0.36

0.03
0.29

-0.01
0.21

-0.04
0.20

-0.06
0.19

-0.09
0.16

-0.10
0.20

-0.14
0.16

0.14
0.11

0.11
0.19

0.09
0.10

0.08
0.09

0.06
0.06

0.07
0.07

0.06
0.07

0.09
0.12

*Logarithm of the engineers' estimate.
**Ranked1 and Ranked2 are the winning bid and the bid ranked in second position, respectively.

Table 2: Bid Subsmission and Bid Level Decisions
Estimation Method:
Dependent Variable:
Number of observations:
Chi^2:
Degrees of freedom:
Log Likelihood:

Probit
Bid Submission
22230
22230
1605.65
1984.17
6
15
-4281.26
-4092.39

22230
1677.77
15
-4245.60

Tobit
(R-Bid)/Estimate*
22230
22230
1518.99
1883.42
6
15
-3765.05
-3582.84

22230
1589.23
15
-3729.93

Heckman
(R-Bid)/Estimate*
22230
22230
420.41
444.64
6
15
-3404.46
-3394.35

22230
420.44
15
-3366.71

Variable
Constant
Estimate
Working Days
Nbid-Fringe
Distance
# Plants within Region
Backlog
Firm_2
Firm_3
Firm_4
Firm_5
Firm_6
Firm_7
Firm_8
Firm_9
Firm_10
Backlog_2
Backlog_3
Backlog_4
Backlog_5
Backlog_6
Backlog_7
Backlog_8
Backlog_9
Backlog_10

-2.8485
(0.173)
0.2905
(0.015)
-0.3176
(0.022)
-0.1835
(0.027)
-0.5193
(0.023)
0.1807
(0.051)
-0.0835
(0.015)

-3.169
(0.184)
0.3024
(0.016)
-0.3234
(0.023)
-0.1913
(0.027)
-0.4805
(0.024)
0.0513
(0.054)
-0.0856
(0.015)

-2.864
(0.174)
0.2902
(0.015)
-0.3270
(0.023)
-0.1885
(0.027)
-0.5238
(0.023)
0.1786
(0.052)
-0.1079
(0.053)

0.6784
(0.061)
-0.0338
(0.073)
0.1499
(0.074)
-0.0325
(0.073)
-0.1885
(0.076)
0.2011
(0.072)
-0.0515
(0.073)
-0.2070
(0.077)
0.2277
(0.069)

-1.1654
(0.089)
0.1235
(0.008)
-0.1498
(0.011)
-0.0882
(0.013)
-0.2536
(0.012)
0.0638
(0.025)
-0.0383
(0.007)

-1.2511
(0.091)
0.1220
(0.008)
-0.1446
(0.011)
-0.0875
(0.013)
-0.2240
(0.012)
0.0078
(0.024)
-0.0372
(0.007)

-1.1644
(0.089)
0.1250
(0.008)
-0.1537
(0.011)
-0.0905
(0.013)
-0.2543
(0.012)
0.0632
(0.024)
-0.0528
(0.025)

0.3093
(0.072)
0.0040
(0.006)
-0.0533
(0.008)
-0.0613
(0.007)
-0.1196
(0.008)
-0.0051
(0.014)
-0.0127
(0.004)

0.2985
(0.029)
-0.0081
(0.034)
0.0649
(0.034)
-0.0133
(0.033)
-0.0976
(0.035)
0.0969
(0.033)
-0.0212
(0.034)
-0.0893
(0.035)
0.1297
(0.031)
0.0345
(0.072)
-0.0239
(0.063)
-0.0637
(0.078)
0.3193
(0.070)
0.0495
(0.076)
0.0970
(0.074)
-0.2357
(0.075)
0.0546
(0.071)
-0.0195
(0.071)

0.2734
(0.076)
0.0038
(0.007)
-0.0540
(0.009)
-0.0599
(0.008)
-0.0978
(0.009)
-0.0193
(0.015)
-0.0127
(0.005)

0.3207
(0.073)
0.0032
(0.007)
-0.0527
(0.008)
-0.0624
(0.008)
-0.1188
(0.009)
-0.0052
(0.015)
-0.0162
(0.017)

0.1204
(0.019)
-0.0223
(0.024)
0.0011
(0.022)
-0.0097
(0.023)
-0.0458
(0.023)
0.0054
(0.022)
-0.0357
(0.023)
-0.0372
(0.023)
0.0742
(0.021)
0.0214
(0.034)
0.0033
(0.030)
-0.0338
(0.037)
0.1530
(0.034)
0.0256
(0.034)
0.0458
(0.035)
-0.1117
(0.036)
0.0261
(0.034)
-0.0075
(0.030)

Mills Ratio

All variables except Backlog are in logarithm. The numbers in parenthesis are standard deviations.
*(R-Bid)/Estimate denotes the logarithm of the variable (Reserve price minus the Bid) over the engineers' Estimate plus one.

0.2342
(0.011)

0.2233
(0.011)

0.0065
(0.022)
0.0015
(0.019)
-0.0258
(0.024)
0.0591
(0.023)
-0.0072
(0.024)
0.0128
(0.023)
-0.0344
(0.024)
0.0018
(0.024)
-0.0096
(0.022)
0.2319
(0.011)

Table 3: Parameter Estimates of the Bid Distributions
Data:
Number of Observations:
Log Likelihood:
Variables

θ1

Regular and Fringe Bids
30,873
-1,467.46
Regular Bids Fringe Bids Lower Bound

-13.1688
(22.689)

θ4
Constant
Ln Estimate
Ln Working Days
Estimate/Reserve_Price
Nbid-Fringe
Distance
# of Plants within the Region
Backlog
Sum_Distance
Sum_# of Plants within the Region
Sum_Backlog
Backlog_Firm_1
Backlog_Firm_2
Backlog_Firm_3
Backlog_Firm_4
Backlog_Firm_5
Backlog_Firm_6
Backlog_Firm_7
Backlog_Firm_8
Backlog_Firm_9

Regular and Fringe Bids
30,873
-1,500.82

5.6934
(0.193)
-0.3739
(0.015)
0.2765
(0.021)
-2.8037
(0.200)
0.025
(0.006)
0.0559
(0.003)
-0.3144
(0.026)
0.0721
(0.015)
0.0015
(0.001)
0.1242
(0.012)
0.0108
(0.006)

Regular Bids

Fringe Bids Lower Bound

-13.1721
(14.779)
-1.3354
(0.155)
1.8821
(0.170)
-0.0014
(0.011)
-0.0283
(0.018)
-2.5396
(0.158)
0.0049
(0.008)

-0.8228
(0.019)
1.0541
(0.001)
-0.0049
(0.002)
-0.0188
(0.013)
0.0011
(0.001)

0.0002
(0.001)
-0.0262
(0.013)
0.0278
(0.007)

-0.0004
(0.000)
-0.0129
(0.002)
-0.0022
(0.001)

5.6997
(0.193)
-0.3767
(0.015)
0.2813
(0.021)
-2.7803
(0.200)
0.0258
(0.007)
0.0562
(0.003)
-0.3159
(0.027)
0.0803
(0.016)
0.0015
(0.001)
0.1271
(0.012)
0.0128
(0.006)
-0.0497
(0.045)
0.0530
(0.035)
0.0274
(0.026)
0.0777
(0.059)
-0.2561
(0.045)
-0.0416
(0.056)
-0.0526
(0.046)
0.2264
(0.050)
-0.0375
(0.028)

-1.3357
(0.154)
1.8820
(0.151)
-0.0014
(0.006)
-0.0283
(0.019)
-2.5395
(0.158)
0.0049
(0.006)

-0.8228
(0.022)
1.0541
(0.001)
-0.0049
(0.002)
-0.0188
(0.013)
0.0011
(0.001)

0.0002
(0.001)
-0.0262
(0.014)
0.0277
(0.007)

-0.0004
(0.000)
-0.0129
(0.002)
-0.0022
(0.001)

Table 4: Estimates of Efficiency Losses
Range of Engineers' Estimate (in $ 1,000)
Variable

[0,100]

(100,400]

(400,1000]

(1000,5000]

Overall
(5000,.]

All Contracts:
Number of Contracts
Prob of an Inefficiency
Average Efficiency Loss*

49
0.03
0.08

893
0.53
0.13

525
0.17
0.18

545
0.27
0.23

184
0.33
0.32

2196
0.35
0.18

1
0.44
1.00

90
0.14
0.24

94
0.54
0.22

147
0.36
0.18

42
0.47
0.29

374
0.37
0.22

48
0.02
0.06

803
0.58
0.12

431
0.09
0.17

398
0.24
0.26

142
0.29
0.32

1822
0.35
0.17

Contract Won by a Regular Bidder:
Number of Contracts
Prob of an Inefficiency
Average Efficiency Loss *
Contract Won by a Fringe Bidder:
Number of Contracts
Prob of an Inefficiency
Average Efficiency Loss*

*Efficiency losses are reported as a fraction of the engineers' estimate.

