                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     AREA DIFFERENCES IN UTILIZATION OF MEDICAL CARE AND MORTALITY
                           AMONG U.S. ELDERLY


                                             Victor R. Fuchs
                                            Mark McClellan
                                            Jonathan Skinner


                                          Working Paper 8628
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8628


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2001




Paper presented at the NBER Conference on Aging at the Boulders, Carefree AZ, May 2001. For
development of the variables used in this paper we are indebted to Jeffrey Geppert, Chris Kagay, Hoon Byun,
and Sarah Rosen. We also thank Deborah Kerwin-Peck and Sarah Rosen for preparation of the tables and
Dan Gottlieb for additional research assistance. Financial support was provided to Fuchs by the Robert
Wood Johnson and Kaiser Family Foundations and to Mark McClellan and Jonathan Skinner by the National
Institute on Aging. Helpful comments from David Cutler, Ed Glaeser, and especially Joseph Newhouse are
gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Victor R. Fuchs, Mark McClellan and Jonathan Skinner. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Area Differences in Utilization of Medical Care and Mortality Among U.S. Elderly
Victor R. Fuchs, Mark McClellan and Jonathan Skinner
NBER Working Paper No. 8628
December 2001
JEL No. I11



                                              ABSTRACT


        This paper examines 313 U.S. areas for differences in medical care utilization and mortality of
whites ages 65-84 in 1990. The variables included in the analysis are education, real income, cigarette
sales, obesity, air pollution, percent black, and dummy variables for seven regions and five population
size categories from MSAs over 500,000 to not in MSA.
        Utilization, especially inpatient care, is strongly positively related to mortality. Mortality is
positively related to cigarette sales, obesity, air pollution and percent black. Utilization (especially
outpatient) is significantly higher in MSAs with populations greater than 500,000. Mortality does not
vary with population size, with or without controls. Florida is an outlier for both utilization (very high)
and mortality (by far the lowest of any region). The puzzles of Floridian exceptionalism and the positive
relation between white mortality and percent black are discussed but not resolved.




Victor R. Fuchs                  Mark McClellan                       Jonathan Skinner
NBER                             Department of Economics              Department of Economics
30 Alta Road                     Stanford University                  Dartmouth College
Stanford, CA 94305               Stanford, CA 94305                   Hanover, NH 03755
                                 and NBER                             and NBER
I. Introduction
       The two most important, most enduring questions in health economics are: (1) What are

the determinants of expenditures? (2) What are the determinants of health? Extensive research

over the last 35 years has produced a variety of answers to these questions, depending in large

part on the specific context within which the questions are posed. One crucial distinction is

between explaining changes over time and explaining cross-sectional differences at a given time.

With regard to secular changes in the U.S. in recent decades, most health economists now

believe that advances in medical technology provide the major explanation for both increases in

expenditures and improvements in health.1 With regard to cross-sectional differences, the focus

of this paper, there is less agreement. By exploiting a rich body of data from the Center for

Medicare and Medicaid Services (formerly HCFA), the U.S. Census of Population, and other

sources, we hope to narrow that disagreement, at least with respect to area differences in

utilization of care and mortality of the elderly.

       Our focus on the elderly is motivated in part by the fact that they account for a

disproportionate share of national health care expenditures and an even greater share of

government health care expenditures. Moreover, the elderly experience the bulk of the major

health problems of the population. Approximately one-half of all deaths occur between ages 65-

84, and another one-fourth occur at ages 85 and above. These shares are based on the current age

distribution of the U.S. population. For a stationary population experiencing current age-specific

mortality rates, deaths at ages 65-84 would still account for almost one-half the total; the share at

85 and above would rise to one-third. The focus on the elderly is facilitated by the fact that the

Medicare program generates a large, detailed body of data on utilization and mortality.



                                                    3
       One reason for focusing on area differences is that the large number of metropolitan and

non-metropolitan areas in the U.S. provides a convenient framework for aggregating individual

data in the search for variables that may be related to utilization and mortality. Moreover, many

health policy analysts believe that an understanding of area differences may suggest opportunities

to limit expenditures and/or improve health (e.g., Wennberg, Fisher, and Skinner, 2001).

       This paper has two main sections: utilization and mortality. In most markets an interest

in expenditures would require attention to prices as well as quantities, but given universal

insurance coverage through Medicare and administrative price setting by HCFA, utilization is a

natural subject for study. Mortality is only one of many possible measures of health, but there

are several reasons to concentrate on it. First, mortality is by far the most objective measure.

Secondly, it is, for most people, the most important health outcome. Thirdly, it is probably

significantly correlated with morbidity since most deaths are preceded by illness.

       In this paper we focus on “whites”, ages 65-84, or more specifically, those not identified

as African-American. We exclude blacks because at those ages both utilization and mortality of

blacks are higher than for whites and the percentage black in an area is correlated with other

variables of interest. Moreover, preliminary research by Donald Nichols suggests that the

relationship between those other variables and utilization and mortality may be significantly

different for blacks than for whites. We exclude anyone 85 and over because it is more difficult

to obtain accurate measures for self-reported variables such as education and income. About

one-half the population 85 and over suffer from some form of dementia and about one-fifth are in

nursing homes where measurement of income is particularly problematic. Moreover, most

nursing home utilization is not covered by Medicare, the source of our data on utilization.


                                                 4
        Briefly, we find wide variation in the utilization of health services across regions. It is

not simply that some regions are higher along all dimensions of care, but that in some regions

(Florida, for example) there is much more diagnostic testing, even while per capita inpatient

services are comparable to the national average. In general, utilization is strongly positively

associated with mortality across areas - in other words, areas with more sick elderly use more

health care, other things equal. There remains, however, substantial variation in utilization after

controlling for factors such as education, income, and mortality.

        Cross-area variations in mortality rates among this elderly group are not as large as

variations in utilization, but they are still substantial. The 10 percent of MSAs with the highest

mortality (age-sex adjusted) have an average death rate 38 percent greater than the 10 percent of

MSAs with the lowest mortality. The comparable differential between the high and low

utilization areas is 49 percent.

        Education, real income, cigarettes, obesity, air pollution, and the percent black account

for more than half of the variation in mortality across areas, but there is still substantial

differences across regions unexplained by these variables. Florida, in particular, has death rates

significantly below the national average; the differential is particularly large for areas in the

southern portion of the state. The final section of the paper explores two puzzles revealed by

regression analyses: (1) Why Florida is so different from the rest of the country with respect to

utilization and mortality; and (2) Why the presence of more blacks in an area should be

associated with higher mortality among elderly whites. We considered several possible solutions

to these puzzles, including differential migration patterns of the elderly, but ultimately we are left

with conjectures rather than robust explanations.


                                                   5
II. Previous Studies

Spatial Variations in Health Care Utilization

       There is an extensive literature on geographic variations in health care spending and how

it might be explained; we consider here a selective overview of these studies.

       Researchers have documented variations across regions in health care utilization

beginning with the studies by Glover in the 1930s, the work by Wennberg and associates in the

1970s and 1980s, and more recent studies by a wide variety of researchers.2 There is a general

consensus that the variations are real and persistent over time. The Dartmouth Atlas of Health

Care provides extensive documentation of the differences across regions for a variety of

utilization measures (Wennberg and Cooper, 1999). In the Atlas studies, regions are defined

based on Hospital Referral Regions (HRRs), each of which has at least one hospital with a

tertiary cardiovascular or neurological surgical center. The geographical boundary of the HRR is

based on the migration patterns of Medicare patients who use the hospitals inside the HRR, of

which there are 306 in the U.S. Average 1995-96 fee-for-service Medicare per capita

expenditures ranged from $3,506 in Eugene, Oregon, $3,700 in Minneapolis, $7,783 in Miami,

to $9,033 in McAllen, Texas; these are all adjusted for age, sex, race, and regional price

differences using a variant of the Part B price adjuster. Utilization rates of specific interventions

that are not subject to the difficulties of price adjustment also show dramatic variations across

regions. These differences are therefore best thought of as differences in quantities – hospital

admissions, physician visits, and procedures – for the enrollees who live in each region,


                                                  6
regardless of where they actually get their care.

       Most of the controversy comes in how these variations can be interpreted. One clear

possibility is factors related to demand; a sicker population, for example, should lead to greater

demand for health care. Health status is clearly a critical determinant of health care utilization.

Average annual spending for Medicare beneficiaries with "poor" self-assessed health is $8743,

but only $1656 for those in excellent health (Wennberg and Cooper, 1996).

       While regional differences in health status are clearly important determinants of health

care spending (as we demonstrate below), they do not fully explain the two-fold differences in

Medicare spending across regions. Even after accounting for differences across regions in

underlying health measures such as stroke, heart attacks, hip fractures, cancer incidence, income,

poverty rates, and behavioral factors such as the percentage of smokers and seatbelt users, one

cannot explain more than 42 percent of the overall variation across regions in expenditures

(Skinner and Fisher, 1997; Skinner, Fisher, and Wennberg, 2001). Longitudinal cohort studies

also reveal differences in resource use across both hospitals and regions after controlling for

patient health status and function (Chau, Fisher, and Skinner, 2001).3

       A related “demand” based explanation is that patient preferences (owing to unmeasured

illness or preferences for care holding illness constant) determine health care utilization, so that

health care resources move to areas with the greatest demand as measured by initial physician

visits or other indicators such as health (Escarce, 1992; Escarce, 1993; Folland and Stano, 1989;

Green and Becker, 1994). In many of these studies, demand is inferred by the frequency of initial

visits to the physician (as opposed to subsequent referrals, which are viewed as supply-driven). It

remains an interesting, and largely untested question as to whether visits to physicians reflect


                                                    7
demand (patient preferences) or supply (how often the physician schedules office visits).

Clearly, these demand-related factors can potentially explain some of the variation we observe,

particularly in Florida where rates of utilization are higher than the rest of the country.

       Another explanation is based on the supply of health care resources. The earliest

incarnation of this link is “Roemer’s Law,” which states that if a hospital bed is built, it will be

filled. In this view, the pre-existing resource capacity of the area, which arose out of historical

accident, in turn determines the intensity of care in the region. In regions with greater supplies of

hospital beds, inpatient expenditures are higher. A similar story holds for physician supply;

larger populations of physicians per capita are associated with higher levels of per capita

physician expenditures (Wennberg and Cooper, 1996, 1999).

       However, correlation does not establish causation. One could expect more hospital beds

to be built where there is greater demand, and one would expect physicians to move to regions

where the demand of physician services is high. Furthermore, the correlations are not very

strong. For example, using Dartmouth Atlas data, just one-quarter of the variation in Part B

(physician) expenditures across the U.S. can be explained by physician supply. And while the

supply of specialists in Miami is 45 percent higher than the supply in Minnesota, the number of

visits by specialists to people in their last six months of life in Miami is more than 4 times larger.

In other words, there appear to be significant nonlinearities in treatment patterns across regions

that cannot be explained solely by differences in resource supply.

       Another hypothesis, closely related to Wennberg’s “practice style” theory is that some

physicians show greater “enthusiasm” for specific procedures (Wennberg, Barnes, and Zubkoff,

1982; Chassin, 1993). A recent study surveyed both orthopedic surgeons and referring


                                                  8
physicians with regard to their propensity to perform surgery (in the former case) and their

perceptions of outcomes and propensity to refer (in the latter case), and found that these factors

were highly significant in explaining overall knee replacement rates in the population, even after

controlling for the underlying clinical conditions of the patients (Wright et al, 1999). The study

did not, however, test patient preferences conditional on health needs.

       A number of studies seeking to explain physician behavior have examined associations

between specific physician psychosocial attributes or physician training or practice characteristics

(years in practice, diversity of diagnoses managed, specialty) and measures of utilization

(Allison, et al, 1998; Franks et al, 2000; Pearson et al., 1995; Selby et al, 1999). Although

associations were generally weak, physicians with greater fear of malpractice, anxiety due to

uncertainty, and less willingness to take risks were more likely to spend more per patient or more

likely to refer. However, the magnitudes of these differences are not large enough to explain, by

themselves, the wide regional variation in utilization.

       As a statistical proposition, differences in physician enthusiasm by themselves are not

enough to generate regional variations. Most regions include a large number of physicians, and if

physicians are endowed with differing but randomly distributed levels of enthusiasm, they would

average out over the large number of physicians in the area. (Of course, for some surgical

procedures, one or two specialists could exert a strong influence on regional rates.) The

interesting question therefore is why enthusiasm should be correlated across physicians within a

given region.

       Finally, factors that operate at the level of the hospital and market are also known to

influence spending. Teaching status, membership in multi-hospital chains, degree of


                                                 9
competition, and hospital ownership (e.g. for-profit ownership) have all been associated with

differences in resource use (Gray and McNerney, 1986; Kessler and McClellan, 1999; Silverman,

Skinner, and Fisher, 1999; Taylor, Whellan, and Sloan, 1999). The extent to which these factors

contribute to regional differences in spending is not well understood.

Spatial Variations in Mortality

       Spatial variations in mortality have not been studied as extensively as variations in

utilization, and many studies have focused heavily on the influence of one or two variables such

as air pollution or income inequality. The earliest investigations typically used states or a limited

number of MSAs as the units of observation, thus suffering from the problem of few degrees of

freedom. (Auster, Leveson, Sarachek, 1969, Morris Silver, 1972) Considerable effort has been

devoted to studying the effects of income and education, and to sorting out the relative

importance of these closely related variables. Both variables are usually found to be related to

mortality, but their importance can vary greatly with age and cause of death. Income, for

instance, is much more highly correlated with infant mortality than with deaths at other ages.

       Attempts to discover the impact of medical care have produced mixed results (Fuchs-

Kramer, 1972; Hadley 1988). More recently, Skinner, Fisher, and Wennberg (2001) used as an

instrument physician visits in the last six months. This geographical variable was highly

correlated with overall Medicare expenditures but uncorrelated with predicted survival based on

regional measures of health. This study found “flat of the curve” effects of Medicare

expenditures on survival, at least for the expenditures explained by physician visits in the last six

months. Similar results were found using cohort data of heart attack patients controlling for

detailed chart data using the Cooperative Cardiovascular Project data (Fisher et al, 2001).


                                                 10
        Several studies have found a positive association between air pollution and mortality.4

More recently, numerous investigators have focused on income inequality (rather than low

income per se) as a major cause of higher mortality.5 In two comprehensive reviews of this

literature Deaton (2001) and Deaton and Paxson (1999) critique the theoretical foundations of

these studies and their empirical implementations. Deaton’s attempts to find evidence of a

relation between income inequality and mortality give no support to this popular hypothesis

(Deaton and Paxson (2001) and Deaton and Lubotsky (2001)).



III. Data and Estimation Strategy

        In this paper utilization is measured using a weighted index of quantities of services. We

adopt this approach, instead of using Medicare expenditures, because it sidesteps the difficult

problem of deflating Medicare expenditures across regions to “undo” differential payments made

by Medicare for the same service in different areas. These differentials are introduced to offset

differences in costs experienced by the providers of care and for other reasons. Deflated

expenditures are also problematic to the extent that the residents of an area receive services in

another area. In such cases, the price index of the area of residence is not the appropriate

deflator.6

        We count the number of specific services received by the resident of an area, regardless

of the area where the services were provided. Each detailed service is then weighted by the

national reimbursement rate for that service; the sum of the weighted quantities divided by the

number of Medicare enrollees is the total utilization for each area. Because this approach relies

on billing codes for thousands of detailed services, systematic differences across areas in coding


                                                11
could introduce inaccuracies into this measure. Also, services not covered by Medicare are not

included.

        The year of the study is 1990, with the utilization and mortality measures based on an

average of 1989-91. Many of the other measures are obtained from the 1990 Census of

Population. There are 224 metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) with populations exceeding

100,000.7 In addition, residents of MSAs with less than 100,000 are aggregated to one group

within each state and residents outside MSAs are also aggregated to one group per state. The

result is 313 areas.8

        In this paper the areas are aggregated into seven “regions” as follows:

        Region                 Census Divisions and States

1.      North:                New England, Middle Atlantic, and East North Central

2.      Upper South:          Delaware, Maryland, D.C., Virginia, and West Virginia

3.      Deep South:           North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, and East South Central

4.      Florida:              Florida

5.      West/South:           West South Central

6.      Big Sky:              West North Central, Montana, Idaho, Wyoming and Colorado

7.      West:                 Pacific, Arizona, New Mexico, Utah and Nevada



This regional breakdown was developed by a geographer, Ge Lin, who found it to be more useful

than the conventional census regions or divisions in studying disability among the elderly (Lin,

2000). We find this breakdown intuitively appealing, especially for the distinctions it makes

among the southern states and among the mountain states and its treatment of Florida as a


                                                12
separate region.

       We also aggregate areas according to their total population size in the following manner

(1) Over 500,000, (2) 250,000 to 500,000, (3) 100,00 to 250,000, (4) Under 100,000 (aggregated

to a single area within a state), and (5) Non MSAs (aggregated to a single area within each state).

When regions and population size are used as dummy variables, the omitted categories are North

and Over 500,000.



IV. Results

       Table 1 presents a list of variables included in this paper, giving the short name,

definition, and source. For a fuller explanation of the derivation the utilization measures, see

Appendix A. The utilization measure, mortality, percent high school dropout (LOED), and real

income have all been adjusted for age and sex. Cigarette use and obesity are state measures; the

same value is assigned to every area within each state. Particulate concentration (Pollution) is

only available for MSAs >100,000.

       Table 2 provides summary statistics for each variable. The means and standard

deviations are calculated by weighting each area by its share of the population white ages 65-84.

Looking first at the means, we see that inpatient utilization accounts for about two-thirds of the

total and outpatient utilization one-third. Admissions are approximately evenly divided between

medical and surgical. Approximately one-half of total physician utilization is accounted for by

treatment (procedures), about one-third by evaluation and management, and about one-sixth by

diagnostic interventions.

       The utilization measure shows considerably more variation across areas than does


                                                13
mortality. The relative variation in outpatient utilization is more than double that for inpatient

utilization. As between medical admissions and surgical admissions, the former has twice the

variation of the latter. Diagnosis has the most variation of the three types of physician services;

all three have much greater variation than hospital admissions. This difference may be explained

in part by more random variation in the measure of outpatient utilization, which has a smaller

mean and is calculated from a smaller sample.

Utilization Indexes By Region and Population Size

       Tables 3 and 4 show indexes of utilization for areas grouped by region or population size

for various types of utilization. All indexes are based on US=100. All are adjusted for age and

sex, and areas are weighted by their population of whites 65-84. The first column of Table 3

shows total utilization is much greater in Florida than in the rest of the country. Utilization is

lowest in Big Sky. Across areas grouped by population size, total utilization is highest in the

areas with over 500,000 population and, the 250,000-500,000 population group is second

highest. The other three categories all have below average utilization, with little difference

among them.

       Comparisons between indexes for inpatient (INUTIL) and outpatient (OUTUTIL)

utilization (Table 3 columns 2 and 3) show many substantial differences, both for regions and

population size. Most noteworthy is Florida, where the inpatient index is slightly below the

national average, but outpatient utilization is approximately 55 percent above. In Big Sky the

direction of difference is reversed; the inpatient index exceeds the outpatient index by more than

20 percentage points. Areas of large population size tend to show relatively more utilization of

outpatient care; the reverse is true for MSAs < 100,000 and the areas that are not MSAs.


                                                 14
       Substantial regional and population size differences in the indexes for medical admissions

and surgical admissions can be seen in Table 4. In Florida, the index for surgical admissions is

15 percentage points higher than for medical admissions; the West region also has relatively

more surgical admissions. In the three southern regions, medical admissions tend to be relatively

higher than surgical admissions but the only big differential is in the Deep South.

       The final utilization comparisons in Table 4 are among three types of physician services:

evaluation and management, diagnosis, and treatment (surgical and non-surgical procedures).

The differences for Florida are huge, with the index for diagnostic tests 63 percent above the U.S.

average while evaluation and management is only 27 percent above. The procedures/treatment

index is intermediate at 45 percent above the U.S. average. When only the areas above 100,000

are compared, the differentials are slightly smaller. In Big Sky the diagnostic test index is

particularly low: 14 percentage points below the procedures/treatment index in the same region.

Correlations Among The Different Measures of Utilization

       Most measures of utilization are positively correlated, suggesting that the forces that

influence variation in utilization across areas are stronger than the possibilities for substitution

between various types of utilization. For example, the coefficient of correlation between

inpatient and outpatient utilization is 0.27, even though there are surely some opportunities for

substitution between inpatient and outpatient care. Similarly, although some health problems can

be treated either medically or surgically, the correlation between medical admissions and surgical

admissions is 0.47. The largest negative correlation , -0.13, is between medical admissions and

physicians’ diagnostic services. (For a full set of correlation coefficients see Appendix Table B-

1).


                                                  15
Mortality Indexes

       Table 5 presents mortality indexes for areas grouped by region or by population size. As

in the utilization tables, all indexes have been adjusted for age and sex, and areas are weighted by

the population of whites 65-84 in those regions. The most striking result is the low mortality in

Florida, which is slightly more than 10 percent below the U.S. average. Also below the U.S.

average are Big Sky and West regions. The other four regions all have above average mortality

with the Deep South experiencing the highest rate, more than 8 percent above the U.S. average.

When areas are grouped by population size, the most notable result is that the mortality indexes

are approximately the same across all the groups. Apparently despite the many socio-economic

and other differences that exist between the large and the small metropolitan and non-

metropolitan areas, white death rates at ages 65-84 do not vary with population size.

       The second and third columns of Table 5 allow comparisons of mortality between ages

65-74 and 75-84 (adjusted for sex mix). On the whole, the indexes are very similar. The

regional rankings of mortality for the two age groups are almost identical. There is a slight

tendency for the regional differentials to be smaller at ages 75-84 than at 65-74. When age-

adjusted mortality rates for men and women are compared (columns 4 and 5 of Table 5), two

substantial regional differentials are evident. In Deep South the relative mortality index is more

than 7 percentage points higher for men than for women. In West, the index for men is 6

percentage points lower than for women.

Socioeconomic and Other Indexes

       Differentials in socioeconomic and other indexes across areas grouped by population size

and region are shown in Table 6. Florida again stands out from the rest of the country in several


                                                16
respects. The percentage of high school dropouts is the lowest and real income the highest of all

the regions. Only the West rivals Florida in having a low percentage of elderly with less than 12

years schooling. By contrast, the percent of dropouts is particularly high in the Deep South.

Across the population size groups, the patterns for the percentage of high school dropouts and

real income are quite systematic, with the former indexes rising and the latter falling as

population size falls.

       Regional differences in cigarette use and obesity are not as large as for the percentage

with low education and have distinctive patterns of their own. Cigarette use is highest in the

Deep South and lowest in the West. Obesity is highest in the North and WestSouth and lowest in

Florida. Both cigarette use and obesity are lowest in the two largest population size groups and

highest in the three other groups. In this respect, the pattern is similar to that for low educational

attainment.

       The reasons for including BLACK in the study will become apparent in discussion of the

mortality regressions. For the present, we note that this variable has great regional variation,

with extremely high rates in the Upper South and Deep South and extremely low rates in Big Sky

and West. The index is much above average in the largest metropolitan areas and considerably

below average in all the others.

       The last variable in Table 6, pollution, is only measured for the MSAs greater than

100,000. The index for the West is 21 percent above the U.S. average; all other regions are

below the U.S. average, with the lowest rate in Florida. Across population size groups, the

pollution index declines steadily from the largest to the smallest.




                                                 17
Correlations Among Variables

       Some variables, such as low education and real income, are highly correlated with one

another; the coefficient is –0.61. Low education is also significantly correlated with cigarettes

(0.38) and obesity (0.37). All three variables are significantly correlated with mortality: low

education (0.49), cigarettes (0.44), and obesity (0.41). For a full matrix of correlation

coefficients among all the variables see Appendix Table B-2

Regression Analysis: Utilization

       In this section, we consider what factors appear to explain the various measures for

utilization. All variables are in natural logs except for the region and population size dummy

variables. All regressions are run across the 313 areas and across the 224 MSAs > 100,000. At a

theoretical level, the relation between low education and utilization is uncertain. It might be

negative because individuals with less than 12 years of schooling might lack information about

health care or might have less easy access to care. On the other hand, the relationship might be

positive to the extent that those with less education are in worse health and require more care.

      The predictive relation between income and utilization is also uncertain. If higher-income

individuals are in better health, the relationship might be negative, but the relationship could be

positive if there is a strong positive income elasticity of demand for care. Among other

considerations, higher-income individuals are more likely to have private insurance that

supplements Medicare.

       Finally, because poor health usually results in increased utilization of health care, we

expect mortality to be positively related to utilization to the extent that mortality is a good

indicator of poor health. The relationship could be negative if this effect is outweighed by a


                                                 18
reverse causality running from greater utilization to lower mortality. Because of the possibility

of reverse causality, the parameter estimate for MORT should be regarded as a lower-bound

estimate of the true coefficient.

        Table 7 presents regression results for our measure of total utilization for three

specifications. The first includes only the region and population size dummies, the second the

two socioeconomic variables and mortality, and the third all the variables together. The results

for the 224 MSAs are similar to those for the 313 areas and are available in Appendix Table B-3.

Probably the most striking result is the large coefficient for MORT: With all variables included,

it is 0.51 (0.08). Under the reasonable assumption that the mortality rate is a good indicator of

the health of the population, we infer that variation in health status across areas is a major

determinant of health care utilization among whites 65-84. Another notable result is the large

increase in the Florida coefficient when the other variables are added to the regression. All the

population size dummies have significant negative coefficients; that is, utilization is greater in

MSAs larger than 500,000 than in any of the other areas. One likely interpretation is that patients

in large metropolitan areas find it easier to obtain care (because of closer proximity to hospitals

and physicians and the availability of a wide range of specialists).

        Table 7 also presents regression results for inpatient utilization and outpatient utilization

for the specification that includes all the variables. The coefficient for mortality is very large for

inpatient care, but much smaller for outpatient care. For Florida, the reverse is true, with a huge

coefficient for outpatient care and a much smaller (but still statistically significant coefficient) for

inpatient care. In contrast, the Big Sky region has a large, statistically significant positive

coefficient for inpatient care and a negative one for outpatient care. Clearly, regions differ both


                                                  19
with regard to overall utilization as well as with respect to specific components of care. Neither

low education nor real income are significantly related to utilization after controlling for the other

variables. This result may reflect the offsetting theoretical considerations discussed above.

       Table 8 presents similar regression results for medical and surgical admission and the

three types of physician services. The coefficient for mortality is extremely large for medical

admissions, no doubt reflecting the severe illness of many patients with neoplastic,

cardiovascular, and cerebrovascular diseases who are admitted to medical services with little

hope of altering the final outcome. The mortality coefficient for surgical admissions is less than

half that for medical admissions, but still highly significant. In contrast, none of the three types

of physician utilization has a mortality coefficient that is significantly different from zero.

       The relationship between mortality and utilization reported in this paper is echoed in a

study by Frohlich, Fransoo, and Roos (2001) of 12 communities in Winnipeg, Manitoba. They

found that age-sex adjusted deaths before age 75 (their “Premature Mortality Rate”) was

positively correlated with most types of care. However, PMR was not correlated with visits to

specialists and negatively correlated with “high profile” procedures such as MRIs, CABGs, hip

and knee replacements, and preventive services.

        The coefficients for Florida are particularly large for diagnostic and treatment services,

smaller but still highly significant for evaluation and management, and smallest for hospital

admissions. The Big Sky region has notably large negative mortality coefficients for evaluation

and management and diagnostic services and a notably large positive coefficient for medical

admissions. In comparisons of utilization across areas grouped by population size, the most

striking result is the much higher utilization of evaluation and management and diagnostic


                                                  20
services in MSAs > 500,000 relative to those with 250-500,000 and especially areas with less

than 250,000 or not MSAs. The only significant result for the socio-economic variables is a

large positive relation between real income and treatment.

            Because there may be some causality running from utilization to mortality, we also ran

two-stage least squares regressions. The results are reported in Appendix Table B-5. The

coefficients for predicted Ln mortality are typically much larger than in the OLS regressions, but

the standard errors are also much larger, raising questions about the reliability of the estimates.

Regression Analysis: Mortality

            In addition to the dummy variables for region and population size, the mortality

regressions include the percentage of who did not finish high school and mean real income.

Education and income have been shown to exhibit strong associations with mortality. Similarly,

the harmful effects of cigarettes and obesity on health have been well established. Finally, we

also include a variable measuring the fraction of the population that is African-American. We

hypothesize a positive relationship between the percentage black and mortality for two reasons.

First, this variable may be a marker for selective migration; migrants tend to be healthier than

nonmigrants and they may have disproportionately opted for areas with low percentage black. A

second set of reasons involve differences between the areas directly related to the percentage of

African Americans. These differences might take the form of changes in the psychosocial

environment that adversely affected health, or changes the quantity and mix of locally-provided

services.

       The mortality regression results are presented in Table 9 in three specifications similar to

those shown for utilization. First we note that the R2s are considerably higher for mortality than


                                                  21
for utilization regressions. This is despite the fact that none of the population-size dummies are

significantly different from zero either when just the geographical dummies are included or when

the other variables are entered into the regression. This is unlike the utilization regressions

where there is a significant differential between the largest areas and the others.

        Inclusion of the other variables results in a significant reduction in the negative

coefficients for Big Sky and West. There is also a small reduction in the negative coefficient for

Florida. Nevertheless, even after controlling for all the other variables, Florida has a coefficient

(relative to North) of -0.096 (0.01). It is the region with by far the lowest mortality. After

controlling for the other variables, the highest regional mortality is in the Upper South.

        Looking at the other variables we find that the percentage of high school dropouts has a

positive coefficient until the geographic variable dummies are entered into the equation. Then

the coefficient, while still positive, is not significantly different from zero. In the full regression

real income has a negative coefficient which is significantly different from zero. Cigarette use

has the expected positive coefficient which becomes larger when the geographic dummies are

included. Obesity has the expected positive coefficient but it becomes smaller when the

geographic dummies are included. Finally, the percent black has a positive coefficient and also

remains relatively unchanged by inclusion of the geographic dummies. In the regressions across

the 224 MSAs > 100,000, shown in Appendix Table B-6, the results are similar. In addition, the

pollution index has the expected positive coefficient and remains relatively unchanged in the

presence of the geographic dummies.

        Preliminary efforts to find an effect of income inequality were unsuccessful. In fact, in a

variety of specifications, the coefficient for inequality was always negative. Similarly, we found


                                                  22
no evidence of a relationship between religiousity and mortality whether measured by percent of

religious adherents or by frequency of church attendance.



V. Two Puzzles

       Here we consider two specific puzzles regarding patterns of mortality and utilization.

The first puzzle is why the percentage of African-Americans in an area is positively related to the

mortality of whites 65-84. The second puzzle concerns the unusually low mortality and

unusually high utilization in Florida relative to the rest of the country.

Percent Black and Mortality

       Why should the mortality of whites 65-84 be significantly positively related to the percent

of the total population of an area that is black? The possible answers fall into two main

categories. First, there may be health differences among the elderly whites that are correlated

with BLACK, differences that are not accounted for by the other variables in the mortality

regression. Such differences could arise as a result of selective in- and out-migration under the

reasonable assumption that the movers are healthier than the stayers.

       Second, there may be differences among the areas that are correlated with the white

mortality. Some of these differences could take the form of fewer, locally provided services or a

different mix of services that affect white mortality. Some differences could be psychosocial,

such as racial tension or the fear of crime.

       In order to learn more about the relationship between percent black and white mortality,

we tested to see whether it is stronger in areas of high or low segregation. Using three Cutler-

Glaeser measures of segregation – centralization, isolation, and dissimilarity -- we divided the


                                                 23
areas into equal groups of high segregation and low segregation and ran the basic mortality

regression for each group. In none of the three trials did the coefficient for LnBLACK differ

significantly between the high and the low segregation group. The mean coefficient for the three

high segregation groups regressions was 0.018 and for the low segregation groups 0.022.        It

appears that the relation between BLACK and MORT is about the same for areas of high and low

segregation.

       Another attempt to gain insight into the percent black effect produced more significant

results. We divided the 224 MSAs > 100,000 into two equal groups based on the percentage

change in the population of whites 65-74 between 1980 and 1990. The two groups are

designated as “high growth” and “low growth” respectively. We then ran identical, full

specification regressions for each group with the following results for the percent black

coefficient: In the high growth areas, the coefficient is 0.051 (0.010); in low growth areas, the

coefficient is 0.008 (0.009). The fact that percent black is not significantly related to mortality in

the low growth areas suggests rejection of explanations that rely on differences among the areas.

If such differences were causal, it is not easy to see why they would not also be operative in the

low growth areas.

       The large coefficient in the high growth areas suggests the possibility of unmeasured

differences in selective migration, with the healthier (or more health conscious) migrants moving

to the areas with lower percent blacks. However, if there is also a selective out-migration, why

doesn’t that produce a significant coefficient for BLACK in the low-growth areas? One possible

answer is that much of the out-migration probably comes from a relatively few, very large areas

such as New York, Chicago, Philadelphia, Boston and Detroit whereas the destination of the


                                                 24
migrants is more dispersed with many going to areas with relatively small populations. This

means that the effect of out-migration on the mortality rates of the remaining populations could

be much less than the effect of in-migration on mortality rates in the high growth areas.

Floridian Exceptionalism

       The data examined in this paper reveal that Florida is exceptional in three respects: (1)

Among whites ages 65-84 utilization of care is much higher than in any other region and the

differential increases when other variables are introduced as controls; (2) Mortality is by far the

lowest in the country; (3) The positive relation between mortality and utilization which is

evident in the rest of the country is not present in Florida.

       Above average Medicare spending in Florida has been well established in previous

studies, e.g., Wennberg and Cooper (1999). Our direct, detailed measures of utilization of

services (rather than nominal or deflated Medicare spending) show that the Florida differential

from the North of 0.193 (0.021) when only population size is controlled for rises to 0.270 (0.023)

when education, real income, and mortality are included in the regression. Depending on the

type of care, the size of the Florida differential varies enormously, from 0.058 (0.029) for

medical admissions to 0.499 (0.049) for diagnostic services.

       With respect to mortality the introduction of other variables reduces the negative

coefficient for Florida from –0.134 (0.014) to –0.096 (0.015), but it still remains much larger

than Big Sky, the region with the next lowest mortality –0.026 (0.012).

       The combination of low mortality and high utilization is one of the most intriguing

aspects of Floridian exceptionalism. When total utilization in Florida is regressed on mortality

(controlling for education and income, all variables in logs) the coefficient is slightly negative,


                                                  25
albeit not significantly different from zero. For the country as a whole, including Florida, the

coefficient is 0.515 (0.084); when Florida is excluded the coefficient rises to 0.636 (0.092).

       In order to gain some insight into Floridian exceptionalism, we examined each Florida

MSA > 100,000 separately as shown in Table 10. Predicted levels of utilization and mortality,

obtained for each MSA from regressions that exclude Florida, are compared to actual levels, and

the percent differential between actual and predicted calculated. We see that utilization is above

predicted in every Florida MSA, but the differentials tend to be largest in the southern portion of

the state. The mortality differentials also tend to be greatest in the southern MSAs; indeed the

three most northern MSAs have actual mortality that is above the levels predicted from the

regression. Two exceptions to the north vs. south differences are Daytona Beach and Ocala;

these relatively northern MSAs have utilization and mortality differentials that resemble those of

the southern MSAs.

       Is Florida the only state with exceptional results? To answer this question we examined

several other states that have been mentioned in health policy discussions as being unusual with

respect to utilization or mortality or both. With methods analogous to those used to obtain the

results presented in Table 10, we calculated percentage differentials between actual and predicted

values for MSAs > 100,000 in Arizona, Minnesota, Nevada, Oregon, and Utah. The results

presented in Table 11, show some differentials, but nothing that comes close to challenging the

characterization of Florida as “exceptional.”

       Another possible explanation for the low mortality rates in Florida is migration. Suppose

that people who move to Florida are, on average, healthier than their counterparts who did not

move. Given the large share of Florida residents who have moved from other states, one would


                                                26
expect that Florida would be a very healthy region simply because of this selection effect.

       To test this hypothesis, we used the Medicare claims database for 1998 in Miami and

Tampa, Florida, two regions with large populations of retirees. We first compared mortality rates

of current residents of these areas as a function of where they were living three years previously.

The sample was limited to nonblacks aged 68-84, with a cut off of 68 to ensure that we could

match Medicare denominator information on zip code of residence from three years before when

they were 65. Migrants from the North experience a lower mortality probability (odds ratio equal

to 0.80, 95% confidence interval of 0.71 to 0.91), which is consistent with the hypothesis that

migrants tend to be somewhat healthier than non-migrants. Migrants from other parts of the

country, however, showed if anything slightly elevated mortality rates, although individually the

effects were not significant. In any case, the overall influence of recent migrants (during the past

3 years) is minimal with regard to overall mortality rates because the proportion of recent movers

– just 4.2 percent of the sample – is so small. Weighting the odds ratios by the proportion of

people who migrated implies that the influence of this recent migration on overall mortality rates

in the region is to reduce it by only about 0.5 percent.

       The three-year window is probably too restrictive. Another approach is to use the first

three digits of the individual’s Social Security number. For this cohort, Social Security numbers

were most likely issued while in their adult years, particularly during the 1940s through the

1960s when eligibility of Social Security gradually expanded to cover most employment sectors.

This approach runs the risk of including in the “migrant” category individuals who may have

been living in Florida for several decades. In any case, the results do not support the migration

explanation; the one-third of the sample who received their Social Security number in Florida


                                                 27
had slightly lower mortality than those who received their number in some other region.

       If selective in-migration does not explain low mortality in the southern Florida MSAs,

there are two other possibilities that need to be explored. First, the relatively benign climate for

most of the year allows the elderly residents to pursue a great deal of physical activity including

golf, tennis, swimming, walking, etc. Such activity is undoubtedly conducive to better health.

Second, the low mortality in the southern Florida MSAs may result from a high level of social

interaction among the elderly, as well as public services directed toward this very large voting

bloc. Many of them live in communities populated primarily by other elderly where there is a

great deal of eating out together, participating in social functions, and helping one another at

times of physical or emotional stress.

       Many social critics deplore age-restricted living arrangements and argue that the elderly

would derive health and other benefits from interactions with members of younger generations.

Reconciliation of these two points of view could lie in the classic quantity-quality trade-off.

Holding the quantity of social interaction constant, the social critics may be correct that

interactions across generations are more beneficial. But it also may be true that the greater

quantity of social interactions in the elderly-segregated communities more than offsets the lower

value of a given unit of interaction.

       As is apparent from the above discussion, it is much easier to document Floridian

exceptionalism than it is to explain it. We do not think that the high utilization is the cause of the

low mortality because there is no support for this view in data for the rest of the country. When

we tried utilization as a RHS variable in the mortality regression, the coefficient was positive in

both OLS and 2SLS specifications. Nor do other studies find in comparisons between Florida


                                                 28
and other regions that reductions in mortality are attributable to greater levels of care (Skinner,

Fisher, and Wennberg, 2001). One “demand-driven” explanation for both high utilization and

low mortality is that Floridians are very concerned about health, and this concern may also be

expressed in exercise, diet, and other behaviors that are demonstrably linked to longevity, as well

as increased demand for medical care.



VI. Summary

        This paper examines 313 U.S. areas for differences in medical care utilization and

mortality of whites ages 65-84 in 1990. Areas are grouped into seven regions and five groups

based on population size. Utilization is measured by direct count of detailed services, weighted

by the national reimbursement for each service.

        Probably the most noteworthy result of the utilization regressions is the extent to which

cross-area variation in utilization is related to variation in mortality. For total utilization, the

elasticity is 0.515 (0.084) after controlling for region, population size of area, education and real

income. This is a lower-bound estimate; the true coefficient would be larger to the extent that

there is a negative relationship running from utilization of care to mortality. The elasticity is

especially large for medical admissions, and especially small for physicians’ diagnostic services

and treatments.




                                                  29
       Also noteworthy is the extent to which the well-known propensity for higher utilization in

Florida is even larger after controlling for socioeconomic variables and mortality. The

coefficient for Florida is 40 percent (eight percentage points) higher when the other variables are

in the regression.

       A third result worthy of comment is the much higher utilization in MSAs of over 500,000

population relative to other areas. The average differential is about eight percent. Among the

other areas there is no strong pattern related to population size. Similarly, there is no consistent

pattern for the socioeconomic variables in their relationship to total utilization of care (although

see McClellan and Skinner, 1999).

       The mortality regressions produced several noteworthy results. First, we find no

relationship between mortality and population size. Elderly residents of large MSAs enjoy no

advantage in life expectancy over their peers who live in small MSAs or outside MSAs despite

the well publicized differentials in the availability of medical care. Secondly, we find a very

large negative coefficient for Florida. This region has by far the lowest mortality of any large

region regardless of whether or not other variables are controlled for. Cigarette smoking, air

pollution, and obesity have their expected positive coefficients. Lastly we note a robust positive

relationship between percent black and mortality of whites 65-84. This relationship is

particularly strong among areas with above average growth of the elderly population between

1980 and 1990. Among low growth areas, the coefficient is not significantly different from zero.

This puzzle, and the exceptional results for Florida for utilization and mortality, require further

investigation.




                                                 30
Endnotes

      1. See for example Cutler, et al. (1998), Pardes, Manton, and Lander (1999), Currie and

           Gruber (1996), and Schneider (1999).

      2. For an excellent review of some of this earlier literature, see Eisenberg (1986). More

           recently, see Wennberg and Cooper (1999), Escarce (1992), Green and Becker (1994),

           Welch, et al. (1994), Chassin, Brook, Park, et al. (1986), and references therein.

      3. Cutler and Sheiner (1999) found that regional measures of the age/sex/race

           composition of the population explained 70 percent of regional differences in (age-

           sex-race adjusted) Medicare expenditures. The factors providing the additional

           explanatory power included the age-composition of deaths in the region and the age-

           specific mortality rates. Here we raise a cautionary note about “ecological fallacy” in

           which aggregated data are used to make inferences about individual causal pathways,

           a concern of particular importance to any research on geographic variation (Susser,

           1994a, 1994b). For example, the percentage of the elderly population that is Hispanic

           is predicted to increase regional Medicare expenditures (Cutler and Sheiner, 1999),

           yet average Medicare expenditures for Hispanics is roughly equal to expenditures for

           non-Hispanics.

      4. See Evans, et al. (1984), Chappie and Lave (1982), and Ozkaynak and Thurston

           (1987).

      5. See Kennedy, et al. (1996), Kaplan, et al. (1996), and Lynch, et al. (1998).

      6. The Medicare records define residence as the location where the individual receives

           Social Security retirement checks.


                                                31
       7. One other MSA > 100,000, St. Cloud, Minnesota, was excluded from the study

             because of problems with the mortality data.

       8. Some states do not have any MSAs with less than 100,000 or do not have any non-

             MSA residents.


References

Allison, J. J., C. I. Kiefe , E. F. Cook, M. S. Gerrity, E. J. Orav, and R. Cenor. 1998. The
association of physician attitudes about uncertainty and risk taking with resource use in a
Medicare HMO.” Medical Decision Making 18: 320-29.

Auster, Richard, Irving Leveson, and Deborah Saracheck. 1969. The production of health, an
exploratory study. Journal of Human Resources 4 (4): 411-36.

Chappie, Mike and Lester Lave. 1982. The health effects of air pollution: A reanalysis. Journal
of Urban Economics 12: 346-76.

Chassin, M.R. 1993. Explaining geographic variations: The enthusiasm mypothesis. Medical
Care 31: YS37-44.

Chassin, M.R., R. H.Brook, R. E.Park, et al. 1986. Variations in the use of medical and surgical
practices by the Medicare population. New England Journal of Medicine 314: 285-90.

Chau, Derek, Elliott Fisher, and Jonathan Skinner. 2001. The importance of regional practice
style in a cohort of elderly hip fracture patients. Hanover, NH: Dartmouth Medical School.
Mimeograph.

Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber. 1996. Saving babies: The efficacy and cost of recent
changes in the Medicaid eligibility of pregnant women. Journal of Political Economy 104 (6)
(December): 1263-96.

Cutler, David, Mark McClellan, Joseph Newhouse, and Dahlia Remler. 1998. Are medical
prices declining?: Evidence from heart attack treatments. Quarterly Journal of Economics 113
(4) (November): 991-1024.

Cutler, David, and Louise Sheiner. 1999. The geography of Medicare. American Economic
Review 89 (2) (May): 228-33.

Deaton, Angus. 2001. Inequalities in income and inequalities in health. In Inequality in


                                                32
America, ed. Finis Welch. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press (forthcoming).

Deaton, Angus, and Darren Lubotsky. 2001. Inequality and race in American cities and states.
NBER Working Paper no. 8370. Cambridge, Mass: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Deaton, Angus, and Christina Paxson. 1999. Mortality, education, income, and inequality
among American cohorts,” NBER Working Paper no. 7140. Cambridge, Mass: National Bureau
of Economic Research, May.

Deaton, Angus, and Christina Paxson. 2001. Mortality, income, and income inequality over
time in Britain and the United States, NBER Working Paper no. 8534. Cambridge, Mass:
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Eisenberg, John A. 1986. Doctors’ decisions and the cost of medical care: The reasons for
doctors’ practice patterns and ways to change them. Ann Arbor, MI: Health Administration
Press Perspectives.

Escarce, Jose. 1992. Explaining the association between surgeon supply and utilization. Inquiry
29: 403-15.

Escarce, Jose. 1993. Medicare patients’ use of overpriced procedures before and after the
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987. American Journal of Public Health 83: 349-55.

Evans, J.S., et al. 1984. Cross-sectional mortality studies and air pollution risk assessment.
Environmental International 10: 55-83.

Fisher, Elliott S., Etoile Pinder, Daniel Gottlieb, and Therese Stukel. 2001. Associations
between regional variations in Medicare expenditures, access to care, and patient satisfaction.
Hanover, NH: Dartmouth Medical School. Mimeograph.

Folland, Sherman, and Miron Stano. 1989. Sources of small area variation in the use of medical
care. Journal of Health Economics 8: 85-107.

Franks, P., G. C. Williams, J. Zwanziger, C. Mooney, M. Sorbero. 2000. Why do physicians
vary so widely in their referral rates? Journal of General Internal Medicine 15: 163-68.

Frohlich, N. R. Fransoo, and N. Roos. 2001. Indicators of health status and health service use
for the Winnipeg Regional Health Authority. Winnipeg, Manitoba: Manitoba Center for Health
Policy and Evaluation; Department of Community Health Sciences; Faculty of Medicine;
University of Manitoba, March.




                                                33
Fuchs, V. R., and Marcia J. Kramer. 1986. Determinants of expenditures for physicians’
services in the United States, 1948-1968. In The health economy, ed. Victor R. Fuchs.
Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press.

Gray, B. H., and W. J. McNerney. 1986. For-profit enterprise in health care: The Institute of
Medicine Study. New England Journal of Medicine 314:1523-28.

Green, L. A., and M. P. Becker. 1994. Physician decision making and variation in hospital
admission rates for suspected acute cardiac myocardial infarction. A tale of two towns. Medical
Care 32: 1086-97.

Hadley, Jack. 1988. Medicare spending and mortality rates of the elderly. Inquiry 25: 485-93.

Kaplan, George A., et al. 1996. Inequality in income and mortality in the United States:
Analysis of mortality and potential pathways. British Medical Journal 312: 999-1003.

Kennedy, Bruce P., et al. 1996. Income distribution and mortality: Cross-sectional ecological
study of the Robin Hood Index in the United States. British Medical Journal 312:1004-07.

Kessler, Daniel, and Mark McClellan. 1999. Is hospital competition socially wasteful? NBER
Working Paper no. 7266. Cambridge, Mass: National Bureau of Economic Research, July.

Lin, Ge, “A regional assessment of elderly disability in the U.S.” 2000. Social Science and
Medicine, 50: 1015-24.

Lynch, John W., et al. 1998. Income distribution and mortality in metropolitan areas of the
United States. American Journal of Public Health 88 (7): 1074-80.

McClellan, Mark, and Jonathan Skinner. 1997. The incidence of Medicare, NBER Working
Paper, revised 2000.

McClellan, Mark, and Jonathan Skinner. 1999. Medicare reform: Who pays and who benefits?
Health Affairs 18 (1) (Jan/Feb): 48-62.

Ozkaynak, Haluk, and George D. Thurston. 1987. Associations between 1980 U.S. mortality
rates and alternative measures of airborne particle concentration. Risk Analysis 7 (4): 449-61.

Pardes, H., K. G. Manton, E. S. Lander, et al. 1999. Effects of medical research on health care
and the economy. Science 283 (January 1): 36-37.

Pearson, S. D., L. Goldman, E. J. Orav, et al. 1995. Triage decisions for emergency department
patients with chest pain: Do physicians’ risk attitudes make the difference? Journal of General
Internal Medicine 10: 557-64.


                                               34
Schneider, E. L. 1999. Aging in the third millennium. Science 283 (February 5): 796-97.

Selby, J. V., K. Grumback, C. P. Quesenberry, et al. 1999. Differences in resource use and costs
of primary care in a large HMO according to physician specialty. Health Services Research 34:
503-18.

Silver, Morris. 1972. An econometric analysis of spatial variations in mortality rates by race and
sex. In Essays in the economics of health and medical care, ed. Victor R. Fuchs. New York,
NY: Columbia University Press.

Silverman, Elaine, Jonathan Skinner, and Elliott Fisher. 1999. The association between for-
profit hospital ownership and increased Medicare spending. New England Journal of Medicine
341 (August 5): 420-26.

Skinner, Jonathan, and Elliott Fisher. 1997. Regional disparities in Medicare expenditures: An
opportunity for Medicare reform. National Tax Journal 50 (September): 413-25.

Skinner, Jonathan, Elliott Fisher, and John Wennberg. 2001. The efficiency of Medicare. NBER
Working Paper no. 8395. Cambridge, Mass: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Susser, M. 1994a. The logic in ecological: I. The logic of analysis. American Journal of
Public Health 84: 825-29.

Susser, M. 1994b. The logic in ecological: II. The logic of design. American Journal of Public
Health 84: 830-35.

Taylor, D. H., Jr, D. J. Whellan, F. A. Sloan. 1999. Effects of admission to a teaching hospital
on the cost and quality of care for Medicare beneficiaries. New England Journal of Medicine
340: 293-99.

Wennberg, John E, Benjamin A. Barnes, and Michael Zubkoff. 1982. Professional uncertainty
and the problem of supplier-induced demand. Social Science and Medicine 16: 811-24.

Wennberg John E., and Megan M. Cooper. 1999. The quality of medical care in the United
States: a report on the Medicare Program. The Dartmouth atlas of health care in the United
States. Chicago, IL: American Health Association Press.

Wennberg, John E., and Megan M. Cooper. 1996. The Dartmouth atlas of health care in the
United States. Chicago, IL: American Health Association Press.

Wennberg, John E., Elliott Fisher, and Jonathan Skinner. 2001. Geography and the debate over
Medicare reform. Health Affairs. Forthcoming.


                                               35
Wright, James G., G. A. Hawker, and C. Bombardier, et al. 1999. Physician enthusiasm as an
explanation for area variation in the utilization of knee replacement surgery. Medical Care 37:
946-56.




                                               36
             Table 1. Names, Definitions, and Sources of Variables
TOTUTIL   Total health care utilization per white Medicare enrollee 65-         efg
                                                                          HCFA , 1989-1991
            a
          84 , 1989-1991
INUTIL    Inpatient utilization (including institutional reimbursement andHCFAefg, 1989-1991
          physician services), per white Medicare enrollee 65-84a, 1989-
          1991
OUTUTIL   Outpatient utilization (including institutional reimbursement HCFAefg, 1989-1991
          for same day services, physician and misc. services) per white
          Medicare enrollee 65-84a, 1989-1991
TOTADM    Weighted total hospital admissions, 1989-1991, per white        HCFAef, 1989-1991
                                  a
          Medicare enrollee 65-84 , 1989-1991
MEDADM    Weighted hospital medical admissions, per white Medicare        HCFAef, 1989-1991
                        a
          enrollee 65-84 , 1989-1991
SURGADM   Weighted hospital surgical admissions, per white Medicare       HCFAef, 1989-1991
                        a
          enrollee 65-84 , 1989-1991
TOTPHYS   Total physician utilization (inpatient and outpatient), per white HCFAeg, 1989-1991
                                   a
          Medicare enrollee 65-84 , 1989-1991
EANDM     Physician utilization for evaluation and management services HCFAeg, 1989-1991
          (inpatient and outpatient), per white Medicare enrollee 65-
             a
          84 , 1989-1991
DIAG      Physician utilization for diagnosis (inpatient and outpatient), HCFAeg, 1989-1991
          per white Medicare enrollee 65-84a, 1989-1991
TREAT     Physician utilization for procedures/treatment (inpatient and         eg
                                                                          HCFA , 1989-1991
                                                         a
          outpatient), per white Medicare enrollee 65-84 , 1989-1991
MORT                                     a                                      e
          Deaths per 1,000, whites 65-84 , average 1989-1991              HCFA , 1989-1991

LOED                             a
          Percent of whites 65-84 with less than 12 years of schooling, U.S. Census of
          1990                                                          Population, 1990

REALINC   Mean income for whites ages 65-84a (1990) deflated by cost      U.S. Census of
                         c
          of living index (1991)                                          Population, 1990

CIGS      Per capita sales by state (packs), average 1984-1989            Tobacco Institute, 1998

OBESE                   d                                                 Mokdad et al, 1999
          Percent obese by state, adjusted for race, 1991

POLUTN    Mean PM-10 concentration (particulate matter 10 microns or Shprentz, 1996
          smaller in diameter, µg/m3), average 1990-1994
BLACK     Percent of total population black, 1990                         Area Resource File,
                                                                          1992
                   Table 1. Names, Definitions, and Sources of Variables
Notes:

a) Standardized for age and sex
b) HCFA 5% samples (Medpar, Outpatient SAF, BMAD, HHA SAF, Hospice SAF)
c) COL predicted from a regression of U.S. Chamber of Commerce cost-of-living index for 109
metropolitan areas (1991) on standardized wage index and median property values (1990)
d) Body mass index (weight divided by square of height)≥ 30 kg/m2
e) Hiskew 20% random sample
f) MEDPAR 20% random sample
g) BMAD 5% random sample

References:

Area Resource File, Office of Data Analysis and Management, U.S. Bureau of Health
  Professions, March 1992.
Data Users Reference Guide, Health Care Financing Administration, Baltimore, MD, January, 2000.
  Health Insurance Skeleton Eligibility Write-Off File
  Medicare Provider Analysis and Review File
  Physician/Supplier Standard Analytic File
  Home Health SAF
  Hospice SAF
  Outpatient Hospital SAF
Mokdad, A.H. Serdula, M.K. Dietz, W.H. Bowman, B.A. Marks, J.S. Koplan, J.P. “The Spread
  of the Obesity Epidemic in the United States, 1991-1998", JAMA , October 27, 1999 - Vol
  282, No. 16.
Part B Medicare Annual Data (BMAD) Procedure File, Health Care Financing
  Administration, Five Percent Random Sample of Medicare Enrollment Data, 1989-1991.
Shprentz, D.S. "Breath-taking: Premature Mortality Due to Particulate Air Pollution in 239
  American Cities", Natural Resources Defense Council , May 1996.
  http://www.igc.apc.org/nrdc/nrdc/nrdcpro
"The Tax Burden on Tobacco", Tobacco Institute , Washington, D.C., Vol. 33, Historical
  Compilation 1998.
U.S. News Online (1997-98). http://www.usnews.com/usnews/edu/beyond/bcmed.htm
                                           Table 2. Summary Statistics: All Areas
                                                      Part A N=313
                                                                percentile
                         a             a            a
                Mean         St. Dev        C.V.        25th      50th       75th    MIN     MAX
TOTUTIL         3265           368          11.3        2870      3088       3375    2316    4368
INUTIL          2132           207           9.7        1903      2063       2231    1576    2931
OUTUTIL         1133           254          22.4         930      1051       1169     691    1998
TOTADM          1783           178          10.0        1589      1735       1888    1352    2423
MEDADM           933           138          14.8         793       904       1004     567    1518
SURGADM          849            65           7.7         789       840        889     615    1083
TOTPHYS         1195           237          19.9         975      1096       1226     797    1976
EANDM            400            82          20.5         318       359        397     235     660
DIAG             210            61          29.2         157       185        222     100     460
TREAT            585           120          20.6         488       546        637     377    1011

MORT              38.3         3.1            8.1       36.1      38.8       41.1    29.2    51.8

LOED             0.382        0.098           25.7      0.318    0.388       0.459   0.134   0.691
REALINC          14022        1570            11.2      12772    13995       15373   9473    21105
CIGS             114.7        16.2            14.1      107.3    112.6       124.3   62.4    193.4
OBESE            0.118        0.018           15.1      0.103    0.120       0.132   0.082   0.158
BLACK            0.108        0.088           81.0      0.018    0.061       0.143   0.001   0.425

a) Weighted by population whites ages 65-84
                                           Table 2. Summary Statistics: MSAs > 100,000
                                                        Part B N=224
                                                                  percentile
                         a             a              a
                Mean         St. Dev           C.V.       25th      50th       75th      MIN     MAX
TOTUTIL         3340           388             11.6       2880      3113       3484      2316    4368
INUTIL          2136           215             10.1       1874      2056       2238      1576    2931
OUTUTIL         1204           267             22.2        955      1084       1218       691    1998
TOTADM          1766           179             10.1       1567      1710       1889      1352    2423
MEDADM           906           126             13.9        777       872        980       567    1518
SURGADM          859            71              8.3        787       850        914       615    1083
TOTPHYS         1274           243             19.1       1012      1132       1273       797    1976
EANDM            430            83             19.3        328       373        410       235     660
DIAG             230            63             27.2        165       195        235       117     460
TREAT            613           127             20.8        503       566        652       377    1011

MORT              38.2         3.1              8.2       36.2      38.9       41.3      29.2    51.8

LOED             0.345        0.080             23.2      0.305    0.368       0.425     0.167   0.691
REALINC          14464        1536              10.6      13221    14402       15679     9473    21105
CIGS             112.9        13.8              12.2      107.3    112.6       124.3     62.4    193.4
OBESE            0.116        0.017             14.8      0.103    0.120       0.133     0.082   0.151
POLUTN            29.3         6.1              20.9       23.7     26.4        29.1     17.2     60.4
BLACK            0.124        0.077             62.2      0.028    0.076       0.154     0.001   0.425

a) Weighted by population whites ages 65-84
                                    a            b
  Table 3. Utilization Indexes for Areas Grouped by Region and Population Size
                                     (US=100)
                           Part A       N=313 All Areas
                    TOTUTIL             INUTILc    OUTUTILd
Region
  North                 96.8              97.8             95.1
  Upper South          101.2             102.4             98.9
  Deep South           102.7             104.8             98.6
  Florida              117.5              97.4            155.3
  West South           101.8             104.9             95.9
  Big Sky               91.8              99.3             77.7
  West                 101.8             100.3            104.5

Population size
  > 500 K              103.6             101.4            107.9
  250-500 K             99.5              95.8            106.4
  100-250 K             94.8              95.7             93.2
  < 100 K               96.9             100.3             90.5
  Not MSA               94.9              99.2             86.7
U.S. Expenditure
per enrollee           3265              2132             1133

                        Part B    N=224 MSAs > 100,000
                                          c            d
                    TOTUTIL         INUTIL      OUTUTIL
Region
  North                 96.1              98.1             92.5
  Upper South          100.1              99.2            101.8
  Deep South           100.5             102.3             97.1
  Florida              116.0              97.2            149.3
  West South           101.6             104.9             95.8
  Big Sky               93.1             101.6             78.1
  West                 102.2             102.2            102.0
U.S. Expenditure
per enrollee           3340              2136             1204

a) All indexes standardized for age and sex
b) Area values weighted by population whites ages 65-84
c) Includes hospital and physician
d) Includes hospital, physician and misc. services
Table 4. Hospital Admissions Indexes for Areas Grouped by Region and Population
                                 Size (US=100)
                                           Part A    N=313 All Areas
                                                              a            a         a           a
                TOTADM      MEDADM SURGADM TOTPHYS                EANDM        DIAG      TREAT
Region
 North            98.5        98.8         98.2       94.0         100.1       95.4      89.3
 Upper South      102.2       105.4        98.8       98.5         99.6        95.5      98.9
 Deep South       107.3       113.5        100.4      92.7         91.0        91.0      94.5
 Florida          92.3        84.8         100.7      142.0        126.6       162.8     145.0
 West South       105.8       107.0        104.4      97.5         91.7        99.0      101.0
 Big Sky          101.1       101.9        100.2      85.3         80.5        77.2      91.6
 West             97.8        94.4         101.4      111.2        110.3       104.9     114.0

Population size
 > 500 K        100.0         98.4         101.7      109.0        111.6       112.8     105.8
 250-500 K      95.4          91.1         100.1      102.7        96.6        104.4     106.2
 100-250 K      96.2          94.0         98.6       92.4         87.7        92.1      95.7
 < 100 K        102.1         105.2        98.6       89.5         88.5        83.3      92.4
 Not MSA        101.6         105.5        97.3       86.3         84.2        80.5      89.8
U.S. Expenditure
per enrollee     1783          933          849        1195        400         210        585



                                         Part B    N=224 MSAs > 100,000
                                                              a
                TOTADM      MEDADM SURGADM TOTPHYS                EANDMa       DIAGa     TREATa
Region
 North            99.4        100.8        98.0       91.7         97.7        93.3      86.9
 Upper South      97.7        98.1         97.3       102.1        100.0       101.6     103.8
 Deep South       104.6       106.7        102.2      91.5         86.4        90.1      95.6
 Florida          92.6        86.3         99.2       136.4        121.7       153.6     140.3
 West South       105.7       105.9        105.6      97.6         91.1        97.1      102.3
 Big Sky          103.3       105.2        101.4      85.3         81.7        77.6      90.8
 West             100.3       99.0         101.7      108.3        108.1       100.7     111.3
U.S. Expenditure
per enrollee     1766          906          859        1274        430         230        613

a) Includes inpatient and outpatient
Note: See footnotes a and b to Table 4
    Table 5. Mortality Indexes for Areas Grouped by Region and Population Size
                                     (US=100)

                                  Part A    N=313 All Areas

Region                MORT        65-74      75-84     Men       Women
  North               102.2       102.3      102.0     101.9      102.5
  Upper South         106.4       107.4      105.5     106.3      106.5
  Deep South          108.5       109.7      107.5     112.0      104.5
  Florida              89.5        90.0       89.2     90.3       88.7
  West South          103.9       104.0      103.8     104.3      103.4
  Big Sky              94.0        93.2       94.6     95.4       92.4
  West                 94.0        92.8       94.9     91.0       97.3
Population size
  > 500 K              99.8       99.7       99.9      98.7      101.1
  250-500 K            98.1       97.1       98.8      97.8      98.4
  100-250 K            100.7      100.6      100.8     101.4     100.0
  < 100 K              101.7      102.0      101.4     102.8     100.4
  Not MSA              99.8       100.1      99.5      101.6     97.7
Deaths per 1,000       38.31      26.16      59.68     48.95     30.72




                               Part B     N=224 MSAs > 100,000

Region                MORT        65-74      75-84     Men       Women
  North               102.9       103.4      102.6     103.1      102.8
  Upper South         104.4       103.8      104.8     103.6      105.2
  Deep South          108.7       110.2      107.6     112.0      105.1
  Florida              88.9        89.8       88.2     90.5       87.1
  West South          104.7       103.5      105.6     105.4      103.9
  Big Sky              97.7        96.8       98.3     98.1       97.2
  West                 94.5        93.4       95.3     92.2       97.1
Deaths per 1,000       38.20      26.03      59.60     48.41     30.92

Note: See footnotes a and b to Table 4
    Table 6. Socioeconomic and Other Indexes for Areas Grouped by Region and
                             Population Size (US=100)

                                  Part A       N=313 All Areas
                           a               a
                    LOED       REALINC          CIGS    OBESE    BLACK
Region
  North             102.2         95.6          102.0    108.0   94.1
  Upper South       109.6         107.5         105.9    95.9    167.8
  Deep South        131.0         96.3          118.3    97.6    195.2
  Florida           73.3          112.3         106.4    83.0    121.6
  West South        115.4         104.0         97.3     105.3   126.0
  Big Sky           100.1         104.1         94.8     101.0   38.5
  West              75.9          100.7         83.9     88.1    48.9
Population size
  > 500 K           88.4          103.3         97.9     98.0    125.5
  250-500 K         95.1          103.1         99.4     98.9    78.8
  100-250 K         100.4         101.8         100.9    102.2   74.1
  < 100 K           116.0         94.0          104.1    102.8   77.4
  Not MSA           119.6         94.2          102.2    102.9   68.3
U.S. average        0.382         14,022        114.7    0.118   0.108


                                    Part B      N=224 MSAs > 100,000
                    LOEDa      REALINCa         CIGS    OBESE    BLACK   POLUTN
Region
  North             109.7         94.8          102.6    109.1   106.6    97.2
  Upper South       95.6          118.0         107.1    90.5    203.0    90.2
  Deep South        121.4         101.9         118.3    98.3    168.3    99.0
  Florida           79.8          108.5         108.1    84.2    105.3    81.7
  West South        110.9         108.8         97.6     107.9   118.9    87.3
  Big Sky           94.9          103.8         98.8     97.3    64.7     96.4
  West              80.9          99.0          85.4     89.1    49.2     120.8
U.S. average        0.345         14,464        112.9    0.116   0.124    29.3

a) Standardized for age and sex
Note: See footnote b to Table 4
                 Table 7. Utilization Regression Results,
               OLS, N=313 (Standard error in parenthesis)

                        LnTOTUTIL               Ln INUTIL   Ln OUTUTIL
R2            0.366       0.090     0.450         0.343        0.652

Upper South    0.053                 0.029        0.022        0.036
              (0.025)               (0.025)      (0.024)      (0.037)

Deep South     0.080                 0.040        0.027        0.063
              (0.018)               (0.019)      (0.018)      (0.027)

Florida        0.193                 0.270        0.113        0.496
              (0.021)               (0.023)      (0.022)      (0.034)

West South     0.064                 0.049        0.064        0.021
              (0.019)               (0.020)      (0.019)      (0.029)

Big Sky        -0.028                0.014        0.092        -0.148
              (0.018)               (0.019)      (0.018)      (0.028)

West           0.038                 0.091        0.094        0.087
              (0.015)               (0.017)      (0.016)      (0.025)

250-500        -0.064                -0.058       -0.053       -0.065
              (0.020)               (0.019)      (0.018)      (0.027)

100-250        -0.090                -0.090       -0.074       -0.118
              (0.021)               (0.020)      (0.019)      (0.029)

<100           -0.061                -0.060       -0.027       -0.117
              (0.016)               (0.016)      (0.015)      (0.024)

Not MSA        -0.082                -0.079       -0.041       -0.152
              (0.014)               (0.015)      (0.015)      (0.022)

Ln LOED                    -0.080    0.036        0.043        0.020
                          (0.033)   (0.036)      (0.034)      (0.052)

Ln REALINC                 0.151     0.026        -0.032       0.147
                          (0.072)   (0.074)      (0.071)      (0.108)

Ln MORT                    0.361     0.515        0.694        0.216
                          (0.086)   (0.084)      (0.080)      (0.122)

Intercept      8.086       5.247     5.986        5.458        4.853
              (0.009)     (0.730)   (0.763)      (0.729)      (1.113)



                                    12/4/2001
       Table 8. Utilization Regression Results by Type of Service, OLS, N=313



              Ln MEDADM     Ln SURGADM           Ln EANDM       Ln DIAG   Ln TREAT

R2                0.526          0.261                0.549      0.570      0.609

Upper South       0.024         -0.019                 0.035     0.025      0.076
                 (0.031)        (0.020)               (0.040)   (0.054)    (0.037)
Deep South        0.046          0.001                -0.029     0.033      0.064
                 (0.023)        (0.015)               (0.030)   (0.040)    (0.028)
Florida           0.058          0.077                 0.264     0.499      0.464
                 (0.029)        (0.018)               (0.037)   (0.049)    (0.034)
West South        0.063          0.051                -0.030     0.080      0.112
                 (0.025)        (0.016)               (0.032)   (0.042)    (0.029)
Big Sky           0.139          0.064                -0.115    -0.138      0.042
                 (0.024)        (0.015)               (0.030)   (0.041)    (0.028)
West              0.081          0.067                 0.078     0.062      0.242
                 (0.021)        (0.013)               (0.027)   (0.036)    (0.025)
250-500          -0.067         -0.013                -0.156    -0.140     -0.039
                 (0.023)        (0.015)               (0.030)   (0.040)    (0.028)
100-250          -0.087         -0.036                -0.213    -0.184     -0.083
                 (0.025)        (0.016)               (0.032)   (0.042)    (0.029)
<100              0.007         -0.023                -0.196    -0.254     -0.060
                 (0.020)        (0.013)               (0.026)   (0.034)    (0.024)
Not MSA           0.009         -0.039                -0.235    -0.280     -0.110
                 (0.019)        (0.012)               (0.024)   (0.032)    (0.022)
Ln LOED           0.084          0.013                -0.009     0.064      0.043
                 (0.044)        (0.028)               (0.057)   (0.076)    (0.053)
Ln REALINC       -0.147          0.083                -0.126     0.170      0.304
                 (0.092)        (0.059)               (0.118)   (0.157)    (0.109)
Ln MORT           1.100          0.466                 0.190    -0.116      0.106
                 (0.104)        (0.067)               (0.133)   (0.178)    (0.123)
Intercept         4.272          4.250                 6.560     4.239      3.046
                 (0.945)        (0.605)               (1.212)   (1.618)    (1.122)




                                          12/4/2001
              Table 9. Mortality Regression Results, N=313 All Areas


                            (1)          (2)            (3)
          2
       R                  0.485         0.521          0.627

Upper South                0.041                       0.045
                          (0.017)                     (0.016)
Deep South                 0.064                       0.025
                          (0.012)                     (0.013)
Florida                    -0.134                     -0.096
                          (0.014)                     (0.015)
West South                 0.019                       0.020
                          (0.013)                     (0.013)
Big Sky                    -0.079                     -0.026
                          (0.012)                     (0.012)
West                       -0.085                     -0.009
                          (0.010)                     (0.012)
250-500                    -0.013                      0.001
                          (0.013)                     (0.012)
100-250                    -0.004                      0.009
                          (0.014)                     (0.013)
<100                       -0.009                     -0.004
                          (0.011)                     (0.011)
Not MSA                    -0.016                     -0.010
                          (0.009)                     (0.011)

Ln LOED                                 0.076          0.036
                                       (0.018)        (0.023)
Ln REALINC                              -0.141        -0.121
                                       (0.042)        (0.049)

Ln CIGS                                 0.098          0.133
                                       (0.027)        (0.031)
Ln OBESE                                0.148          0.111
                                       (0.024)        (0.025)
Ln BLACK                                0.027          0.021
                                       (0.003)        (0.004)

Intercept                  3.671        4.992          4.507
                          (0.006)      (0.428)        (0.510)
                                       a
  Table 10. Percent Differential Between Actual and Predicted Values for Florida
                                  MSAs > 100,000


                                  TOTUTIL                 MORT               Percent Differential
Degrees
north
latitude                       Actual      Pred.      Actual    Pred.       TOTUTIL      MORT


30.26      Pensacola            3724       3197        41.1      37.9          16.5         8.4
30.2       Jacksonville         4084       3310        40.5      37.8          23.4         7.0
29.4       Gainesville          3548       3190        42.7      36.7          11.2        16.4
29.11      Daytona Beach        3342       2524        30.7      37.4          32.4        -17.9
29.1       Ocala                3331       2610        33.1      38.8          27.6        -14.7
28.33      Orlando              4074       3120        37.8      37.7          30.6         0.3
28.04      Melbourne            3858       2843        35.8      36.9          35.7        -2.8
28.02      Lakeland             3129       2814        35.0      38.5          11.2        -8.9
27.58      Tampa                3874       2992        35.7      37.5          29.5        -4.7
27.29      Bradenton            3442       2800        36.3      36.7          23.0        -1.1
27.28      Fort Pierce          3661       2690        33.3      37.1          36.1        -10.4
27.2       Sarasota             3667       2478        30.1      35.3          48.0        -14.6
26.42      West Palm Beach      4030       2607        30.2      35.7          54.6        -15.4
26.39      Fort Meyers          3769       2435        29.3      36.9          54.8        -20.5
25.45      Miami                4130       2820        33.0      37.7          46.5        -12.5


a) Calculated by running regressions across 209 MSAs >100,000 (Florida excluded), then predicting
utilization and mortality for each Florida MSA using the regression equations and the MSA values,
then calculating the percentage differential between observed and predicted.
   Table 11. Percent Differentiala Between Actual and Predicted Values for MSAs >100,000 in
                                         Selected States
                          TOTUTIL            MORT
ARIZONA

Phoenix                       17.8             -3.6
Tucson                        5.7              6.0
Yuma                          4.7              1.2


MINNESOTA

Duluth                        -5.8            10.9
Minneapolis                   -5.5             -0.7
Rochester                     19.5             -4.1


NEVADA

Las Vegas                     -5.0             6.5
Reno                          -5.4             0.2


OREGON

Eugene-Springfield            -6.8             -7.1
Medford                       -9.7            -10.3
Portland-Vancouver           -13.6             7.0
Salem                        -12.6             -7.4


UTAH

Provo-Orem                   -12.8            7.2
Salt Lake City-Ogden         -24.6            10.5

a) Calculated for each state by running regressions across MSAs >100,000 (excluding the state
in question), then predicting utilization and mortality for each MSA in that state using the
regression equations and the MSA values, then calculating the percentage differential between
actual and predicted.




                                              12/5/2001
            Appendix Table B1. Coefficients of Correlationa Among Ten Measures of Utilization

                                              Part A    N=313 All Areas

           TOTUTIL     INUTIL     OUTUTIL     TOTADM    MEDADM SURGADM TOTPHYS     EANDM   DIAG     TREAT


TOTUTIL      1.000      0.748      0.842       0.562     0.420    0.651   0.836    0.728   0.738    0.778

INUTIL       0.748      1.000      0.272       0.947     0.856    0.780   0.338    0.352   0.222    0.314

OUTUTIL      0.842      0.272      1.000       0.046     -0.086   0.310   0.938    0.770   0.890    0.873

TOTADM       0.562      0.947      0.046       1.000     0.947    0.730   0.058    0.103   -0.014   0.051

MEDADM       0.420      0.856      -0.086      0.947     1.000    0.472   -0.087   0.027   -0.134   -0.122

SURGADM      0.651      0.780      0.310       0.730     0.472    1.000   0.346    0.227   0.250    0.400

TOTPHYS      0.836      0.338      0.938       0.058     -0.087   0.346   1.000    0.873   0.910    0.915

EANDM        0.728      0.352      0.770       0.103     0.027    0.227   0.873    1.000   0.807    0.630

DIAG         0.738      0.222      0.890       -0.014    -0.134   0.250   0.910    0.807   1.000    0.736

TREAT        0.778      0.314      0.873       0.051     -0.122   0.400   0.915    0.630   0.736    1.000

a) Weighted by population whites ages 65-84
            Appendix Table B1. Coefficients of Correlationa Among Ten Measures of Utilization

                                        Part B     N=224 MSAs > 100,000

           TOTUTIL     INUTIL     OUTUTIL     TOTADM   MEDADM SURGADM TOTPHYS    EANDM   DIAG     TREAT

TOTUTIL      1.000      0.751      0.847       0.588    0.484    0.623   0.861   0.727   0.724    0.813

INUTIL       0.751      1.000      0.285       0.954    0.888    0.828   0.391   0.411   0.213    0.373

OUTUTIL      0.847      0.285      1.000       0.086    -0.011   0.238   0.935   0.725   0.879    0.880

TOTADM       0.588      0.954      0.086       1.000    0.950    0.833   0.141   0.192   0.006    0.141

MEDADM       0.484      0.888      -0.011      0.950    1.000    0.619   0.051   0.193   -0.056   -0.002

SURGADM      0.623      0.828      0.238       0.833    0.619    1.000   0.267   0.143   0.117    0.359

TOTPHYS      0.861      0.391      0.935       0.141    0.051    0.267   1.000   0.857   0.892    0.911

EANDM        0.727      0.411      0.725       0.192    0.193    0.143   0.857   1.000   0.776    0.601

DIAG         0.724      0.213      0.879       0.006    -0.056   0.117   0.892   0.776   1.000    0.706

TREAT        0.813      0.373      0.880       0.141    -0.002   0.359   0.911   0.601   0.706    1.000

a) Weighted by population whites ages 65-84
                                                                a
                 Appendix Table B2. Coefficients of Correlation Among Utilization, Mortality and Other Variables



                                 Part A   N=313 All Areas

           TOT UTIL     MORT         LOED     REAL INC   OBESE      BLACK       CIGS


TOTUTIL      1.000      0.119       -0.145     0.191     -0.158     0.383      0.055

MORT         0.119      1.000        0.490     -0.275       0.411   0.398      0.443

LOED        -0.145      0.490        1.000     -0.610       0.366   0.067      0.379

REALINC      0.191      -0.275      -0.610     1.000     -0.193     0.287      -0.136

OBESE       -0.158      0.411        0.366     -0.193       1.000   -0.081     0.209

BLACK        0.383      0.398        0.067     0.288     -0.081     1.000      0.262

CIGS         0.055      0.443        0.379     -0.136       0.209   0.262      1.000

a) Weighted by population whites ages 65-84
                                                                    a
                 Appendix Table B2. Coefficients of Correlation Among Utilization, Mortality and Other Variables

                                              Part B   N=224

           TOT UTIL     MORT        LOED        REAL INC   OBESE        BLACK    CIGS     POLUTN


TOTUTIL      1.000      0.001       -0.170        0.143        -0.153   0.244    0.096     0.302

MORT         0.001      1.000       0.526        -0.216        0.531    0.395    0.403     0.086

LOED        -0.170      0.526       1.000        -0.547        0.474    0.127    0.336    -0.012

REALINC      0.143      -0.216      -0.547        1.000        -0.149   0.287    0.048    -0.214

OBESE       -0.153      0.531       0.474        -0.149        1.000    0.085    0.311    -0.040

BLACK        0.244      0.395       0.127         0.287        0.085    1.000    0.391    -0.047

CIGS         0.096      0.403       0.336         0.048        0.311    0.391    1.000    -0.273

POLUTN       0.302      0.086       -0.012       -0.214        -0.040   -0.047   -0.273    1.000


a) Weighted by population whites ages 65-84
              Appendix Table B3. Utilization Regression Results, OLS,
                             N=224 MSAs > 100,000

                          LnTOTUTIL             Ln INUTIL   Ln OUTUTIL


R2               0.309      0.043     0.418       0.343         0.581


Upper South      0.037                 0.021      0.003         0.058
                (0.036)               (0.037)    (0.034)       (0.055)

Deep South       0.053                 0.011      0.006         0.022
                (0.027)               (0.027)    (0.025)       (0.040)

Florida          0.197                 0.289      0.121         0.533
                (0.024)               (0.028)    (0.026)       (0.041)

West South       0.063                 0.043      0.063         0.010
                (0.026)               (0.028)    (0.026)       (0.042)

Big Sky          -0.020                0.012      0.090         -0.146
                (0.028)               (0.027)    (0.025)       (0.040)

West             0.056                 0.115      0.108         0.130
                (0.017)               (0.021)    (0.019)       (0.031)

250-500          -0.062                -0.055     -0.049        -0.062
                (0.021)               (0.019)    (0.018)       (0.029)

100-250          -0.087                -0.083     -0.066        -0.116
                (0.022)               (0.021)    (0.019)       (0.031)

Ln LOED                      -0.090    0.025      -0.004        0.073
                            (0.047)   (0.048)    (0.044)       (0.072)

Ln REALINC                   0.093     0.066      -0.035        0.232
                            (0.094)   (0.102)    (0.095)       (0.153)

Ln MORT                      0.186     0.627      0.799         0.343
                            (0.114)   (0.106)    (0.099)       (0.159)

Intercept        8.083       6.441     5.172      5.053         3.624
                (0.010)     (0.921)   (1.019)    (0.948)       (1.526)
Appendix Table B4. Utilization Regression Results by Type of Service, OLS, N=224
                                MSAs > 100,000

              Ln MEDADM    Ln SURGADM      LnEANDM       LnDIAG     LnTREAT


R2               0.452         0.289          0.410        0.443       0.615


Upper South     -0.017        -0.041          0.040        0.034       0.137
                (0.044)       (0.029)        (0.061)      (0.079)     (0.052)

Deep South       0.006         0.003         -0.091        -0.037      0.057
                (0.032)       (0.021)        (0.044)      (0.058)     (0.038)

Florida          0.046         0.091          0.274        0.511       0.527
                (0.033)       (0.022)        (0.045)      (0.059)     (0.039)

West South       0.056         0.050         -0.036        0.022       0.132
                (0.033)       (0.022)        (0.046)      (0.060)     (0.039)

Big Sky          0.129         0.060         -0.130        -0.170      0.060
                (0.032)       (0.021)        (0.044)      (0.058)     (0.038)

West             0.085         0.084          0.107        0.089       0.284
                (0.024)       (0.016)        (0.034)      (0.044)     (0.029)

250-500         -0.060        -0.011         -0.154        -0.131      -0.038
                (0.023)       (0.015)        (0.032)      (0.041)     (0.027)

100-250         -0.073        -0.033         -0.205        -0.171      -0.085
                (0.025)       (0.016)        (0.034)      (0.045)     (0.029)

Ln LOED         -0.001        -0.002          0.012        0.078       0.072
                (0.056)       (0.038)        (0.078)      (0.102)     (0.067)

Ln REALINC      -0.144         0.109         -0.105        0.293       0.244
                (0.120)       (0.080)        (0.167)      (0.217)     (0.142)

Ln MORT          1.162         0.613          0.174        0.081       0.330
                (0.125)       (0.084)        (0.174)      (0.226)     (0.148)

Intercept        3.924         3.447          6.436        2.371       2.815
                (1.200)       (0.803)        (1.672)      (2.173)     (1.422)
     Appendix Table B5. Utilization Regression Results, Two-Stage Least Squares
                          (standard error in parenthesis)
                                 Part A    N=313 All Areas

                     Ln TOTUTIL           Ln INUTIL    Ln OUTUTIL
 2
R                        0.422              0.246           0.637

Upper South               0.018             0.022           0.009
                         (0.027)           (0.025)         (0.040)
Deep South                0.028             0.027           0.032
                         (0.021)           (0.020)         (0.031)
Florida                   0.295             0.114           0.557
                         (0.029)           (0.027)         (0.043)
West South                0.045             0.063           0.011
                         (0.020)           (0.019)         (0.031)
Big Sky                   0.030             0.092           -0.109
                         (0.022)           (0.021)         (0.033)
West                      0.105             0.094           0.122
                         (0.020)           (0.019)         (0.030)
250-500                   -0.054            -0.053          -0.054
                         (0.019)           (0.018)         (0.029)
100-250                   -0.087            -0.074          -0.111
                         (0.020)           (0.019)         (0.030)
<100                      -0.053            -0.027          -0.100
                         (0.017)           (0.016)         (0.025)
Not MSA                   -0.070            -0.041          -0.128
                         (0.017)           (0.016)         (0.025)
Ln LOED                   0.015             0.042           -0.031
                         (0.039)           (0.037)         (0.058)
Ln REALINC                0.034             -0.032          0.166
                         (0.075)           (0.071)         (0.112)
Pred. Ln MORT             0.758             0.703           0.811
                         (0.185)           (0.174)         (0.276)
Intercept                 5.000             5.424           2.438
                         (1.020)           (0.961)         (1.525)
Note: First stage used to predict regressions can be found in Table 9
     Appendix Table B5. Utilization Regression Results, Two-Stage Least Squares
                          (standard error in parenthesis)
                            Part B    N=224 MSAs > 100,000

                     Ln TOTUTIL        Ln INUTIL       Ln OUTUTIL
 2
R                        0.381             0.260            0.528

Upper South               0.000            -0.007           0.017
                         (0.041)          (0.036)          (0.065)

Deep South                -0.022           -0.009           -0.043
                         (0.031)          (0.027)          (0.049)

Florida                   0.369            0.156            0.687
                         (0.038)          (0.033)          (0.060)

West South                0.031            0.058            -0.013
                         (0.031)          (0.027)          (0.049)

Big Sky                   0.036            0.100            -0.098
                         (0.030)          (0.026)          (0.048)

West                      0.153            0.124            0.204
                         (0.025)          (0.022)          (0.040)

250-500                   -0.042           -0.043           -0.038
                         (0.022)          (0.019)          (0.034)

100-250                   -0.072           -0.061           -0.095
                         (0.023)          (0.020)          (0.037)

Ln LOED                   -0.048           -0.036           -0.067
                         (0.056)          (0.049)          (0.089)

Ln REALINC                0.063            -0.037           0.225
                         (0.112)          (0.097)          (0.177)

Pred. Ln MORT             1.332            1.106            1.702
                         (0.229)          (0.198)          (0.362)

Intercept                 2.549            3.907            -1.438
                         (1.339)          (1.160)          (2.116)

Note: First stage used to predict regressions can be found in Table 9
     Appendix Table B5. Utilization Regression Results, Two-Stage Least Squares
                          (standard error in parenthesis)
                                        Part A    N=313 All Areas, cont.

                Ln MEDADM        Ln SURGADM          Ln EANDM          Ln DIAG    Ln TREAT
 2
R                   0.450            0.204             0.544             0.564     0.608

Upper South         0.023           -0.029              0.019            0.001      0.080
                   (0.033)          (0.021)            (0.043)          (0.057)    (0.039)
Deep South          0.044           -0.010              -0.047           0.007      0.069
                   (0.025)          (0.017)            (0.033)          (0.044)    (0.030)
Florida             0.060            0.100              0.301            0.551      0.455
                   (0.035)          (0.023)            (0.046)          (0.061)    (0.042)
West South          0.063            0.048              -0.036           0.071      0.114
                   (0.025)          (0.016)            (0.032)          (0.043)    (0.030)
Big Sky             0.141            0.079              -0.091           -0.105     0.036
                   (0.027)          (0.018)            (0.035)          (0.047)    (0.032)
West                0.082            0.080              0.099            0.092      0.236
                   (0.024)          (0.016)            (0.031)          (0.042)    (0.029)
250-500            -0.067           -0.009              -0.150           -0.131    -0.040
                   (0.024)          (0.015)            (0.031)          (0.041)    (0.028)
100-250            -0.086           -0.033              -0.208           -0.178    -0.084
                   (0.025)          (0.016)            (0.032)          (0.043)    (0.030)
<100                0.008           -0.017              -0.186           -0.240    -0.063
                   (0.021)          (0.014)            (0.027)          (0.036)    (0.025)
Not MSA             0.010           -0.030              -0.220           -0.260    -0.114
                   (0.021)          (0.013)            (0.027)          (0.036)    (0.024)
Ln LOED             0.082           -0.006              -0.039           0.021      0.051
                   (0.047)          (0.031)            (0.062)          (0.082)    (0.056)
Ln REALINC         -0.147            0.090              -0.115           0.187      0.301
                   (0.092)          (0.060)            (0.119)          (0.159)    (0.109)
Pred. Ln MORT       1.123            0.684              0.553            0.392      0.011
                   (0.225)          (0.147)            (0.293)          (0.391)    (0.268)
Intercept           4.181            3.366              5.087            2.176      3.432
                   (1.246)          (0.812)            (1.617)          (2.162)    (1.481)
Note: First stage used to predict regressions can be found in Appendix Table B6
     Appendix Table B5. Utilization Regression Results, Two-Stage Least Squares
                          (standard error in parenthesis)
                                    Part B    N=224 MSAs > 100,000, cont.

                Ln MEDADM        Ln SURGADM          Ln EANDM          Ln DIAG    Ln TREAT
 2
R                   0.358            0.229             0.394             0.419     0.587

Upper South        -0.024           -0.053              0.012            -0.008     0.111
                   (0.044)          (0.031)            (0.065)          (0.086)    (0.056)

Deep South         -0.004           -0.015              -0.136           -0.102     0.016
                   (0.034)          (0.023)            (0.050)          (0.065)    (0.043)

Florida             0.071            0.133              0.380            0.666      0.626
                   (0.041)          (0.028)            (0.060)          (0.079)    (0.052)

West South          0.052            0.044              -0.052           -0.002     0.117
                   (0.033)          (0.023)            (0.049)          (0.065)    (0.042)

Big Sky             0.137            0.073              -0.097           -0.121     0.090
                   (0.033)          (0.023)            (0.048)          (0.064)    (0.042)

West                0.098            0.105              0.158            0.164      0.331
                   (0.027)          (0.019)            (0.040)          (0.053)    (0.034)

250-500            -0.056           -0.004              -0.137           -0.107    -0.023
                   (0.023)          (0.016)            (0.035)          (0.046)    (0.030)

100-250            -0.069           -0.027              -0.191           -0.150    -0.072
                   (0.025)          (0.017)            (0.037)          (0.049)    (0.032)

Ln LOED            -0.024           -0.041              -0.085           -0.064    -0.018
                   (0.061)          (0.042)            (0.090)          (0.118)    (0.077)

Ln REALINC         -0.145            0.107              -0.110           0.285      0.240
                   (0.121)          (0.084)            (0.178)          (0.235)    (0.153)

Pred. Ln MORT       1.385            0.989              1.113            1.456      1.199
                   (0.247)          (0.172)            (0.365)          (0.481)    (0.313)

Intercept           3.096            2.044              2.941            -2.750    -0.423
                   (1.445)          (1.005)            (2.132)          (2.815)    (1.833)

Note: First stage used to predict regressions can be found in Appendix Table B6
       Appendix Table B6. Mortality Regression Results, N=224, MSAs > 100,000


                             (1)          (2)           (3)
          2
        R                   0.473        0.517         0.645

Upper South                 0.011                      0.055
                           (0.022)                    (0.023)
Deep South                  0.056                      0.043
                           (0.017)                    (0.018)
Florida                     -0.147                    -0.088
                           (0.015)                    (0.017)
West South                  0.017                      0.051
                           (0.016)                    (0.016)
Big Sky                     -0.053                     0.004
                           (0.017)                    (0.016)
West                        -0.087                    -0.008
                           (0.011)                    (0.016)
250-500                     -0.012                     0.008
                           (0.013)                    (0.012)
100-250                     -0.006                     0.016
                           (0.014)                    (0.013)

Ln LOED                                  0.115         0.021
                                        (0.025)       (0.029)
Ln REALINC                               -0.031       -0.178
                                        (0.055)       (0.064)

Ln CIGS                                  0.088         0.142
                                        (0.039)       (0.044)
Ln OBESE                                 0.169         0.138
                                        (0.032)       (0.036)
Ln POLUTN                                0.057         0.045
                                        (0.021)       (0.024)
Ln BLACK                                 0.024         0.026
                                        (0.005)       (0.006)

Intercept                   3.672        3.879         4.900
                           (0.006)      (0.578)       (0.692)
