NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MARKET ENTRY COSTS, PRODUCER HETEROGENEITY, AND EXPORT DYNAMICS
Sanghamitra Das
Mark J. Roberts
James R. Tybout
Working Paper 8629
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8629
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2001

We would like to thank Daniel Donath for excellent research assistance, and Behzad Diba, Martin Evans,
Keith Head, Michael Keane, Andrew Levin, Ariel Pakes, Nina Pavcnik, John Rust, and Nadia Soboleva for
helpful discussions. This research was supported by the World Bank and the National Science Foundation
(Grant No.SES-0095574). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2001 by Sanghamitra Das, Mark J. Roberts and James R. Tybout. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Market Entry Costs, Producer Heterogeneity, and Export Dynamics
Sanghamitra Das, Mark J. Roberts and James R. Tybout
NBER Working Paper No. 8629
December 2001
JEL No. F10, L10

ABSTRACT
As the exchange rate, foreign demand, production costs and export promotion policies evolve,
manufacturing firms are continually faced with two issues: Whether to be an exporter, and if so, how
much to export. We develop a dynamic structural model of export supply that characterizes these two
decisions and estimate the model using plant-level panel data on Colombian chemical producers. The
model embodies uncertainty, plant-level heterogeneity in export profits, and sunk entry costs for plants
breaking into foreign markets. Our estimates, and the simulation exercises that they support, yield several
implications. First, entry costs are typically large, but vary greatly across producers. Second, there is
substantial cross-plant heterogeneity in gross expected export profit streams. Third, these large entry costs
make expectations about future exporting conditions important for many producers, so changes in the
exchange rate regime that are credible induce much more entry than those that are not. Fourth, however,
most of the entry and exit takes place among marginal exporters who contribute little to aggregate export
revenues. Finally, subsidies on export earnings have a much larger impact on export revenues (per dollar
spent) than subsidies that reduce the entry costs faced by new exporters.

Sanghamitra Das
Planning Unit
Indian Statistical Institute
7 S J S Sansanwal Marg
New Delhi 110016, India
dasm@isid.isid.ac.in

Mark J. Roberts
Department of Economics
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
and NBER
mroberts@psu.edu

James R. Tybout
Department of Economics
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
and NBER
jxt32@psu.edu

1.

Overview
In developing countries, manufacturing sectors that respond to export stimuli are highly

prized. By making greater imports feasible, these sectors help to generate the traditional gains
from trade. They also stabilize domestic employment by venting surplus production in foreign
markets, and they may even generate efficiency gains through trade-related technology diffusion
(e.g., Westphal, 2001). But export supply responses are poorly understood. Seemingly similar
stimuli have given rise to very different export responses in different countries and time periods,
making it difficult to know whether the next devaluation or export subsidy scheme will generate a
surge or a trickle of new exports.
Several micro explanations might account for the puzzle of export responsiveness. First, a
strong export response may require the entry of non-exporters into foreign markets. But to break
into foreign markets, firms must establish marketing channels, learn bureaucratic procedures, and
develop new packaging or product varieties. In the presence of these entry costs, expectations
about future market conditions can critically affect current behavior, and doubts about the
permanence of export promotion packages may discourage foreign market entry.1
Second, entry costs make firms’ export supply responses dependent upon their previous
exporting status. Firms that already export can adjust their volumes at marginal production costs,
while those that do not must bear the sunk costs of breaking in before any exports are possible.
These two margins of adjustment—volume and entry—have distinct determinants and lead to
different supply elasticities, so seemingly similar industries with different degrees of foreign
market presence may respond quite differently to exporting stimuli.

1

Start-up costs are the focus of the analytical literature on export hysteresis (Baldwin and Krugman,
1989; Dixit, 1989; Krugman, 1989).

1

Finally, even within narrowly-defined industries, firms are heterogeneous in terms of their
production costs and their product characteristics. Depending upon the distribution of these
characteristics across firms, there may be many firms poised on the brink of foreign market entry,
or just a few. Thus, when these cross-plant distributions of marginal cost and foreign demand are
unobservable, widely different export responses are possible under seemingly similar conditions.
In this paper we develop a dynamic optimizing model of export supply that captures each
of these micro phenomena, and we econometrically fit the model to plant-level panel data on
Colombian producers of industrial chemicals. We use our estimates to simulate export responses
to a shift in the mean of the exchange rate process. In doing so we quantify the roles of sunk
costs, exporting experience and firm heterogeneity in shaping export responsiveness. We also
demonstrate a methodology that should be relevant for other applications involving firms’
decisions to diversify into new geographic or product markets.
Our estimates imply that entry costs are large and variable across plants. Further, we find a
great deal of cross-plant heterogeneity in gross exporting profits. Most producers anticipate only
very modest profits from exporting, while a handful enjoys far more favorable foreign demand
and/or marginal cost conditions.
These features of the Colombian chemical industry shape the results of our policy
simulations. First, the fact that sunk entry costs are large makes expectations about future
exporting conditions important for many plants. Thus we find that a moderate shift in the mean of
the log exchange rate process induces sustained net entry by new exporters and rising export
volumes if producers view it as a credible regime shift. On the other hand, the exact same change
in the exchange rate process induces far less entry when producers retain their old beliefs about

2

the exchange rate process.
Second, profits for the major exporters are sufficiently large to keep them in the export
market under any reasonable policy scenario. So the foreign market entry and exit that takes place
is concentrated among small suppliers who have a relatively minor effect on export volumes. It
follows that, while expectations have a dramatic effect on the number of exporters, their effect on
the volume of exports is much more modest.
Third, policies that promote exports through per-unit subsidies generate far larger
responses per peso spent than policies that promote exports through lump-sum transfers for new
exporters. The reasons are that (1) exporters that need a subsidy to get into export markets are
almost always marginal suppliers; (2) these same exporters face relatively high entry costs, and (3)
large incumbent exporters, who account for most of the industry’s foreign sales are unaffected by
entry subsidies, but positively affected by volume subsidies.
Finally, because of the cross-plant heterogeneity in our data, our simulations imply
diminishing returns to sunk or fixed cost subsidies in terms of export revenues generated per peso
spent. This is because, as subsidy rates rise, entrants at the margin are increasingly less suited to
exporting and sell increasingly little abroad.
In addition to quantifying the micro phenomena behind export responses, our model of
exporting behavior makes several methodological contributions. First, because we use a dynamic
structural framework, we are able to estimate sunk costs in dollars rather than simply test for their
existence.2 These costs are critical to policy evaluation but they have rarely been estimated

2

Earlier studies of export market participation have focused on the null hypothesis that sunk costs don’t
matter, but have not been structural and thus have not quantified sunk costs (Roberts and Tybout, 1997a; Campa,
1998; Bernard and Jensen, 2001; Bernard and Wagner, 2001).

3

because they can only be identified by their very non-linear effects on market participation
patterns. Second, although we model producers as choosing foreign prices and export quantities,
we cast the estimating equations in terms of the variables that we actually observe—export
revenues and variable costs. We thus sidestep the usual problem that arises with plant-level
survey data of constructing proxies for prices and quantities from poorly measured variables.
The remainder of the paper has four sections. Section 2 develops an dynamic empirical
model of both the plant’s discrete decision to participate in the export market and it’s continuous
decision on the level of export revenue. Section 3 discusses econometric issues. Section 4
presents empirical results and section 5 discusses their implications for export supply response.
Finally, section 6 offers concluding remarks.

2.

An Empirical Model of Exporting Decisions with Sunk Costs and Heterogeneity
Our model of export supply is based on several key assumptions. First, products are

differentiated across firms, and the foreign and domestic market for each is monopolistically
competitive. This eliminates strategic competition, but it ensures that each firm faces a
downward-sloping marginal revenue function in each market. Second, producers are
heterogeneous in terms of their marginal production costs and the foreign demand schedules they
face for their products, so export profit trajectories vary across firms. Third, future realizations on
the exchange rates, marginal costs, and foreign demand shifters are unknown, but each evolves
according to a known Markov process. Fourth, firms must pay stochastic sunk start-up costs to
initiate exports. Finally, marginal costs do not respond to output shocks. This assumption implies
that shocks that shift the domestic demand schedule do not affect the optimal level of exports, so

4

it allows us to focus on the export market only.3

2.1

Gross export profits and revenues
We begin by characterizing the export profit stream that firms earn once they have broken

into foreign markets. The magnitude of this stream depends upon things that shift the marginal
cost schedule, like technology shocks and factor prices, and things that shift the foreign demand
schedule, like foreign aggregate demand and the real exchange rate. We assume that marginal
costs and foreign demand are Cobb-Douglas functions of these factors, so that gross export
profits are log-linear in the same set of arguments:
ln(Bit)
Here

it

' R0 zi % R1 et % R2 t % <it

(1)

is firm i’s gross operating profits in the export market during year t (i = 1, . . . n; t =1, . .

., T), zi is a vector of time-invariant, firm-specific characteristics that lead to differences in
marginal costs and product desirability, et is the log of the real exchange rate and t is a time trend
that captures secular trends in factor prices, technical efficiency and foreign demand that are
general to all firms.4 Finally, vit is a stationary, serially-correlated disturbance term that captures
all idiosyncratic shocks to foreign demand and marginal production costs.
Controlling for the trend, export profits evolve over time with exogenous shocks to et and
vit . We assume that the exchange rate follows a first-order Markov process with normally
distributed shocks and we collect the parameters that characterize this process in the parameter
3

The assumption appears to be reasonable for the industry, country, and time period we will study, since
some excess capacity was present. Estimates of average variable cost functions revealed little dependence on
within-plant temporal output fluctuations.
4

Some characteristics, such as domestic market size or capital stock, do change over time but including these as
time-varying state variables requires an increase in the complexity of the model that makes it intractable.

5

vector

e.

Because the profit function disturbance, vit , picks up unobserved shocks on both the

demand and the cost side, it requires a less restrictive specification. To allow for multiple sources
of shocks while keeping firms’ dynamic optimization problems tractable, we assume that vit can
be represented as the sum of m normally-distributed, first-order Markov processes, which we
collect in the vector xit = ( xit1 , xit2 ,

K, x )’.
m
it

5

This assumption implies that vit is normal and has a

stationary ARMA(m, m-1) representation. We collect the parameters that characterize the
distribution of xit and vit in the vector

.

x

Our data set includes information on export revenues but not on export profits, so we
cannot estimate Ψ = ( ψ 0 , ψ 1 , ψ 2 ) and

x

directly from equation (1) .6 To surmount this

problem we assume that firms incur no adjustment costs when changing from one positive level of
exports to another. Then short-run profit maximization implies the standard mark-up relationship
between price (Pit) and marginal cost (Cit): Pit (1 − η i−1 ) = Cit , where η i > 1 is a firm-specific
export-demand elasticity. Also, given our earlier assumption that marginal costs do not depend
upon output levels, we can multiply both sides of this relationship by output and re-write it a
simple expression linking exporting profits and exporting revenues (Rit):

π it = Rit − Qit Cit = η i−1 Rit . Substituting ln( η i−1 Rit ) on the left-hand of (1) renders the dependent
variable observable up to the vector of firm-specific foreign demand elasticities,

={

i

},

i=1,2,...n., which become parameters to be estimated.

5

It would be straightforward to allow for higher-order exchange rate processes in the same way that we
treat vit . However to keep the number of state variables reasonably small we do not do so.
6

Most plant- and firm-level data sets, including ours, lack information on the prices, export quantities, and factor
prices that would be necessary to identify marginal revenue and marginal cost schedules.

6

2.2

The export market participation rule7
Because we have used a logarithmic functional form for equation (1), gross export profits

are always positive. Nonetheless, firms may choose not to export for several reasons. First, firms
that aren’t already exporting face the sunk start-up costs of establishing distribution channels,
learning bureaucratic procedures, and adapting their products and packaging for foreign markets.
Second, exporters incur some fixed costs each period to maintain a presence in foreign markets,
including minimum freight and insurance charges, and the costs of monitoring foreign customs
procedures and product standards. We now characterize firms’ exporting decisions in the face of
these costs.
Denote the fixed costs of exporting

F

- g1it, where

F

is a component common to all firms

and g1it captures all variation in fixed costs across firms and time. Also, if the ith firm did not
export in period t-1, assume it must pay the additional start-up costs,

z + g1it - g2it , where

S i

S

is

a vector of coefficients on the fixed plant characteristics, zi, and εit = (ε1it , ε 2it ) is a vector of firm
specific shocks that is normally distributed with zero mean and covariance matrix
Rust (1988), we assume that each component of

g,

. Following

ε it is serially uncorrelated and independent of xit

and et. 8
Finally, define the binary variable yit to take a value of one during periods when the firm
exports and zero otherwise. Then, denoting the gross profit function in equation (1) by (xit, zi, et,
t), and assuming that all sunk costs are borne in the first year of exporting, net current export
7

Dixit (1989), Baldwin and Krugman (1989) and Krugman (1989) develop theoretical models that characterize
export market participation decisions in the presence of sunk entry costs. Our representation of the decision to export is a
variant of their basic framework.
8

These are Rust’s (1988) conditional independence assumptions. They substantially simplify the numerical
solution of the firm’s dynamic optimization problem. Note that the errors git can also be interpreted as the managers’
transitory optimization errors when choosing export quantities or prices, as well as variation in fixed and sunk costs.

7

profits accruing to the ith firm in year t may be written as:

u(et, xit, z i, t, yit, yit&1,

it)

&

F

%

1it

(xit, zi, e t, t)

&

F

&

S zi

'

(xit, zi, e t, t)

0

if y it

%

2it

' 1 and yit&1' 1

' 1 and yit&1 ' 0 (2)
if y it ' 0
if y it

Note that net profits depend on the firm’s export participation in the previous year, yit-1 , because
that determines whether it must pay the sunk entry costs to export in year t.9 Thus the return to
becoming an exporter today includes the expected value of being able to continue exporting next
period without incurring start-up costs, which in turn depends upon the perceived distribution of
future gross exporting profits (e.g., Dixit, 1989).
We shall assume that each period, prior to making their exporting decisions, firms observe
the current period realizations on the arguments of their gross profit function (1): zi , et , and xit .
These variables all follow first-order Markov processes, so they provide all the information
available at time t on the possible future paths for gross exporting profits. Suppressing i
subscripts, at time 0 a firm that maximizes its discounted expected profit stream over a planning
horizon of H years will therefore choose the sequence of decision rules
Y

' {yt ' y(et, x t, z, ,t, yt&1, t, )}Ht'0 that solves:
max
Y

H

E0{j
t'0

t

u(et, xt, z, t, yt&1, yt, t, )}

(3)

Here E0 is the expectation operator conditioned on information available at time 0, is a discount
9

Equation (2) implies that firms completely lose their investment in start-up costs if they are absent from the
export market for a single year. Earlier studies suggest that these investments depreciate very quickly, and that firms which
most recently exported two years ago must pay nearly as much to re-enter foreign markets as firms that never exported
(Roberts and Tybout, 1997a). In light of these findings, and given that more general representations make structural
estimation intractable, we consider (2) to be a reasonable abstraction.

8

is the parameter vector θ = ( Ψ , Γ F , Γ S , Ω x , Ω e , Ω ε ) .

factor 0 < < 1, and

To characterize the decision rule y(@), note that expression (3) is equal to the value
function that solves the Bellman equation:

Vt(et, x t, z, t, yt&1,

t,

)

'

max [u(et, xt, z, t, yt&1, y t, t, )
yt0{0,1}

% EVt(et, xt, z, t, y t, )],

(4)

where EVt is the expected value of Vt+1 over the future paths of the state variables e, x, and g :

EVt(et, x t, z, t, yt, ) =
*

e t %1

*x

t %1

*

t %1

(5)

Vt%1(et%1, xt%1, z, t, yt, t%1, )dFex(et%1, xt%1, *et, xt ,

x,

e)dF

( t%1 *

),

and dFex and dF are the conditional distribution functions for the period t+1 values of the vectors
(e, x) and g, respectively.10 Thus the sequence of optimal decision rules satisfies:

y(et, xt, z, t, yt&1,

, )

t

' argmax [u(et, xt, z, t, yt&1, yt, t, ) % EVt(et, xt, z, t, yt, )]
y t0{0,1}

Given the parameter vector
variables (et, xit,

it) ,

(6)

θ and our distributional assumptions for the exogenous state

equations (6) and (1) determine optimal foreign market participation

patterns and export profits for the ith firm. Also the relationship π it = η i−1 Rit converts profits to
revenues. Hence, aggregating over firms, these three equations provide a framework for

10

This model satisfies the regularity conditions required for the existence and uniqueness of the value function:
time separability of the profit function, a Markovian transition density for the state variables, and a discount rate less than
one. See Rust (1995), section 2.

9

assessing the roles of heterogeneity, sunk costs, expectations, and history in shaping export
responsiveness at the industry level. In the next section we discuss the econometric issues that
arise in estimating equations (1) and (6) with micro panel data.

3.

Econometric Issues
We will base our estimates on annual panel data describing all manufacturing plants in the

Colombian chemical industry operating continuously over an 11 year period.11 For each plant and
year we observe a few fixed plant characteristics (zi), total sales revenues ( TRit ), total variable
costs ( TVCit ), and export revenues (Rit ). Given Rit, we can, of course, infer each plant’s discrete
decisions concerning whether to export (yit). Finally, we have time-series observations on the
real peso-dollar exchange rate (et), adjusted for the relevant export subsidies (Ocampo and Villar,
1995). We do not observe plants’ gross export profits, output prices, input prices, physical
quantities sold, or any direct information on the sunk and fixed costs of exporting.
Our objective is to obtain estimates of the parameter vector

=( ,

,

F

,

S

,

x

,

e

g

)

using the likelihood function for observed trajectories of the endogenous variables, (yit, Rit). By
equations (1) and (6), yi and Ri depend upon (e, xi , zi , ε i ) , where variables without t subscripts
denote entire trajectories over the sample period (t = 1, ... T). However, both the xi and the ε i
trajectories are unobserved, so to state the likelihood function in terms of our data we must take
the expectation of the joint density function for ( yi , Ri , e, xi , zi , εi ) over ( xi , ε i ). Expectations
with respect to

ε i are straightforward to calculate because these disturbances are serially

uncorrelated and independent of ( xi , zi , Ri , e) . But the xi trajectories are serially correlated and

11

Firm-level data would have been preferable but these were unavailable.

10

related to (e, zi , Ri ) by equation (1). Matters are further complicated by the fact that we do not
see the export revenues that were available to plants in the years when they are were not
exporting. That is, Rit is censored at zero when yit = 0 .
To deal with these problems, we base the likelihood function on observed profits of
exporters, π ia = η i−1 Ria where Ria is the sub-vector of Ri for which Rit is strictly positive. Then,
after taking expectations over

Li =

ε i , the likelihood function for the ith plant becomes:

∫ P ( y | e, x , z , θ ) g ( x | η
i

i

i

i

−1
i

Ria , e, zi , Ψ , Ω x )h( η i−1 Ria | e, zi , Ψ , Ω x ) dxi

(7)

xi

The product of the three components of the integrand is the joint distribution for yi , Ria and xi ,
conditioned on zi and e. (The integration over xi is mT-dimensional where m is the number of
state variables in x.) The first component of this product, P( ⋅ | ⋅ ) , is the conditional probability
for the exporting trajectory, yi , based on the decision rule (6), after taking the expectation over

ε i . The second component, g( ⋅ | ⋅ ) , gives the distribution for the exogenous state variables, xi ,
conditional on the observed export revenue stream (among other factors). Note that because xi is
serially correlated, export revenues in each year convey information on xit for all t. The last
component, h( ⋅ | ⋅ ) , which corresponds to equation (1), is the density for profits from foreign
sales during the exporting years, given the exogenous conditioning variables. All three
components of the integrand in equation (7) depend on the profit function parameters ( ,
and the vector of firm demand elasticities, , but only P( ⋅ | ⋅ ) depends upon

,

F

, or

S

x

)

.

Given the need for several layers of numerical integration (discussed below), it is not
feasible to obtain estimates of all of the parameters that appear in (7) from a one-step maximum

11

likelihood estimator .12 To handle the complexity we proceed in stages. First, we estimate those
parameters that can be identified outside the model—the vector of firm-specific foreign demand
elasticities, η , and the parameters that govern the exchange rate process,
the profit function parameters ( ,

. Next we estimate

e

) using the conditional density h( η i−1 Ria | zi , e, Ψ , Ω x ) . Then

x

using these parameters, we construct the plant-specific conditional density for the mT profit
shocks, g ( xi | η i−1 Ria , e, zi , Ψ , Ω x ) . Finally, taking ( ,

),

x

and

e

as given, we construct the

likelihood function for observed export market participation patterns and maximize this function
over ( F,

,

S

g

). This approach limits the number of parameters we solve for in the

computationally-intensive third stage, which requires repeated multi-dimensional integration (see
equations 5 and 7). The costs of this approach are that, first, it is less efficient than single-stage
maximum likelihood, and second, it means that the standard errors for ( F,

,

S

g

) based on the

information matrix from the final stage likelihood function are asymptotically biased downward.
We deal with the latter problem by constructing bootstrap standard errors.

3.1

Estimating demand elasticities and the exchange rate process
To estimate the vector of plant specific demand elasticities, we assume that each plant’s
−1

demand elasticity is the same at home and abroad, making η i one minus the ratio of total
(domestic and foreign) variable production costs (TVC) to total revenue (TR) by the mark-up
rule. Then, assuming that true variable costs are measured up to a zero-mean error by labor and
intermediate input costs, we estimate ( i)-1 as a plant-specific average of the right-hand-side of this

12

For a discussion of the computational burden of dynamic discrete choice models, see Rust (1995).

12

expression across observations: ( η$ i )

−1

=

1 T 
TVCit 

 . Discrepancies between estimated
1
−
∑
T t =1 
TRit 

and true elasticities will induce measurement error in profits and will be reflected in vit.
our identifying restriction that et is independent of xi and

Given

trajectories, there is no advantage to

i

estimating the exchange rate process jointly with other parameters. Hence, at this preliminary
stage we also obtain the parameters of the exchange rate process by fitting a simple AR(1)
process to macro data on et .

3.2

Estimating profit function parameters
Next we obtain maximum likelihood estimates of the profit function. By earlier assumption,

l

the disturbance term of this function can be written as νit = l’xit where = (1, 1,

L

1)’ is an m

by one vector of ones and the elements of xi follow normal AR(1) processes. We we write the
latter as:

xit = Mxit −1 + ωit ,

 λ1
0
ω
~
N
(
0
,
Q
)
where i
, M=


0

M

0
λ2

L

L 0
M 
O 0 
0

λm 

(8)

 q1 0
0 q
2
and Q = 


0

M

L

L 0
M  .
O 0 
0

13

This

qm 

rendering of the AR(1) processes implies the parameter vector describing the evolution of the state
variables xit is

x

= (M, Q). More substantively, assuming that each plant begins with a random

draw from the steady state distribution of xit, it implies that the profit shocks vit are distributed

13

The assumption that the elements of it are orthogonal to one another is innocuous. If they were not, we
could re-state the model in terms of orthogonal shocks by using a Cholesky decomposition of their covariance
matrix.

13

N (0, l’Q[ I − M 2 ]−1 l) . Also, for all k ≠ 0 , E [ ν it vit − k ] = l’ M |k |Q[ ( I − M 2 ) −1 ] ’l and

E[ν it v jt − k ] = 0 ∀ i ≠ j (e..g., Chow, 1983). These relationships define the conditional density
h(η i−1 Ria | e, zi , Ψ , Ω x ) , which in turn provides a basis for estimation of the parameters

Ψ and Ω x .
Two final complications must be dealt with. First, we apply our estimator to the unbalanced
panel of observations for which exports are positive. But firms self-select into the export market
partly on the basis of

νit , so we need to correct for selectivity bias. In principle we could handle

this problem by maximizing a likelihood function based on (7) over the entire parameter vector .
However, as noted earlier, this approach is computationally very burdensome. We therefore use a
variant of Heckman’s (1979) selection correction that amounts to including a Mills ratio in (1).
This variable is based on a simple reduced form probit equation that explains each plant’s
probability of exporting as a function of its strictly exogenous characteristics: location, business
type, and initial capital stock.14
Second, firms that have just entered the export market and firms that are about to leave the
export market do not typically report a full year’s worth of export revenues.15 We assume that their
reported values represent some fraction of the year drawn from a uniform distribution on the (0,1]
interval, and these fractions are independent across plants and time. Then we numerically integrate
them out of the likelihood function based on h( η i−1 Ria | e, zi , Ψ , Ω x ) .
Once we have obtained estimates of ,

, and

x

we can construct the conditional

14

Ψ

Monte Carlo experiments confirm that this procedure does a good job of recovering true values for

and

Ω x.
15

Brooks (2000) finds that, for a given plant, the first and final year of exporting data are significantly

smaller.

14

distribution g ( xi | η i−1 Ria , e, zi , Ψ , Ω x ) that appears in (7). First, we use equation (1) and the data

[

]

to calculate the profit shocks νit = l’xit = η i−1 Rit − ψ 0 zi + ψ ‘et + ψ 2 t for all exporting years. Then,
collecting all of these observable realizations on

for the ith plant in the column vector ν i , and
a

it

exploiting well-known properties of the multivariate normal distribution, we obtain:

(

−1 a
−1 ’
g ( xi | η i−1 Ria , e, zi , Ψ , Ω x ) = g( xi | ν ia ) = N Σ xν Σ νν ν i , Σ xx − Σ xν Σ νν Σ xν

).

(9)

Here xi is the column vector obtained by stacking the year-specific xit’s, and representative blocks
of the matrices that appear in (9) are defined by:

{
{

}
}

∑ xx ={ E ( xitxit + s ’)} = M Q( I − M 2 ) −1 ,
s
∑ xv = {E ( xitν it + s )} = M Q( I − M 2 ) −1 l
and
∑ vv = {E (ν it ν it + s )} = {l’ M s Q( I − M 2 ) −1 l} .
s

Several features of the density (9) merit comment. First, although our notation does not
show it explicitly, the dimensions and composition of Σ xν and Σ νν vary across plants with their
export market participation patterns. Second, equation (9) uses information on a plant’s observed
exporting revenue to extrapolate to non-exporting years, given the autoregressive processes
summarized by

x

. Finally, if the ith plant never exports, we do not observe νit in any year so the

distribution of xi is unconditional: E( xi ) = 0 and E ( xi xi ’)= Σ xx . This is the only case in which Σ xx

[

]

is full rank; otherwise the constraint l’xit = η i−1 Rit − ψ 0 zi + ψ ‘et + ψ 2 t makes one component of
xit a deterministic function of the others in the exporting years.

3.3

Estimating sunk and fixed cost parameters
Having obtained Ψ , Ω

x

, η , Ω e and g ( xi⋅ | η i− 1 Ria , zi , e, Ψ , Ω x ) , we estimate the
15

remaining parameters in θ by maximizing the sample likelihood function based on (7) over ( F,
g

,

S

). Given our assumptions on the exogenous state variables ε i , xi ,and ei , exporting decisions in

year t depend only upon exporting status in year t-1 and current year information. So, taking
expectations over

ε i , the probability of the participation trajectory yi may be written as a product

of year-to-year transition probabilities, conditioned on the other variables:

P(yi | e , xi, zi, )

'

T
t'1

[ P(y it'0| et, xit, zi, yit&1'0, )

P(yit'1 | e t, xit, zi, yit&1'1, )

yit yit &1

(1&yit )(1&yit &1)

P(y it'0| et, xit, zi, yit&1'1, )

P(yit'1 | et, xit, zi, yit&1'0, )

y it (1&yit &1)

(1&yit )(yit &1)

(10)

]

(Equation A1.2 of appendix 1 provides the expression we use to calculate these transition
probabilities.) The likelihood function we use for our final stage of estimation is thus:

L( Γ F , Γ S , Ω ε ) =

n



i =1



∏  ∫ P[ y |e, x , z , θ ]g( x | η
i

i

i

i

xi

−1
i


Ria , e, zi , Ψ , Ω x ) ⋅ dxi 


(11)

When evaluating (11), we integrate over xi trajectories numerically. Specifically, plant by
plant, we sample xi realizations antithetically from g ( xi | η i−1 Ria , zi , e, Ψ , Ω x ) , calculate the
associated probabilities, P[ yi | e, xi , zi , θ ] , and average them.16
Obtaining the transition probabilities themselves is more involved. To calculate them we first
evaluate EVt(et, x it, zi, t, yit, ) at yit = 1 and yit = 0 using backward induction. Then we substitute
these values into right-hand side of the decision rule (6) along with the net profit function (2), and we

16

Antithetic sampling is a way to limit simulation error. It means that for each draw from the relevant density we
include its mirror image, ensuring that the set of draws used is symmetric about the true mean. See Rubinstein (1986) for
discussion.

16

take the expectation of the implied yit choice over ε it . We repeat these calculations plant by plant for
each sample year, every time the likelihood function is evaluated. Further details are provided in
appendix 1.
Each step of the backward induction involves taking expected values over (et + 1 , xit + 1 )
realizations, given (et , xit ) . Earlier studies have performed this type of calculation by discretizing the
vector of state variables and calculating transition probabilities among each vector of values (Rust,
1988, Das, 1992). The problem with this approach is that it involves a large number of calculations.
For example, with 3 continuous state variables and r different values per state variable, there are r3
points in the state space and r6 transition probabilities involved in the calculations at each stage of the
backward induction. With a reasonably long planning horizon, approximation errors compound, and it
becomes necessary to use very large values of r. This “curse of dimensionality” led Rust (1997) to
develop an alternative approach. Instead of treating all possible combinations of values for the
discretized state variables as elements of the state space, Rust generates the state space with random
draws from the joint probability distribution for the vector of state variables. This solves the
dimensionality problem because increasing the number of state variables increases the dimension of
each point, but does not increase the number of points over which one integrates.
We adopt Rust’s (1997) approach in the present study. First, taking our estimates of
Ω x and Ω e as given, we draw G points from the steady state distribution of (et ,xit ) using antithetic

sampling. Then using Ω x and Ω e once more, we calculate the G2 transition probabilities for
movements between all possible pairs of these points, thereby constructing a discrete analog to

dF (et +1 , xit + 1 | et , xit , Ω e , Ω x ). Together, these points and transition probabilities allow us to perform
the integration at each step of the backward induction algorithm for calculating EVt .

17

4.

An Application to the Colombian Chemicals Industry

4.1

Overview of the export patterns
Although our framework should describe any industry in which exporting is potentially

profitable for some firms, it is easiest to identify parameters in those industries which have many
exporters, and which exhibit substantial variation in the set of exporters over time. For these reasons,
we choose to estimate our model using data on the Colombian chemicals industry for the period 1982
through 1991, which is summarized in table 1 below. Our data set covers 62 major chemical
producers that operated continuously during the sample period.17 It was originally collected by
Colombia’s Departamento Administrativo Nacional de Estadistica (DANE), and was cleaned as
described in Roberts and Tybout (1996).
Note that the Colombian peso depreciated substantially in real terms during the sample period,
and that chemical exports simultaneously grew. The expansion was partly due to an increase in the
number of exporters, and partly due to increases in the magnitude of foreign sales at the typical
exporting plant.18 Colombian chemicals plants produced 35.00 billion pesos ($236 million US) worth
of exports in 1991, of which 29.94 billion came from plants that were exporting in 1984. So entry by
new exporters contributed 5.06 out of the 27.10 expansion. Also, of the 62 plants that existed during
the entire sample period, 18 exported in all ten years, 26 never exported, and 18 switched exporting
status at least once. So, although there were a number of switches, the data exhibit substantial
17

A more general framework would treat each plant as making simultaneous decisions to enter or exit
production and to enter or exit the export market. This would require us to model the sunk costs involved in setting up a
plant. In Colombia, most exports over the sample period came from the plants that were continuously in operation and
focusing solely on this group of plants is a reasonable starting point that substantially simplifies the empirical model.
18

The number of chemical plants remains fixed at 62 during the sample because we have excluded
producers who enter or exit to simplify the econometrics, so there is some potential for selectivity bias.

18

persistence. This could be due to serial correlation in the plant-specific state variables, ( xit1 ,x it2 ) , or it
could be due to sunk entry costs, or some combination of both. Our estimates will shed light on the
relative importance of these different forces.

4.2

First Stage Estimation: Demand Elasticity and the Exchange Rate Process
1



TVC 

it
−1
Using ( η$ i ) = T ∑ t = 1  1 − TR  , we begin by obtaining plant-specific estimates of the

it 
T

elasticity of demand. The smallest elasticity is 1.5 and the largest elasticity is constrained to be 20.
(Six plants were affected by this constraint.) More than 80 percent of the plants fall between 1.5 and
8.5, and the median elasticity is 5.0. Thus export profits at the typical plant amount to approximately
one-fifth of export revenue.19
Using data for 1967-1992, we estimate a simple AR(1) process for the real effective export
exchange rate calculated by Ocampo and Villar (1995).20 The coefficients (standard errors in
parentheses) are e$t = .549 (.429) + 0.883 (.094) et-1 and σ$ 2 = 0.0043. The Dickey-Fuller test
statistic for stationarity is -1.93 and the critical value is -2.78 at a 90 percent confidence level. So,
although our point estimates suggest the exchange rate process is stationary, the usual problem with
test power prevents us from rejecting the null hypothesis of a unit root.

19

Goldberg and Knetter (1999) use data aggregated to the seven-digit industry level to estimate much
lower export demand elasticities for manufactured products. The discrepancy between their results and ours
probably traces largely to the fact that individual plants within a narrowly defined product category export close
substitutes for each others’ products.
20

An AR(2) process fits the data significantly better, but the improvement is minor (R2 = .85 versus R2 =
.79), and the cost of adding an additional state variable to the model is substantial. Given that the focus of the
paper is not on modeling the exchange rate process, we have chosen to keep this aspect of the model as simple as
possible.

19

4.3

Second Stage Estimation: Profit Function Parameters
Next we use π it = η$ i− 1 Rit to impute export profits and we estimate the profit function (1).

Exploratory tests using GMM estimators reject the null hypothesis that the error in the profit function
error, νit , follows a first-order process, but they do not reject the null that it follows an ARMA(2,1)
(see appendix 2). Thus we model the profit error as the sum of two AR(1) processes and use
maximum likelihood to estimate the parameters of the profit function

and

x

= {Q, M} that

describe the evolution of the profit shocks.
The resulting parameter estimates are reported in Table 2. Recall that zi is meant to capture
time-invariant heterogeneity in operating profits. We model these using a set of three size dummies
based on domestic sales in the pre-sample year. These dummies should proxy for both product quality
and marginal production costs at the beginning of the sample period. Our estimates imply that this
type of variation in not particularly important. (Experimentation with other dummies based on
geographic location and business type yielded similar results.)
On the other hand, the elasticity of export profits with respect to the exchange is 2.45 and
significant. Since the same elasticity describes responses of export revenues, it implies that
devaluations do more than simply revalue a fixed physical quantity of exports—volumes respond too.
The trend term, which picks up secular growth or shrinkage in foreign markets and/or in marginal
production costs, adds little. We caution, however, that both of these coefficients are identified with
only eleven years of data, so they may not be representative of longer time periods. Replacing the
exchange rate and the trend term with annual time dummies did not improve the fit significantly
(results not reported), so these variables appear to do a reasonable job of controlling for time effects
that are common to all plants. Put differently, barring spatial correlation, our assumption that the

20

disturbances in equation 1 are not correlated across plants seems reasonable. Finally, note that the
Mills ratio has the expected sign and is quite significant. This implies that exporting firms enjoy
relatively favorable realizations on vit .
The parameters of the xit process,

, are reported at the bottom of table 2. Each is identified

x

with plant-specific variation and thus is estimated with a good deal of precision. Both

1

and

2

are

less than one in absolute value and significantly different from zero. The variances, q1 and q2 , are also
significantly greater than zero. Thus, as suggested by the specification tests reported in appendix 2, it
would be inappropriate to treat the profit function disturbance, vit, as a first-order process. Our
interpretation is that profit shocks arise from both demand and cost shocks, each with its own root.

4.4

Third Stage Estimates: Sunk Costs and Fixed Costs
Table 3 reports our estimates of ( Γ F , Γ S , Ω ε ) . Four

s

estimates appear in this table,

corresponding to the four plant size quartiles we distinguish. We report two types of standard errors.
The first, reported in column 2, is based on the information matrix for the third stage likelihood
function (11), and therefore is not adjusted for the fact that the first and second stage parameters are
estimated. The second, reported in column (3), is a bootstrap estimate that recognizes the estimation
of all the parameters in the model. 21 Although the bootstrap standard errors suggest that our third
stage parameter estimates are not significantly different from zero, this implication is misleading.
Their magnitude reflects the fact that, out of the 200 bootstrap samples, several contained very few
21

To generate the bootstrap standard errors, we repeatedly draw random samples of 248 plants (with
replacement) from our data set of 62 plants. Each draw is an entire plant-specific trajectory for the variables that enter our
estimator. For each bootstrap sample we repeat all stages of estimation except the exchange rate process. Then we
construct the mean squared deviation of bootstrap estimates from the estimates based on our original sample of 62 plants.
We used bootstrap samples 4 times the size of the original sample because when only 62 plants are drawn we occasionally
get a sample with too few transitions in exporting status to identify all of the parameters. To correct for this difference in
sample size, we double the root mean squared deviations (i.e., weight them by 4 ) before reporting them.

21

exporting plants and thus poorly identified ( Γ F , Γ S , Ω ε ) . Nonetheless, as figure 1 demonstrates, all
of the bootstrap samples yielded Γ S parameter estimates greater than zero. Further, the bootstrap
samples that yielded large Γ S estimates also yielded large estimates of

σ ε 1 and σ ε 2 . Thus we

estimate the ratios of sunk costs to the noise in the profit function for entrants with much greater
Γ S1 Γ S 2 Γ S 3 Γ S 4
precision. The vector ( σ , σ , σ , σ ) is estimated to be (4.06, 2.27, 2.60, 1.81) and the
2ε

2ε

2ε

2ε

associated vector of asymptotic z-ratios is (1.39, 2.76, 2.53, 2.55). So for all size categories except
the smallest, sunk entry costs are clearly greater than zero.
Turning to the parameter estimates themselves, note first that sunk costs appear to fall with
plant sizes, suggesting that big plants with large domestic market shares are in a better position to
step into international markets. (
smallest size quartile,

s2

s1

is the average export market entry cost among plants in the

is the average entry cost for plants in the second quartile, and so on.) This

pattern could reflect existing contacts and distribution channels among large firms, the types of
products large firms produced, or to the mix of people they employ.
One advantage of structural estimation is that it allows us to calculate the sunk costs of
entering foreign markets in currency units. Table 3 implies that, at a discount factor of 0.9, the
expected sunk costs of breaking into export markets vary from 108 to 242 million 1986 pesos,
depending upon which plant size category we are describing. In 1999 US dollars, these figures are
$730,000 and $1.6 million, respectively.
The fixed cost

F

estimate is very close to zero, and as already discussed, our bootstrap

distribution suggests that these costs are negligible on average. Recall, however, that fixed costs are
- ε it , and our bootstrap distribution bounds σ ε above zero. So fixed costs are important at least
1

F

1

some of the time for some of the plants. Finally, note that σ ε 2 is similar in magnitude and also

22

bounded above zero by the bootstrap distribution, implying that sunk costs vary considerably across
plant, even after controlling for their size class.
Given that the estimation procedure involves several stages and repeated multi-dimensional
integration, we explored the sensitivity or our estimates to the fineness of the grid used for integration
over one-step-ahead realizations on exogenous state variables and the number of trajectories drawn
per plant for integration over xi . Coefficient estimates varied roughly 20 percent with grid draws
and xi draws. However, this range of variation did not decline as we increased the number of grid
points and xi trajectories per plant to the maximum values feasible with our hardware. (The maximum
number of grid points, G, we used was 300 and the maximum number of xi trajectories per plant we
used was 50.)

5.

Implications for Export Supply

5.1

Profits, option values and transition probabilities
To explore the implications of sunk costs and plant profit heterogeneity, we calculate the

plant-specific gross expected value of exporting in year t before netting out sunk costs:

~
Vit =

∫ [π ( x , z , e , t ) − Γ
δ ( EV ( x , z , e , t , y
it

t

i

t

it

i

t

F

+

it

= 1) − EVt ( xit , zi , et , t , yit = 0)) ⋅ g ( xit | Ria , et , zi )dxit

]

.

This expression has a current profit component (first line) and an option value component (second
line), which measures the value of being able to export next period without paying entry costs. Note

~

that Vit is an expectation over the unobservable xit values, so it shows less cross-plant heterogeneity
than was actually present.

23

The gross expected value of exporting for the first year in our sample (t=1982) is compared
with expected sunk entry costs, Γ S zi , plant by plant, in figure 2. Plants are sorted by sunk cost

~

category, then by ascending Vi ,1982 . The circled lines in the figure are the sunk costs that are estimated
for each of the four plant types, where the type is defined by the plant’s size in the domestic market.
For the left-most group of plants, the ones with the smallest domestic output levels, the sunk cost of
entry (242 million pesos) exceeds the gross expected export value for all the plants. This is also true
for the second group of plants, which faced a sunk entry cost of 136 million pesos, but in this case
both the gross expected export value and sunk cost are lower than for the first group. Ignoring noise
in sunk costs and xi,1982 realizations, no non-exporter in either group would find it profitable to enter
the export market. For the remaining two groups of plants the profit heterogeneity is more extreme
and some plants have gross expected export values that are high enough that they would enter the
export market. For the largest plants, expected profit heterogeneity is substantial. Note that a single
plant stands out with exceptional export profits.
For several reasons, figure 2 should not be used to predict which plants will actually be in the
export market: it averages out noise in sunk costs and xi,1982 realizations, and it provides no
information on plants’ prior export experience. To illustrate the difference that prior experience
makes, we construct the 1982 plant-specific transition probabilities, once again taking expectations
over xi,1982 . Figure 3 shows the probability that each plant will remain an exporter, assuming it
exported in the previous year, and the probability that each plant will enter the export market,

~

assuming it did not export in the previous year. Plants are sorted in order of ascendingVi ,1982 . The
probability of remaining an exporter, once in, is above .8 for virtually all plants. That is,

~

P( Vi ,1982 + ε 1i ,1982 > 0) is quite high for most plants. In contrast, the probability of entering the market

24

~

P( Vi ,1982 − Γ S zi + ε 1i ,1982 >0) is much lower for virtually all plants, and below .1 for half of the plants.
Only a few plants have entry probabilities that exceed .5, indicating that the sunk entry costs are a
significant entry hurdle for most producers.
We now isolate the role of option values in determining export market participation patterns.

~

This component of Vi ,1982 depends on the plants’ expectations of future market conditions and is
bounded by their sunk costs. To illustrate how important the option value is as a source of the plant’s
total export value, figure 4 plots current profit net of fixed costs, Γ F , and total export value for each
of the non-exporting plants in 1982. The difference between the two curves is the option value. If
there were no sunk costs of entry, the option value would be zero and the two curves in figure 4
would be identical. The figure demonstrates that the option value is a large component of the total
value of the plant. In fact, in many cases the current profits that would be earned by being an

~

exporter are close to zero, so that the option value is the largest component of Vi ,1982 . Even among
firms with substantial current profits from exporting, the option value still accounts for about twothirds of total export value. As expectations of future market conditions improve, the option value
term increases and can induce entry even if current profits are unaffected.
Total industry exports depend on both the number of plants exporting and the foreign sales
volume of each plant. Figure 5 illustrates the distribution of export revenue for all plants in 1982,
sorted by export revenue. The upper line, denoted by triangles, gives the cumulative export revenue
earned by the 25 plants that were actually in the export market in that year. Total export revenues
were approximately 6.3 billion pesos. Differences in the size of the exporters are obvious, with the
largest two plants accounting for almost half of the industry revenue. Figure 5 also illustrates the
predicted revenues that would have been earned by each of the non-exporting plants if they had been

25

induced to enter the market. The cumulative predicted exports of the 37 non-exporting plants are
approximately 2.6 billion pesos. These plants would have increased industry export revenue by
approximately 41 percent if they had been in the market, but no one of the non-exporters would have
added more than several percentage points by itself.

5.2

Simulated Effect of a Devaluation
The export supply response to a devaluation reflects adjustments on two margins: entry-exit

and output adjustments among incumbents. To quantify each type of response we simulate firms’
reactions to a permanent change in the exchange rate process that depreciates the steady state value
of the peso by 10 percent, leaving its variance unchanged.22 The regime shift takes place in period 1
and we track firms reactions over the following nine periods. Firms always begin period 1 in their
observed state, thereafter all realizations on x and e are simulated. We calculate expected reactions by
simulating 300 exchange rate trajectories under each scenario and averaging each firm’s responses.
The effect on the number of exporting plants is illustrated in the top panel of figure 6. The
first simulation, which we label “credible devaluation,” characterizes reactions when the regime
switch is correctly anticipated and believed by all plants. By this terminology we mean that all plants
use the correct new regime parameters for the exchange rate process when they formulate
expectations about future profits. Under this assumption we calculate an expected first-year increase
of 4.5 percent in the number of exporting plants. The expected number of exporters continues to
expand by a total of 12.2 percent over the nine-year horizon we simulate.
22

This is accomplished by increasing the intercept of the estimated autoregressive process for the log of the
exchange rate. Given the parameter estimates reported in section 4.2, the steady state mean of the logarithmic exchange
rate is .549/(1-.883) = 4.69. Using the relationships between the mean and variance of a normal and a log normal random
variable, a two percent increase in the mean of the log exchange rate translates into a 10 percent increase in the mean of the
exchange rate itself.

26

Figure 6 also shows expected responses to a “non-credible” regime switch in which producers
incorrectly continue to use the pre-reform exchange rate parameters in their evaluation of future
profit trajectories. Under this scenario there is virtually no response in the expected number of
exporting plants. Even after 5 years of experience with the more favorable exchange rate, no new
entry has occurred. This markedly different outcome is solely due to differences in expectations,
since gross operating profits evolve in the same way under both scenarios. Thus a substantial,
permanent change in the exchange rate process may not induce entry if firms view the outcomes as
transitory shocks generated by the old regime.
The effect of the same devaluation on the level of export revenue is illustrated in the bottom
panel of table 6. Here expected export revenues increase approximately 5 percent in the first year of
the new policy and approximately 37.5 percent over the nine-year horizon. The increase in total
export revenue is driven primarily by the expansion of the existing exporters and this is insensitive to
the perceived credibility of the exchange rate change. The difference in revenue growth between the
credible and non-credible devaluation is the result of the entry of the new exporters in the credible
regime. While there is significant new entry, the new exporters are relatively small and so they make
only a small contribution to total export revenue.

5.3

Alternative Policies to Subsidize Exports
The case for export promotion policies is controversial.23 Nonetheless, it is quite common to

find significant promotional regimes in place. In this section we shall ignore the question of whether

23

Those who advocate export promotion (e.g., Westphal, 2001) argue that exports generate various
positive spillovers, while those who are opposed to export promotion (e.g., Panagaria, 1999) discount the
importance of these spillover effects.

27

export promotion is desirable and address the positive quantitative issue of how effective various
types of promotion are in terms of their impact on export volumes.
Aside from currency devaluation, governments in developing countries and elsewhere have
used a variety of tools to encourage manufactured exports. (Panagaria,1999, provides a critical
review.) In terms of value, the most significant ones are usually direct subsidies linked to plant’s
export revenues.24 Preferential credit and insurance are commonly provided by official export
promotion agencies and/or administered through the financial sector. Export processing zones
provide duty-free access to imported inputs that are subject to tariffs among non-exporters. Policies
that affect transport costs through the public development of port facilities do the same. All of these
subsidies increase the profits of plants once they are in the export market and thus tend to induce
volume adjustments among incumbent exporters, as well as net entry.
A second policy option is to directly subsidize the sunk costs that plants incur to enter export
markets.25 Matching grant programs that subsidize information acquisition or investments in
technology acquisition for export development fall under this heading, presuming that these are oneshot start-up costs.26 Support for participation in trade fairs might also be classified as this type of

24

In Colombia, the most important subsidy has been a tax rebate that is proportional to foreign sales. This
rebate has been delivered in the form of negotiable certificates (Certificado Abono Tributarios) that recipients can
use to retire their taxes or sell on a secondary market. Other export subsidies have included a duty drawback
scheme (Plan Vallejo), insurance against exchange rate risk on dollar-denominated export loans (discontinued in
1977), and subsidized export credit (from PROEXPO). As Ocampo and Villar (1995) document, the combined
value of these subsides fluctuated between 16 and 27 percent of export sales for manufacturing overall during the
sample period. We use Ocampo and Villar’s real effective export exchange rate to estimate our model, so although we
do not isolate their effects, these subsidies are built into our analysis.
25

Alternatively, creation of export trade groups that collect information on sources of demand and match foreign
buyers and domestic producers can also act to reduce one substantial cost of entry for new exporters. Information
deficiencies were identified as significant impediments to exporting by Colombian manufacturers in a recent survey. See
Roberts and Tybout (1997) for discussion.
26

Pursell (1999) notes that such programs have gained popularity rapidly at the World Bank during the
past decade. “The justification for these projects is generally that there are exporting firms that would increase

28

policy, given that it reduces the costs of establishing a foreign clientele. Sunk cost subsidies
encourage entry, but if they do not affect marginal production costs they should not affect export
volume decisions, given foreign market participation. Further, they also encourage exit if they are
available repeatedly to the same producer because they reduce the incentive to avoid re-entry costs by
remaining in foreign markets during unprofitable periods.
A third type of export promotion provides subsidies that are not directly tied to plants’ export
level but rather are flat payments designed to cover the annual fixed costs of operating in the export
market. The same types of policies that help to reduce entry costs can fall under this heading,
provided that regular expenditures are required to maintain foreign clients and/or adapt the product to
evolving tastes, technologies and characteristics of competing products. Unless they shift the marginal
production cost schedule, fixed costs subsidies resemble sunk cost subsidies in that they operate on
the entry-exit margin but not the volume margin. However, given that they do not affect the threshold
costs associated with exit and re-entry, their effect should be primarily on the number of exporters
rather than the long run rate of turnover among exporting plants.
Using our estimated model, we simulate each of these policy options. First we explore the
effects of a per-unit subsidy equal to 10% of their export revenue. Second, we simulate fixed cost

~

subsidies amounting to 10 million pesos and 20 million pesos. (The average Vit value is 152 million
pesos among the existing exporters in 1982.) Finally, we simulate a reduction of sunk entry costs by
50 million pesos, which given our estimates of 108 to 242 million pesos, amounts to a 20 to 50%
reduction in entry costs, depending on the plant type. In order to compare these policies, we

their exports and non-exporters that would start to export, but do not do so because they lack crucial information
and services, e.g., information on export markets, production techniques, packaging and delivery requirements,
product standards, etc.” (Pursell, pp. 20-21)

29

construct a benefit-cost ratio for each one by calculating the total gain in export revenue that would
accrue in each year and dividing it by the direct cost of the subsidy in that year.
Export revenues per unit subsidy (hereafter “benefit-cost ratios”) for the four policy options
are graphed in figure 7. Policies that subsidize fixed or sunk costs all generate benefit-cost ratios that
are less than one, varying from .11 to .57 in the first year after the change. In contrast, the subsidy
proportional to revenue has a benefit-cost ratio of 3.3 in the first year. The reason for this difference
is that revenue subsidies act directly on the exports of the largest exporting plants which, in turn,
account for a substantial increase in total market revenue. In contrast, the other three policies all act
exclusively on the entry-exit margin. All induce new exporters to enter, but because the new entrants
are very small and the policy provides no incentive for the large existing exporters to expand, the
overall impact on total market revenue is small. For example, the policy that reduces fixed cost by 10
million pesos generates a 14.8 percent increase in the number of exporting plants but only a 1.8
percent increase in total export revenue. Increasing the subsidy to 20 million pesos generates a 34.4
percent increase in exporters and a 3.5 percent increase in revenue. Both policies are relatively
expensive because they subsidize every exporter by the same amount, regardless of export volume.
Over time the benefit-cost ratios change as additional entry and exit occurs. The ratio for the
policy that reduces fixed costs by 10 million pesos trends upward over time and exceeds one after five
years. At that point the total number of exporters has increased by 48.1 percent and total export
revenue by 6.7 percent. The higher subsidy of 20 million pesos also has a benefit-cost ratio that
trends upward over time as entry occurs but the ratio never exceeds .77. The reason for this is that it
encourages the entry of many more small exporters. The total number of exporters increases by 91.7
percent over 5 years and, while this generates a larger increase in export revenue, 10.4 percent, than

30

the smaller subsidy, it also generates significant subsidy costs. The rate is so generous that many
small plants choose to enter and remain in the export market but generate so little revenue that they
do not cover the cost of the subsidy they receive.
Sunk cost subsidies also generate a gradual increase in the number of exporting plants, 17.0
percent, and export revenue, 2.8 percent, over the nine year simulation horizon. However, the
benefit-cost ratio for this type of policy never rises above .65. The main reason for this is that the
sunk cost subsidy is available to each plant each time it enters, so the government repeatedly pays the
entry costs of the same group of marginally profitable exporters as they move in and out of the
market. Total turnover, the sum of the number of entering and exiting plants, doubles, from 5
plants/year before the subsidy to 10 plants/year afterward, making this a relatively inefficient way to
generate export revenue. Finally, entry into the export market also affects the benefit-cost ratio of the
revenue subsidy policy. In this case the ratio falls over time. This happens because the marginal
exporters drawn into the market by subsidies have relatively low demand elasticities, and thus
generate relatively little revenue per unit of subsidy received.

6.

Summary
In this paper we develop a dynamic structural model that characterizes firms’ decisions

concerning whether to export and the volume of foreign sales among those who do. The model
embodies uncertainty, plant-level heterogeneity in export profits, and sunk entry costs for plants
breaking into foreign markets. We estimate the model with plant-level panel data on sales and
production costs among Colombian chemical producers. Then we use the results to quantify sunk
entry costs and export profit heterogeneity, and we conduct dynamic policy analysis.

31

Our results imply that entry costs are substantial. Consequently, producers don’t initiate
exports unless the present value of their expected future export profit stream is large. They also tend
to continue exporting when their current profits are negative, thus avoiding the costs of reestablishing themselves in foreign markets when conditions improve. For example, we calculate that
plants exporting in year t generally remain exporters in year t+1 with probability 0.8 or greater. But if
these same plants were, for some reason, not to have exported in year t, very few would have
exported in year t+1 with probability greater than .5. Further, for many plants the option value of
being able to export next year without paying entry costs substantially exceeds the current profits that
they expect to earn by exporting.
Heterogeneity in plants’ marginal production costs and the foreign demand conditions they
face also affects their export sales volumes. In a typical sample year, the 5 largest exporters account
for 74 percent of total sales while most of the other 20 exporters contributed less than one percent
each. We calculate that the 37 non-exporters would have contributed even smaller shares, on average,
if they had entered. The major exporters find it profitable to maintain their foreign market presence
under any reasonable policy scenario, so almost all of the entry and exit that takes place is
concentrated among these small producers.
The export growth induced by a pro-trade shift in the exchange rate regime depends on the
volume response among existing exporters and the number and size of foreign market entrants versus
quitters. In our application, much of the response to a 10 percent devaluation in the expected steady
state rate comes from foreign sales growth among existing exporters. For example, after 9 years, a
credible 10 percent devaluation in the steady state expected exchange rate results in a 12.2 percent
increase in the number of exporters and a 37.5 percent increase in export revenue. The average

32

incumbent exporter is 19.3 percent larger at the end of the period and the average entrant is 6 percent
larger. These results on the number of exporters depend crucially on the credibility of the exchange
rate change and the magnitude of sunk entry costs. When producers view the same exchange rate
realizations as generated by the pre-reform regime, the number of exporting plants increases by only
2.3 percent and the total increase in export revenue is virtually unchanged.
Finally, the effectiveness of export promotion policies depends upon their form. Subsidies that
are proportional to plants’ export revenues generate far more foreign exchange per peso spent than
policies that reduce the sunk costs of foreign market entry. For example, a 10 percent subsidy on
export sales generates 3.3 pesos worth of foreign exchange per peso spent by the government. In
contrast, a 50 million peso reduction in sunk entry costs (which amounts to a 20 to 50 percent
reduction in entry costs, depending upon the plant) generates only 0.1 peso worth of foreign
exchange per peso spent. The relative inefficiency of market entry subsidies reflects the fact that they
act only on the entry/exit margin, and thus induce no sales responses among the dominant export
suppliers. Further, the producers who are induced to enter by entry subsidies are generally marginal
suppliers.
In sum, sunk entry costs and cross-plant heterogeneity in cost and foreign demand conditions
significantly affect export dynamics. We have demonstrated how to characterize these effects
empirically using plant-level panel data on a few basic variables. While the parameter estimates we
report and the quantitative effects they imply are specific to the Colombian chemicals industry, we
believe that the forces we have documented are general, and that the methodology we exposit here
should be adaptable to other contexts involving market diversification .

33

References
Arellano, Manuel and Stephen Bond. 1991. “Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data: Monte
Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations.” Review of Economic Studies,
58, pp. 277-297.
Baldwin, Richard E. and Paul Krugman. 1989. "Persistent Trade Effects of Large Exchange Rate
Changes." Quarterly Journal of Economics 104(4), 635-54.
Bernard, Andrew, Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen and Samuel Kortum. 1999. “Plants and
Productivity in International Trade: A Ricardian Reconciliation.” working paper, Boston
University.
Bernard, Andrew and J. Bradford Jensen. 1999. “Exceptional Exporter Performance: Cause, Effect,
or Both?” Journal of International Economics 47 (February), 1-25.
Bernard, Andrew and J. Bradford Jensen. 2001. “Why Some Firms Export,” Working Paper,
Dartmouth College, Tuck School of Business .
Bernard, Andrew and Joachim Wagner. 2001. “Export Entry and Exit by German Firms,”
Welktwirtschaftliches Archiv 137, 105-123.
Breitung, Jorg and Wolfgang Meyer. 1994. “Testing for Unit Roots in Panel Data: Are Wages on
Different Bargaining Levels Co-integrated?” Applied Economics, 26, 353-361.
Brooks, Eileen. 2001. “Why Don’t Firms Export More?” Working Paper, Department of Economics,
U.C. Santa Cruz.
Campa, Jose. 1998. “Exchange Rates and Trade: How Important is Hysteresis in Trade?” Working
Paper, Stern School of Business, New York University.
Chow, Gregory. 1983. Econometrics. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Clerides, Sofronis, Saul Lach, and James Tybout.1998. “Is Learning by Exporting Important? Micro
Dynamic Evidence from Colombia, Mexico and Morocco,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
August, pp. 903-947.
Das, Sanghamitra 1992. “A Micro-Econometric Model of Capital Utilization and Retirement: The
Case of the U.S. Cement Industry,” Review of Economic Studies, 59, 277-297.
Dixit, Avinash K. 1989. "Entry and Exit Decisions Under Uncertainty." Journal of Political Economy
97(3), 620-38.

34

Goldberg, Penelopi and Micheal Knetter.1999. “Measuring the Intensity of Competition in Export
Markets,” Journal of International Economics 47(1), pp. 27-60.
Heckman, James. 1979. “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error,” Econometrica 47(1), 153161.
Krugman, Paul R. 1989. Exchange Rate Instability. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Ocampo, Jose Antonio and Leonardo Villar. 1995. Colombian Manufactured Exports, 1967-91,” in
G.K. Helleiner, ed., Manufacturing for Export in the developing World: Problems and
Possibilities. New York, NY: Routledge.
Panagaria, Arvind. 1999. “Evaluating the Case for Export Subsidies.” Working Paper, Department of
Economics, The University of Maryland.
Pursell, Garry. 1999. “Export Policies and Institutions in Developing Countries: The Role of the
World Bank.” Working Paper, The World Bank, Washington, D.C.
Roberts, Mark J. and James R. Tybout. 1997a. “The Decision to Export in Colombia: An Empirical
Model of Entry with Sunk Cost,” American Economic Review, September, pp. 545-564.
Roberts, Mark and James Tybout. 1997b. What Makes Exports Boom? The World Bank. Directions
in Development Monograph.
Roberts, Mark, Theresa A. Sullivan and James R. Tybout. 1995. “Micro Foundations of Export
Booms,” Working Paper, Department of Economics, Pennsylvania State University.
Rubinstein, Reuven Y. (1986), Monte Carlo Optimization, Simulation and Sensitivity of Queueing
Networks, New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Rust, John. 1988. “Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Discrete Control Processes,” SIAM Journal
of Control and Optimization, 26(5), 1006-1023.
Rust, John. 1995. “Numerical Dynamic Programming in Economics,” in Handbook of Computational
Economics, edited by H. Amman, D. Kendrik and J. Rust.
Rust, John. 1997. “Using Randomization to Break the Curse of Dimensionality,” Econometrica
65(3), May, pp. 487-516.
Westphal, Larry. 2001. “Technology Strategies for Economic Development in a Fast-Changing
Global Economy,” forthcoming in Economics of Innovation and New Technology.

35

Appendix 1: Transition Probabilities for Export Status
The likelihood function in equation (11) requires evaluation of transition probabilities for
export status. These in turn require us to calculate the optimal export decision in (6) and evaluation
of the expected future value EVt in (5). Let V0t, V10t and V11t respectively be the value from not
exporting in period t, from beginning to export in period t after not exporting in period t-1, and from
continuing to export in period t after exporting in period t - 1, each exclusive of transitory noise:
V11it

' ( xit, zi, et, t) &

F

% EVt (xit, zi, et, t, yit'1)

V10it

' (xit, zi, et, t) &

F

&

V0it

S

% EVt (xit, zi, et, t, yit'1)

(A1.1)

' EVt (xit, zi, e t, t, yit'0).

We assume that the profit function errors (see equation 2),
variables so that Fε (ε | Ω ε ) = Φ (

1

and

, are independent normal random

2

ε1
ε
)Φ ( 2 ) .27 Then suppressing plant (i) subscripts, the
σ1
σ2

probabilities of observing the different combinations of exporting states in years t-1 and t can be
written as functions of the normal cdf:
P[yt'1|yt&1'0]

' P[V10t%

2t

> V0t]

'

V10t&V0t
2

P[yt'1|yt&1'1]

' P[V11t%

1t

> V0t]

'

V11t&V0t
1

P[yt'0|yt&1'0]

'1&

V10t&V0t

(A1.2)

2

P[yt'0|yt&1'1]

'1&

V11t&V0t
1

27

It does not matter that

1

and

2

are independent. Given a value of yit-1 only one will affect plant profits in year

t.

36

Once V0t, V10t and V11t are calculated up to the unknown parameters, maximum likelihood
estimation using equation 11 becomes straightforward. However, these expressions are difficult to
calculate because they involve the expected value of the period t+1 value function conditioned on
period t information. We begin by writing this expectation as:

EVt(et, x t, yt, )

' yt Et max(V11t%1%

1t%1,V0t%1 )

% (1&y t)Et max(V10t%1%

2t%1,V0t%1 )

(A1.3)

where:
Et max(V11t%1% 1t%1,V0t%1)

Et max(V10t%1% 2t%1,V0t%1)

Then, since ( 1t,

' P[

1t%1 > V0t%1

% P[

1t%1

& V11t%1]@[V11t%1 % E(

1t%1 | 1t%1 > V0t%1

& V11t%1)]

< V0t%1 & V11t%1]@V0t%1

' P[

2t%1 > V0t%1

% P[

2t%1

& V10t%1]@[V10t%1 % E(

2t%1 | 2t%1 > V0t%1

& V10t%1)]

< V0t%1 & V10t%1]@V0t%1

) is bivariate normal, the conditional expectations above can be expressed as Mills

2t

ratios, and the probabilities (conditioned on xt +1 ) can be obtained from the standard normal
distribution function, M(@) :

(A1.4a)

Et max(V11t%1 %
[

mxt%1met%1
%

1t%1, V0t%1)

V11t%1 & V0t%1

'
@ V11t%1 %

1

V0t%1 & V11t%1

V0t%1&V11t%1
1
1

@ V0t%1 ] dF(xt%1, et%1*xt, e t )

1

37

V11t%1 & V0t%1
1

(A1.4b)

Et max(V10t%1 %

2t%1, V0t%1)

'

V10t%1 & V0t%1

[

mx̃t%1met%1

@ V10t%1 %

1

V10t%1 & V0t%1

2

V0t%1 & V10t%1

%

V0t%1&V10t%1
2

2

@ V0t%1] dF(xt%1, et%1 *xt , e t )

2

We construct EVt ( et , xt , yt , θ ) using the backward-induction algorithm described by Rust (1995).
Specifically, we assume that firms have a finite planning horizon of H years. In the terminal year
there are no future periods to consider so EVH ( eH , xH , yH , θ ) is set to zero in (A1.1), and each firm’s
exporting decision maximizes current payoffs, u( eH , x H , z , ε H , y H , y H −1 , θ ) . Accordingly, for period
H-1, the expected value function is simply:

EVH − 1 (eH − 1 , x H − 1 , z , y H −1 , θ ) =

[

E H − 1 max u(eH , x H , z , y H , ε H , y H −1 , θ )

]

yH
where expectations are taken over both ε H and x H conditioned on x H −1 , as in (A1.4). Once the
expected value function for period H-1 has been calculated for each possible realization on x H −1 , it
enters into the calculation of the expected value function for period H-2 can be calculated for each
possible realization on x H −2 :

EVH − 2 ( eH − 2 , x H − 2 , z , y H − 2 , θ ) =

[

]

E H − 2 max {u(eH − 1 , x H −1 , z , y H − 1 , ε H −1 y H − 2 , θ ) + δ EVH − 1 ( eH −1 , x H −1 , z , y H − 1 , θ )}
y H −1

This calculation can be repeated, backing up one year at a time, until period t. This generates the
values needed for V10t, V11t, and V0t which in turn enter the likelihood function.

38

Appendix 2: Specification Tests for the Profit Function

1.

Trend Stationarity
To establish whether profits are trend stationary we first conduct an augmented Dickey-Fuller

test using the specification:

ln( π it ) = φ 0i + φ 1 ln( π it −1 ) + φ 2 ∆ ln( π it −1 ) + φ 3t + ν it

(A2.1)

Here, as in our structural model, the intercept is allowed to vary across 4 size classes. Given that
there are no unobserved plant effects or random coefficients, this specification does not suffer from an
incidental parameters problem and the distribution of the test statistic is straightforward to obtain.28
Specifically, if we let n (the number of plants) approach infinity while holding the number of time
periods and the number of size classes fixed, the parameters are asymptotically identified by the crosssectional variation in the data and the GMM estimator of standard errors is asymptotically correct
regardless of whether a unit root is present. The Dickey-Fuller test then amounts to a simple t-test of
whether H0 :φ 1 = 0 .
Results for the augmented Dickey-Fuller test are reported in Table A2.1.

Note that we can

reject the null hypothesis of a unit root, despite the relatively small coefficient on lagged profits. This
is because we use enough orthogonality conditions in our GMM estimator to obtain very precise
estimates. OLS estimates (not reported) are quite similar, but their standard errors are larger, and do
not permit us to reject the null of a unit root.

28

Breitung and Meyer (1994) make this observation in a similar context.

39

2.

Order of the

it

Process

To determine whether

it

can be represented as the sum of two AR(1) processes (i.e., whether

m = 2 is a reasonable assumption), we multiply both sides of equation (1) by (1& 1L)(1& 2L) ,
yielding an ARMA(2,1) expression for log profits, conditioned on a distributed lag in the exchange
rate and a trend:

ln( π it ) = β *0i + β 1* ln( π it −1 ) + β *2 ln( π it − 2 ) + β *3et + β *4 et − 1 + β *5et − 2 + β *6t + ψ it + µ ψ it −1

(A2.2)
.

Here ψ it = ω 1,it + ω 2 ,it is serially uncorrelated and β * ’s are functions of the various underlying
*
structural parameters. (Note in particular that β 1 = λ 1 + λ 2 and β *2 = − λ 1λ 2 .) This form of (11) can

be implemented using GMM estimators if the non-linear parameter constraints are ignored; doing so
allows us to perform a battery of specification tests without cumbersome programming. In particular,
the presence of second order serial correlation in the disturbances or the significance of a third lag on
profits would challenge the assumption m = 2.
Estimates of equation A2.2 are reported in Table A2.2. Note first that our results are quite
consistent with the stationary ARMA(2,1) process implied by m = 2. Using Arellano and Bond’s
(1991) tests for serial correlation in the residuals, the null of no first-order correlation is rejected with
a p-value of 0.062, but the null of no second order correlation is easily accepted (p-value 0.782).
Further, although the second lag on log profits is quite significant, adding a third lag to the equation
does not significantly improve the fit.29 As an aside, it is worth noting that the coefficients on lagged
profits imply roots of 0.972 and -0.452, which are close to the roots estimated by applying maximum
likelihood to equation 1. (See table 2 of the text.)

29

The coefficient on the third lag was -0.059 with a standard error of 0.053. These results are not
reported in Table A2.2.

40

Table A2.1
Augmented Dickey-Fuller Regression (GMM)
Parameter Estimates
(Standard errors in parentheses)

φ 01 (intercept 1)

0.188
(0.098)

φ 02 (intercept 2)

0.398
(0.109)

φ 03 (intercept 3)

0.292
(0.102)

φ 04 (intercept 4)

0.522
(0.093)

φ 1 (lagged profits)

-0.043
(0.007)

φ 2 (lagged change in profits)

-0.298
(0.016)

φ 3 (trend)

0.034
(0.002)

1st order serial correlation test (z)

1.207

2nd order serial correlation test (z)

-0.087

Table A2.2
GMM Stage 1 Parameter Estimates a
Parameter Estimates
(Asymptotic standard errors in
parentheses)

β *01 (intercept 1)

-5.56
(1.37)

β *02 (intercept 2)

0.27
(0.15)

β *03 (intercept 3)

0.03
(0.11)

β *04 (intercept 4)

0.12
(0.15)

β 1* (log profits, t-1)

0.52
(0.04)

β *2 (log profits, t-2)

0.44
(0.04)

β *3 (log exchange rate)

0.63
(0.33)

β *4 (log exchange rate, t-1)

1.73
(0.36)

β *5 (log exchange rate, t-2)

-1.10
(0.47)

β *6 (trend)

-0.03
(0.02)

Mills ratio

0.23
(0.09)

λ 1 (imputed)

.972

λ 2 (imputed)

-.452

1st order serial correlation test (z)

1.87

2nd order serial correlation test (z)

0.28

a

The instrument set includes lagged values of export profits (two or more periods back), beginning of
period capital stocks, geographic location of the plant, 4-digit industry dummies, and time dummies.

Figure 1: Sunk Cost Parameter Estimates by Bootstrap Sample
Size Class 1

Size Class 2
30

25

25

20

20

Frequency

Frequency

30

15
10

15
10

5

5

0
0

60

0

120 180 240 300 360 420 480 540 600 660 720 780

0

60

Sunk Costs

120 180 240 300 360 420 480 540 600 660 720 780

Sunk Costs

Size Class 3

Size Class 4

50

70
60

40

Frequency

Frequency

50
30

20

40
30
20

10

10
0
0

60

120 180 240 300 360 420 480 540 600 660 720 780

Sunk Costs

0
0

60

120 180 240 300 360 420 480 540 600 660 720 780

Sunk Costs

Figure 2

Plant Export Value and Sunk Cost in 1982

millions of 1986 pesos

600

500

400

300

200

100

1

10

20
30
40
plant rank-sorted by type, value

50

60

Figure 3

Effect of Export History on Current Export Status

probability of remaining in

probability of entering

1
.9
.8
.7
.6
.5
.4
.3
.2
.1

1

10

20
30
40
plant rank - sorted by value

50

60

Figure 4
Option Value for Non-exporting Plants

plant value

current profit

millions of 1986 pesos

150

100

50

0
1

10

20
30
plant rank - sorted by value

40

Figure 5
Cumulative Predicted Export Market Revenue in 1982

nonexporters

exporters

6300
6000

millions of 1986 pesos

5000

4000

3000
2600
2000

1000

1.4
5

10

15
20
25
30
plant rank - sorted by revenue

35

40

Figure 6

Percentage Change in the Number of Exporters and Export Revenue
Under a 10 Percent Devaluation of the Exchange Rate

Percentage change in number of exporters

credible devaluation

noncredible devaluation

12

10

8

6

4

2

0
3

1

5
year

7

9

5
year

7

9

Percentage change in export revenue

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1

3

Figure 7
Revenue-Cost Ratio for Alternative Export Subsidy Plans
reduce fixed cost by 10
reduce sunk cost by 50

reduce fixed cost by 20
10% revenue subsidy

revenue gain per peso of subsidy

3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
.5
0
1

3

5
year

7

9

Table 1
Colombian chemical Producers, Exporters Versus Non-exporters *

Year

Peso
Value of
Exports a

Dollar
Value of
Exports b

Number of
Exporters

Number of
Entrants

Number of
Quitters

Real
Exchange
Rate

1982

6.18

41.71

25

1

1

79.5

1983

8.60

58.05

30

6

1

80.5

1984

7.90

55.32

28

1

3

89.8

1985

11.79

79.58

25

3

6

102.2

1986

14.10

95.17

24

1

2

113.6

1987

15.40

103.95

23

1

2

113.7

1988

21.97

148.30

28

6

1

112.3

1989

20.62

139.19

27

2

3

115.2

1990

27.10

182.93

28

1

0

127.2

1991

35.00

236.25

30

2

0

121.1

Average

16.866

114.045

26.8

2.4

1.9

105.51

* Data describe the 62 Colombian producers of industrial chemicals continually observed over the period 1982-91.
a Billions of 1986 pesos (deflation done using manufacturing-wide wholesale price deflator).
b Millions of 1999 dollars (conversion done at the official 1986 exchange rate and brought forward using the U.S. wholesale
price deflator).

Table 2
Operating Profit Function Parameters ( Ψ and

x

)

Coefficient

Standard Error

1

(intercept)

-3.034

(4.901)

2

(size dummy 2)

-2.344

(0.852)

3

(size dummy 3)

-0.899

(0.912)

4

(size dummy 4)

-1.819

(1.124)

5

(log exchange rate)

2.453

(1.104)

6

(trend)

0.005

(0.063)

2.375

(0.591)

Mills ratio
1

(root, x1)

-0.502

(0.145)

2

(root, x2)

0.895

(0.051)

)

0.366

(0.120)

)

0.763

(0.036)

q1 (variance,
q2 (variance,
sample size
log-likelihood

1
2

293 observations
-351.714

Table 3
Sunk and Fixed Cost Estimates
Parameter

Estimate

Standard errors
based on third
stage information
matrix

Bootstrap
standard errors

Γ S1

242.17

108.53

309.46

Γ S2

135.52

67.04

161.42

Γ S3

155.60

70.77

184.58

Γ S4

107.99

54.41

136.57

ΓF

0.476

3.50

4.39

F,1

58.03

32.54

64.37

F,2

59.62

34.67

72.43

log-likelihood

-129.67

(grid size = 100, number of simulated trajectories per plant =10)

