                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         TO BE OR NOT TO BE INNOVATIVE: AN EXERCISE IN MEASUREMENT


                                           Jacques Mairesse
                                            Pierre Mohnen


                                          Working Paper 8644
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8644


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2001




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.


© 2001 by Jacques Mairesse and Pierre Mohnen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
To Be or Not To Be Innovative: An Exercise in Measurement
Jacques Mairesse and Pierre Mohnen
NBER Working Paper No. 8644
December 2001
JEL No. C35, L60, O31, O33



                                             ABSTRACT

        In this paper, we put forward the idea of an innovation accounting framework and consider two
main indicators based on it: expected innovation and innovativeness. The framework is the analogue of
the standard framework of economic growth accounting, with innovativeness being a parallel notion to
that of (total factor) productivity. We provide an illustration of the idea using data from the European
Community Innovation Surveys (CIS1 and CIS2) and measuring innovation by the share of firm
innovative sales. We adopt a generalized tobit model of the propensity and intensity of innovation as our
accounting framework. We first apply the framework to a comparison of the innovation performance of
French manufacturing industries, while also checking the robustness of our estimates to the use of micro-
aggregated firm data provided by Eurostat versus the original individual firm data. We also provide an
overview of the results of a larger comparison of innovation across seven European countries.




Jacques Mairesse                                                Pierre Mohnen
CREST-INSEE                                                     MERIT
15, boulevard Gabriel Peri                                      Maastricht University
92244 Malakoff cedex, France                                    P.O. Box 616
and NBER                                                        6200 MD Maastricht, Netherlands
mairesse@ensae.fr                                               p.mohnen@merit.unimaas.nl
                                     I. INTRODUCTION




Out of a growing concern that inputs into the innovation process were insufficiently covered

by the notion of R&D expenditures as defined in the Frascati Manual (OECD, 1963), that the

output of that process had to be measured in a more direct way than through patents, and, last

but not least, that information was lacking on the organisation of research and innovation

activities, statistical experts met under the auspices of the OECD to set guidelines for the

design of innovation surveys. These have been formulated in the so-called Oslo Manual

(OECD, 1992; OECD and Eurostat, 1997).


To date, a number of countries have launched two or three innovation surveys, which have

been conducted in more or less the same fashion, following the guidelines set out in the Oslo

Manual. In Europe, these surveys are known as CIS (Community Innovation Surveys).

Despite efforts by Eurostat towards harmonisation, the first round of surveys, CIS1,

performed in 1993 and relating to 1990-92, suffered from major differences in terms of

coverage, sampling, questions asked, reporting unit, and organisation of the survey (see

Archibuggi et al., 1994, for details). The second round of surveys CIS2, performed in 1997

and pertaining to the period 1994-96, was more comparable across countries, and the third

round of surveys, CIS3, which is currently under way, is expected to show considerable

improvements. In addition to exploitation of the results by national statistical agencies,

Eurostat assembles and analyses the country data in a consistent way in an effort to render

them, to the fullest extent possible, suitable for international comparisons. Eurostat also

contributes to making the CIS data available to researchers for further investigation. However,

in order to strictly preserve the confidentiality of firm-level information, Eurostat delivers the

                                                3
data in micro-aggregated form.1 The micro-aggregation process adopted by Eurostat for CIS1

and CIS2 consists of replacing each observation of a given variable by an average of itself and

the two adjacent observations in a ranking order of the observations for that variable.2


To compare innovation performance across industries or countries we have elsewhere

proposed two related indicators (Mohnen and Dagenais, 2001; Mohnen, Mairesse and

Dagenais, 2001). Both use information retrieved from the innovation surveys. The first is the

expected share of innovative sales in total turnover. It estimates the percentage of innovative

sales that can be expected for a firm, an industry or a country, when controlling for a number

of explanatory variables that influence innovation. The second is what we call innovativeness,

which is defined as the difference between the observed and the expected share of innovative

sales. In a model or framework which aims to account for innovation, innovativeness can be

viewed as an analogue to total factor or multifactor productivity in the standard production (or

output growth) accounting framework.


In this article, we do two things. We first illustrate the construction and interpretation of the

two proposed innovation indicators, while checking how robust they are to the use of micro-

aggregated vs. individual firm data. To do so, we contrast the estimation results obtained on

two random samples of French firms, both drawn from CIS2. One is drawn from the raw data

set, the other one from the micro-aggregated data set. We then further illustrate the use of the

two indicators by comparing innovation across seven European countries on the basis of the

CIS1 micro-aggregated data for these countries.


The article is organised as follows. In Section II, we define the two analytical innovation

indicators as they can be constructed from an appropriate econometric analysis of the


                                               4
available innovation survey data. In Section III, we examine to what extent these two

indicators may be sensitive to the micro-aggregation of the individual data, putting them to

test in a comparison of innovation across French manufacturing industries based on the

French CIS2 survey. In Section IV, we proceed to an international comparison of innovation

across seven European countries using CIS1 data. In Section V, we conclude by discussing

how the two analytical indicators compare to other innovation metrics and by suggesting

possible avenues of future research to refine our measure and understanding of innovation.




       II. INNOVATION INDICATORS FROM INNOVATION SURVEY DATA




Innovation surveys based on the guidelines of the Oslo Manual, such as the CIS surveys,

typically provide information on the input and output of a firm’s innovative activities, as well

as on the modalities of these activities. On the input side, we have quantitative data on R&D

expenditures and other current and capital expenditures on innovation, and know whether

firms engage or not in R&D, in R&D collaboration or in the outside acquisition of

technology. On the output side, we know whether or not firms have introduced new products

or processes, and have quantitative estimates on the share of sales broken down into

unchanged or marginally modified products, and significantly improved or entirely new

products, the share in sales of new or improved products not only new to the firm but also to

its market. Regarding the modalities of innovation, we know whether R&D was performed

continuously or not, and can obtain qualitative information on sources of knowledge, reasons



                                               5
for innovating, perceived obstacles to innovation and perceived strengths and weaknesses of

various appropriability mechanisms.


In this work, as in other related work, we assess the extent of innovation in a given industry or

country by the share of innovative sales. Innovative sales can be viewed as a sales weighted

measure of the number of innovations. Compared to R&D expenditures – and even to the

broader concept of innovation expenditures defined in the Oslo Manual, which embraces

expenditures such as pilot studies and market analyses – innovative sales have the advantage

of being an output measure of innovation. Also, in contrast to patents, they have a much

broader scope and are defined in a more straightforward way than through the decisions of the

innovating firms to protect their intellectual property rights.3 Innovative sales, as we define

them here, are constructed on the basis of the CIS1 and CIS2 questionnaires, as the sales due

to new or improved products for the firm (but not necessarily for the market) in the last three

years (1990-92 for CIS1 and 1994-96 for CIS2).4


In assessing the extent of innovation in a country or an industry by the share of innovative

sales, we believe that an important first step in an inter-country or -industry comparison,

irrespective of more focused and deeper analyses, is to control for differences in industry

composition, average firm size, as well as average intensity firm R&D effort, and possibly

characteristics of the economic environment. This implies the explicit choice of an

econometric model, or to use a different vocabulary, an (econometrically based) “accounting

framework”, whose implementation would be, of course, largely dependent on the available

information.




                                               6
In particular, we consider it important to base a country or industry comparison not just on the

innovative sales of innovating firms but also on the propensity of firms to innovate or not. If

we restrict the analysis to innovating firms only, we ignore the information about the non-

innovating firms, and as a matter of fact our analysis would be conditional on that restriction,

or otherwise would be likely to suffer from selection biases if we wanted to extend its results

to the whole population of firms. If we limit ourselves to qualitative information on whether

or not firms are innovative (responding yes or no to the question of to whether or not they had

introduced any new or improved products or processes in the last three years), we can

compute an index of ability or propensity to innovate for all firms, but we then fail to exploit

the quantitative information that we have on innovating firms but that we do not have for non

innovating ones.5 Therefore, we surmise that the appropriate way to proceed is to combine

both types of information by implementing an appropriate econometric model or accounting

framework which tries to account for the fact that firms are either innovative or not, and, for

those that are innovative, the extent to which they are so.6 In what follows, we thus focus on a

generalised tobit model, which seems to be the natural two equations specification to consider

(Mohnen and Dagenais, 2001; Mohnen, Mairesse and Dagenais, 2001).


As an important outcome of such accounting framework, we propose to focus on two types of

innovation indicators: “expected innovation” and “innovativeness”. The expected (or

explained) innovation indicator is the share of innovative sales which can be predicted given

the model adopted to account for both the propensity to innovate and the intensity of

innovation, for a given set of values of the exogenous variables in this model. It measures the

share of innovative sales that we would predict for firms in a particular industry, of a given

size and given intensity of R&D effort, in a certain economic environment, and so on.


                                               7
Innovativeness is the unexpected (or unexplained or residual) part of the actual observed share

of innovative sales, which remains unaccounted for by the model as it stands.


The interest of the expected innovation indicator (and the underlying accounting framework)

is that it goes beyond merely reporting the observed share of innovative sales, and attempts to

explicitly assess the differences which are imputable to the differences in industry, size, R&D

effort, economic environment, and so on. It should allow for a better-informed comparison of

innovation performances across different countries, industries or group of firms; and different

time periods.7


Innovativeness is to innovation what multifactor productivity or total factor productivity

(TFP) is to output. The measure of innovativeness is conditional on a model of the

“innovation function” and a set of innovation factors, just as TFP is conditional on an explicit

or implicit specification of the production function and measured factors of production.8

Innovativeness is the “residual” of the innovation function, just as TFP is that of the

production function. Both thus correspond to omitted factors of performance such as

technological, organisational, cultural or environmental factors, although TFP is commonly

interpreted as an indicator of technology. However, both also correspond to other sources of

misspecifications and errors in the underlying model of the innovation or production function,

and could be rightly viewed as “measures of our ignorance”. Both innovativeness and TFP

can, in principle, be measured in terms of growth and levels, and for intertemporal

comparisons (between time periods) as well as for interspatial comparisons (across countries,

industries or firms). In this article, however, we shall estimate and compare levels of industry

or country innovativeness, whereas TFP is usually considered and measured as TFP growth.9



                                               8
Innovativeness could ideally acquire, in the context of innovation comparisons, a usefulness

that would be similar to, if not on a par with, that acquired by TFP over the years in the

context of productivity comparisons. However it remains, in the case of innovativeness as in

that of TFP, that these are not simple indicators, but elaborate constructs, and that their

meaning and usefulness ultimately rely on the consideration of the entire underlying

accounting framework from which they arise.




                                              9
 III. INNOVATION INDICATORS FOR FRENCH MANUFACTURING BASED ON

  CIS2 DATA: ROBUSTNESS TO MICRO-AGGREGATION AND COMPARISON

                                   ACROSS INDUSTRIES




To illustrate the construction of the proposed expected innovation and innovativeness

indicators and, at the same time, examine their robustness to the micro-aggregation procedure

used by Eurostat to protect statistical confidentiality, we estimate our generalised tobit model,

using the raw and micro-aggregated French CIS2 data. The raw data are those collected by

SESSI (Service des Statistiques Industrielles) of the French Ministry of Industry. The micro-

aggregated data are those provided by Eurostat. The industries to which the firms belong are

defined using the NACE 1 (Rev. 2) classification. In order to have a sufficient number of

observations per cross-sectional unit, industries are grouped into ten sectors, following

Eurostat’s (1997) presentation of descriptive statistics from CIS1 (see Annex for the NACE

codes corresponding to these sectors).10


To make the SESSI data comparable to those from Eurostat, the nominal data from SESSI are

converted to euros, divided by the raising factor, and codified in the same way as Eurostat

data, e.g. as missing data for all variables corresponding to questions that needed be answered

by innovators only. Both data sets are cleaned for outliers. Firms with more than 100 000 or

less than 20 employees were eliminated, as were those with an R&D/sales ratio of over 50%.

From each of the two data sets, we take a random sample of 1 000 firms in the high-R&D

sectors (regrouping chemicals, machinery and equipment, electrical machinery and

                                               10
transportation equipment), and a random sample of 1 000 firms in the low-R&D sectors

(regrouping textiles, wood, rubber and plastics, non-metallic mineral products, basic and

fabricated metals, and furniture and not-elsewhere-classified industries). As a first rough

control for industry heterogeneity, we estimate separately our model from the samples in the

high-R&D and the low-R&D sectors, based on previous econometric evidence showing large

differences not only in R&D intensity but also in the returns to R&D between these two

groups of sectors (Griliches and Mairesse, 1984). Note that to control further for industry

heterogeneity, we also introduce industry dummies in each of the two equations of the

generalised tobit model (four in the high-R&D sector samples; six in the low-R&D sector

samples).


The first equation of our tobit model explains the ability or propensity to innovate. Are

considered as innovators, those enterprises that declare having introduced a technologically

new or improved product or process, or having unsuccessful or not yet completed projects to

introduce such a product or process in 1994-96. The second equation explains the intensity of

innovation (if a firm innovates). The intensity of innovation is captured by the share in sales

of innovative products, defined as technologically new or improved products introduced

between 1994 and 1996.11 The explanatory variables introduced in the first equation to

explain the ability to innovate are, in addition to the industry dummies, the fact of being part

of an enterprise group, and size, measured by the number of employees (in logarithm). For the

intensity of innovation we have, in addition to the preceding explanatory variables, an

indicator for the strength of competition, an indicator for the proximity to basic research, the

existence of any kind of co-operation in innovation, the absence of any R&D activity, the

existence of continuous R&D activity, and the R&D intensity. Competition is deemed to be


                                              11
strong when opening new markets or increasing market share gets the highest mark, i.e. three.

Proximity to basic research is given the value of one when sources of information from

universities/higher education or government laboratories have a score of two or three. Firms

conducting both transitory and permanent R&D are classified among the continuous R&D

performers.


An ideal test of the robustness to micro-aggregation of the estimates would have been to

contrast the results obtained from the same firms once with raw data and once with micro-

aggregated data. Instead, we picked two random samples from both data sets for each of two

sub-samples, high-R&D sectors and low-R&D sectors and contrast our results for these

random samples. In a sense, this is a more demanding (and more realistic) test since the

individual and “micro-aggregated” firms in the corresponding samples are not necessarily the

same, but are randomly drawn from the same population of firms, in the high-R&D and low-

R&D sectors respectively.


Before comparing the estimates of our model, it is instructive to compare the descriptive

statistics on the individual and micro-aggregated data samples. This is done in Table 1 and

Figures 1 and 2. As is evident from Table 1, the sample means of the different variables

entering in our model are very close in the two types of samples. First, the sample distribution

with respect to the industrial composition is very similar. Only for textiles does the share of

firms in the two samples differ by more than two percentage points. For all the other variables

(other than the industry dummies), we report the sample means and the sample standard

deviations. We also give the standard error for the test of comparison of the sample means for

the two types of sample.12 A difference between the sample means of a variable in the two

types of sample is statistically significant (at the 5% confidence level) if it exceeds roughly

                                              12
two times the corresponding standard error for the test. An asterisk marks these cases. In the

case of the high-R&D sector samples, we find significant differences among the two types of

samples only for the percentage of R&D-performing firms among the innovators and, among

those, for the share of continuous R&D performers. In the low-R&D sector samples, we find

significant differences for the share in sales of innovative products, the percentage of R&D

performers, the percentage of continuous R&D performers, the R&D/sales ratio, and the

percentage of firms close to basic research. However, even in these cases, the differences are

not very large. We also note that differences between the sample standard deviations for the

individual and micro-aggregated data samples are quite small. In fact, the differences of the

means of all the variables are much greater and statistically significant between the high-R&D

and the low-R&D sector samples (which is consistent with our choice to consider them

separately in estimating our model). Firms in the high-R&D sectors are larger, more

innovative (in frequency and in size), and more R&D-intensive. They also collaborate more in

innovation, face more competition, are closer to basic research, and more often belong to an

enterprise group.




                                             13
In Figures 1 and 2, we present the decile distribution of the share in sales of innovative

products in the four samples. Again, it is clear that, by and large, the distributions are very

close for the micro-aggregated and individual data samples, and the distributions show greater

differences between the low-R&D and high-R&D sector samples (although in both cases, the

bulk of the firms have a relatively low share of innovative sales).


In Table 2, we present the estimation results of the generalised tobit model that underlies the

constructed indicators of innovation. We experienced difficulties in estimating the correlation

coefficient ρ between the error terms in the two equations of the model. A grid search

revealed that the highest likelihood was obtained at values of ρ tending towards one, and we

therefore decided to settle for a value of 0.95.13


We can see first that the estimates are rather similar whether we take the individual or the

micro-aggregated data. If we leave aside the industry dummies, there is only one occurrence

of a significant coefficient in one sample and not in the other for the high-R&D sectors, and

four occurrences for the low-R&D sectors. Actually, the confidence intervals of the estimates

always overlap, except for the wood industry dummy. The two types of data thus do not seem

to yield systematically different estimates, even in such a non-linear model as our tobit model.

These results confirm and reinforce the conclusion already drawn for CIS1 by Hu and

DeBresson (1998) that the use of micro-aggregated data produces reliable results. However, it

should be noted that our model does not perform very well, and, hence, the lack of significant

differences between the two sets of estimates could very well be due in part to their poor

precision.




                                                14
Table 2 also reveals clearly that the model performs somewhat better in the high-R&D than in

the low-R&D sectors. Firm size, R&D intensity and the characteristic of conducting

continuous R&D are strong explanatory factors of innovation for the high-R&D sectors. The

same can be said for firm size, for being part of a group or being an R&D performer, or for

the strength of competition in the case of the low-R&D sectors but, surprisingly, R&D

intensity does not appear to be significant.


In Table 3, we present the results of applying our innovation accounting framework to the

comparison of the innovation performance of the industries in the high-R&D and low-R&D

sector samples, as estimated respectively on the individual data (in the two upper panels) and

on the micro-aggregated data (in the two lower panels). We account for the observed

innovation intensity in terms of the innovation intensity expected (explained by the

underlying model) and innovativeness (unexplained by the model). We also decompose the

expected intensity into an overall average intensity and three categories of “structural” effects

corresponding to the explanatory variables introduced in our model: size and group effects,

R&D effects, and environment effects ( perceived competition and proximity to basic

research). For each industry in a given sample, we start (column 1) from the overall average

of observed innovation intensity for the full sample (i.e. a weighted average of the different

industry averages). Note that this average is defined over all firms in the sample, irrespective

of whether they are innovating or not, taking observed intensity of innovation to be zero for

non-innovating firms. We then compute the expected intensity of innovation for each industry

by taking a linear approximation of the expected intensity of innovation around the overall

observed averages of the different variables in the model. The different terms of this

decomposition are thus approximate measures of the respective contributions of the variables


                                               15
to the expected intensity in each industry. By taking a linear approximation, we ensure that

these measures are independent of the sequential order of the variables in the decomposition.

The “average” row in each panel of Table 3 makes it clear that this decomposition is to be

interpreted in terms of industry effects relative to full sample effects (industry deviations to

full sample effects). It also makes clear that innovativeness, computed as the difference

between the observed and expected average innovation intensity in each industry, is to be

viewed as industry innovativeness relative to overall innovativeness.14 When weighted

appropriately by the different number of observations in each industry in the full sample, the

three categories of effects and innovativeness (shown in the “industry” rows in each panel)

average out to zero.


If we take, for example, the vehicles industry in the case of the individual data sample (first

row of first panel), we see that the average observed innovation intensity in this industry is

24%; that is 2.7% higher than the 21.3% average observed intensity for all firms operating in

the high-R&D sectors. This difference (2.7%) is accounted for by the sum of structural effects

of 3.7% and the relative innovativeness of -1%, the former being mainly due to the combined

effect of size and group-participation (3.6%) and to a tiny extent to the combined effect of all

R&D variables (0.1%).


If we compare the innovation performance in the vehicles and machinery and equipment

industries, we see that according to our estimates the vehicles industry has a clear size/group

advantage as well as an R&D advantage, both types of effects explaining a difference in

expected innovation intensity of 6.7% between the two industries. Actually the difference in

the observed innovation intensity is significantly smaller, of 3.5%, since innovativeness is

higher in the machinery and equipment industry (2.2% compared with –1%).

                                              16
As a general observation, it appears that most of the inter-industry differences in expected

innovation intensity are due to the size/group effect, and that the sum of structural effects and

innovativeness vary roughly in about the same range from 0% to about + or –3% (with the

exception of the chemicals industry and the non elsewhere classified products industry where

innovativeness exceeds + or –6%). In fact, the inter-industry differences in the observed

innovation intensity tend to be themselves relatively limited, in the range of 0 to + or -8%

within the high-R&D and low-R&D sectors(while much wider across the two type of sectors).


Figures 3 and 4 permit an easy industry by industry comparison of the differences in

innovativeness and the sum of “structural effects”, as estimated on the individual and the

micro-aggregated data. By and large, the figures confirm that it does not matter much whether

we work with micro-aggregated data or with individual data. Only for innovativeness in the

vehicles industry do we see a sizeable difference, with a change in the sign.




      IV. COMPARISON OF INNOVATION INDICATORS BETWEEN SEVEN

                   EUROPEAN COUNTRIES BASED ON CIS1 DATA




To further illustrate the construction of our expected innovation and innovativeness

indicators, and our innovation accounting framework, we now turn to an international

comparison of innovation. In Mohnen, Mairesse and Dagenais (2001), we estimated a

generalised tobit model on the pooled CIS1 micro-aggregated data of the manufacturing

sectors of seven European countries: Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, the


                                               17
Netherlands, Norway and Italy. Compared to section III, we now distinguish eleven

industries, adding the food sector for which data were unavailable for France in CIS2 (see the

Annex for the corresponding NACE codes). Again, we estimated the model separately for

high-R&D and low-R&D sector samples. In pooling all observations, we estimated a common

structure that was applied to individual country data in order to compare their innovation

performance.


We defined an innovating firm as one that reports positive values of innovative sales. Indeed,

some firms declare having introduced a new product or process and yet report no innovative

sales. We treated such firms as non-innovative.15 As explanatory variables, we have basically

the same variables as in the preceding model applied to French CIS2 data, with a few minor

differences. We now have not only industry but also country dummies to control for

heterogeneity. The two continuous variables, size (the number of employees in logarithm) and

R&D intensity, are expressed in deviations from the average of country averages, i.e. in

deviation from a hypothetical Europe where each country has equal weight. Co-operation

relates to R&D only. Competition is deemed to be strong when increasing or maintaining

market share receives a rating greater than or equal to four, and proximity to basic research is

given the value of one when sources of information from universities/higher education or

government laboratories are given a score greater than or equal to two (both on a five point

Likert scale). These cut-off values correspond roughly to the median responses. Prior to

estimation, the data were cleaned for outliers and missing values.


In Table 4, we present the results of applying our innovation accounting framework to the

comparison of the innovation performance of seven European countries, in the same format as

we did in Table 3 for the comparison of innovation performance of French manufacturing

                                              18
industries. Here the reference point is the innovation intensity of the hypothetical European

average country, constructed as the simple average of country averages(each country being

given equal weight). The “average” rows in the two panels are thus the simple averages of

country-specific deviations with respect to this European average.


Again, we clearly note a lower intensity of innovation for low-R&D sectors than for high-

R&D sectors. However, the inter-country differences within the two groups of sectors tend to

be wider than what we observed for the inter-industry differences in French manufacturing.

The size/group variable again dominates all the structural effects. Innovativeness varies in

about in the same range as the sum of “structural” effects in the high-R&D sectors, but not in

the low-R&D sectors where it is always much greater.


The biggest observed difference in innovation intensity is between Germany and Italy, of

18.2%in the high-R&D sectors and 27.3% in the low-R&D sectors, in favour of Germany.

However, the difference in expected innovation intensity in the high-R&D sectors is only

5.5% of which 1.7% can be explained by industry composition, 1.8% by R&D effects and

3.4% by environment effects (differences in competition and proximity to basic research).

The difference in expected innovation intensity is even smaller in the low-R&D sectors, of

2.1%, of which 0.8% correspond to R&D effects and 1.2% to environment effects. It is thus

the case that the difference in innovativeness accounts for the bulk of the observed differences

in the innovation intensity between these two countries. And of course the sources of such

large difference in innovativeness remain to be understood.




                                              19
                V. DISCUSSION OF THE INNOVATION INDICATORS




Innovation surveys serve to increase our understanding of the innovation process. Two

important pieces of information contained in these surveys are the proportion of innovative

firms by sector or country and the percentage of innovative products in sales. These variables

complement traditional measures of innovation, based on R&D, patents or publications. In

particular, the share of innovative products in sales provides a direct measure of an innovation

output and gives greater weight to successful innovations, i.e. those accepted by the market.

There is no need to rely on additional pieces of information in order to attribute more weight

to important innovations, as would be necessary in the case of patents application, such as

renewal fees, forward citations, number of claims, number of parallel patents, or litigation

expenses incurred (Lanjouw and Schankerman, 1999).


However, the point here is not to argue in favour of innovation-survey-based indicators over

R&D, patent or bibliometric data (Brouwer and Kleinknecht; 1996;Mohnen and Dagenais,

2001, for a more detailed discussion comparing various innovation indicators). The point of

this article is to demonstrate the usefulness of going beyond descriptive statistics towards

model-based innovation indicators to gain a better understanding of differences in innovation

performance. We propose two constructed indicators that combine information on the

propensity to innovate and the intensity of innovation for innovating firms: expected

innovation and innovativeness. The former corresponds to the share in sales of innovative

products accounted for by variables such as size, R&D effort, closeness to basic research or

competition, while the latter measures the residual share of innovative sales not accounted for

by these explanatory variables. In other words, we propose an innovation accounting

                                              20
framework similar to the familiar growth accounting framework, where innovativeness plays

a role comparable to that of TFP.


These indicators, however, require some caveats. First, the share of innovative sales refers

essentially to product innovations. Looking at the data, it appears that most product innovators

also declare themselves to be process innovators. The two innovations are thus largely

confounded and the share in innovative sales reflects, in part, the rewards from the

introduction of new processes. Second, how do we define an innovation? It is not only a

question of what constitutes an innovation, which in itself is debatable and subject to the

respondent’s appreciation, but also a question of relying on one notion rather than on another:

should we consider the notion of products new to the enterprise but not to the industry, the

notion of products new to the industry or else that of products that are in the initial phase of

their product life cycle? Third, it will be important for a sound comparison of innovation

across space and time to have as much homogeneity as possible in the survey questionnaire.

Efforts are under way to ensure greater harmonisation of the innovation surveys. If some

questions are neglected in one survey, the analysis we prone in this article will be

handicapped because some explanatory variables are absent for one country. In this respect, it

will be useful also to ask more questions to non-innovating firms in order to gain a better

understanding of the reasons why they do not innovate (using perhaps a different version of

the questionnaire with a specific set of questions for such firms, or preferably by including a

larger set of questions common to the two groups of firms).16


In this article, which we view mainly as an exercise in measurement, we have tried to make

good use of the qualitative and quantitative data contained in the innovation surveys.

Although the first results and insights gained are rewarding, the analysis would need to be

                                              21
generalised in various dimensions. More systematic sensitivity analyses would be useful. In

particular, it would be interesting to compare the innovation indicators obtained using a given

country or industry’s innovation structure instead of estimating a common structure by

pooling data. Mohnen and Dagenais (2001) find that the predicted innovation measure for

Ireland and Denmark is similar regardless of whether the econometric structure used to

perform the country comparison is the Danish or the Irish one. It would be also useful to

analyse in more detail the sources of some of the econometric difficulties we encountered in

estimating the generalised tobit specification. Beyond such analyses, it would, of course, be

useful to combine innovation surveys with other survey data in order to increase the number

of relevant explanatory variables to our model as it stands here and to be able to contrast

indicators of R&D, patents, commercial innovations, publications, etc. Another promising line

of research would be to extend the model (by adding more equations) in order to be able to

analyse jointly, and hopefully better, the relations between R&D, innovation, productivity and

other dimensions of firm performances (see Crépon, Mairesse and Duguet, 1998, for a step in

this direction).


Finally, we wish to conclude this article by bringing to the fore the confirmation that the

micro-aggregation procedure used by Eurostat to protect the statistical confidentiality in the

data does not seem to significantly affect the results arising from a relatively sophisticated

analysis of the kind conducted in this article, where in particular the estimated equations of

interest are highly non-linear. We can thus hope that this procedure will be largely developed

and will be an important contribution to the diffusion of micro level information for research

purposes, and hence to its progress.




                                              22
                                        NOTES




*
     *The authors would like to thank Dominique Guellec for encouragements and
     comments and Bronwyn Hall for helpful advice. We are grateful to both SESSI and
     Eurostat for permission to use the individual and micro-aggregated CIS2 data for
     France, and again to Eurostat for permission to use the micro-aggregated CIS1 data
     for different European countries. This study has benefited from financial support by
     the OECD and CNRS.




1.   It does so only with the explicit and specific consent of the countries and under some
     other conditions.

2.   The micro-aggregation process adopted by Eurostat for CIS1 and CIS2 and its
     justification are explained in detail in Eurostat (1996, 1999).

3.   Since what is most generally known is the number of patents not their value, the
     innovative sales variable has also the practical advantage of being continuous (rather
     than a count data variable).

4.   We thus adopt the widest definition, although it would, of course, be interesting to
     consider and take advantage of the distinctions between new and improved products
     and between products new to the firm and new to the market.

5.   There are, in principle, two categories of reasons to explain why we do not have the
     same information for the two types of firms: either a given information is only
     meaningful for innovating firms (the question is not posed to non-innovating firms
     because it makes no sense to ask them); or it is not collected because of the design of


                                           23
     the questionnaire (the question is not posed to non-innovating firms but it could be
     asked with a different questionnaire). For example, most of the questions concerning
     the sources or objectives of innovation fall into the first category, while the questions
     concerning R&D expenditures and its modalities fall into the second one (these
     questions make sense for the two types of firms, even if we can expect that most non-
     innovating firms do not perform R&D, while most R&D-performing firms are
     innovators). In practice, however, the reasons why many questions are restricted to
     innovating firms are not straightforward and fall more or less into the two categories
     (it is conceivable and it would be interesting to ask such questions of non-innovating
     firms, but it is probable that they would have particular difficulties in understanding
     and answering them).

6.   A related option would be to consider that the same model specification will apply to
     both non-innovating and innovating firms. In this case, the variables which are not
     available for the non-innovating firms will be treated as missing variables, and the
     share of innovative sales of non-innovating firms will be simply taken as being zero
     (or a very small but unknown value to be estimated jointly with the other parameters
     of the model). This approach is, however, a priori less satisfactory, and might be
     impossible to implement in practice. For an example in the context of an econometric
     analysis of the productivity of R&D (for a sample of R&D- and non-R&D-
     performing French manufacturing firms) where this approach worked fairly well, see
     Cuneo and Mairesse (1985).

7.   It also opens up the possibility of counterfactual comparison with respect to a
     country, an industry or a group of firms of reference (with hypothetical
     characteristics).

8.   The analogy is direct when TFP is estimated on the basis of an econometrically
     estimated explicit production function; it is not as straightforward when TFP is
     measured on the basis of an overall weighted index of the measured factors of
     production, where the weights are taken to be equal to the corresponding factor
     shares (in total revenue or total cost) available from the firms accounts. In practice, it

                                            24
      is impossible to measure innovativeness based on a similar overall index of the
      factors of innovation for lack of external measures of appropriate weights (and of a
      theory of how, and under which hypotheses, they could be defined and measured). In
      theory, that could be conceivable (and the analogy with TFP could then be complete)
      if we had well-functioning markets for innovation and factors of innovation where
      relative prices and marginal productivities would tend to become equal.

9.    See Caves, Christensen and Diewert (1982) for a rigorous generalisation of TFP in
      the context of interspatial productivity comparisons.

10.   The SCESS, the statistical office of the Ministry of Agriculture, (not the SESSI)
      collected the French CIS2 data for the food sector. We have excluded the food sector
      from our analysis.

11.   More precisely, we do not take as the dependent variable of the second equation the
      share of innovative sales itself, say y2, which is limited to the 0 to 1 interval, but the
      logit-transformed share of innovative sales, that is z2 = log (y2/(1-y2)) which is
      unbounded. However, the logit transformation is undefined for the innovating firms
      declaring that none of their sales are innovative sales or on the contrary that all of
      their sales are innovative sales. For these firms, we replaced shares equal to 0 by 0.01
      and shares equal to 1 by 0.99. We have verified that taking somewhat different
      values for these extreme shares does not affect our estimates in practice.

12.   The standard error for the test of comparison of the sample means for the two type of
      samples is calculated as the average of the individual and micro-aggregated sample
      standard deviations (which are usually quite close) divided by square root of the
      common size of these samples (i.e. 1 000 ). Note that we do the test as if the
      individual and micro-aggregated firms in these samples were the same, (which can
      only be the case for a fraction of them, since they are randomly drawn from a larger
      population); if we were to assume that they were all different, it will be more
      appropriate to multiply the standard error calculated as above by      2 , and the test of
      comparison will thus be less stringent.

                                             25
13.   The difficulties we experienced in estimating ρ seem to be rather typical of the
      generalised tobit model. They are sometimes ignored when the likelihood function
      has not a unique (absolute) maximum but several local maxima, if the software
      program used converges to one of the local maximum (without searching for the
      others). However, it is reasonable to think that these difficulties are not only
      technical. They also reflect the fact that the specification of the model leaves
      something to be desired, if only for lack of more explanatory variables (and
      particularly so for the probit equation).

14.   If our model was linear, relative innovativeness would be nothing but the industry
      dummy effect. However, since it is non-linear, relative innovativeness as computed
      also captures the linear approximation error. We have found, however, that for most
      industries, the linear approximation error remains small compared to the industry
      dummy effect.

15.   In the estimation on French CIS2 data (in Section III), we make a slightly different
      assumption. There, a firm which declares itself to be innovative, but which gives a
      zero response to the percentage of innovative sales, is classified among innovating
      firms with a share of innovative sales taken to be 0.01. However, as previously, we
      take as the dependent variable of the second equation the logit-transformed share of
      innovative sales (and replace shares equal to 1 by 0.99).

16.   See endnote 5 above.




                                             26
                                          Annex


                              INDUSTRY DEFINITIONS



Industry     NACE                                  Industry definition
              code
             (Rev. 1)

                                     High-R&D sectors

Vehicles      34-35     Manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers, semi-trailers, and other
                        transport equipment

Chemicals     23-24     Manufacture of coke, refined petroleum products and nuclear fuel,
                        manufacture of chemicals and chemical products

Machinery      29       Manufacture of machinery and equipment nec

Electrical    30-33     Manufacture of office machinery and computers, electrical
                        machinery
                        and apparatus, radio, television and communication equipment
                        and apparatus, medical, precision and optical instruments, watches
                        and clocks

                                     Low-R&D sectors

Food*         15-16     Manufacture of food, beverages and tobacco

Textiles      17-19     Manufacture of textiles, wearing apparel, dressing and dyeing of
                        fur, tanning, and dressing of leather, luggage, handbags, saddlery,
                        harness and footwear




                                              27
Wood             20-22    Manufacture of wood and products of wood and cork, except
                          furniture, manufacture of straw and plaiting materials, pulp, paper,
                          and paper products, publishing, printing, and reproduction of
                          recorded media

Plastics,         25      Manufacture of rubber and plastic products
rubber

Non-metallic      26      Manufacture of other non-metallic mineral products

Basic metals     27-28    Manufacture of basic metals, fabricated metal products, except
                          machinery and equipment

NEC               36      Manufacture of furniture, manufacturing nec




      *The food industry is excluded from our analysis of the French data in section III.




                                              28
                                     REFERENCES



Archibuggi, D., P. Cohendet, A. Kristensen and K.A. Schäffer (1994), Evaluation of the

     Community Innovation Survey (CIS), Phase I, EIMS Publication No. 11, IKE Group,

     Department of Business Studies, Aalborg, Denmark.


Brouwer, E. and A. Kleinknecht (1996), “Determinants of Innovation: A Micro-econometric

     Analysis of Three Alternative Output Indicators”, in A. Kleinknecht (ed.), Determinants

     of Innovation: The Message from New Indicators, Macmillan Press, London.


Caves, D., L. Christensen and E. Diewert (1982), “Multilateral Comparisons of Output, Input,

     and Productivity using Superlative Index Numbers”, Economic Journal 92, pp. 1393-

     1414.


Crépon, B., E. Duguet and J. Mairesse (1998), “Research and Development, Innovation and

     Productivity: An Econometric Analysis at the Firm Level”, Economics of Innovation

     and New Technology, Vol. 7, No. 2, pp. 115-158.


Cunéo, Ph. et J. Mairesse (1985), “Recherche-développement et performances des

     entreprises”, Revue Economique, numéro spécial sur l’Économie de la recherche-

     développement, Vol. 36, No. 4, pp. 1001-1041


Eurostat (1996), Manual on Disclosure Control Methods. 9E, Statistical Office of the

     European Communities, Luxembourg.


Eurostat (1999), “Annex II.9. Micro-Aggregation Process”, in The Second Community

     Innovation Survey, Statistical Office of the European Communities, Luxembourg.

                                            29
Eurostat, (1997), The Community Innovation Survey, CD-Rom, Statistical Office of the

     European Communities, Luxembourg.


Griliches, Z. and J. Mairesse (1984), “Productivity and R&D at the Firm Level”, in Z.

     Griliches (ed.), R&D, Patents and Productivity, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.


Hu, X. and C. DeBresson (1998), “An Empirical Evaluation of the Eurostat Micro-

     aggregation Procedure for the Analysis of the Community Innovation Survey”,

     technical report, mimeo.


Lanjouw, J. and M. Schankerman (1999), “The Quality of Ideas: Measuring Innovation with

     Multiple Indicators”, NBER Working Paper No. 7345, Cambridge, Mass.


Mohnen, P. and M. Dagenais (2001), “Towards an Innovation Intensity Index. The Case of

     CIS-1 in Denmark and Ireland”, in A. Kleinknecht and P. Mohnen (eds.), Innovation

     and Firm Performance. Econometric Explorations of Survey Data, Palgrave, London

     (forthcoming).


Mohnen, P., J. Mairesse and M. Dagenais (2001), “The Importance of Being Innovative: A

     Comparison across Seven European Countries”, mimeo.


OECD (1963), The Measurement of Scientific and Technical Activities – Frascati Manual,

     OECD, Paris.


OECD (1992), “OECD Proposed Guidelines for Collecting and Interpreting Technological

     Innovation Data – Oslo Manual”, first edition, OECD, Paris.




                                            30
OECD and Eurostat (1997), OECD Proposed Guidelines for Collecting and Interpreting

Technological Innovation Data – Oslo Manual, second edition, OECD, Paris.




                                           31
                                     Table 1. Summary statistics: CIS2 data for France

                         Individual data from SESSI and micro-aggregated data from Eurostat
                                           “high-R&D“ and “low-R&D“ sectors

 Variable                                              High-R&D sectors                     Low-R&D sectors
                               Type of data                          Micro-                              Micro-
                                              Individual data                     Individual data
                                                                aggregated data                     aggregated data
 Number of firms                                  1 000              1 000            1 000              1 000
 % of firms in vehicles                            15.6               14.3                -                  -
 % of firms in chemical                            22.7               24.2                -                  -
 % of firms in M&E                                 29.4               29.4                -                  -
 % of firms in electrical                          32.3                32.1               -                  -
 % of firms in textile                               -                   -              22.6              19.8
 % of firms in wood                                  -                   -              20.4              20.7
 % of firms in plastic                               -                   -               9.3              10.7
 % of firms in non-metal.                            -                   -               8.6               8.8
 % of firms in metals                                -                   -              31.1              31.3
 % of firms in nec                                   -                   -               8.0               8.7
 Average number of employees (in logs)             5.21               5.18              4.51              4.56
                                                  (0.05)             (0.05)           (0.04)             (0.04)
                                                  [1.46]             [1.46]           [1.20]             [1.21]
 % of firms belonging to a group                   69.4               67.8              45.8              49.2
                                                  (1.47)             (1.47)           (1.58)             (1.58)
                                                  [46.1]             [46.8]           [49.9]             [50.0]
 Percentage of innovators                          75.0               76.1              48.2              45.9
                                                  (1.36)             (1.36)           (1.56)             (1.56)
                                                  [43.3]             [42.7]           [50.0]             [49.9]
 Share in sales of innovative products, for        28.4               27.8            23.3*               21.2*
 innovators (y2)                                  (0.86)             (0.86)           (0.84)             (0.84)
                                                  [27.2]             [27.4]           [28.5]             [24.8]
 Log of y2/(1-y2), trimmed                        -1.38               -1.40           -1.83*             -1.97*
                                                  (0.06)             (0.06)            (0.07             (0.07)
                                                   [2.0]              [2.1]            [2.5])             [2.1]
 % of R&D firms among innovators                  83.9*              76.0*            56.9*               49.9*
                                                  (1.26)             (1.26)           (1.58)             (1.58)
                                                  [36.8]             [42.8]           [49.6]             [50.1]
 Average R&D/sales in %, if performing              4.6                 4.8             1.8*               2.4*
 R&D                                              (0.19)             (0.19)           (0.08)             (0.08)
                                                   [6.0]              [5.7]             [2.4]             [2.5]
 % of continuous R&D, if performing R&D           80.0*              84.1*            67.9*               74.2*
                                                  (1.21)             (1.21)           (1.43)             (1.43)
                                                  [40.1]             [36.6]           [46.8]             [43.8]
 % of co-operating           firms   among         52.7               52.7              33.4              34.4
 innovators                                       (1.58)             (1.58)           (1.50)             (1.50)
                                                  [50.0]             [50.0]           [47.2]             [47.6]
 % of strongly perceived competition               68.0               66.0              54.8              57.1
 among innovators                                 (1.49)             (1.49)           (1.57)             (1.57)
                                                  [46.7]             [47.4]           [49.8]             [49.6]
 % of close proximity to basic research            25.7               26.3            15.6*               13.1*
 among innovators                                 (1.39)             (1.39)           (1.11)             (1.11)
                                                  [43.8]             [44.1]           [36.3]             [33.8]
Note: The first figures in each cell are the sample means, while those in brackets are the sample standard
deviations. The figures in parentheses are the standard errors of the tests of comparison of the sample means for
the individual and micro-aggregated data samples (computed as the average of two corresponding standard
deviations divided by the square root of 1000). The superscript * indicates that these sample means are
significantly different at the 5% confidence level.




                                                                32
Table 2. Maximum likelihood estimates of the generalised tobit model of innovation: CIS2 data
for France
                           Micro-aggregated data from Eurostat and individual data from SESSI

                                                          High-R&D sectors

                                                   Micro-aggregated data                         Individual data
Variables                                  Propensity to              Intensity of   Propensity to           Intensity of
                                             innovate                 innovation       innovate               innovation
Vehicles                                   0.51* (.13)              -3.33* (.33)     0.44* (.12)             -3.45* (.30)
Chemicals                                  0.63* (.12)              -3.71* (.32)     0.40* (.12)             -3.66* (.30)
Machinery and equipment                    0.82* (.11)              -2.82* (.29)     0.66* (.11)             -2.75* (.28)
Electrical                                 0.71* (.10)              -3.03* (.30)     0.60* (.10)             -2.97* (.28)
Log-employees                              0.29* (.04)                0.45* (.07)    0.24* (.04)             0.50* (.07)
Part of a group                            0.15     (.11)             0.27   (.23)   0.30* (.11)             0.31   (.23)
R&D/sales                                         -x-                 3.17*(1.42)         -x-                3.17*(1.30)
Innovators not doing R&D                          -x-              -0.19     (.23)        -x-                -0.31 (.21)
Doing R&D on a continuous basis                   -x-                 0.52* (.21)         -x-                0.39* (.18)
Co-operating in innovation                        -x-                 0.11   (.14)        -x-                0.22 (.14)
Perceived competition                             -x-                 0.22   (.14)        -x-                 0.10 (.14)
Proximity to basic research                       -x-              -0.02     (.16)        -x-                -0.13 (.16)
Standard error of error terms              1 (assumed)                2.47* (.07)    1 (assumed)              2.45*(.07)
Correlation coefficient of the two error                 0.95 (imposed)                          0.95 (imposed)
terms

                                                          Low-R&D sectors
                                                   Micro-aggregated data                         Individual data
Variables                                  Propensity to              Intensity of   Propensity to           Intensity of
                                             innovate                 innovation       innovate               innovation
Textile                                    -0.44* (.10)             -5.08* (.42)     -0.33* (.09)            -5.28* (.42)
Wood                                       -0.50* (.10)             -5.56* (.44)     -0.23* (.11)            -5.03* (.44)
Plastic and rubber                          0.18 (.14)              -3.77* (.49)     0.29* (.14)             -4.09* (.51)
Non-metallic products                      -0.24        (.14)       -4.61* (.54)      0.03 (.14)             -4.89* (.54)
Basic metal                                -0.18* (.09)             -4.90* (.40)     -0.12      (.08)        -5.10* (.38)
NEC                                         0.01 (.14)              -3.19* (.51)      0.04 (.14)             -4.11* (.53)
Log-employees                              0.23* (.04)                0.38* (.12)    0.23* (.04)             0.48* (.14)
Part of a group                            0.28* (.10)                0.40 (.29)      0.18 (.10)             0.74* (.34)
R&D/sales                                         -x-               -2.64 (5.14)          -x-                8.35 (5.50)
Innovators not doing R&D                          -x-               -0.66* (.31)          -x-                -0.66* (.27)
Doing R&D on a continuous basis                   -x-                 0.31 (.30)          -x-                -0.36 (.29)
Co-operating in innovation                        -x-                 0.18 (.20)          -x-                -0.05 (.22)
Perceived competition                             -x-                 0.37* (.17)         -x-                0.55* (.19)
Proximity to basic research                       -x-                 0.16   (.28)        -x-                0.30 (.29)
Standard error of error terms              1 (assumed)                3.03* (.11)    1 (assumed)             3.43* (.12)
Correlation coefficient of the two error                 0.95 (imposed)                          0.95 (imposed)
terms
Note: Standard errors of estimates in parentheses. The superscript * indicates a coefficient statistically different
from zero at a 5% confidence level.




                                                                 33
               Table 3. Average observed and expected innovation intensities, and innovativeness
                   Ten manufacturing sectors, individual and micro-aggregated CIS2 data for France
                   Average
                                Size +                                    Sum of
                   intensity:                             Environment                 Expected                     Observed
                                group      R&D effects                   structural               Innovativeness
                   full                                     effects                   intensity                    intensity
                                effects                                   effects
                   sample
                                             High-R&D sectors – individual data
Vehicles              21.3       3.6           0.1            0.0           3.7         25.0           -1.0          24.0
Chemicals             21.3       1.3           0.4            0.0           1.7         23.0           -6.7          16.3
Machinery             21.3       -2.5          -0.6           0.0          -3.0         18.3           2.2           20.5
&equipment
Electrical            21.3       -0.6          0.2            0.0          -0.4         20.9           3.3           24.2
products
Average               21.3       0.0           0.0            0.0           0.0         21.3           0.0           21.3
                                              Low-R&D sectors – individual data
Textiles              11.2       -0.5          0.1            -0.3         -0.7         10.5           -1.5           9.1
Wood                  11.2       0.1           -0.3           -0.2         -0.4         10.9           -0.4          10.5
Plastics, rubber      11.2       2.0           -0.2           0.8           2.7         13.9           1.7           15.6
Non-metallic          11.2       1.8           -0.1           0.8           2.5         13.7           -3.0          10.7
mineral
products
Basic metals          11.2       -0.4          0.2            0.0          -0.2         11.1           -0.5          10.6
NEC                   11.2       -0.3          -0.1           0.0          -0.4         10.8           6.5           17.4
Average               11.2       0.0           0.0            0.0           0.0         11.2           0.0           11.2
                                          High-R&D sectors – micro-aggregated data
Vehicles              21.1       2.0           -0.3           0.0           1.7         22.8           1.2           24.0
Chemicals             21.1       1.3           0.4            0.0           1.7         22.9           -6.9          16.0
Machinery &           21.1       -1.8          -0.8           0.0          -2.6         18.5           2.4           20.9
equipment
Electrical            21.1       -0.4          0.5            0.0           0.1         21.3           2.7           24.0
products
Average               21.1       0.0           0.0            0.0           0.0         21.1           0.0           21.1
                                          Low-R&D sectors – micro-aggregated data
Textiles              9.7        -0.4          0.0            -0.1         -0.5          9.2           -1.7           7.5
Wood                  9.7        0.0           -0.1           -0.1         -0.2          9.5           -2.7           6.8
Plastics, rubber      9.7        1.5           0.0            0.5           2.0         11.7           2.7           14.4
Non-metallic          9.7        0.6           0.3            0.2           1.2         10.9           -1.4           9.5
mineral
products
Basic metals          9.7        -0.3          0.1            0.0          -0.2          9.5           -0.7           8.8
NEC                   9.7        0.7           -0.5           0.1           0.3         10.0           9.7           19.7
Average               9.7        0.0           0.0            0.0           0.0          9.7           0.0            9.7




                                                            34
              Table 4. Average observed and expected innovation intensities, and innovativeness
                       Seven European countries, micro-aggregated CIS1 data from Eurostat

                                     Size +                              Sum of
              European    Industry              R&D      Environment                 Expected    Innovative-   Observed
                                     group                              structural
              intensity    effect              effects     effects                   intensity      ness       intensity
                                     effects                             effects
                                                     High-R&D sectors
Belgium         34.7        -1.2      2.6        0.9         0.7           3.0         37.7          0.2         37.9
Denmark         34.7         1.3      -0.7       0.4         0.4           1.4         36.1          0.7         36.8
Germany         34.7        1.3       0.6        0.9         1.7          4.5          39.2          4.6         43.8
Ireland         34.7        -0.6      -2.2       0.1        -0.1          -2.6         32.1          3.1         35.2
Italy           34.7         0.4      1.1       -0.9        -1.6          -1.0         33.7         -8.1         25.6
Netherlands     34.7        -0.8      -1.1      -0.6         0.1          -2.4         32.3          1.0         33.3
Norway          34.7        -0.5      -0.2      -0.7        -1.5          -2.9         31.8         -1.6         30.2
Average         34.7         0.0      0.0        0.0         0.0           0.0         34.7          0.0         34.7
                                                     Low-R&D sectors
Belgium         22.3       0.4        0.3        0.2         0.1           1.0         23.3          5.5         28.8
Denmark         22.3       0.0        0.7        0.0        -0.1           0.6         22.9         -2.7         20.2
Germany         22.3       0.3        0.4        0.4         0.6           1.7         24.0         13.5         37.5
Ireland         22.3       0.4        -0.9       0.2         0.2          -0.1         22.2          3.3         25.5
Italy           22.3       0.7        -0.1      -0.4        -0.6          -0.4         21.9        -11.7         10.2
Netherlands     22.3       -1.0       -0.2      -0.2        -0.1          -1.5         20.8         -2.4         18.4
Norway          22.3       -0.8       -0.2      -0.1        -0.2          -1.3         21.0         -5.4         15.6
Average         22.3       0.0        0.0        0.0         0.0           0.0         22.3          0.0         22.3
Note: Small discrepancies are due to rounding errors.




                                                           35
                                             Figure 1. Histogram of the share of innovative sales
                                   for the sub-sample of innovative firms in the high-R&D sector samples

                                          Individual data from SESSI and micro-aggregated data from Eurostat




                  250




                  200




                  150
Number of firms




                  100




                  50




                   0
                        0   0.05   0.15    0.25   0.35   0.45   0.55   0.65   0.75   0.85       0.95   1
                                                  Share of innovative sales


                                      Micro-aggregated Data                   Individual Data
                             Figure 2. Histogram of the share of innovative sales
                   for the sub-sample of innovative firms in the low-R&D sector samples

                        Individual data from SESSI and micro-aggregated data from Eurostat




                  250




                  200
Number of firms




                  150




                  100




                  50




                   0
                         0   0.05   0.15     0.25   0.35   0.45    0.55     0.65    0.75    0.85   0.95   1
                                                    Share of innovative sales

                                           Micro-aggregated data          Individual data
                                            Figure 3. “Structural effects” and innovativeness in the high-R&D sector samples

                                                         Individual data from SESSI and micro-aggregated data from Eurostat


                                     12


                                     10


                                      8
Variations in innovation intensity




                                      6


                                      4


                                      2


                                      0
                                              Vehicles                        Chemicals                Machinery and equipment                 Electrical
                                     -2


                                     -4


                                     -6


                                     -8
                                                                                                 Industries

                                                            structural ind.    structural agg.     innovativeness ind.   innovativeness agg.



                                             Figure 4. ”Structural effects” and innovativeness in the low-R&D sector samples

                                                         Individual data from SESSI and micro-aggregated data from Eurostat


                                     12


                                     10


                                     8
Variations in innovation intensity




                                     6


                                     4


                                     2


                                     0
                                          Textiles            Wood             Plastics, rubber         Non-metallic         Basic metals            NEC
                                     -2                                                               mineral products


                                     -4


                                     -6


                                     -8
                                                                                                Industries

                                                            structural ind.   structural agg.      innovativeness ind.   innovativeness agg.
