                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF INTERNATIONAL UNIONS


                                             Alberto Alesina
                                            Ignazio Angeloni
                                              Federico Etro


                                          Working Paper 8645
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8645


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2001




We thank Robert Barro, Massimo Bordignon, Francesco Caselli, Chris Foote, Karina Firme, Greg Mankiw,
David Laibson and participants in seminars at the Center for Financial Studies, University of Frankfurt,
Catholic University of Milan and Harvard University for useful comments. Alesina gratefully acknowledges
financial support from the NSF through the NBER. Etro is grateful to Robert Barro for encouragement and
support and acknowledges financial support from Fondazione Luigi Einaudi. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the affiliating
institutions.


© 2001 by Alberto Alesina, Ignazio Angeloni and Federico Etro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Political Economy of International Unions
Alberto Alesina, Ignazio Angeloni and Federico Etro
NBER Working Paper No. 8645
December 2001
JEL No. F2, F42, H73, P16



                                              ABSTRACT

        We model an international union as a group of countries deciding together the provision of certain
public goods and policies because of spillovers. The countries are heterogeneous either in preferences
and/or in economic fundamentals. The trade off between the benefits of coordination and the loss of
independent policymaking endogenously determines the size, the composition and the scope of unions.
Our model implies that the equilibrium size of the union is inversely related to the degree of heterogeneity
between countries and to the spectrum of common policies. Hence, there is a trade off between
enlargement and deepening of coordination: a union involved in too many collateral activities will be
favored by few countries, while a union which focuses on a core of activities will be favored by many
countries. However the political equilibrium implies a bias toward excessive centralization and small size
of the union. This bias can be corrected if there is a constitutional commitment of the union to centralize
only certain policies.




Alberto Alesina                      Ignazio Angeloni                     Federico Etro
Department of Economics              European Central Bank                Department of Economics
Harvard University                   Frankfurt am Main                    Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138                  ignazio.angeloni@ecb.int             Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                                                  and NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu                                                      fetro@nber.org
1     Introduction

Historically, the nation state concentrated most of the authority in every pol-

icy domain.   In recent decades, however, we observe a more complex picture

characterized by two phenomena: first, the demand for more autonomy (if not

secession) at a subnational level; second, the creation or strengthening, at the

supranational level, of country unions whihc assume certain policy prerogatives

and harmonize them across the whole membership.

    The increasing integration of the world economy is (at least in part) re-

sponsible for both developments.     On the one hand, as argued by Alesina,

Spolaore and Wacziarg (2000), in an integrated world economy small countries

can prosper because their market is the world. On the other hand the increasing

integration leads to more spillovers, externalities, need for policy coordination

and, in more extreme cases, supernational jurisdictions. Examples include re-

gional trade agreements like Mercosur or Nafta, Currency unions like the French

Franc zone, military alliances, like NATO. Other examples of unions include

associations of countries with broader mandates like WTO or the UN. The

most striking example is perhaps the European Union which, especially after

the Maastricht Treaty, has substantially broadened its supranational mandate.

An important political debate is now mounting in Europe on what the functions

of the Union should be, and where the boundaries between Union’s and national

prerogatives should be placed, in light particularly of the prospective entry of

a long list of applicants, especially from central and eastern Europe. Several


                                       3
observers ( Alesina and Wacziarg (1999), and especially, Alesina, Angeloni and

Schnuknet (2001)) have pointed out several inconsistencies between the scope

of the European Union and its enlargement. Related issues concerns what the

WTO should do (see Bagwell and Staiger (2001)) or the role of the UN.

   This paper examines the political-economy of multi country unions. It ex-

amines, in particular, what are the forces which determine the equilibrium size

and composition of unions, and discusses issues of optimal and equilibrium at-

tribution of prerogatives between the union and the member countries. The

core of our model, and the element that in our view is central to the political

economy of all unions (including the United States), is the existence of a tension

between the heterogeneity of individual countries’ preferences and the advan-

tage of taking certain decision in common, i.e. of centralizing certain budget

decisions, harmonizing certain policies, enforcing defense of borders.

   Our results shed light on current policy debates. First, the size of spillovers

between countries and the heterogeneity between their preferences or their eco-

nomic fundamentals determines endogenously the size of the union and its com-

position. Even if multiple equilibria can arise because of strategic complementar-

ities in the choice to join the union, under mild conditions all of these equilibria

are characterized by countries with similar preferences, and the size of the union

increases when the heterogeneity between countries is reduced or the spillovers

increase.

   Second, the size of the union is inversely related to the spectrum of common



                                         4
policies which are centralized at the union level. That is, for given heterogeneity,

in equilibrium one obtains either small unions that coordinate a lot, or large

unions in which very few functions are merged.

   Third, and this is probably our most original result, we find that the political

equilibrium implies a bias toward excessive centralization and small size of the

union, unless there is a constitutional commitment of the union to centralize

only certain policies. The source of this ineﬃciency is a time-inconsistency

problem: once the union is formed, a majority of members will want to increase

the policy prerogatives of the union, and the expectation of this induces many

countries to step back from the beginning. Therefore this results underscore the

necessity of specifying ex ante a clear mandate for the union in a Constitutional

stage.

   Finally, the new members most likely to be admitted are those with prefer-

ences similar to the status quo. If new member(s) would substantially change

the median of the union, a majority would block the admission, despite the pos-

itive externality that the new entrants may bring. Moreover, if the union has a

redistributive role, “poor” countries applying for admission would be rejected,

while rich countries willing to join would be welcomed.

   The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the basic model.

Section 3 characterizes the equilibrium size of unions and discusses issues of en-

largement. Section 4 discusses the trade-oﬀ between the number of policy pre-

rogatives which are centralized and the size of the unions. Section 5 introduces



                                         5
heterogeneity in economic fundamentals (productivity) instead of heterogeneity

in preferences between countries. The last section concludes.




2     The Model

Consider a group of N equally sized countries with the population size normal-

ized at 1. For the moment we assume that economic fundamentals (including

income) are the same in all the countries, while preferences diﬀer across coun-

tries. In Section 5 we allow for diﬀerences in economic fundamentals.

    The utility function for the representative individual of country i is:



                                Ui = ci + αi H(gi )                           (1)

where gi is the per capita and total level of government spending in country

i, ci is private consumption which enters linearly in the utility function for

simplicity and Hg (·) > 0, Hgg (·) < 0. The parameter αi > 0 captures how much

the representative individual of country i values public consumption relative to

private consumption: we will refer to αi as the preference of country i and we

assume that these parameters are observable and, without loss of generality,

that countries are ordered such that α1 ≤ α2 ≤ · · · ≤ αN −1 ≤ αN .

    If N countries form a union all together, the representative individual in

member country i has the following utility function:




                                        6
                                                         N
                                                         X
                              Ui = ci + αi H(gi + β               gj )                     (2)
                                                       j=1,j6=i

where β ∈ [0, 1] captures the spillover eﬀects from other countries’ government

spending on the “home” country.1 Thus, we assume that membership in the

union is a necessary condition for receiving some externalities, which are zero

if a country is out. This is a simplifying assumption that can be extended by

allowing some or all of the outsiders to be aﬀected (positively or negatively) by

the externalities of the union.2

   One can interpret gi as a public good, such as infrastructures and public

investment (fiscal unions) or defense (military unions). We may also view the

public good in a broader sense. For instance, one can think of custom unions or

free trade agreements, where the benefits derive from the coordination of trade

policies between the union’s members and with the external countries while the

“tax” (or the “cost”) is the loss of an independent trade policy.3 One can also

think of one public good as a common currency. In this case, joining currency

unions may bring the benefits of easier trade, commitment to low inflation,

etc.; the cost would be the loss of monetary independence.4 Another possible

interpretation for our model would be in terms of risk sharing and redistribu-

  1 When    β = 1(0) we are in the case of a pure public good at the union (national) level.

  2 See   Etro (2001) for this extension.

  3 For   a recent general discussion see Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2001).

  4 See   Mundell (1960) and Alesina and Barro (2002).




                                               7
tion between federated countries (fiscal federalism).5 The bottom line is that a

union improves some technology for public good provision and/or provides some

credible commitment to a better policy. Notice that, while many policies are

characterized by positive spillovers between countries (prosper-thy-neighbor poli-

cies), like the one directly considered here, other policies have negative spillovers

(beggar-thy-neighbor policies). The spirit of our model would remain unchanged

if we directly considered this second class of policies - for instance, by assuming

β < 0.

    We assume that income (y) is exogenously given and equal for everyone in

every country. Each country has a balanced budget, therefore gi = ti ∈ (0, y)

where ti are the lump sum taxes raised in country i.6 Using the government

budget constraint, we then have


                                                                 N
                                                                 X
                            Ui = y − gi + αi H(gi + β                     gj )               (3)
                                                               j=1,j6=i

    Consider first the decentralized equilibrium, in which every country acts in-

dependently in the union, taking as given the spending of all the other countries.

The first order conditions for a maximum in country i imply:


                                                     X
                                    αi Hg (gi + β           gj ) = 1                         (4)
                                                     j6=i
   5 See   Persson and Tabellini (1996a, 1996b), Alesina and Perotti (1998) and Oates (1999)

on the political economy of fiscal federalism.
   6 We    could extend the model to distorsive taxation without changing the qualitative results

(see also section 5).


                                                 8
   Let’s call the solution of the system of N equations (4) as g n (αi ) where

n stands for Nash equilibrium, which is ineﬃcient because countries do not

take into account the eﬀect of their choice on the other countries. Due to the

free-riding problem, g n (αi ) is decreasing in the size of the externality β, and

∂g n (αi )/∂αi > 0.

   Consider now the case in which the union centralizes the decision on public

expenditure. Let’s start from the first best policy. Since all countries have the

same population and the same exogenous income, it is reasonable to focus on

an utilitarian union. This would choose diﬀerent public expenditures for each

country so as to maximize the sum of their utilities; the optimality conditions

for each country i are:

                                 X                     X                      X
                 αi Hg (gi + β          gj ) = 1 − β          αj Hg (gj + β          gk )   (5)
                                 j6=i                  j6=i                   k6=j


which is another system of N equations, with solution g ∗ (αi ) again increasing

in αi , but higher than g d (αi ) for each αi .

   The first best policy requires that the union dictates a diﬀerent policy for

each country and that the policy preferences of every country are known and

verifiable. This seems highly unrealistic especially if information about coun-

tries’ preferences are not verifiable.7 Moreover, transfers or decision rules which

are country-specific and contingent on the country’s preferences (and on its

spillovers with other countries) may be diﬃcult to be politically supported in a
  7 For   a specific discussion on this point in a related two countries model with asymmetric

information and distorsive taxation, see Bordignon, Manasse and Tabellini (2001).



                                                 9
world of otherwise identical countries. For this reason we assume that a policy

decided at the union level has to be the same for every country and cannot be

contingent to the countries’ preference parameter α. In particular, we focus on

the simplest institutional rule, majority voting, and we study the determination

of the equilibrium size of the union.8



2.1     Political Equilibrium

Let us consider the one-country-one-vote rule, which is reasonable since for the

moment we are assuming that all the countries have equal size. Define αm as

the median αi . Note that given the structure of preferences we can apply the

median voter theorem: the solution of this majority voting problem is the policy

most preferred by the “voter” (i.e. by the country) with the median α. This

is because the diﬀerences in preferences between members is confined to one

parameter which enters linearly in the utility function and single peakedness

holds. Thus the level of spending chosen by the union gm solves the following

first order condition:



                                                             1
                       αm Hg {gm [1 + β(N − 1)]} =                                     (6)
                                                       1 + β(N − 1)

We summarize the features of the political equilibrium provision of public good

in the following proposition:
   8 Alesina,   Angeloni and Etro (2001) investigate holding the size of the union constant

diﬀerent solutions for the organization of the union




                                             10
   Proposition 1. The political equilibrium provision of public goods increases

in αm and it decreases (increases) with the size of the union and of the spillovers

if the elasticity of the marginal utility of public goods is higher (lower) than unity,

while, under unitary elasticity we have size-independence.


   First of all, note from (6) that gm (αm ) is increasing in αm , because:
                                  µ                          ¶
                     dgm   gm                   1
                         =                                       >0                (7)
                     dαm   αm         θ{gm [1 + β(N − 1)]}

where θ(g) = −Hgg (g)g/Hg (g) > 0 is the usual index of relative concavity, while

the comparative statics with respect to the size of the externality β, and the

size of the union N are ambiguous:
                                            µ                              ¶
              dgm            gm                 1 − θ{gm [1 + β(N − 1)]}
                     =                                                             (8)
           dβ(N − 1)   [1 + β(N − 1)]             θ{gm [1 + β(N − 1)]}

   Hence, the political equilibrium provision of public goods decreases (in-

creases) with the size of the union and of the spillovers if and only if θ{gm [1 +

β(N − 1)] > (<)1.

   The ambiguous eﬀect of an increase in spillovers on the union policy choice

is due to the usual substitution and income eﬀects. But the same argument

holds, more surprisingly for an increase in the number of members. This will

be relevant when we will examine the creation of a union and the entry of a

new country. Even if this new country is strictly in favor of a small government

and it will increase votes in this direction inside the union, its entry could

end up determining a bigger size government: this can happen if the concavity


                                           11
of the function H(·) is not too strong. The intuition is that in this case the

substitution eﬀect (more public goods because they produce more spillovers)

more than compensates the income eﬀect (more consumption because we have

already a lot of spillovers). Also the opposite could happen: the entry of a

country in favor of a big government could end up reducing the size of it the

concavity of H(·) is strong enough.9

     Finally, remember that the political equilibrium is ineﬃcient. However, we

cannot exclude that the median country and some countries around it may prefer

the political equilibrium solution to the utilitarian optimum: if these countries

were the majority in the union we would have a majority in support of it and

so an extreme form of status quo bias inside the union.




3      The Creation of the Union and its Enlarge-

       ment

In this section we characterize the equilibrium size of a union. We begin by an

“initial stage” of union formation in which we have M potential members. The

set of “potential members” is composed of countries that can join the union,

without an approval of the existing union members. We want to characterize

the size of the union N ≤ M and its composition.                       In this formation stage
    9 This   result holds for any non separable utility function, but the cut-oﬀ is lower than unity

if public and private goods are complements.




                                                  12
every potential member has the right to join the union, without approval of the

union members. We then analyze a second stage. After the union is formed

we discuss issues of “enlargement” of the union, in which new members are

admitted only if approved (by majority rule) by the members of the union.



3.1    The Equilibrium Size of the Union

Consider now a set of potential members (M ) of a union which provides the

spillovers described in the basic model of the previous section. We do not

impose any structure on the distribution of the preferences except for a strictly

technical one. Given αi ∈ [αmin , αmax ] for any i, we will assume:


   A.1: αmax < 2αmin .


   Assumption A.1 amounts to an upper bound on the heterogeneity of the

preferences between countries (indeed it can be rewritten as αmax − αmin <

αmin ). More discussion of this assumption is later.

   Any country i who decides not to participate to the union will not benefit

from the spillovers, but it will be able to choose independently its own pub-

lic expenditure so as to maximize (1). The solution is an expenditure g o (αi )

satisfying the first order condition:


                                    αi Hg (g o ) = 1                                (9)

                        H (g o )2                                         1
with ∂g o (αi )/∂αi = − Hggg (go ) > 0 and g o (αi ) = y for any αi ≥   Hg (y) .   This

autonomous choice, which is clearly independent from the policy of the union,

                                          13
provides utility:

                             Uiout ≡ y − g o (αi ) + αi H(g o (αi ))                        (10)

   Let us define a union (αm , N ) as a group of N countries with median αm .

The utility of country i if in a union (αm , N ), is:


             Uiin (αm , N ) ≡ y − gm (αm ) + αi H{gm (αm )[1 + β(N − 1)]}                   (11)


Define as α0 (αi , αm , N ) as the new median of the same union when a previously

outsider country i joins to it. We are now ready for a formal definition of an

equilibrium union (EU ).


   Definition 1. An equilibrium union (αm , N )EU is a union composed of

N members with a median voter characterized by αm , such that 1) the union

policy is chosen by the union by majority voting, 2) for each country i joining

the union, the following condition holds:10



                                     Uiin (αm , N ) > Uiout                                 (12)

and 3) for each country k outside the union, the following condition holds:



                            Ukin (α0 (αk , αm , N ), N + 1) ≤ Ukout                         (13)



 10 We   assume with no loss of generality that if a country is indiﬀerent it chooses not to join.




                                               14
    The first equilibrium condition says that every member must be better oﬀ

inside the union than outside. The second condition assures that none of the

countries outside the union would prefer to enter in it, taking into account

both the induced change of the median and the increase in spillovers due to the

augmented size of the union.11

    This equilibrium concept generally implies multiple equilibria.                  There are

two dimensions of multiplicity. One is that, for given size of the union (i.e., hold-

ing N fixed) there would be diﬀerent possible equilibria with diﬀerent median.

The second dimension is that holding αm constant there might be multiple equi-

libria with diﬀerent sizes. In fact, no country would want to join a small union

by itself, but, because of “strategic complementaries,” a group of countries may

find it in everybody’s interest to join the same small union.

    We can deal with the second type of multiplicity by using the notion of the

coalition-proof equilibrium (CP EU ). Under this equilibrium concept, not only

unilateral deviations, but all multilateral deviations (which are internally con-

sistent) have to be non profitable (see Benheim, Peleg and Whinston, 1987). To

formalize this concept we need to extend our definition of α0 (·) to multicountry

entry: α0 (Γ, αm , N ) is the new median of the union (αm , N ) after a set Γ(S) of

S previously outsider countries joins to it.
  11 Since   this is an equilibrium condition, the outsider does not take into account the possi-

bility that other countries may want to exit the union in consequence of its entry or to enter

contemporaneously: other countries’s strategies are taken as given.




                                                15
    Definition 2. A coalition-proof equilibrium union (αm , N )CEU is an equi-

librium union such that 4) in the set of the countries outside the union, there is

not a subset of S countries Γ(S) such that:12


                      Ukin (α0 (Γ, αm , N ), N + S) > Ukout      ∀ k ∈ Γ(S)                  (14)




    For a given median, we will show that a coalition-proof equilibrium union is

the largest size equilibrium union. While the coalition proof notion eliminates

multiplicity of equilibria with the same median, it does not eliminate the pos-

sibility of multiple equilibrium unions with diﬀerent medians. In other words,

a union biased toward low provision of public good and another biased toward

high provision may be both coalition-proof equilibria if and only if they have

diﬀerent median countries. In any case, all these possible equilibrium unions

have in common the same properties and comparative statics.                       Since we are

not interested in studying multiple unions, we focus on the case in which in

equilibrium we only have one CP EU , with median αm .

    We now investigate the properties of this union.13 We begin with the follow-

ing:
  12 We    should also state that there are no coalitions of members who would like to exit all

together, but this is clearly guaranteed by the requirement for the CEU to be an EU, which

implies that no single member would like to exit: and there is no further gain from exiting

together with others.
  13 All   the following analysis will make use of a family of functions of net gain from partici-

pating to the union, defined as the diﬀerence between staying into the union and outside of


                                                 16
    Lemma 1. The net gain from participating to a union ∆(α, β) is a concave

function in the preference parameter α which has positive value only for a closed

set of values of α.


    Proof: see the Appendix.


    This lemma establishes the pattern of gains from adhesion to a union. Under

a condition derived in the Appendix, which is satisfied as long as the median

country of the union has a low enough αm , the lemma establishes the non

monotonicity of these gains, which are positive only for intermediate values of

the preference parameter. The result holds for any functional form of the utility

function and independently from the distribution of preferences.

    In the rest of the paper, however, we will adopt the following assumption:


    A.2: The index of relative concavity of the function H(g), is θ(g) ≥ 1/2.


    Assumption A.2 sets a lower bound on the elasticity of the marginal utility of

public goods. Remembering the comparative statics of the political equilibrium

provision of public goods in (8), this assumption is consistent with a provision

which is decreasing, constant or weakly increasing in spillovers and number of
it. Each function ∆(α, ·) is parameterized by the number of other countries joining the union

and its median country, and it is expressed as depending on a generic value of preference

parameter α and on the spillover size β.

  However, we remind that in our model there is only a finite number of preference parameters

· · · ≤ α1 ≤ α2 ≤ · · · ≤ αM−1 ≤ αM .




                                             17
countries.      Assumptions A1 and A2, are suﬃcient to guarantee an intuitive

result:


   Lemma 2. Under A.1-2, when a country k outside a union enters in it,

utility from staying in the union is increased for the new member k and for any

country i on the same side of the median m as the new member:


            Uiin (α0 (αk , αm , N ), N + 1) > Uiin (αm , N ) ∀ i ≶ m if k ≶ m


   Proof: see the Appendix.


   This lemma derives from the fact that a new entrant increases the total

spillovers and moves the median of the union toward its own preferences,14 and

it makes clear how strategic complementarities exist between countries: the

participation of one country to the union increases the payoﬀ of a set of other

countries from participating to the same union.

   We can now derive our first result on equilibrium unions, which holds inde-

pendently from the actual distribution of preferences:


   Proposition 2. Under A.1-2, a) an equilibrium union is composed by coun-

tries with contiguous preferences: for a given equilibrium union, there exists a

compact set of preferences around the median such that all and only all countries
 14 Only   in the special case of size-independence, these are the only eﬀects. In general, there

is a third eﬀect which may work in the opposite direction, because the greater number of

members aﬀects the union policy in an ambiguous way even if the median country was the

same. See the Appendix for the more general argument.


                                               18
with preferences in this set belong to the union; b) the equilibrium size of the

union is weakly increasing in the size of the spillovers; c) for a given median,

the only coalition-proof equilibrium union is the largest equilibrium union.


    Proof: see the Appendix.


    The point of this proposition is that the EU is formed by countries with

similar preferences. According to part a), the distance from the median in terms

of the parameter α is the key determinant concerning the decision of joining or

not. The more spread out is the distribution of the α the larger the fraction

of countries that would be worse oﬀ in the equilibrium union.                If preferences

are very similar, instead, most countries benefit from the internalization of the

spillover eﬀects, on net. Moreover, part b) shows that, for a given distribution of

α, the larger is β the larger the fraction of countries that benefit from the union,

since the loss of spillover eﬀects outside the union is more relevant. In other

words, the equilibrium size of the union is determined by a trade oﬀ between

the spillover benefits and the costs of having to agree on the same policy, which

in this case boils down to a choice of public expenditure.15 Large unions are

possible when heterogeneity is low and externalities high and the other way
  15 This   has some similarity, but important diﬀerence to the trade oﬀ between economy of

scale and costs of heterogeneity which determines the optimal size of a country in Alesina and

Spolaore (1997). There are two key diﬀerences. First, the trade oﬀ here is not between scale

and heterogeneity. Second, here we are considering unions between large entities (countries)

as opposed to ”unions” between atomistic agents. Voting issues and equilibrium concepts are

therefore quite diﬀerent.


                                             19
around. We illustrate part b) in figure 1, where we show the net gains from

participating to a union (αm , N ) under two diﬀerent spillovers, β1 and β2 < β1 .

The net gain increases in the spillover for all countries. Hence, if (αm , N ) is an

EU under spillovers β2 , it means that there are N countries in the set [B, C],

but if there are countries in the set [A, B] ∪ [C, D], there must be an EU of size

greater than N when spillovers are β1 .


   ∆(α,β)                                                     β1   > β2
                                        ∆(α;β1)



                                             ∆(α;β2)

        0           A           B                        C                D
                                      αm




                                                                              α

                    Net gains from the Union and spillovers

   Assumptions A.1 and A.2 are only suﬃcient for results a) and b): what we

need is that preferences between countries are not too heterogeneous and the

elasticity of the marginal utility of public goods is not too low. Otherwise we

cannot exclude equilibrium unions which do not include countries with interme-

diate preferences between those of some other members, and that the size of the

union shrinks when spillovers rise. The reason is that if these countries enter

in the union, the increase in the number of members may change the policy in


                                        20
such a way to make the outside option better than to stay in the bigger union!

These paradoxical results could happen under two circumstances. The first is

the case in which the substitution eﬀect induced by a change in the number

of countries on the median country choice is particularly strong (for instance

if public and private consumption are nearly perfect substitutes): in this case

when the entrant is a country k with αk ≤ αm , a bias of the new political equi-

librium toward high public expenditure (induced by the increase in the number

of participants when θ(·) is low)16 may be counterproductive for countries far

enough from the median. The second case is the one in which preferences are

highly dispersed after the median: in this case when the entrant is a country k

with αk ≥ αm , a bias of the new political equilibrium toward low public expen-

diture (induced by the increase in the number of participants when θ(·) is high)

may be counterproductive for countries far enough to the right of the median.

   Result c) of Proposition 6 tells us that only the largest EU s for each median

are robust to the coalition-proof refinement. Note that the largest EU is the

only Pareto-eﬃcient union for each median, hence EU s can be Pareto-ineﬃcient,

but CP EU s are always Pareto-eﬃcient.



3.2    Enlargement

We now examine the issue of union enlargement. That is we ask the question:

now that a union is formed, when will it admit, by majority rule, a new member?

 16 Remember          dgm
               that   dN
                            > 0 when θ < 1.




                                              21
   First of all, only countries with externalities with union members would

be admitted, otherwise their only eﬀect in the union would be to change the

median, and at least 50 per cent of the members would object to that.

   If a country provides a positive externality to the existing members, then

its potential entry has two eﬀects. One is to increase utility by virtue of the

internalized externality. The second eﬀect is to change the median voter in

the union. If the potential entrant is exactly at the preexisting median, which

therefore remains unchanged, then it would be unanimously accepted,17 since it

brings a positive eﬀect for everybody with small enough policy changes - under

our regularity assumptions A.1 and A.2. If the median changes, then each

existing union member may or may not be better oﬀ. Consider the admission

of a country k, and suppose that the new median α0 (αk , αm , N ) is at distance

ε from the old one, αm .18 In this case, first of all we can use the general result

established in Lemma 2: it implies that all the union members on the same side

of the old median as country k would be in favor of the new entrant, as long as

this does not imply the exit of previous members. By continuity, there exists an

ε so small that even at least a member of the union on the other side of the old

median would vote in favor of the new entrant and noone of the other countries

decides to exit. This is because the change in the median is so small that does

not eliminate, on net, the gain due to the rise in spillovers, and it does not

 17 This   is a simple consequence of Lemma 2.

 18 Notice   that this includes the case in which the new median is actually the entrant.




                                              22
induce exit. Clearly there cannot be an admission with contemporaneous exit

of a previous member: otherwise spillovers would not increase, but the median

would change, making impossible a majority in favor of the entrant.

   We make more precise this argument in the following proposition:


   Proposition 3. Under A.1-2, an equilibrium union will accept a new mem-

ber if and only if the change in the median after entry is small enough.


   Proof: see the Appendix.


   We showed that countries very close to the current median of the union are

more likely to be accepted. However, for countries not immediately contiguous

to the median, acceptance is unrelated to their exact position: what matters is

just the distance between the current median and the nearest member of the

union on the same side of the candidate entrant. If this is too big, no admissions

can be implemented. Hence our model rationalizes a form of status-quo bias in

union reforms. Note that the spirit of our result goes through if the admission

of more countries together is allowed and all these countries are on the same

side of the median. Obviously, when a group of candidate members is partly on

one side and partly on the other side of the median, group admission is easier,

because spillovers increase a lot and the median does not change a lot. Finally,

if there are equal numbers of candidates on both sides of the median, the median

is not going to change and the increase in spillovers strongly acts in favor of the

admission.

                                        23
    After a new member enters, the median changes. Therefore the subsequent

decisions about other members would be taken by a diﬀerent median.19 In a

multi-period setting, the decision about one member to be admitted today will

take into account that this will change the median voter that tomorrow will have

to decide about new members.20 This discussion captures the fact that often

certain countries are in favor of expanding the union in certain “directions” and

other members are opposed.

    The general point we want to make in this section is that members of a union

tend to favor the entry of new countries with similar preferences to their own.

In our model “preferences” are captured by the level of government spending.

In reality, preferences may diﬀer in other dimension, such as the composition of

spending or certain types of public policies like regulation, defense, etc. Also the

diﬀerence may be not in the preference side but in the production side. If the

existing and potential members have diﬀerent level of income, then one would
  19 For   a somewhat related discussion see Alesina and Grilli (1992) for the specific case of

entry in a monetary union.
  20 More   formally, immagine a multiperiod version of our model with discounting and a finite

number of possible candidates. In each period the admission of a new member is decided

under majority voting. This situation depicts a dynamic game with complete information.

Even if the game’s tree may be quite complex, we know that the subgame perfect equilibrium

implies a unique outcome for this game (except for trivial multiplicity in some subgames).

Hence, given an initial union, it is possible to forsee the long run equilibrium union and also

its formation path. It is easy to prove that a new country will be admitted in every period

until the long run equilibrium is achieved and that this long run equilibrium must be an EU

as previously defined.



                                               24
have to consider not only diﬀerence in preferences but also the redistributive

flows from one country to the other.21




4     The Trade-oﬀ between Size and Scope of the

      Union

Suppose now that we have two policies, which consist of the provision of two

diﬀerent types of public goods, with low and high spillovers. That is the utility

function is now:



                                                X                              X
      Ui = y − (gi1 + gi2 ) + αi H(gi1 + β1            gj1 ) + αi H(gi2 + β2          gj2 )   (15)
                                                j6=i                           j6=i


where the superscripts 1 and 2 identify the two diﬀerent public goods, and of

course the budget constraint is now gi1 + gi2 = ti . Suppose β1 > β2 . The union

can now choose to centralize the provision of both policies or of only one. If

both policies are decentralized there is no union. To formalize this, let us define

with UiG (αm , N ) the utility of country i joining a union producing the set of

public goods G - which in this simple case may be (1, 2) or (1) or (2)-, when

there are N members in the union and the median voter is characterized by αm ,

and with UiG the utility from the decentralized production of the same set of

goods.

 21 See   Alesina and Wacziarg (1999) and section 5 below for some discussion of this case.




                                              25
    We can now extend our previous definitions of a union. According to the

voting procedure in the union, diﬀerent results may arise. The common and

realistic assumption is that only after the creation of the union, its members

decide which policies to centralize, and which levels to provide for each public

good. We will discuss two diﬀerent kinds of equilibria, characterized by the

following alternative rules:


    Rule A. The provisions of each public good are chosen by majority voting.


    Rule B. The policies to centralize are chosen by majority voting and, sub-

sequently, for each voted policy, the provisions of each public good are chosen by

majority voting.


    The diﬀerence between rule A and B is that the latter allows a two step

decision: first which policy to centralize, and than how much of the public good

to choose. Given these rules X = A, B, we define the X equilibrium union as

follows.


    Definition 3. A X-equilibrium union (αm , N, G)X|EU is a union providing a

set of public goods G, composed of N members with a median voter characterized

by αm , such that:

    1) rule X applies;

    2) for each country i joining the union, the following condition holds:22
  22 Obviously,   the utility from the production of goods not in the equilibrium set Ω is the

same if in or out of the union, hence it does not aﬀect the set of equilibrium conditions.


                                               26
                                 UiG (αm , N ) > UiG                           (16)

and 3) for each country k between the countries outside the union, the following

condition holds:



                         UkG (α0 (αk , αm , N ), N + 1) ≤ UkG                  (17)




   Definition 4. A coalition-proof X equilibrium union (αm , N, G)X|CEU is an

X equilibrium union such that 4) in the set of the countries outside the union

there is not a subset of S members Γ(S) such that:


                   UkG (α0 (Γ, αm , N ), N + S) > UkG   ∀ k ∈ Γ(S)             (18)




   Again we focus on the qualitative properties of the equilibria which hold

independently from the actual distribution of preferences. We will omit the

proofs of the results of this section, because they are straightforward applications

of Lemma 1 and 2, thanks to the quasi-linearity of preferences.


   Proposition 4. Under A.1-2, a) an A equilibrium union is composed by

countries with contiguous preferences and it produces all public goods; b) for a

given median, the only coalition-proof equilibrium union is the largest equilibrium

union.

                                         27
   This proposition shows that if Rule A is adopted, both policies are central-

ized. This is a case of a relatively “small” but highly centralized union.

   An interesting feature of this equilibrium is that it is possible that a majority

of members would prefer to centralize only good 1, the high spillover good, even

though, in an A-equilibrium this does not happen. We call this a “centralization

bias” in the union. In other words we have a sort of time-inconsistency problem:

once the union is formed, the median extend excessively its powers, and the

expectation of this induces too many countries to step back from the beginning.

   A simple way to illustrate this problem is shown in figure 2, where we indicate

with ∆(α, N ; β1 , β2 ) the net gains from participating to a union (αm , N, (1, 2))

which provides both public goods, with ∆(α, N ; β1 , 0) those from the union

(αm , N, (1)) and with ∆(α, N ; 0, β2 ) those from the union (αm , N, (2)). Note

that:23

                   ∆(α, N ; β1 , β2 ) = ∆(α, N ; β1 , 0) + ∆(α, N ; 0, β2 )

as we show graphically in figure 2. The immediate consequences is that the range

of preferences for which ∆(α, N ; β1 , β2 ) > 0 is strictly smaller than the one for

which ∆(α, N ; β1 , 0) > 0. Now, suppose that (αm , N, (1, 2)) is an A equilibrium

union; this means that in the set [B, E] in figure 2 there are N countries, with the

median somewhere in the subset [C, D] (which is consistence with its preference

for the centralization of all the goods). All the countries in the set [B, C]∪[D, E]

would actually prefer to centralize just good 1. Moreover, in a union with

 23 This   simple decomposition is possible because of our assumption of a quasi-linear utility.



                                               28
 ∆(α,N;.,.)
                                          ∆(α,N;β1,β2)

                                          ∆(α,N;β1,0)


                                          ∆(α,N;0,β2)
         0                                     αm
                          A    B      C                  D     E   F




                                                                            α


          Figure 1: Complete centralization in A-Equilibrium Union


centralization just of good 1, all the countries in the set [A, B] ∪ [E, F ] would

like to join the union, so as to create a bigger union (which may also make every

country better oﬀ because of the increase in spillovers).

   Let us now consider the diﬀerent political process in which, after the union

is created, countries vote on the set of goods to centralize G, and finally on the

amount of each good from this set to provide: this is the rule B. In figure 2 it is

clear that our A equilibrium union cannot be a B equilibrium union as long as

there is a majority of the members voting for G = (1) - that is, there are more

countries in the set [B, C] ∪ [D, E] than in the set [C, D].

   We can derive the following result:




                                          29
 ∆(α,N;.,.)                             ∆(α,N;β1,β2)
                                                              ∆(α,N;β1,0)



                                         ∆(α,N;0,β2)

         0                               αm
                  A                 B                  C                    D




                                                                                α


              Figure 2: Decentralization in B-Equilibrium Union


   Proposition 5. Under A.1-2, a) an B-equilibrium union is composed by

countries with contiguous preferences to produce at least the public good with

highest spillover; b) in the class of equilibrium unions with a given median,

a higher equilibrium number of countries must be associated with an equal or

smaller set of public goods provided; and c) for a given median, the only coalition-

proof B-equilibrium union is the largest B-equilibrium union.


   In figure 3 we show a possible B | EU with decentralization of the low

spillover good and an increased size of the union. In this case (αm , N, (1)) is a

B | EU as long as N countries are in the set [A, D], a majority of which are in

the subset [A, B] ∪ [C, D], which means that a majority votes to centralize just



                                        30
policy 1. Part a) of the Proposition illustrates this point.

   Part b) of Proposition 5 shows that the larger the set of policies that are

centralized, the lower the expected membership of the union because the larger is

the set of potential disagreement, and the institutional environment determines

if the union is going to be a small and centralized one or a big and decentralized

one.

   This kind of multiplicity is interesting because it can describe a lively argu-

ment of discussion inside the European Community before the creation of the

Euro or other union level initiatives as well: the debate between enlargement

and deepening of the union. Note that the spirit of our results would hold

under a more general utility function, but if the two public goods were comple-

ments there would be a bias toward small and centralized equilibrium unions,

while if they were substitutes there would be a bias toward big and relatively

decentralized equilibrium unions.

   Finally, part c) of Proposition 5 shows that whenever for a given median

there exists an equilibrium union providing only the high spillover good, then

the coalition proof equilibrium union with this median must be unique and

provide only the high spillover good.

   Propositions 4 and 5 deliver a useful result in evaluating the economic con-

sequences of diﬀerent institutional environments inside the union:


   Corollary 1. Under A.1-2, in coalition-proof equilibrium with a given me-

dian, rule B implies unions of size weakly bigger than rule A and it is preferred

                                        31
by at least a majority of countries.


   This is equivalent as saying that a strong commitment of the union to cen-

tralize only a limited set of policies - those with the strongest spillovers between

members - can incentivate the creation of a bigger union. The result does not

implies simple welfare comparisons. However, it can be verified that there could

be situations in which rule B strictly dominates rule A, that is, its adoption

makes all countries at least as well oﬀ and at least one of them strictly better

oﬀ - because of the increase in the size and in the spillovers -, while the opposite

can never be true!



4.1     Discussion

4.1.1   Multiple Goods


The previous results can be easily extended to the case of F > 2 goods. Suppose

that the utility function of country i is now:


                                F
                                X                F
                                                 X                  P
                     Ui = y −         gik + αi         H(gik + βk          gjk )   (19)
                                k=1              k=1                j6=i

   Without loss of generality suppose that βr > βs if r > s. Propositions 4 and

5 continue to hold. In particular, rule A implies again complete centralization

for all F goods and small size of the union because of the dynamic inconsistency

problem discussed previously. Rule B implies that if a union chooses to coor-

dinate policy s, it will coordinate all the policies on the left of s, that is with



                                             32
higher spillovers.

   Suppose now that the diﬀerence between the public goods is not only on the

level of spillovers, but it is also a diﬀerence on the distribution of the preferences,

that is the utility function is now:


                                F
                                X             F
                                              X                      P
                     Ui = y −         gik +         αik H(gik + βk          gjk )   (20)
                                k=1           k=1                    j6=i

   The complete centralization result under rule A goes through, even if now

diﬀerent policies may be characterized by diﬀerent medians.

   The trade-oﬀ between size and scope of the union which underlies the equi-

librium under rule B is still present, but which of the goods is centralized or

not depends now also on the distribution of the α. Suppose for simplicity that

all distributions have the same median, αm . Given our assumption, the median

voter in the union would choose the same level of all goods. If the distribution

of, say α1 has a lower standard deviation, than, say α2 then, ceteris paribus,

more countries are better oﬀ centralizing good 1 than centralizing good 2. More

precisely, the number of countries willing to join the union is higher if good 1

is centralized and good 2 is not than if the opposite combination holds. This




                                               33
induces again a bias toward big unions centralizing only few policies.


 ∆(α,N1,N2;.,.)
                                              ∆(α,N1,N2;β1,β2)


                       ∆(α,N1;β1,0)
                                             ∆(α,N2;0,β2)
              0              A           B     αm           C        D




                                                                               α

                    Enhanced cooperation in a union a la carte

4.1.2   Unions “à la carte”


An alternative institutional arrangement is one in which diﬀerent members of

the union merge diﬀerent policies. This arrangement would allow to coordinate

those policies with high spillovers and low disagreement, and also allow for

subgroups of countries with more similar preferences to coordinate more policies

and the other way around. By adding an element of flexibility this arrangement

clearly moves the union closer to the first best type described in Section 2.

Figure 4 illustrates a possible equilibrium configuration for a union à la carte

with two policies. In the set [A, D] there must be N1 countries which centralize

the high spillover policy 1, while in the subset [B, C] there must be N2 countries

which centralize just policy 2. Correspondingly, the total net gain is given by



                                       34
the function ∆(α, N1 , N2 ; β1 , β2 ) depicted in bold.

    The advantage of a “union à la carte” would be enhanced in the use of

diﬀerent spillover eﬀects. That is, consider the following generalization of the

utility function:


                               F
                               X             F
                                             X                   P
                    Ui = y −         gik +         αik H(gik +          βij gjk )   (21)
                               k=1           k=1                 j6=i

    So in this case we have a total of F goods with diﬀerent degree of externality

across countries. For instance the values of the β may depend on the distance

between two countries on the similarity of their economic structures. This sug-

gests that one could observe a union in which diﬀerent members coordinate at

diﬀerent levels. That is a “core” may adopt common polices on many, or all

goods. Others may coordinate only a fraction of goods within the largest exter-

nalities. In Europe, for instance, some countries have adopted the Euro, others

have not; some countries have eliminated border checks within the union, others

have not. Presumably, implementation costs may become very large if this is

pushed to an extreme diversification.




5     Redistributive Politics in the Union

Until now we have abstracted from a genuine redistributive purpose in the union

and we have ignored distortions in taxation, because we considered exogenous

and equal income for each country.            If countries are heterogenous in income,



                                              35
poor countries have a natural preference toward an higher redistribution or an

higher provision of public goods financed by the union. However, in the real

world, redistribution is costly because taxes are distorsive.

    We focus on labor income taxation and heterogeneity in the average pro-

ductivity between countries. We assume that labor is immobile across countries

and income is endogenous, and we study the choice of the income tax rates.24

The union collects the revenue and provides a common level of the public good

in each country.

    For simplicity let us consider the case of zero income eﬀects (on labor supply)

and let’s assume every diﬀerences in preferences setting αi = α for every i:

                                                                    X
                      Ui = wi (1 − ti )li + V (hi ) + αH(gi + β            gj )            (22)
                                                                    j6=i


where hi is leisure, li is working time chosen by the representative agent of

country i to maximize utility under the constraint hi + li = 1, in function of the

income tax rate ti and the wage rate wi with w1 ≤ w2 ≤ ... ≤ wN and median

wm , while the function V (h) satisfies Vh (h) > 0, Vhh (h) < 0, and the weak

regularity condition Vhhh (h) ≤ 0, which will be suﬃcient (but not necessary) to

guarantee the applicability of the median voter theorem in this set-up. First of

all, we define the labor supply as the function li = L(wi , ti ) which satisfies the
  24 In   doing so, we of course ignore an important issue in taxation policies in a federation:

tax competition with mobile factors. For a discussion of this and related issues see Oates

(1999) and for recent results Perotti (2001).




                                                36
first order condition:

                                wi (1 − ti ) = Vh (1 − li )

with Lw (wi , ti ) = − (1−t i)
                        Vhh > 0, Lt (wi , ti ) =
                                                    w
                                                   Vhh   < 0 and Ltt (wi , ti ) < 0 because

of our assumptions. Define yi = wi L(wi , ti ) as the gross income in country i,

which is clearly increasing in wi , and ε(yi ) = − tiL(w
                                                     Lt (wi ,ti )
                                                         i ,ti )
                                                                  < 1 as the elasticity of

substitution of income (and labor supply as well) with respect to the tax rate.

   Under decentralization of the decisions, each country would choose its own

tax to maximize (22) without spillovers (β = 0) under the budget constraint

gi = ti wi L(wi , ti ), and countries with less elastic labor supply would decide for

an higher tax.

   In a union (wm , N ), the budget constraint is:
                                     PN
                                       i=1 ti wi L(wi , ti )
                               g=
                                              N

   An utilitarian first best union (wm , N ) would choose country specific taxes

ti so as maximize the sum of utilities of all countries, internalizing the spillovers

between countries and adopting equalization of the elasticities of substitution

for all countries, which implies again higher taxation for countries with lower

elasticity of the labor supply, but with eﬃcient public expenditure.

   If instead we adopt our basic model of a “rigid union,” the median country

chooses the tax rate t to maximize:
                                                      "                  PN                      #
                                                                           i=1   twi L(wi , t)
Um = wm (1−t)L(wm , t)+V (1−L(wm , t))+αH [1 + β(N − 1)]
                                                                                  N



                                            37
and the political-economic equilibrium tax rate tm (wm ), and hence the equilib-
                                                                  PN
                                                                               yi
rium expenditure gm (wm ) = tm (wm )ȳ (where ȳ =                    i=1
                                                                       N            is average income in

the union), are defined by:25
                                                                 ³         ´
                                                                     ym
                                                                      ȳ
                 αHg {gm [1 + β(N − 1)]} =                                                         (23)
                                                      [1 + β(N − 1)] [1 − ε(ȳ)]
                      PN
where ε(ȳ) = −t[        i=1   wi Lt (wi , t)]/ȳN is the elasticity of substitution of the

average income with respect to the tax rate across all the countries of the union.

    The tax rate and hence the political-economic equilibrium provision of the

public good are properly defined by (23) as decreasing in ym and so in wm ,

a point which is not surprising according to the political economic theory of

redistribution of Roberts (1977) and Meltzer and Richard (1981), which is here

extended to inter-country redistribution and through public goods instead of

transfers. Notice that (23) includes two new terms. At the numerator there

is a redistributive component which is just given by the ratio between average

income in the median country and in the union: the higher is the former com-

pared to the latter, the lower is the political-economic provision of public goods
  25 Our   assumptions imply that:

                      ∂ε(yi )    [Lt (wi , t) + tLtt (wi , t)] − tLt (wi , t)2
                              =−                                               >0
                        ∂t                        L(wi , t)

which guarantees that single-peakedness in preferences holds. To verify this note that the

favourite tax of a country with productivity wi , let us say ti (wi ), satisfies:

        dti (wi )                     L(wi , t)/ [1 + β(N − 1)]
                  = n                                                                 o <0
          dwi         Hgg [1 + β(N − 1)] [1 − ε(ȳ)]2 ȳ2 − Hg ȳNε(ȳ)/t − Hg ∂ε(ȳ)
                                                                                ∂t


under the approximation that ∂ ȳ/∂yi ∼ 0.




                                                 38
because richer countries favor less redistribution. At the denominator there is

an eﬃciency term: the more elastic is the labor supply of the average income

country, the more distorsive is taxation and, hence, the lower should be the

provision of public goods. Distorsive taxes create a bias toward lower public

expenditure: indeed, in case of lump sum taxation or completely inelastic labor

supply, the eﬃciency term would disappear (ε(ȳ) = 0), leaving us with the only

redistributive eﬀect.

    Summarizing, the richer is the median country the smaller should be the

redistributive role of the union, but nevertheless the model is consistent with

a process of increased activism on the part of the union as long as the median

country income increases less than the average one or, in other words, when the

median income is lower than the average one, if inequality between countries is

increasing in the union.26

    How would be the equilibrium union in a world with income heterogeneity

and distorsive taxes? The spirit of our previous results would be unaﬀected.

Under some regularity conditions it can be shown that an equilibrium union is

composed by countries with intermediate productivity or all the countries with

productivity below a cut-oﬀ and that a new member will be accepted only if its

productivity is high enough.27
  26 The   literature on inequality, redistribution and growth makes a similar point in a closed

economy context (see Alesina and Rodrik, 1994 and Persson and Tabellini, 1994).
  27 A   similar point is made by Bolton and Roland (1997) and by Persson and Tabellini (2000)

in a two region model: the rich region may decide to secede from the poorer to avoid the burden




                                               39
    The homogeneity in economic fundamentals is clearly reflected in the compo-

sition of the European Union and in the doubts of the richest European countries

to join it.28 On the other side, almost all the poor Eastern European countries

have candidate themselves to enter the European Union and our model may

help to explain the future gradual extension of the European Community to

the Eastern European countries, whose income is only slowly converging to the

Western standards. Indeed, the group of the next countries to be admitted, the

so called “ins” (according to the “Agenda 2000”, ratified in July 1997, Cyprus,

Slovenia, Czech republic, Hungary, Estonia and Poland) are the richest between

the Eastern European countries. The oﬃcial estimates on the enlargement to

the “ins” group imply that the current members will have to raise their aver-

age contribution to the European Community budget from 10% to 20% (see

Nava, 2000): clearly, the economic incentives for this enlargement must be in

the hidden economic spillovers that the new countries will provide.




6     Conclusions

We modeled a Union as a heterogeneous group of countries deciding together

on the provision of certain common goods or policies, that aﬀect them all. Our
of redistribution. Instead, in our multicountry model with spillovers between countries, wealth

distribution aﬀects the size and composition of the union.
  28 The   three richest European countries (Norway, Switzerland and Iceland) do not belong

to the European Union: obviously many other factors that have nothing to do with our

redistributive argument are relevant.



                                              40
model captures key features of all unions, in particular the tension between

heterogeneity of preferences and the advantage of taking certain decision in

common. It highlights that a trade-oﬀ arises between size and scope of the

union: a union involved in too many activities will be favored by few countries

and this will imply small spillovers between them, while a union which focuses on

a core of activities will be favored by many countries and will raise many positive

externalities between them in those activities. The institutional environment

determines the equilibrium outcome, and we have shown that under certain

conditions we observe a bias toward excessive centralization and small size of the

union. This is due to a time-inconsistency problem: once the union is formed,

the politics naturally tends to spread its power in all the possible activities, and

the expectation of this induces many countries to step back from the beginning.

   We have emphasized a constitutional solution to this problem. The Consti-

tution of the union should ex ante establish which prerogatives can and cannot

be centralized. A constitutional commitment for the union to centralize only a

limited set of functions could raise participation and enhance welfare for a ma-

jority or even for all. Obviously one would need to impose qualified majorities

to change ex post the Constitution.

   An interesting area for future research focuses on the relationship between

the size of countries and the size of unions between countries. Recent history

seems to have been characterized, especially in Europe, by a contemporaneous

existence of centrifugal forces (regional autonomy in most Western European



                                        41
countries and the break-up of some Eastern European nations) and of centripetal

forces (the tendency to delegate policies to supernational entities like the Eu-

ropean Union). These two apparently conflicting forces may have a natural

interconnection: the raising benefits from adhesion to unions may contempora-

neously reduce the equilibrium size of nations.29 Separatism within nations and

delegation of policies to supernational entities could well be shown, by future

research, to be complementary parts of the same process.




 29 Notice   that three of the newly admitted countries in the European Union - Estonia,

Czech Republic and Slovenia - derive from three break-ups of nations - URSS, Czechslovack

and Jugoslavia.


                                           42
7     Appendix


Proof of Lemma 1.


    For a given union (αm , N ) and spillovers β, we can define the net utility of

staying into it for the country with preferences αi as the function:


∆(αi , β) ≡ Uiin (αm , N ) − Uiout =

           = αi [H{gm (αm )[1 + β(N − 1)]} − H(g o (αi ))] − [gm (αm ) − g o (αi )]


Using the envelope theorem we have:


           ∆α (α, β) = H{gm (αm )[1 + β(N − 1)]} − H(g o (α)), and

                                       ∂g o (α)
          ∆αα (α, β) = −Hg (g o (α))            <0
                                         ∂α

which shows concavity in α. Moreover, ∆(0, β) < 0 and ∆α (0, β) > 0. This and

the fact that ∆(αm , β) > 0 and ∆α (αm , β) > 0 (which derives from a simple

revealed preference argument) imply the existence of a cut-oﬀ αl (β) < αm such

that ∆(αl , β) = 0 and ∆α (αl , β) > 0. We can have two alternative cases.

    In the first case, we have:


                       H{gm (αm )[1 + β(N − 1)]} > H(y)


and the function ∆(α, β) is always positive, increasing and with slope approach-

ing a constant for α → Hg (y)−1 and equal to this constant there on. Hence,

∆(α, β) > 0 for any α ∈ (αl , ∞).


                                        43
   If instead the median country of the union has a low enough αm so that:


                           H{gm (αm )[1 + β(N − 1)]} ≤ H(y)


   it follows that ∆α (α, β) equals a negative constant for α ≥ Hg (y)−1 , which

implies that ∆(α, β) < 0 for α high enough. It follows the existence of a unique

value α̂ > αm , defined by H{gm (αm )[1 + β(N − 1)]} = H(g o (α̂)) such that

∆α (αi , β) T 0 if and only if α S α̂.30 This and the concavity of ∆(·) imply

that there must exist an other cut-oﬀ αu (β) > αm such that ∆(αu , β) = 0 and

∆α (αu , β) < 0. Hence ∆(αi , β) > 0 for any αi ∈ (αl , αu ). Q.E.D.



   Proof of Lemma 2.


   We need to show that, for any i ≤ m when k ≤ m, and for any i ≥ m when

k ≥ m we have:


                      Uiin (α0 (αk , αm , N ), N + 1) > Uiin (αm , N )


The eﬀects induced by entry are to move the median of the union towards the

entrant, and to increase the number of members, which has an ambiguous eﬀect

on the union policy. However, to prove the claim it is suﬃcient to show that

both eﬀects are going in the right direction.
 30 As   a collateral result, we have proved that the maximum gain from the equilibrium union

is not obtained by the median country, but from some country with preferences more biased

toward big governments than the median country. Moreover there is an intervall to the right

of αm in which any country benefits from the union more than the median country.



                                              44
   Let us consider the eﬀect of a change in the number of countries for a given

median. Using (6) and (8), we have:

  ∂Uiin (αm , N )              βgm (αm )                                   ∂gm
                        =                  + {αi Hg (·)[1 + β(N − 1)] − 1}     =
       ∂N                   [1 + β(N − 1)]                                 ∂N
                                           ·   µ            ¶µ          ¶¸
                               βgm (αm )          αi − αm           1
                        =                   1−                 1−
                            [1 + β(N − 1)]           αm            θ(·)

whose sign is always positive under our assumptions.

   To verify this assume first that k ≥ m and consider any country i ≥ m.

From A.1 it follows that αi − αm < αm for any i and m. When θ(·) < 1 we have
³        ´³         ´                                  ³      ´³          ´
  αi −αm
    αm
                 1
           1 − θ(·)   < 0, and when θ(·) ≥ 1 we have αiα−αm
                                                            m
                                                                 1 −  1
                                                                     θ(·)   ∈

[0, 1) because it is the product of two numbers between 0 and 1.

   Assume now that k ≤ m and consider any country i ≤ m. In this case
                                                   ³        ´³          ´
αm − αi > αm for any i and m. When θ(·) < 1 we have αiα−α
                                                        m
                                                          m
                                                               1 −  1
                                                                   θ(·)   ∈

[0, 1] because it is the product of two negative numbers with absolute value
                                                                  ¯        ¯
                                                                  ¯     1 ¯
between 0 and 1 (here we use assumption A.2, which implies ¯1 − θ(·)       ¯ < 1
                                ³        ´³         ´
), and when θ(·) ≥ 1 we have αiα−α   m
                                       m        1
                                           1 − θ(·)   ∈ (−1, 0] because it is the

product of two numbers with absolute value between 0 and 1.

   Let us finally consider the eﬀect of a change in the median for a given number

of countries:

∂Uiin (αm , N )       ∂gm (αm )
                    =           · [αi Hg {gm (αm )[1 + β(N − 1)]}[1 + β(N − 1)] − 1]
    ∂αm                 ∂αm
                      µ         ¶
                        αi − αm       αm
                    =                        θ(·)
                           αm       gm (αm )

where we used (6) and (7) in the second line. But α0 (αk , αm , N ) S αm if and



                                           45
only if αi S αm , hence:
          ½                                         ¾
                                    ∂Uiin (αm , N )
             0
       sgn (α (αi , αm , N ) − αm )                   = sgn [αi − αm ]2 > 0
                                        ∂αm

Q.E.D.


   Remark. As it is evident from the proof of Lemma 2, what we really need

for it and the following propositions to hold is that:
                           µ             ¶µ                ¶
                               αi − αm               1
                                              1−               <1
                                  αm                θ(·)

which implies:
                                µ               ¶
                                    1 − 2θ(·)
                   αmin > αm                        whenever θ(·) < 1
                                    1 − θ(·)

and:
                                µ               ¶
                                    2θ(·) − 1
                  αmax < αm                         whenever θ(·) > 1
                                     θ(·) − 1

Obviously, A.1 and A.2 are only suﬃcient conditions for this to hold.


   Proof of Proposition 2.


   Consider the case of Lemma 1 in which H{gm (αm )[1 + β(N − 1)]} ≤ H(y)

and αl (β) and αu (β) are defined as the preferences for which the utility from

staying in a union (αm , N ) is the same as the utility from staying out of it.

First we will show that these values are the lower and upper bounds such that

all and only all the countries i ∈ (l, u) belong to the equilibrium union - part a)

- and then we will show that ∂αl (β)/∂β < 0 and ∂αu (β)/∂β > 0 - part b). The

proof is analogous when H{gm (αm )[1 + β(N − 1)]} > H(y).

                                           46
   a) Suppose that a country k ∈ (l, u) does not belong to the equilibrium

union. Notice that from Lemma 2 Ukin (α0 (αk , αm , N ), N + 1) ≥ Ukin (αm , N ).

Because of this and the fact that ∆(αk , β) > 0 , it follows:


   Ukin (α0 (αk , αm , N ), N + 1) − Ukout > Ukin (αm , N ) − Ukout = ∆(αk , β) > 0


This contradicts the fact that (αm , N )EU was an equilibrium union.

   Now suppose that a country k ∈
                                / (l, u) belongs to the equilibrium union.

Since ∆(αk , β) ≤ 0 by construction, it is clearly better for the country to stay

out. Again, this contradicts the fact that (αm , N )EU was an equilibrium union.

   b) The cut-oﬀs αl (β) and αu (β) are defined in Lemma 1 by the function:

                                                         gm (αm ) − g o (α)
            [H[gm (αm )(1 + β(N − 1)] − H(g o (α))] =
                                                                α

Total diﬀerentiation with respect to α and β, and repeated use of (6) and (9)

provide:
                                          ·   µ        ¶µ        ¶¸
           dα        gm (αm )(N − 1)            α − αm       1
              =−                           1−            1−
           dβ    [1 + β(N − 1)] ∆α (α, β)         αm        θ(·)

whose sign, under A.1-2, is the opposite of the sign of ∆α (α, β) - the proof of

this follows the one in Lemma 2. Since ∆α (αl , β) > 0 and ∆α (αu , β) < 0, αl (β)

is decreasing in β and αu (β) is increasing.

   c) This is immediate after recognizing that each CEU is an EU. Indeed, for

a given median and for a given EU there is always a set of outsiders Γ(S) with

S even, such that (14) holds, unless the EU is the largest size EU with the same

median. Q.E.D.

                                         47
   Proof of Proposition 3.


   We will prove that an equilibrium union (αm , N )EU accepts any new member

k if and only if | α0 (αk , αm , N ) − αm |< ²̄ for some ²̄ > 0.

   Define ² ≡ α0 (αk , αm , N ) − αm and assume that αk > αm so that ² > 0

(the argument is symmetric in the opposite case). Country 1 will not exit from

the union after entry of country k if and only if U1in (α0 (αk , α1 , N ), N + 1) >

U1in (α1 , N ), that is if and only if ² is lower than a cut-oﬀ ²̂ defined by:

                                                       gm (αm + ²̂) − g o (α1 )
        [H[gm (αm + ²̂)(1 + βN )] − H(g o (α1 ))] =
                                                               α1

   Now consider the median country m. This country will support k’s admission

                in
if and only if Um  (α0 (αk , αm , N ), N + 1) > Um
                                                 in
                                                    (αm , N ), that is if and only if ²

is lower than a cut-oﬀ ²̃ such that:

                                                                   gm (αm + ²̃) − gm (αm )
[H[gm (αm + ²̃)(1 + βN )] − H{gm (αm )[1 + β(N − 1)]}] =
                                                                            αm

The claim follows setting ²̄ = min(²̂, ²̃). Q.E.D.




                                          48
References

[1] Alesina, Alberto, Ignazio Angeloni and Federico Etro, 2001, Institutional

   Rules for Federations, mimeo, Harvard University and European Central

   Bank


[2] Alesina, Alberto, Ignazio Angeloni and Ludger Schuknecht, What Does the

   European Union Do?, mimeo, Harvard University and European Central

   Bank


[3] Alesina, Alberto, Enrico Spolaore and Romain Wacziarg, 2000, Economic

   Integration and Political Disintegration, American Economic Review, 90

   (5), 1276-97


[4] Alesina, Alberto and Robert Barro, 2002, Currency Unions, Quarterly

   Journal of Economics, forthcoming.


[5] Alesina, Alberto and Vittorio Grilli, 1992, The European Central Bank:

   Reshaping Monetary Policy in Europe, (eds) M. Canzoneri, V. Grilli and

   P. Masson, Establishing a Central bank: Issues in Europe and Lessons from

   the U.S., Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 49-77


[6] Alesina, Alberto and Roberto Perotti, 1998, Economic Risk and political

   Risk in Fiscal Unions, Economic Journal, 108 (449), 989-1008


[7] Alesina, Alberto and Enrico Spolaore, 1997, On the Number and Size of

   Nations, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112:4, 1027-56


                                    49
 [8] Alesina, Alberto and Dani Rodrik, 1994, Distributive Politics and Economic

    Growth, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109 (2), 465-90


 [9] Alesina, Alberto and Romain Wacziarg, 1999, Is Europe going too far ?,

    Carnegie-Rochester Conferences Series on Public Policy 51, 1-42


[10] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger, 1999, An Economic Theory of the

    GATT, American economic Review, XCIX, March, 215-48


[11] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger, 2001, Domestic Policies, National

    Sovereignty, and International Economic Institutions, Quarterly Journal of

    Economics, 116, 519-62


[12] Bernheim, B. Douglas, Bezalel peleg and Michael D. Whinston, 1987,

    Coalition-Proof Nash Equilibria. Concepts, Journal of Economic Theory,

    42 (1), 1-12


[13] Bolton, Patrick and Gerard Roland, 1997, The Breakup of Nations: A

    Political Economy Analysis,    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112 (4),

    1057-90


[14] Bordignon Massimo, Paolo Manasse and Guido Tabellini, 2001, Optimal

    Regional Redistribution Under Asymmetric Information, American Eco-

    nomic Review, 91 (3), 709-23


[15] Etro, Federico, 2001, International Policy Coordination with Economic

    Unions, mimeo, Harvard University and N.B.E.R.


                                      50
[16] Meltzer, Allan H. and Scott F. Richard, 1981, A Rational Theory of the

    Size of Government, Journal of Political Economy, 89 (5), 914-927


[17] Mundell, Robert, 1960, A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas, American

    Economic Review, 657-665


[18] Nava, Mario, 2000, La Finanza Europea, Rome, Carocci Ed.


[19] Oates, Wallace, 1999, An Essay on Fiscal Federalism, Journal of Economic

    Literature, 37, 3, 1120-49


[20] Perotti, Roberto, 2001, Is a Uniform Social Policy Better? Fiscal Federalism

    and Factor Mobility, American Economic Review, 91 (3), 596-610


[21] Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini, 1994, Is Inequality Harmful for

    Growth?, American Economic Review, 84 (30), 600-21


[22] Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini, 1996a, Federal Fiscal Constitutions:

    Risk Sharing and Redistribution, Journal of Political Economy, 104, 979-

    1009


[23] Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini, 1996b, Federal Fiscal Constitutions:

    Risk Sharing and Moral Hazard, Econometrica, 64, 623-46


[24] Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini, 2000, Political Economics. Explain-

    ing Economic Policy, MIT Press, Cambridge


[25] Roberts, Kevin W. S., 1977, Voting over Income Tax Schedules, Journal of

    Public Economics, 8, 329-40

                                       51
