                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       AIRBUS VERSUS BOEING REVISITED:
              INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION IN THE AIRCRAFT MARKET

                                          Douglas A. Irwin
                                           Nina Pavcnik

                                         Working Paper 8648
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w8648


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2001




We would like to thank Bill Swan, two anonymous referees, and seminar participants at the Dartmouth
Junior Lunch, the New York Federal Reserve Board, Spring 2001 Midwest International Economics
Meetings, and NBER Summer Institute for useful comments and suggestions. We are grateful to Bill
Congdon for his research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2001 by Douglas A. Irwin and Nina Pavcnik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Airbus versus Boeing Revisited: International Competition in the Aircraft Market
Douglas A. Irwin and Nina Pavcnik
NBER Working Paper No. 8648
December 2001, Revised October 2014
JEL No. F13,F12

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper examines international competition in the commercial aircraft industry. We estimate a discrete
choice, differentiated products demand system for wide-body aircraft and examine the Airbus-Boeing
rivalry under various assumptions on firm conduct. We then use this structure to evaluate two trade
disputes between the United States and European Union. Our results suggest that aircraft prices increased
by about 3.7 percent after the 1992 U.S. – E.U. agreement on trade in civil aircraft that limits subsidies.
This price hike is consistent with a 5 percent increase in firms’ marginal costs after the subsidy cuts.
We also simulate the impact of the future entry of the Airbus A-380 super-jumbo aircraft on the demand
for other wide-bodied aircraft, notably the Boeing 747. We find that the A-380 could reduce the market
share of the 747 by up to 14.8 percentage points in the long range wide-body market segment (depending
upon the discounts offered on the A-380), but would reduce the market for Airbus’s existing wide-bodies
by an even greater margin.


Douglas A. Irwin
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
douglas.irwin@dartmouth.edu

Nina Pavcnik
Department of Economics
6106 Rockefeller Center
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
nina.pavcnik@dartmouth.edu
1. Introduction

       One of the recurring trade disputes between the United States and Europe concerns the

rivalry between Airbus and Boeing in the market for wide-body aircraft. Airbus first began

production of aircraft in the early 1970s with substantial financial assistance from European

governments. As Airbus succeeded in making inroads into many of Boeing’s markets, Boeing

alleged that Airbus benefited from unfair subsidies and has pressured U.S. trade authorities to

counteract Europe’s financial support. As a result, the United States and European Community

signed an agreement on trade in civil aircraft in 1992 that limited government subsides for

aircraft production. This agreement, however, has come under new strain as Airbus introduces

the A-380 super jumbo aircraft designed to compete directly against the Boeing 747.

       Competition in the wide-bodied aircraft industry has attracted attention not just because

of the controversy surrounding the Airbus subsidies, but because of the industry’s unusual

market structure, in which economies of scale are enormous relative to market demand. The

aircraft sector provides a textbook example of an industry in which trade policy could affect the

strategic interaction between a domestic and an international rival and shift profits in favor of the

domestic firm, as proposed in Brander and Spencer’s (1985) canonical model of strategic trade

policy. Previous studies of the commercial aircraft market, notably Baldwin and Krugman

(1987), Klepper (1990, 1994), and Neven and Seabright (1995), used calibrated simulations to

analyze the competitive interaction of Airbus and Boeing. These simulations focused on

Airbus’s impact on the costs and profits of its competitors and on consumer surplus as a way of

evaluating the welfare effects of Airbus’s market presence.

       This paper takes an empirical approach to examining international competition and trade

disputes in the wide-body aircraft market. We employ Berry’s (1994) method of estimating




                                                  2
demand in an oligopoly market with differentiated products using data on commercial aircraft

prices, sales, and characteristics from 1969 to 1998.1 This approach provides us with estimates

of price and cross-price elasticities of demand, which allow us to assess how closely related in

demand various aircraft are. The demand system, combined with an assumptions on firms’

market conduct and learning parameter in production, also yields estimates of price-cost

markups, allowing us to determine whether competitive pressures have increased in this segment

of the market as a result of Airbus’s entry and Lockheed and McDonnell-Douglas’s exit.2

         We then focus on two aspects of the international rivalry between Airbus and Boeing.

First, we examine whether the 1992 U.S-E.U. agreement on trade in civil aircraft limiting aircraft

subsidies had a significant impact on pricing in the aircraft market. We find that the agreement

appears to have raised the prices of both Airbus and Boeing aircraft by about 3.7 percent in the

narrow- and wide-body market. Our structural model and estimates of the wide-body market

suggest that these price increases are consistent with about 5 percent rise in the marginal cost of

production after the subsidy cuts. Second, we use our demand estimates to estimate the impact

of the introduction of the A-380 on the prices and market shares of other wide-body aircraft,

notably the Boeing 747. We find that the A-380 can be expected to have a significant negative

effect on the prices and sales of the 747 within the wide-body market, but an even greater

adverse effect on demand for Airbus’s existing wide-body aircraft (the A-330 and A-340). This


1
 Our approach of estimating demand is in the spirit of Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1999) and Goldberg (1995)
who examine the impact of trade restraints in the automobile industry.
2
  One recent study that combines elements of demand estimation and industry simulation is Benkard (2003). He
estimates demand parameter for wide-body aircraft and uses them with estimates of a cost function that accounts for
learning by doing to compute numerically the dynamic equilibrium in the aircraft market and simulate the evolution
of the industry. He also simulates the welfare implications of an antitrust policy that places an upper bound on the
market share that any one firm can achieve and finds that this harms consumers. Although our approach to
estimating market demand is similar (we allow for additional market segmentation in the market for medium- and
long- range wide-body aircraft, an important differentiation according to our empirical results), our paper ultimately
addresses a different set of issues.



                                                          3
result highlights the fact that as Airbus and Boeing expand their product line over time, profit

maximization by multi-product firms becomes more complicated as demand for a firm’s existing

models is sensitive to the price and characteristics of its new models.

2. Structural Estimates of Aircraft Demand and Markups

       The market for aircraft is typically divided into two product categories: narrow-body and

wide-body aircraft. Narrow-body aircraft are single aisle, short-range aircraft (up to 6,000 km)

that typically carry between 100 to 200 passengers. The leading aircraft in this category are the

Boeing 737, the Boeing 757, and the Airbus A-320. Wide-body aircraft are double aisle,

medium to long-range aircraft (up to 14,000 km) that can carry between 200 to 450 passengers.

The leading aircraft in this category are the Boeing 747, the Boeing 777, and the Airbus A-300.

Within the wide-body market, planes also differ significantly in terms of their characteristics

depending on whether they are aimed at serving the medium range (i.e. Boeing 767, the Airbus

A-300 and A-310, DC-10, and L-1011) or long-range market (i.e. Boeing 747 and 777, the

Airbus A-330 and A-340, and the MD-11). As a result, we can view narrow-body, medium-

range wide body, and long-range wide body aircraft as imperfect substitutes for one another

because the planes are designed to serve different markets. Figure 1 plots the typical number of

seats and the range of various aircraft and indicates how localized the competition is within the

narrow-body, medium range wide body, and long-range wide-body segment.

       We focus mainly on the wide-body segment of the industry in part because most of the

international trade disputes have centered on competition in this product range. The increase in

international travel since the 1970s has made this a rapidly growing segment of aircraft demand.

The wide-body market has also been very profitable: the Boeing 747, for example, is said to

account for as much as a third of Boeing’s entire profits in certain years. As a result, Airbus, for




                                                 4
example, entered the aircraft market in this segment with the A-300 in 1974, and only later began

competing in the narrow-body market with the launch of the A-320 in 1988. There are fewer

product lines in wide-body segment of the market, and the number of aircraft sold is much

smaller than in narrow-body segment. The cumulative output of the best selling wide-body

Boeing 747 has only reached about 1,185 units in 1998 (it was introduced in 1969), and the best

selling Airbus aircraft A300 sold only 481 units between 1974 and 1998. As a result,

competition tends to be more intense in the wide body market, since from the firm’s perspective,

each additional sale generates valuable revenue. In contrast, narrow-body planes often sell well

above 1,000 units over their lifespan, with Boeing 737 selling over 3,200 units until 1998.

2.1 Demand for Wide-Body Aircraft

        The structure of our aircraft demand system is based on the discrete choice random utility

framework outlined in Berry (1994). This framework enables us to estimate the demand for a

differentiated product using product-level data on sales, prices, and other product attributes,

without observing the purchases made by individual consumers. In this framework, consumers

(airlines) have a choice of purchasing either one of several wide-body aircraft or an outside good.

Because aircraft are durable goods, we follow Benkard (2003) and incorporate used planes in the

demand estimation. In particular, the outside good consists of new narrow-body aircraft and

used wide-body planes. Utility from the outside good is normalized at zero. The total potential

market therefore consists of all new aircraft and used wide-body aircraft.

        We model each wide-body aircraft as a bundle of characteristics that airlines value.

These characteristics include price, range, passenger seating, and takeoff weight. Our framework

also allows the airlines to value aircraft characteristics that are not directly observed. Airline i’s

utility of purchasing product j (uij) can be expressed as a linear function of aircraft j’s




                                                   5
characteristics and tastes idiosyncratic to airline i, so that uij = x j β − α p j + ξ j + τ ij , where xj is a

vector of product j’s attributes, and pj is aircraft price. ξj represents aircraft j’s characteristics

that the airlines value, and τij captures airline i’s specific taste for aircraft j, both of which are not

observed by the econometrician. The mean utility level that product j yields to airlines is

denoted by δj, so that δ j ≡ x j β − α p j + ξ j . Note that in this framework all variation in the

valuation of aircraft across airlines stems from the unobserved additive taste term τij.

        We allow consumer-specific tastes to be correlated across products with similar

characteristics by using a nested logit demand model. We group wide-body planes into two

distinct market segments g: medium-range and long-range wide-body aircrafts. Consumers also

have an option of not purchasing a wide-body plane and purchasing the outside good. We can

then rewrite the consumer taste parameter τij as τ ij ≡ vig (σ ) + (1 − σ )ε ij . Term εij captures

consumer tastes that are identically and independently distributed across products and consumers

according to the extreme value distribution. Term vig captures the common taste that airline i has

for all aircraft in market segment g. The common taste depends on the distribution parameter

σ (0 ≤ σ < 1) , which indicates the degree of substitutability between products within a market

segment. When σ is zero, consumer tastes are independent across all aircraft and there is no

market segmentation. The higher the σ, the more correlated the consumer tastes are for products

within the same market segment and the competition among products is stronger within than

across market segments.3



3
 Benkard (2003) allows for market segmentation between the outside good and wide-body market, but does not
distinguish between the medium- and long-range segments of the wide-body market. Our estimates of σ indicate the
importance of allowing for the additional market segmentation. In addition, he estimates the model using data from
1975 to 1994 whereas our data span 1969 to 1998. The additional years of data are important because the A-330, A-
340, and Boeing 777 only enter the market in 1993 and 1995.


                                                        6
         Given the set of available aircraft, airlines are assumed to select the aircraft that gives

them the highest utility.4 Consumer i will choose aircraft j if uij ≥ uik . Given the distributional

assumptions on consumer tastes and functional form for utility, we can aggregate over individual

consumer purchases to obtain predicted aggregate market share sj of aircraft j:

                          e
                              δ j /(1−σ )
                                              Dg1−σ
                                                                   where Dg ≡ ∑ e
                                                                                    δ j /(1−σ )
(1)      s j (δ , σ ) =                                        ,                                  .
                               Dg           ( ∑ Dg   1−σ
                                                           )                 j∈g
                                             g



The first term in this expression is aircraft j’s market share in its market segment, while the

second term is the market share of a market segment g in the overall aircraft market. Since the

outside good yields zero utility by assumption, δ0 is 0 and D0 is 1. We can invert the predicted

market share for product j to obtain an analytic expression for mean utility level δj as a function

of demand and distribution parameter σ: ln S j − σ ln S j| g − ln So = δ j ( S , σ ) ≡ x j β + α p j + ξ j .

Rearranging the above equation yields our estimating equation for demand:

(2) ln S j − ln So = x j β + α p j + σ ln S j|g + ξ j

where Sj is the observed market share of product j, S0 is the observed market share of the outside

good, and Sj|g is the observed market share of product j within its market segment g.

2.2 Estimation Results

         We estimate demand equation (2) using annual product level data on wide-body aircraft

prices, sales, and characteristics from 1969 to 1998. The data cover worldwide sales by Airbus,

Boeing, McDonnell Douglas, and Lockheed Martin. Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics of

the data; further information on sources and data construction are described in the Data



4
 While this framework allows an airline to purchase only one aircraft at a time, airlines often concurrently purchase
several aircraft. Since we do not observe individual purchases, we cannot address this issue. Hendel (1999)
explicitly models and estimates the demand for computers allowing for multiple purchases.


                                                                       7
Appendix. Note that in this study, market share is measured in terms of number of planes sold

(rather than revenue share).

         There are three issues in estimating (2). First, although the econometrician does not

observe aircraft quality ξj, the aircraft producers likely set the price of product j to reflect the

product quality. The aircraft prices are therefore likely correlated with unobserved quality.

Second, the within-group market share Sj|g are also likely correlated with ξj. We instrument for

the two variables with two types of instruments: cost-shifters (hourly manufacturing wages in

the E.U. and the U.S. and the price of aluminum), and the characteristics of the rival aircraft x-j

averaged over the entire wide-body market and averaged over products within each market

segment. Cost shifters affect product prices, but are uncorrelated with product j's unobserved

quality. Similarly, rival products’ characteristics influence the market share and prices of rival

aircraft, and through strategic interaction, also affect the pricing decisions and market shares of

the product j in question. However, they are not econometrically correlated with product j's

unobserved quality ξj. The key identifying assumption is that product attributes xj are not

correlated with ξj. The demand equation is linear in all parameters and the error term, so it can

be estimated by two-stage least squares.5 Finally, errors are likely heteroskedastic and serially

correlated.6 We thus report standard errors that are robust to arbitrary forms of

heteroskedasticity and serial correlation.

         Table 2 presents the estimation results. Column 1 reports the OLS estimates of the

demand parameters and column 2 reports two-stage least squares estimates (IV). Accounting for


5
  Estimating the demand equation separately from the pricing equation (i.e. the supply side) does not affect the
consistency of the estimates.
6
  One potential source of heteroskedasticity is the sampling error in the dependent variable due to low number of
planes of particular type sold in each year. For example, the average number of planes of particular type sold is 26
(the 25th percentile is 14 and the 75th percentile is 37). Our standard errors are robust to arbitrary forms of
heteroskedasticity, so they also account for this potential source of heteroskedasticity.


                                                          8
the endogeneity of price and within market segment market share affects the estimated

parameters. For example, the OLS estimate of the price coefficient in column 1 is -.0265, while

the magnitude of coefficient on price increases (in absolute value) in the IV regression (-.0488).

These estimates are in line with our expectation of upward bias in the OLS coefficient. The

coefficients on other product attributes seem sensible. Focusing on the IV estimates in column 2,

the additional take-off weight, additional seating and range are positively related to aircraft

market share. The coefficients on these characteristics are not estimated very precisely, which is

not surprising given the low number of products and the fact that aircraft manufacturers do not

change typical characteristics for a given aircraft model very frequently.

            The estimated value of σ is 0.45, which suggests that planes within the medium- and

long-range market segment are better substitutes for each other than planes across the market

segments. This has important implications for competition among various aircraft. If a new

product is introduced into a long-range wide-body market (for example, Airbus A-380), it will

erode the market share of the products such as Boeing 747 and Airbus 340 more than the market

share of Boeing 767, which competes mostly with medium-range planes. Similarly, if, for

example, the Boeing 747 increases its price, this increases the market share of its rivals in the

long-range wide-body market segment by more than the market share of its competitors in the

medium-rage market segment.

            This substitutability of products is quantified in table 3 that presents the weighted means

of the own and cross price elasticities of demand.7 The average demand elasticity increases in

absolute value over time, averaging about -2.9 in the early 1970s to -7.8 in the late 1990s. These

estimates suggest that a 1 percent increase in the price lowers a plane’s market share by 2.9%



7
    The elasticity formulas are available in an unpublished appendix available on the authors’ web sites.


                                                             9
(7.8%) during the early 1970s (late 1990s). Thus, the aircraft market appears to have become

much more price sensitive over time, despite the exit of some firms, potentially due to the

increase in number of different aircraft produced by each firm and the growing stock of used

aircraft that is potentially on the market. Within a year, the own-price elasticities also differ

across products, for example, ranging from -4.3 for Boeing 767 to -11.2 for Boeing 747 in 1998.

         In addition, the estimates of the cross-price elasticities reported in column 2 (for products

in the same market segment) and 3 (for product in different market segments) suggest that

products within each market segment are closer substitutes for each other than products across

the segments. For example, the average cross-price elasticity during the late 1990s suggests that

a 1 percent increase in the price of a product leads on average to 1.4 percent increase in the

market share of the products in the same segment and only .05 percent increase in the market

share of the product in a different market segment.8

2.3 Aircraft Markup Estimates

         We can obtain consistent estimates of product demand without assuming the mode of

competition among the firms. However, in order to calculate firm markups we need to assume a

specific form of firm conduct. Suppose that firm f maximizes the present discounted value of its

profits given by:

                        ∞                                            
(3)      π ft = Et  ∑ β t  ∑  p jt q jt ( p ) − c jt q jt ( p )   
                      t = s    j∈F                                  
                                 ft                                   

where Et is the expectation operator conditional on information at time t, β is the discount factor,

qjt is quantity of product j at time t (which is a product of market share of product j at time t and


8
  The cross-price elasticities actually decline in general over time. This is not surprising, since the number of
products in the market has increased. Thus, the effect of a price increase of a product on the market share of each of
its competitors diminishes.



                                                                   10
total market size at t, i.e. q jt = s jt ( p ) M t ), cjt is the marginal cost of product j at time t, and all

other notation follows from previous notation. This objective function accounts for two

characteristics of the aircraft industry—learning by doing in production and multi-product firms.

First, the existence of learning by doing implies that firm’s choices today affect the costs of

production in the future through accumulated experience. Firms likely consider these

intertemporal linkages in their profit maximizing decision. In particular, these dynamic

considerations might make it profitable for a firm to price below marginal cost during the initial

stages of production in order to quickly accumulate the experience and reduce the future cost of

production. Second, Airbus, McDonnell Douglas, and Boeing are multi-product firms that are

selling several products during most time periods. Thus, when Boeing considers lowering a

price of one of its products, this will not only reduce the market share of Airbus’s products, but

might also undercut the sales of Boeing’s other products. Boeing might then lower its prices by

less than in a situation when it only sells one product.

        There is mixed evidence on whether aircraft producers compete in prices or quantities.

Anecdotal evidence on the widespread use of price discounts and favorable financing options

suggests that aircraft companies compete in prices. Yet price competition might be a

questionable assumption during the periods when firms face capacity constraints. As a result we

compute markups based on both Bertrand and Cournot modes of competition for purposes of

comparison.9

        Assuming that firms compete in prices, first-order conditions for profit maximizing firm f

with respect to product j at time t yield:

9
 For example, a Harvard Business School case study reports significant underbidding between Boeing and Airbus,
and cites the former Airbus Chairman Alan Boyd admitting to “pricing for market share...we had to do it in order to
get our feet in the door.” Yet Tyson (1992) reports that industry sources claim that capacity constraints were not
binding during the 1980s. An unpublished appendix available on the authors’ web sites derives the equilibrium for
Cournot competition.


                                                        11
                    ∞ n          ∂ckt + n   dskt
 ∑         −
        kt kt
         p   c − E t  ∑ β qkt + n            
                                    ∂qkt   dp jt
                                                     + s jt = 0
k∈F ft               n =1

To derive a pricing equation for each product j at time t, we use vector notation. Let pt denote a

Jx1 price vector at time t, ct a Jx1 vector of marginal costs, and st a Jx1 vector of market shares

of all products offered at time t (time subscript is omitted in the notation). Let Ωt be a JxJ matrix

                                                           ∂skt
whose element in row j and column k equals −                     if aircraft j and k are produced by the same
                                                           ∂p jt

firm and 0 otherwise. Let ft be a Jx1 vector whose element in row j (fjt) equals

   ∞              ∂c 
Et  ∑ β n q jt + n jt + n  . We can then rewrite the first order profit maximizing conditions in vector
    n =1          ∂q jt 

form as:

(4)    pt − Ωt −1st = ct + f t ≡ ct*

Equation (4) indicates that in equilibrium, the firms equate marginal revenue of product j to the

product j’s “dynamic marginal cost” cjt*, i.e. the sum of current marginal cost cjt and the

expected discounted value of reduction in future cost attributed to current output, fjt.10 This

setting encompasses the possibility that profit maximizing firms price below the current marginal

cost in order to gain experience that lowers the future cost of production.

         If firms were static profit maximizers or there was no learning by doing in production, the

expected discounted value of reduction in future cost attributed to current output, fjt would be

zero. Equation (4) would then equate marginal revenue to current marginal cost, and dynamic

marginal cost would equal to current marginal cost (ie. c=c*). Thus, equation 4, combined with

our demand parameter estimates and the data on prices and market shares, would enable us to


10
  Note that the above equilibrium ignores the fact that a firm’s actions will affect its profits via the effect on the
other firms’ future optimal output decisions.


                                                           12
calculate the markup margin over price ( ( p jt − c jt ) / p jt ) for each product j at time t. However, in

the presence of learning by doing, calculation of markup margins also requires an estimate of

learning rate in order to differentiate between dynamic and current marginal cost.

         We would ideally obtain an estimate of learning rate by estimating a traditional learning

model where current marginal cost is a function of cumulative output Zjt:

                                               t −1
(5)                c jt = Aj Z θjt with Z jt = ∑ q jt and Z j1 ≡ 1
                                               s =1



where Aj is a firm specific cost parameter and parameter θ measures the learning rate.11 The

estimation of (5) ideally requires information on unit cost of production and cumulative output.

Unfortunately, we do not have access to detailed cost data (as, for example, in Benkard (2000

and 2003)). As a result, we would need to base our estimate on a product’s dynamic marginal

costs implied by the equilibrium condition (4). High learning rate would imply that dynamic

marginal cost should decrease through time. However, the implied costs do not drastically

decline during the first few years after the entry. This might be at first surprising given high

estimates of learning rate for aircraft in Benkard (2000) and semiconductors by Irwin and

Klenow (1994). However, the cost curves in the numerical simulations of Benkard’s (2003)

dynamic oligopoly model of aircraft industry (that do not rely on price data) are basically flat 2

to 3 years following the introduction of a plane (see figure 6 in his paper). 12 We think that the

lack of steep decline in cost in the first few years following the entry in our data is due to the fact

that our cost estimates (unlike estimates by Benkard (2000, 2003)) rely heavily on price of
11
   The learning rate is calculated as 1-2θ. For example, a 20% learning rate (associated with θ of -.33) implies that a
doubling of output reduces unit cost of production by 20 percent.
12
   Using detailed data on labor inputs for L-1011, Benkard (2003) suggests that learning effects seem to matter
initially in the production process, but are not a key factor later on: for most years, learning effects are small in
relation to the production run. He shows that learning is effectively exhausted once L-1011 production reaches
about 80 aircraft. Most Boeing aircraft sell at least this many products within two or three years after introduction
(the Boeing 777 took 4 years to reach that level), while most Airbus aircraft reach this figure within the first 4 to 5
years after the initial launch.


                                                          13
aircraft. Aircraft prices, however, are not declining drastically through time (as, for example, in

semiconductor industry).

         Rather than relying on our data to obtain an estimate of learning parameter, we instead

compute current marginal cost (and thus markup margins) for several potential values of the

learning parameter the following way. First, using data on quantity produced, we compute the

ratio between dynamic marginal costs and current marginal cost, implied by cost function (5),

                        ∞ n              θ −1 
                      t  ∑ β q jt + nθ Z jt + n 
               θ
        *S   Z jt + E
      c
d jt ≡ jtS =             n =1                    . In our calculations of the expected discounted value of
                                 θ
      c jt                     Z jt

reduction in future cost attributed to current output, fjt, we assume that firms have perfect

foresight and that firms consider cost reductions for 10 periods into the future.13 We set the

discount rate β of .95. When learning rate is high, dynamic marginal cost will be much lower

than the current marginal cost in the initial stages of production. However, as firms accumulate

sufficient experience, the expected future cost declines associated with current output will

become smaller. Thus the dynamic marginal cost will be similar to the current marginal costs.

Hence, the ratio djt should increase through the life of an aircraft toward 1 as firms take

advantage of learning economies of scale and future reductions in marginal cost due to higher

current output become less important.14




13
    Because our data ends in 1998, we obviously do not observe full 10 years of future production for product-year
observations starting in 1989. When future data is not available, we make use of quantity reported for the last year
of our data (1998) and compute output at t+1 as .7 times output at time t (where t=1998) and continue to do so until
the 10-year time horizon is reached for each product-year observation with unavailable future data. We choose .7
because regression of current output on lagged output yields a coefficient of .7. Given that most aircraft have
already had significant experience accumulated in 1998 and have thus already taken advantage of significant
learning economies, the simulations are not very sensitive to the assumption on unobserved future output.
14
   In fact, at 20% learning rate, our data suggest that the output weighted average of the ratio (over all aircraft) is .47
in the 1st year of production, .72 in the 2nd year, .8 in the 4th year, and .9 in the 10th year of production of the aircraft.


                                                             14
        Second, we take our estimates of dynamic marginal costs implied by (4) as given. We

                                                              c*jt
then compute a measure of current marginal cost as c jt =            and use it to compute markup
                                                              d jt

margins ( p jt − c jt ) / p jt . We perform this exercise for several values of learning parameter

θ ranging from 0 to -.4, which correspond to learning rate of 0 to 25 percent.

        Table 4 presents weighted averages of various markup margins through time. Different

panels of the table correspond to calculations based on different values of learning parameter.

The three columns report markup margins based on assumption of multiproduct Bertrand, single

product Bertrand, and multiproduct Cournot competition. Several interesting findings emerge.

Let us first focus on the markup margins when learning rate is zero, which correspond to markup

margins obtained in static profit maximization. First, multi-product Bertrand estimates suggest

that the average markup margins decline from .36 in the early 1970s to .15 in the late 1990s.

This indicates that the competition in the aircraft market has increased over time despite the

presence of only a few firms. Second, the multi-product firm markups are higher than single-

product firm markups and the difference becomes much more pronounced over time. While no

firm offered more than one wide-body aircraft in the 1970s, Airbus and Boeing introduced new

products starting in the 1980s. When firms have several closely related products on the market,

they become less aggressive in terms of price competition because reducing the price on one

product reduces demand for its other products (and not just the demand for its rivals’ products).

As a result, the markups accounting for multi-product firms are on average 12 percent higher

than the single-firm markups in the 1990s. Finally, the markup estimates are not very sensitive

to whether firms compete in prices or quantities. Cournot markup margins and display similar

patterns as the Bertrand markup margins.



                                                   15
         Given the importance of dynamics in early stages of production, let us now consider

markup margins when we account for learning by doing, taking the learning parameter to be -.3,

corresponding approximately to a 20 percent learning rate suggested by industry sources.15

Several interesting patterns emerge. First, accounting for dynamics often yields negative markup

margins for individual products (not displayed in the table), especially during the first few years

following the entry and in scenarios with higher learning rate. For example, our markup margins

for individual products range from -1.1 to .37 at 20 percent learning rate. In addition, period

averages reported in table 4 suggests that in general, markups are lowest during the 1974 to 1978

period, 1984 to 1988 period, and 1990s. This pattern is consistent with the fact that those periods

follow market entry and thus intensified competition. Anecdotal evidence suggests increased

competition for the market share in both of these entry episodes.16 Moreover, even when we

account for dynamics we continue to find that multiproduct markups exceed single product

markup margins and that the difference between the two increases through time. Similarly, the

markup estimates are not very sensitive to the assumption on the mode of competition (Bertrand

vs. Cournot).17



15
    This information is based on personal correspondence with the chief economist of Boeing, Bill Swan. Benkard
estimates a learning parameter of -0.29 for the L-1011(i.e. 18 percent learning rate). Benkard also estimates cost
functions where he explicitly accounts for forgetting. We do not separately identify learning and forgetting. Thus
the learning rate could be viewed as a net learning rate.
16
    For example, A-300 entered in 1974, following the entry of DC10 in 1971 and L-1011 n 1972. A-310 and
Boeing 767 entered in 1982 and 1983, respectively. Moreover, A330 and A340 entered in 1993 and Boeing 777
entered in 1995.
17
   We can also compare these markup margins to estimates by Benkard (2003), who simulates a dynamic model of
the aircraft industry assuming that firms compete in quantities. It is difficult to make direct comparisons between
his results and ours because he simplifies the industry’s structure and product varieties to reduce the computational
burden of dynamic simulations. His model does an excellent job matching the observed markups of L-1011 (or the
type of plane that matches l-1011 in his simulations), whose actual markup margin over price is essentially zero or
negative throughout its lifespan. Our estimates for L-1011 based on 20 percent learning rate yield markup margins
between -.19 to .2. His simulations also suggest that other plane types have negative markups during the first 2-3
years. However, calculations based on the graphs of his simulated prices and costs suggest that most aircraft other
than L-1011 in the industry simulation actually have positive markups during most of their lifespan (except for the
first 2-3 years). In particular, in most periods after the initial 2-3 years, other aircraft have markup margins around
14 to 17 percent with occasional periods when markup margins drop to 3 to 5%. We find a similar pattern.


                                                          16
3. Aspects of Airbus-Boeing Competition

       The structural estimates from the previous section can be used to explore the impact of

two important events: (1) the 1992 agreement between the United States and European

Community regarding subsidies and competition in the aircraft production, and (2) the entry of

the A-380, Airbus’s new wide body that aims to compete directly with the Boeing 747.

3.1 Impact of the 1992 Agreement

       Following the trade tensions between the United States and the European Union

surrounding the subsidized entry of the A-300 in the early 1970s, the rivalry between Boeing and

Airbus intensified considerably after Airbus introduced the narrow-body A-320 in the mid-

1980s. After Air India cancelled an order for Boeing 757s when Airbus offered steep discounts

on the A-320, the U.S. government intervened on Boeing’s behalf. The United States threatened

using the countervailing duty laws or opening a Section 301 case against Airbus unless an

agreement on subsidies was reached. In 1992, the United States and European Community

reached a bilateral agreement on trade in civil aircraft (see Tyson 1992 and Pavcnik 2002). The

agreement establishes limits on the direct and indirect (military) subsidies used to finance the

development of new aircraft. The maximum allowed direct subsidy is 33 percent of

development costs. In addition to development subsidies, governments also provide assistance to

domestic producers through measures that might affect variable cost of production. As a result,

the agreement has several provisions that affect the variable production cost of aircraft and might

thus affect pricing in the aircraft market. For example, the agreement prohibits production

subsidies and restricts the government's ability to help the domestic aircraft producer offer

financing to airlines. The agreement also requires detailed reporting on subsidies, interest rates,

and repayment conditions, and establishes procedures to monitor the agreement. Finally, the




                                                 17
agreements repayment provision requires that Airbus make repayments on a per-plane basis

rather than delay repayment until the end of the loan, reducing the incentive for Airbus to cut

price significantly to capture certain sales.

           The unanswered question is whether the 1992 bilateral agreement had any impact on

pricing in the aircraft market. In particular, one would a priori expect the agreement to increase

prices because the agreements provision on financing, production subsidies, and repayments of

the loan implicitly increase the marginal cost of an aircraft. Although we can never truly identify

the effect of the 1992 U.S.-E.U. agreement on aircraft prices, our data enable use to compare the

aircraft prices before and after the agreement. We thus regress aircraft prices (in logs) on a

dummy variable set at unity from 1992 and other potential determinants of price. We control for

other time-varying factors that could affect the pricing of aircraft through the inclusion of GDP

growth, price of petroleum, market segment Herfindahl index, and a time trend. Product fixed

effects control for the differences in characteristics across aircraft that affect pricing.18 Since the

estimated coefficients are not statistically different from each other when we estimate the

separate narrow-body and wide-body market segment separately, we pool the data from both

market segments to gain efficiency. We restrict our analysis to data from 1985 onwards so that

we have equal number of time periods before and after the treaty.

           Table 5a presents the results. The coefficients on the treaty indicator in columns 1-4

suggest that prices of aircraft have on average increased after the 1992 U.S. – E.U. trade

agreement. The estimates range from 9.4 to 3.7 percent as we add controls for other time-

varying factors that could independently affect prices such as market concentration captured by

Herfindahl index (column 1), GDP growth and price of petroleum (column 2), a time trend

(column 3), and all of the above controls (column 4). In columns 6-9, we allow the treaty to
18
     The characteristics of most planes do not vary during this period. Thus, aircraft fixed effect accounts for them.


                                                            18
have a differential impact on Airbus’s pricing by interacting the treaty indicator with the Airbus

indicator. Our results suggest that the agreement did not have a statistically differential impact

on the pricing of Airbus. Moreover, the coefficients on the treaty indicator are similar to the

magnitudes obtained in columns 1-4.

        One potential problem with our analysis is that the positive coefficient on the treaty

indicator could simply reflect extremely high prices in one unusual year following 1992 rather

than consistently higher prices from 1992 onwards (or extremely low prices in one unusual year

before 1992). To check for this possibility we consider general trends in prices during the years

surrounding the 1992 agreement by regressing aircraft prices (in logs) on year indicators (1991 is

the omitted indicator) and product fixed effects. The coefficients on year indicators relative to

1991 and their 95 percent confidence intervals are depicted in figure 2. The coefficients on year

indicators for 1992 onwards are all positive. As a result, it is unlikely that one particular year is

driving our findings.19

        Overall, this evidence suggests that the 1992 U.S.-E.U. agreement limiting aircraft

subsidies raised the prices of Boeing and Airbus aircraft. This behavior is consistent with a

Cournot or a Bertrand duopoly model in which subsidies are eliminated. Given that no publicly

available data exist on the magnitude of the subsidy reductions, it is difficult to judge whether

these price increases are big or small. However, the structural model and estimates for the wide-

body aircraft from section 2 enable us to check how big of subsidy reductions these price

increases potentially imply. In particular, we use the estimates of demand parameters, marginal

costs c implied by Bertrand pricing equilibrium, predicted market share equation (1), and

equilibrium pricing equation (4) to simulate equilibrium prices under various increases in firms'


19
 Columns 5 and 10 of table 5a repeat regressions in columns 4 and 9 without the 1985 data (1985 has unusually low
prices). We continue to find a positive coefficient on the treaty indicator.


                                                       19
marginal costs (i.e. various reductions in subsidies). We consider firms' marginal cost increases

ranging from 5 to 20 percent. In these simulations we assume that dynamic marginal cost equal

to the current marginal costs. Because all but one of the planes sold in 1992 (i.e. MD-11) have

been on the market for at least 10 years, they have likely already taken advantage of learning and

the future cost reductions from current output are likely small. In fact, the weighted average of

the ratio of dynamic to current marginal cost based on the calculations reported in section 2.3 is

.89 when learning rate is approximately 20 percent. This confirms that firms have already

accumulated significant experience and that abstracting from future cost reductions associated

with current output might not be problematic. Table 5b reports the average prices of wide-body

aircraft under each of the scenarios and the average percent increase in prices (relative to the

baseline of no change in marginal cost). The table suggests that the observed average 3.7 to 7.5

percent price rise corresponds to about 5 to 10 percent increase in the marginal costs of firms.

3.2 Impact of A-380 Entry

       The most recent trade controversy centers on government funding for Airbus’s super-

jumbo aircraft, the A-380, whose first deliveries are expected in the year 2006 (see Pavcnik 2002

for details on the controversy). As Figure 1 indicates, the A-380 will be the world’s largest

passenger aircraft, designed to carry between 550 to 650 people, have a range of over 14,200 km

(8,000 miles), and have a takeoff payload of 540,000 kg. The governments of France, Germany,

and the United Kingdom are expected to cover about one-third of the estimated $12 billion in

development costs. The United States has warned European governments that the Airbus

financing may violate the 1992 agreement and subsidy rules established in the World Trade

Organization in 1994. The EU has countered by asking that indirect subsidies to Boeing from

military and NASA contracts be examined.




                                                 20
       Press reports indicate that the list price of the A-380 is $235 million, but also suggest that

discounts on the order of at least 10 percent are being negotiated with potential buyers. Some

reports even indicate that 35 percent discounts have been offered, but the industry observers

believe such large discounts will not last for long. Airbus has indicated that 250 aircraft must be

sold for it to break even and cover the enormous development costs. Airbus has only decided to

go ahead with the production once the advanced orders hit the 50-plane mark, and about 60

planes had been ordered as of early 2001. The A-380 is designed to compete directly against the

Boeing 747 at the high end of the wide-body market. Airbus claims that due to the operating-

cost effectiveness of the A-380 (relative to Boeing 747), the airlines flying the A-380 need to fill

only 33 additional passenger seats to break even (relative to Boeing 747 break-even passenger

requirement). Boeing denies that there is a profitable market for such “super jumbos” and is

planning on producing modified versions of the 747 to compete against the A-380.

       Given the heated trade debate and controversy surrounding the A-380 entry, we simulate

the impact of the entry on the prices and market share of existing aircraft using our structural

parameter estimates and product characteristics from section 2. We proceed as follows. First, an

estimate of A-380 mean utility level requires values for A-380 observed attributes and

unobserved quality. We take the announced prices and characteristics of the A-380 as given.

Moreover we assume that its unobserved quality equals the unobserved quality of A-340 in 1998.

We use the A-340 unobserved quality (rather than the unobserved quality of the 747), because

Airbus planes potentially share similar unobserved characteristics. A-340 unobserved quality

does not fluctuate much over time and it follows a similar time path as the unobserved quality of




                                                 21
747 during the late 1990s (albeit unobserved quality of 747 is about 1.7 times higher).20 Thus,

focusing on the 1998 values is not likely to be problematic. In additional simulations, we

allowed the A-380 quality to take values between the quality of A-340 and 747.21 This did not

change the main characteristics of simulated results reported below (albeit A-380 obviously

gained greater market share).

         Using the estimates of the demand parameters and the information on the A-380

attributes we next predict the A-380 mean utility level δ.22 We then incorporate the A-380 mean

utility level δ in the predicted market share expression (1) for each of the existing products and

the outside good. Finally, using this “augmented” predicted market share equations (1) and the

pricing equation (4), we simulate the new equilibrium prices and market shares for each of the

existing products.

         Airbus has an incentive to initially offer large price discounts (and potentially price

below marginal cost) to secure a large market share for the A-380 and to take advantage of

economies of scale. We thus explicitly consider how price discounts on A-380 affect the A-380

current market share and simulate the annual post entry market when the A-380 is sold at the list

price, and at a 10-, 20- and 30-percent discount. Moreover, by comparing the ratio of dynamic to

current marginal cost we can actually check whether the existing planes have already

substantially exhausted gains from learning by 1998. If this ratio is close to one, firms do not


20
   The unobserved quality of A-340 also follows a similar trend to the unobserved quality of A-330 with the
exception of the initial two years. A-330 quality is low in the initial two years, it then increases, and then relatively
levels off.
21
   These results are presented in the unpublished appendix available on the authors’ web sites.
22
   One potential problem with this analysis is that because of the unprecedented size of A-380, the demand estimates
might not apply to A-380. We perform two checks for whether our demand system is potentially misspecified.
First, we estimate a version of the demand equation in which we include the square and cubic value of the predicted
dependent variable. The two nonlinear terms are insignificant and the F-test of joint insignificance yields a p-value
of .15. Second, we graph the demand residuals against various included aircraft characteristics. Visual inspection of
the graphs does not show significant nonlinear trends in the residuals. Thus, out of sample predictions are likely not
very problematic.


                                                          22
anticipate significant future cost reductions associated with current output. The weighted

averaged of the ratio in 1998 is .92 (when we assume 20% learning rate; the ratio is above .96 for

five out of eight aircraft) which suggests that abstracting from the dynamic aspects for existing

planes is likely not very problematic. By 1998, all the existing planes have been on the market

for at least four years and have thus already captured most of the benefits of learning by doing.

As a result, we focus on static equilibrium for existing planes (i.e. we equate the current marginal

cost to dynamic marginal cost).

       Table 6 presents these results. The top part of the table reports overall market share and

the changes in overall market share under different scenarios relative to the no entry case. The

middle part of the table reports the aircraft market share within a market segment (and respective

changes in market share relative to the no entry case). The bottom part of the table reports prices

(and respective changes in prices relative to the no entry case). Given that the press releases

suggest significant initial price discounts on the A-380, we focus on the results when the A-380

is sold at a 20 percent discount. The no entry case always serves as the comparison group.

       Several interesting findings emerge. First, the A-380 gains about 1 percent of the overall

annual market (which translates into 38 aircraft), and 17.4 percent of the long-range market

segment. Boeing 747, for example, controls 1.2 percent of the overall market prior to the A-380

entry (28.5 percent of the long-range market segment). Second, the simulation results reflect the

importance of market segmentation within the wide-body market. As a result of A-380 entry, the

overall market share of a long-range wide body aircraft (for example Boeing 747) declines by 1.6

percent (.0002 decline in market share), while the overall market share of a medium-range plane

(for example Boeing 767) declines only by .9 percent (.0001 decline in market share). This

translates into the total annual loss of 7 sales by the existing long-range varieties and the total




                                                  23
annual loss of .3 sales by the existing medium-range wide body varieties. Third, the market

share loss is substantial for Airbus’s own products, especially in the long-range market segment

since their prices do not fall as much following the A-380 entry. The A-380 substantially

undercuts the demand for the A-330 and A-340, which illustrates the risk that multi-product

firms face in introducing new models. For example, the A-380 lowers the combined market

share within wide-body market segment of the A-330 and A-340 by more than it lowers the

within wide-body market share of the 747. Moreover, the declines in prices of wide-body

Boeing aircraft range from 0.9 to 1.3 percent, while the declines in prices of existing Airbus

wide-body aircraft are about .3 percent. Nevertheless, the overall market share of Airbus still

increases. Overall, given that the industry sources indicate that the Boeing 747 accounts for a

substantial portion of Boeing’s profits, the subsidized A-380 entry into the market might have a

significant negative impact on the U.S. producer and lead to future conflicts in U.S.-E.U. trade

relations.

        Finally, the comparison of the results across various pricing options for the A-380 reveals

the importance of price discounts in securing a higher market share for the A-380. While Airbus

is only able to sell 1 A-380 per year at the list price (corresponding to .02 percent market share),

the annual sales of the A-380 increase to 6 planes at a 10 percent discount (.1 percent market

share), 38 sales at 20 percent discount (1 percent market share), and 177 sales at 30 percent

discount (4 percent market share). Our results thus seem to be consistent with the reports that

cumulative orders for the A-380 are now around 60 planes and that some of these aircraft have

been sold at significant discounts.

        Before we conclude, the question obviously arises whether Airbus can sell enough A-

380s at relatively high prices to recoup its development and production costs. Let us consider




                                                 24
the predictions of simulations, where Airbus sells the A-380 at a 20 percent discount off its $230

million list price reported in table 6. Without additional growth in demand, this yields 38 annual

sales, amounting to 760 planes sold and $140 billion in revenues over the next 20 years (ignoring

discounting). These figures suggest that the A-380 will likely cover its development costs

(estimated to be $12 billion), and that Airbus might be able to repay government loans.

However, the estimates fall short of Airbus's forecast that the airlines will demand 1,500

superjumbos over the next 20 years, yielding around $345 billion in revenues. In fact, the

simulated number of total sales is closer to Boeing's predictions that market will only demand

around 700 superjumbos overall. According to Boeing, these sales are insufficient for the project

to eventually become profitable. Of course, the above analysis abstracts from other potential

reasons for bringing A-380 to the market. For example, if there are synergies in owning all

Airbus (or Boeing) planes, the introduction of a long range plane such as A-380 might induce

additional airlines to switch away from Boeing to Airbus planes.

4. Conclusions

       This paper has taken an empirical look at international competition and trade disputes in

the wide-body aircraft market. We began by estimating the demand for wide-body aircraft and

firm markups under various assumptions on the mode of competition. This exercise yields

several insights into the wide-body aircraft market. First, we find evidence of significant market

segmentation between the medium-range and long-range wide body planes, consistent with the

anecdotal evidence on the near monopoly position enjoyed by the Boeing 747 in the long-range

market until the early 1990s. Second, despite the small number of firms in the industry, market

competition has intensified (we estimate higher demand elasticities and lower markups over

time), especially with the entry of new aircraft varieties. Third, the markup estimates implied by




                                                25
the Bertrand and Cournot competition are relatively similar. This might be explained by the

growing presence of multi-product firms in the industry. As producers expand the range of

products, their incentive to aggressively underbid their rivals is diminished, since price cuts

might also hurt their own sales of other products. Fourth, the presence of multi-product firms

makes it more challenging for the aircraft companies to successfully introduce new aircraft

without hurting their existing product line.

       Given that the aircraft industry continues to be the source of trade friction between the

United States and the European Union, we evaluated two key trade issues. We find evidence that

the 1992 U.S. – E.U. agreement to limit subsidies resulted in higher aircraft prices. Although we

cannot say anything about the magnitude of the government development subsidies that have

helped aircraft producers to launch their products, our evaluation of the 1992 agreement suggests

the observed price increases after the agreement are consistent with increases in firms’ marginal

costs by about 5 percent. We also predict that the introduction of the Airbus A-380 will

substitute most strongly for existing Airbus aircraft rather than the Boeing 747, although the

negative impact on demand for the 747 is not negligible. The extent of this substitution depends

critically on the price discounts that Airbus offers on the A-380.

       Nevertheless, many questions remain unanswered. Most importantly, without more

detailed information on production cost, we also cannot address the issues of strategic trade

policy that are more dynamic in nature such as the role of government subsidies to promote the

aircraft market entry. Benkard (2003) provides a first step in this direction.




                                                 26
Data Appendix

       We take our data on annual aircraft deliveries and average sales price from 1969 to 1998

from the industry publication The Airline Monitor (May 1999 issue). Aircraft characteristics,

such as passengers, range, take-off weight, typical number of seats were taken from various

issues of Jane’s World Aircraft. Summary statistics on data are provided in Table 1 for wide-

body and narrow-body aircraft. Data on A-380 characteristics was obtained from the Airbus

Industrie web site (http://www.airbus.com/pdfs/A380/BRIEF2000.pdf).

       Data on producer price indices, exchange rates, price of petroleum, GDP growth, and the

price of aluminum are taken from IMF's International Financial Statistics Yearbook. Data on the

U.S. hourly manufacturing wages and the U.S. producer price index is from the Bureau of Labor

Statistics (online data). Data on hourly manufacturing wages for France, Germany (the states

comprising former West Germany), and Great Britain are from the Yearbook of Labor Statistics

published by the International Labor Organization. We computed a weighted average of hourly

manufacturing wages in France (weight is .4), Germany (weight is .4), and Great Britain (weight

is .2) using weights that mimic the individual country’s ownership shares in the Airbus

Consortium. Similar procedure was used to compute the producer price index for Airbus. All

values are expressed in 1995 U.S. dollars.

References

Baldwin, Richard, and Paul Krugman. “Industrial Policy and International Competition in Wide-
Bodied Jet Aircraft.” In Robert E. Baldwin (ed.), Trade Policy Issues and Empirical Analysis.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the NBER, 1988.

Benkard, C. Lanier. “A Dynamic Analysis of the Market for Wide-Bodied Commercial
Aircraft." forthcoming (2003) Review of Economic Studies.

Benkard, C. Lanier. “Learning and Forgetting: The Dynamics of Aircraft Production.”
American Economic Review 90 (September 2000): 1034-1054.




                                               27
Berry, Steven. “Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation.” Rand Journal of
Economics 25 (Summer 1994): 242-262.

Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes. “Voluntary Export Restraints on
Automobiles: Evaluating a Trade Policy.” American Economic Review 89 (June 1999): 400-
430.

Brander, James, and Barbara Spencer. “Export Subsidies and International Market Share
Rivalry.” Journal of International Economics 18 (1985): 83-100.

Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou. “Product Differentiation and Oligopoly in International Markets:
The Case of the U.S. Automobile Industry.” Econometrica 63 (July 1995): 891-951.

Hendel, Igal. “Estimating Multiple-Discrete Choice Models: An Application To
Computerization Returns.” Review of Economic Studies 20 (April 1999): 423-446.

Irwin, Douglas A., and Peter J. Klenow. “Learning-by-Doing Spillovers in the Semiconductor
Industry,” Journal of Political Economy 102 (December 1994): 1200-1227.

Klepper, Gernot. “Entry into the Market for Large Transport Aircraft.” European Economic
Review 34 (1990): 775-803.

Klepper, Gernot. “Industrial Policy in the Transport Aircraft Industry.” In Paul Krugman and
Alasdair Smith (eds.), Empirical Studies of Strategic Trade Policy. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press for the NBER, 1994.

Neven, Damien and Paul Seabright. “European Industrial Policy: The Airbus Case.” Economic
Policy (1995): 313-358.

Pavcnik, Nina. "Trade Disputes in the Commercial Aircraft Industry." World Economy 25
(2002): 733-751.

Tyson, Laura D’Andrea. Who’s Bashing Whom? Trade Conflict in High Technology
Industries. Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics, November 1992.

Yoffie, David B. “Collision Course in Commercial Aircraft: Boeing-Airbus-McDonnell
Douglas.” Harvard Business School Case (1991).




                                              28
Figure 1—Range and Typical Number of Seats for Wide Body and Narrow Body Aircraft


                                                                                                    A-380
                  555

                  500


                                                                                              747
                  400
Number of seats




                                                       777

                                                                     A-330
                                                                                      MD-11

                  300                                                                A-340

                                                       A-300
                                           L-1011
                                               DC-10

                                                 767 A-310
                  200               A-321    757
                                  727   MD-90
                          MD-80           A-320
                                  737            737                     707/720
                               A-319

                  100
                        DC-9


                                  4000          6000            8000      10000    12000      14000
                                                               Range in km




                                                                29
                                                         Figure 2--Aircraft Prices Surrounding the 1992 Agreement

                                   0.2



                                  0.15



                                   0.1



                                  0.05



                                     0
                                          85   86   87   88      89       90       91          92    93        94   95   96   97   98


                                  -0.05




Coefficients on Year Indicators
                                   -0.1



                                  -0.15



                                   -0.2
                                                                                        Year
                  Table 1--Descriptive Statistics


                                  Number of
Variable                          plane-years       Mean         S.D.
Wide-body aircraft
Price (million 1995 $)                    148          80          26
Quantity Sold                             148          26          18
Market Share                              148        .203        .160
Take off weight (ton)                     148         225          77
Typical number of seats                   148         293          67
Range (thousand km)                       148        8.04        2.68

Narrow-body aircraft
Price (million 1995 $)                    141          29          10
Quantity Sold                             141          58          46
Market Share                              141        .213        .149
Take off weight (ton)                     141          74          27
Typical number of seats                   141         143          37
Range (thousand km)                       141        4.46        2.18
Note: Data from 1969-1998. Market share refers to product's market
share in the narrow-body or wide-body market.
     Table 2--Estimates of Demand Equation

                               OLS            IV
                               (1)            (2)
price                          -0.0265***     -0.0488***
                               [0.0049]       [0.0139]
take off weight                0.0026         0.0012
                               [0.0025]       [0.0024]
number of seats                0.0032         0.0107
                               [0.0026]       [0.0064]
range                          0.02           0.112
                               [0.051]        [0.082]
gdp growth                     -0.029         -0.012
                               [0.018]        [0.021]
petroleum price                -0.007         -0.01
                               [0.006]        [0.008]

σ                              0.976***       0.448*
                               [0.080]        [0.248]
Adjusted R2                    .82            .63
Note: Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering by
plane are reported in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate
significance at a 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Number of observations is 148.
               Table 3--Price Elasticities


   Period                  Price Elasticities
                     (1)          (2)          (3)
                   Own price Cross price Cross price
                                 same         across
                               segment segments

1969-1973               -2.901          2.570         0.502
1974-1978               -3.750          1.604         0.098
1979-1983               -4.079          1.858         0.101
1984-1988               -4.822          1.789         0.047
1989-1993               -6.410          2.007         0.071
1994-1998               -7.813          1.436         0.047
Note: The reported elasticities are output-weighted period
averages.
   Table 4--Markup Margins Based on Various Learning Rates


                      (1)                    (2)                   (3)
Period           Multi-product         Single-product         Multi-product
                  Bertrand                Bertrand              Cournot
θ=0
1969-1973                      .361                   .361                  .382
1974-1978                      .270                   .270                  .292
1979-1983                      .250                   .248                  .266
1984-1988                      .226                   .213                  .241
1989-1993                      .176                   .166                  .189
1994-1998                      .155                   .141                  .164

θ=-.1
1969-1973                      .272                   .272                  .297
1974-1978                      .207                   .207                  .231
1979-1983                      .199                   .197                  .217
1984-1988                      .168                   .153                  .184
1989-1993                      .123                   .113                  .137
1994-1998                      .105                   .089                  .114

θ=-.2
1969-1973                      .197                   .197                  .225
1974-1978                      .141                   .141                  .167
1979-1983                      .154                   .152                  .173
1984-1988                      .108                   .092                  .125
1989-1993                      .097                   .086                  .111
1994-1998                      .055                   .038                  .064

θ=-.3
1969-1973                      .144                   .144                  .174
1974-1978                      .074                   .074                  .102
1979-1983                      .118                   .115                  .137
1984-1988                      .046                   .028                  .065
1989-1993                      .062                   .051                  .078
1994-1998                      .009                  -.008                  .019

θ=-.4
1969-1973                      .111                   .111                  .143
1974-1978                      .009                   .009                  .039
1979-1983                      .086                   .084                  .107
1984-1988                     -.017                  -.036                  .003
1989-1993                      .030                   .019                  .046
1994-1998                     -.030                  -.048                 -.019
Note: θ denotes the learning rate used in calculation of current marginal cost.
The reported markups are output-weighted period averages. In some instances
the initial observation is omitted for 747, MD-11, and A330 because the model
predicted negative ratio of dynamic to current marginal cost in the first year due
to low first year output and high future output. This inflated the markup
estimates in that year.
                          Table 5a--The Impact of the 1992 U.S.-E.U. Agreement on the Pricing of Aircraft

                       (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)
treaty                 0.094*** 0.039**          0.075*** 0.037*           0.052*** 0.088*** 0.032                0.066*** 0.030           0.049**
                       [0.015]      [0.016]      [0.012]      [0.021]      [0.017]      [0.019]      [0.020]      [0.017]     [0.024]      [0.019]
treaty*airbus                                                                           0.019        0.018        0.024        0.020       0.007
                                                                                        [0.020]      [0.018]      [0.020]     [0.018]      [0.018]
herfindahl index       -0.217*      0.211        -0.267*** 0.156           0.044        -0.217*      0.211        -0.267*** 0.151          0.043
                       [0.115]      [0.165]      [0.089]      [0.131]      [0.121]      [0.118]      [0.166]      [0.093]     [0.131]      [0.123]
gdp growth                                       -0.001       0.000        0.005                                  -0.001       0.000       0.005
                                                 [0.010]      [0.011]      [0.009]                                [0.010]     [0.011]      [0.009]
price of petroleum                               -0.004*** -0.001*         0.001                                  -0.004*** -0.001*        0.001
                                                 [0.001]      [0.001]      [0.001]                                [0.001]     [0.001]      [0.001]
time trend                          0.013***                  0.012*** 0.009***                      0.013***                  0.012*** 0.009***
                                    [0.003]                   [0.004]      [0.003]                   [0.003]                  [0.004]      [0.003]

N                      160          160          160          160          151          160          160          160          160         151
Note: Robust Standard errors adjusted for clustering on products are reported in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate significance at a 1, 5 and 10%
level, respectively. Dependent variable is ln price. All regressions are estimated using product fixed effects. This regression includes wide-body and
narrow-body aircraft. Columns 5 and 10 are estimated without year 1985.
                 Table 5b--The simulated effect of the 1992 trade agreement on prices

                                      No
Marginal cost increase             change         5%      7.5%       10% 12.5%            15% 17.5%                20%

Durable Demand
Average Price                         89.6      93.3       95.1      97.0       98.8     100.7      102.5     104.4
Standard Deviation                  (27.1)    (28.3)     (28.9)    (29.5)     (30.1)     (30.7)    (31.3)     (31.9)
Avg. % Change in Price                 n.a.     4.09       6.14      8.19     10.24      12.30      14.36     16.42
Standard Deviation                     n.a.     (.25)     (.37)      (.50)     (.63)      (.75)      (.88)    (1.01)

Note: Simulations are based on demand parameter from table 2, column 2 and the assumption of multiproduct
Bertrand pricing. Simulations use aircraft characteristics and marginal cost estimates from 1992. The prices are
expressed in million 1995$.
                                  Table 6--The effect of A380 entry on existing wide body planes



                      No entry              List price                10% discount                20% discount                30% discount

                        actual       simulated change             simulated     change        simulated      change       simulated      change
Market Share
Long Range
A380                                      .0002                          .001                        .009                        .040
747                        .0120          .0120        .0000           .0120       .0000           .0118      -.0002           .0100      -.0019
777                        .0167          .0167        .0000           .0167       .0000           .0164      -.0003           .0140      -.0027
MD11                       .0027          .0027        .0000           .0027       .0000           .0027      -.0001           .0023      -.0004
A330                       .0052          .0052        .0000           .0051      -.0001           .0047      -.0005           .0034      -.0018
A340                       .0054          .0054        .0000           .0053      -.0001           .0049      -.0005           .0035      -.0019
Medium Range
767                        .0106          .0106        .0000           .0106       .0000           .0106      -.0001           .0104      -.0003
A300                       .0029          .0029        .0000           .0029       .0000           .0029       .0000           .0028      -.0001
A310                       .0002          .0002        .0000           .0002       .0000           .0002       .0000           .0002       .0000
Outside good               .9442          .9440       -.0002           .9430      -.0012           .9374      -.0068           .9133      -.0309
Market share within each wide-body market segment
Long Range
A380                                        .005                        .032                        .174                        .546
747                          .285           .284      -.0012            .277      -.0080            .240      -.0446            .137      -.1481
777                          .398           .396      -.0017            .387      -.0112            .336      -.0623            .191      -.2068
MD11                         .065           .064      -.0003            .063      -.0018            .054      -.0101            .031      -.0335
A330                         .124           .123      -.0008            .118      -.0054            .096      -.0278            .046      -.0773
A340                         .129           .128      -.0009            .123      -.0056            .100      -.0290            .048      -.0807
Medium Range
767                          .771         .7705        .0000           .7706       .0001           .7709       .0004           .7721       .0016
A300                         .213         .2131        .0000           .2131      -.0001           .2127      -.0004           .2116      -.0015
A310                         .016         .0164        .0000           .0164       .0000           .0164       .0000           .0163      -.0001
Price (million 1995 $)
Long Range
747                        146.8          146.7       -.0389           146.5      -.2542           145.4     -1.3274           143.0     -3.7822
777                        107.6          107.6       -.0390           107.4      -.2543           106.3     -1.3275           103.8     -3.7823
MD11                       101.8          101.7       -.0391           101.5      -.2543           100.4     -1.3276            98.0     -3.7823
A330                       105.7          105.7       -.0113           105.6      -.0732           105.3      -.3698           104.7      -.9827
A340                       112.8          112.8       -.0113           112.7      -.0732           112.4      -.3697           111.8      -.9827
Medium Range
767                          75.3           75.3      -.0010            75.3      -.0068            75.3      -.0394            75.2      -.1458
A300                         82.6           82.6      -.0004            82.6      -.0024            82.5      -.0132            82.5      -.0442
A310                         67.5           67.5      -.0004            67.5      -.0024            67.4      -.0132            67.4      -.0443

Number of A-380 sold                         0.9                          6.1                       37.6                       177.3
Decline in sales of LR aircraft              0.2                          1.0                        7.2                        38.8
Decline in sales of MR aircraft              0.0                          0.1                        0.3                         1.6
Decline in sales of outside good             0.8                          5.0                       30.1                       136.8
Note: Simulations are based on demand parameter from table 2, column 2 and multiproduct Bertrand pricing. The reported changes are
differences between various scenarios relative to the base of no A380 entry reported in column 1. Simulations use aircraft characteristics from
the last year of the data (1998). The changes in sales (i.e. change in number of planes sold) reported on the bottom of the table are calculated
based on the 1998 market size (4424 planes). Market shares are based on quantities of planes sold.
