                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE RETIREMENT INCENTIVE EFFECTS OF
                          CANADA’S INCOME SECURITY PROGRAMS


                                             Michael Baker
                                            Jonathan Gruber
                                             Kevin Milligan


                                          Working Paper 8658
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8658


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2001




We are grateful to Statistics Canada and Human Resources Development Canada for research support, Sue
Biscope, Richard Dupuy, Leonard Landry and Garnett Picot for assistance accessing the data, Andrea
Wenham and Terence Yuen for excellent research assistance and to Paul Finn and participants in seminars
at UBC, HRDC and the NBER for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research, HRDC or Statistics Canada.


© 2001 by Michael Baker, Jonathan Gruber and Kevin Milligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Retirement Incentive Effects of Canada’s Income Security Programs
Michael Baker, Jonathan Gruber and Kevin Milligan
NBER Working Paper No. 8658
December 2001
JEL No. H3, J2



                                               ABSTRACT

        Like most other developed nations, Canada has a large income security system for retirement that
provides significant and widely varying disincentives to work at older ages. Empirical investigation of
their effects has been hindered by lack of appropriate data. We provide an empirical analysis of the
retirement incentives of the Canadian Income Security (IS) system using a new and comprehensive
administrative data base. We find that the work disincentives inherent in the Canadian IS system have
large and statistically significant impacts on retirement. This suggests that program reform can some play
a role in responses to the fiscal crises these programs periodically experience. We also demonstrate the
importance of controlling for lifetime earnings in retirement models. Specifications without these controls
overestimate the effects of the IS system. Finally, our estimates vary in sensible ways across samples
lending greater confidence to our estimates.


Michael Baker                                                     Jonathan Gruber
Department of Economics                                           Department of Economics
University of Toronto                                             MIT
150 St. George Street                                             50 Memorial Drive, E52-355
Toronto, Ontario                                                  Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
Canada M5S 3G7                                                    and NBER
and NBER                                                          gruberj@mit.edu
baker@chass.utoronto.ca

Kevin Milligan
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
2329 West Mall
Vancouver, B.C.
Canada V6T 1Z4
       Canada’s Income Security (IS) programs for seniors face an uncertain fiscal future.

Unfortunate collisions of demography and “pay as you go” financing have precipitated periodic

crises for both the Canada and Quebec Pension Plans. But there is another trend that is equally

ominous for long run fiscal balances: the substantial reduction in the work effort of older

Canadians. From the beginning of the 1960s through the end of the 1990s the labour force

participation rate of 55-64 year old men fell from 87 percent to 61 percent. For men aged 65+ it

fell from 30 percent to under 10 percent. The decline in the working older age population both

lowers the tax revenues that finance IS programs and raises the benefits payments from these

programs, worsening their net fiscal position.

       Ironically, the IS programs may have made a significant contribution the time trend in

retirement that threatens them. The time series correlation is striking, as this period saw an

enormous expansion of IS programs: the Canada/Quebec Pension Plans were greatly expanded,

and new income support programs for low income seniors were introduced or expanded.

       Of course, simple trend comparisons are not a sufficient basis for concluding that IS

programs played a major role in these trends, or contemplating IS reform. Instead, we require

formal, robust inference on the behavioural effects of program parameters. For many countries

there are large and growing literatures on the incentive effects of their national social security

programs. Furthermore, many governments are investing in research programs on aging to help

refine the inference. In contrast, there are but a handful of studies of Canada’s IS programs.

One explanation of this outcome is there are few data sets in Canada with sufficient samples of

older individuals and adequate information on their IS entitlements to support such a program.

       In this paper we attempt to fill in some of the gaps in the Canadian literature, providing

estimates of the incentive effects of the full web of federal IS programs using an extraordinary




                                                                                                     3
new data set. These data are a union of numerous administrative sources, and provide a large

sample of older workers and detailed information on their earnings histories, marital

circumstances, spousal and job characteristics and labour supply choices.

       Using this information we construct estimates of individuals’ entitlements to Canada and

Quebec Pension Plan (CPP and QPP) benefits, the Old Age Security Pension (OAS), the

Guaranteed Income Supplement (GIS) and Spouse’s Allowance (SPA).1 Our measure of the

labour market incentives provided by these programs is based on the present discounted value of

the stream of benefit entitlements from these programs for a given retirement age. By

recalculating this sum at each possible retirement age we create accrual variables that capture the

change in total IS entitlements with additional years of work. We calculate a variety of accrual

variables, which alternatively assume the worker is relatively short or long sighted when making

the retirement decision. We then relate these incentive measures to individuals’ labour market

decisions between age 55 and age 64—the primary retirement ages.

       There is a growing recognition in the literature that identification can be problematic in

empirical models of retirement (Coile and Gruber 2000, Chan and Stevens 2001). This is

because cross individual variation in benefit entitlement is typically the basis of identification.

There are a variety of sources of variation in benefit entitlement across individuals, but clearly

one of the more important is lifetime wages or earnings. The problem arises because variation in

lifetime wages may in turn capture heterogeneity in work preferences. Accordingly, we are

careful to document any variation in inference across specifications that, alternatively, do and do

not control for individuals’ lifetime earnings.

       We also explore variation in the results across samples defined by the probability of

being a member of a Registered Pension Plan and particular income quartile, as well as across




                                                                                                      4
different definitions of retirement. The estimates vary in sensible ways, which lends greater

confidence to our inference.

         The rest of the paper is laid out as follows. First, we describe the previous literature and

the elements of Canada’s income security system and the retirement income environment. Next,

we describe the construction of the data set and the incentive variables used in the analysis. We

then proceed to lay out the empirical framework and present the results. Finally, we offer some

conclusion.



I.       Previous Literature

         The economics of aging literature in Canada is relatively new and still quite small.2 As

noted above, a major obstacle is the lack of panel data that provide large samples of older

workers. This problem is not unique to Canada, however, as special surveys have been initiated

in some countries to remedy this problem (e.g., the US Health and Retirement Survey).

         Pesando and Rea (1977) and Burbidge (1987) are early studies that document the

parameters of Canada’s IS system and provide theoretical analyses of some of their incentives.

Specific features of the CPP/QPP programs have recently been examined by Baker and

Benjamin (1999a, 1999b) and Baker (2002). These include the elimination of the CPP/QPP

earnings test and the introduction of the Spouse’s Allowance (SPA) in the 1970s and the

introduction of early retirement to the CPP/QPP in the 1980s. Tompa (1999) investigates the

determinants of the CPP take-up decision. These studies offer mixed results: some of the

program reforms appear to have affected retirement behaviour (the earnings test and SPA) while



1
  On July 31, 2000 the name of the Spouse’s Allowance was changed to the ‘Allowance.’
2
  Our focus here is on studies of public pension and income security programs. There is a small related literature on
the incentives in Registered Pension Plans. See Gunderson and Pesando (1988) and Gunderson and Pesando (1991).


                                                                                                                   5
others did not (early retirement). In any event, an obvious shortcoming of this research for the

purposes of program reform is its focus on single features of programs in isolation.

       Recently Gruber (1999) provides a step towards more comprehensive analysis by

documenting the incentive effects of the entire web of IS programs based on simulated earnings

histories. He shows that there are positive incentives for retirement starting at age 60 that grow

particularly large by age 69.

       Another recent contribution to this literature is offered by Compton (2001). She

estimates the incentive effects of the full CPP/QPP program using Survey of Labour and Income

Dynamics (SLID) data for 1993-1996, and concludes that program parameters have little effect

on retirement decisions. There are at least two reasons, however, that this conclusion may be too

strong. First, the modelling of retirement incentives in the paper is limited by the SLID’s short

time span. As a consequence most of a worker’s earnings history is not observed, which hampers

the construction of CPP/QPP benefits. In addition, as we document below, the interactions of the

CPP/QPP with the income-tested retirement income programs are crucial to understanding the

effect of incentives on retirement in Canada. Therefore, as noted in the discussion of the Baker

and Benjamin papers no strong conclusions should be drawn from looking at one component of

the system in isolation.

       A second shortcoming is the method used to impute CPP/QPP benefits to potential

retirees. These benefits are imputed to workers based on a sample of workers who both work

and collect CPP/QPP benefits. This sample is not likely to be representative of the working

population. Furthermore, the variables that are used to predict CPP/QPP benefits are included in

the retirement regressions along side the imputed CPP/QPP benefit. With no variables from the

first stage excluded, there is no identifying variation left for the CPP/QPP effect, which renders




                                                                                                     6
its explanatory power inert. Finally, the results using this methodology find no evidence that

money matters, but the precision of the estimates is low, so large incentive effects cannot be

statistically ruled out either.



II.      An Overview of the Income Security System

         Canadians make their retirement decisions within the context of a three component IS

system that is largely a creature of the 1960’s. The first component, the OAS pension, was until

recently a demogrant available to individuals starting at age 65. The second component is the

GIS, and related SPA, which are income tested benefits. The third component is the contributory

public pension plans, the CPP and QPP, in which benefit entitlement is directly related to

individuals’ lifetime work histories. As reference for the following overview of the system, a

graph of the levels of benefits paid out by these programs since 1980 is presented in figure 1.



The Old Age Security Pension

         The OAS was established in 1952, replacing existing provincial means tested, cost

shared, programs that had been in place from as early as 1927. Benefits are available to any

individual aged 65 or older, who meets certain residency requirements.3 Originally benefits were

available to individuals starting at age 70, but this was lowered to age 65 over a 5 year period

starting in 1966.




3
  Individuals a) must be a Canadian citizen or legal resident of Canada on the day preceding the application’s
approval; or b) if no longer living in Canada, must have been a Canadian citizen or a legal resident of Canada on the
day preceding the day he or she stopped living in Canada. A minimum of ten years of residence in Canada after
reaching age 18 is required to receive a pension. The amount of a person’s pension is determined by how long he or
she has lived in Canada. For example, a person who has lived in Canada for at least 40 years after reaching age 18
may qualify for a full OAS pension. The benefit is pro-rated for pensioners with less than 40 years of residence.


                                                                                                                    7
       There is no actuarial adjustment to benefits for delaying receipt beyond age 65. Benefits

are fully taxable, and since 1989 they are clawed back from high income individuals. A special

claw back tax of 15 percent comes into effect as a beneficiary’s income reaches $55,309 (in

2001). Finally, benefits have been fully indexed to the CPI since 1972, and are financed out of

general tax revenues.



The Guaranteed Income Supplement and Spouse’s Allowance

       The GIS, established in 1967, is an (annually) income tested benefit, available to OAS

pensioners. The are separate benefits for singles and individuals living in couples. The

calculation of income for the purposes of the test is similar to that used for the income tax, with

the exclusion of OAS benefits. A key difference is that income for the GIS and SPA is

calculated at the family level. The tax back of benefits is 50 cents for each dollar of income

except in couples where the partner is under age 60 in which the tax back is 25 cents for each

dollar of income.

       The SPA, established in 1975, is a program for partners of OAS pensioners, who are

between the ages of 60 and 64.4 The maximum benefit is equal to the sum of the current OAS

benefit and current GIS benefit at the married rate. Benefits are income tested at higher rates

than the GIS. The tax on benefits is 75 cents for each dollar of income until an amount

equivalent to the OAS benefit has been retrieved. At this point the tax is reduced: the sum of the

remaining SPA benefit and the other partner’s GIS benefits are reduced by 50 cents for each

dollar of additional income. In 1986 the SPA was extended to individuals aged 60 to 64 who had

been widowed and had not remarried. Benefits for these surviving spouses are somewhat larger

but are taxed back similarly.




                                                                                                      8
        Both GIS and SPA benefits are fully indexed to increases in the CPI. Furthermore,

neither benefit is subject to income taxes at the federal or provincial levels.



The Canada and Quebec Pension Plans

        The third component of the IS system is the QPP and CPP which were established in

1966. The two programs are largely identical, and serve, respectively, individuals living in the

province of Quebec and individuals living in the other provinces and territories of the country.

The primary difference between the CPP/QPP and the OAS and GIS/SPA programs is that

CPP/QPP benefits are determined by an individual’s lifetime work history.

        The plans are financed by a payroll tax of 4.3 percent (2001) paid by both employers and

employees. The tax is levied on employment earnings in excess of the Year’s Basic Exemption,

currently frozen at $3,500, up the Year’s Maximum Pensionable Earnings (YMPE), which

equalled $38,300 in 2001. The YMPE is indexed to the growth in average earnings in the labour

market.

        To be eligible for benefits, an individual must have made at least one year of

contributions in his/her contributory period. The contributory period starts at age 18 or January

1, 1966, whichever is later, and normally extends to age 65 or commencement of the retirement

pension, whichever is earlier.

        Benefit entitlement is determined by a series of calculations. In the first, the number of

months in an individual’s contributory period is calculated.5 Some months are excluded. They

include any months in which a disability pension was received, months spent caring for children



4
 Beneficiaries must also meet residency requirements.
5
 Earnings in excess of 1/12 of the YMPE in a given month can be used, if necessary, to “top up” earnings in other
months in the same calendar year.


                                                                                                                    9
under the age of 76, any month between age 65 and the commencement of the pension7 and 15

percent of the remaining months. These last three conditions are subject to the proviso that the

total contributory period cannot fall below 120 months. In the second calculation, pensionable

earnings in each of the remaining months is converted to current earnings by multiplying by the

ratio of the YMPE in the given month to a five year moving average of the YMPE in the month

of application.8 In the final calculation, the product of 0.25 and the average of this real earnings

history,9 called Average Pensionable Earnings (APE), determine benefit entitlement.

        Benefits can be claimed at any age between 60 and 70 subject to an actuarial adjustment.

The “normal” retirement age is 65. Benefits are reduced (increased) by 0.5 percent for each

month the benefit application precedes (succeeds) this age.10 Benefit receipt prior to age 65 is

conditional on a retirement test. Annual earnings in the year the pension is claimed cannot

exceed the maximum retirement pension payable at age 65 for that year. This test is only applied

at the point of application, however; after that point, there is no additional check on the

individual's earnings.

        While CPP/QPP retirement pensions are based on an individual’s earnings record, there

is some dependence of benefits across partners through the surviving spouse benefits. This is

because part of the surviving spouse benefit is determined by the deceased’s earnings history.11

These programs also pay benefits to orphaned children and a death benefit.


6
  If the individual had zero or below average earnings in these months.
7
  Months worked between the ages of 65 and 70 can be substituted for months prior to age 65 if they increase
benefit entitlement.
8
  The moving average is calculated as the year of application and the preceding four years. The method of
calculation has been in place since 1999. Prior to 1998, a three year moving average was used. In 1998 a four year
moving average was used.
9
  The factor of 0.25 has been in place since 1976. In the period 1967 through 1975 the ratio was increased linearly
from 0.025 to this level.
10
   This early retirement option has been available from the QPP since 1984 and from the CPP since 1987.
11
   Further details of the surviving spouse pension can be found CCH Canadian Ltd (2001) and Baker, Hanna and
Kantarevic (2001).


                                                                                                                 10
          The CPP/QPP also provide disability pensions to individuals who are unable to work due

to disability. This dimension of the program may have some impact on the retirement decision,

as there is speculation in the literature that older workers use disability program as a bridge to

retirement.12

          Finally, CPP/QPP benefits have been fully indexed to the CPP since 1972. They are also

fully taxable under federal and provincial income tax laws.



Other Elements of the Environment

          While our focus in this paper is the incentives in the IS programs, there are a number of

other programs that are inputs to the retirement decision. The first is provincially run programs

for seniors. These tend to be relatively small programs and benefits are often means tested.13

          The second element is employer provided pensions or Registered Pension Plans (RPP’s).

In 1997 almost 42 percent of paid workers were participants in one of these plans. Recent

trends have been lower in coverage and away from defined benefit (DB) plans in favour of

defined contribution (DC) plans. Both types of plans can affect retirement decisions, DC plans

primarily through income effects, while DB plans can have quite complex incentive effects.

Relative to public pension plans, employer pensions are relatively understudied due to a lack of

data.14

          A third element is the tax deferred saving program called Registered Retirement Savings

Plans (RRSP). This program allows individuals to save up to 18% of earned income, to

maximum of $13,500 on a pretax basis. This so-called contribution room is reduced by a


12
   Further information on the CPP and QPP disability programs can be found in Gruber (2000).
13
   For example, The GAINS program in Ontario ‘tops up’ the GIS for seniors by a maximum of $83. In 2000,
approximately 8 percent of Ontario OAS receipients received GAINS.
14
   Gunderson and Pesando (1988, 1991) outline the incentives in some Canadian RPPs.


                                                                                                           11
Pension Adjustment for individuals who participate in a RPP. The Pension Adjustment is equal

to the actual contributions to a DC plan and deemed annual contribution for individuals

participating in a DB plan. Assets in RRSP’s accumulate tax free, but are fully taxable on

withdrawal, which must commence by age 69. While RRSP’s are primarily a vehicle for savings

and tax deferral, for the retirement decision they can interact with income tested programs like

the GIS. RRSP distributions are income for the purposes of the GIS/SPA income tests and OAS

clawbacks, and so will face very high tax rates for some individuals.



III.    The Data

        Lack of adequate panel data has presented obstacles to retirement research in

Canada. Proper modelling of retirement incentives requires a panel data set of older workers that

contains sufficient information, in particular full earnings histories, to accurately calculate their

entitlements to IS programs. In this study we make use of a unique administrative data set which

possesses many of these characteristics.

        The starting point is the Longitudinal Worker File (LWF) developed by the Business and

Labour Market Analysis (BLMA) Division of Statistics Canada.15 It is a 10 percent random

sample of Canadian workers for the period 1978-1996. These data are the product of information

from three administrative data files: the T-4 file of Revenue Canada, the Record of Employment

(ROE) file of Human Resources Development Canada and the Longitudinal Employment

Analysis Program (LEAP) file of BLMA. The LWF data also provide information on each




15
  The construction of the database is described in Picot and Lin, (1997) and Statistics Canada (1998). Our
description draws heavily on these sources.


                                                                                                             12
individual’s age and sex. These were established from the T-1 tax returns which individuals file

each year.16

         The T-4 file supplies the earnings data. T-4 tax forms are issued annually by employers

for any employment earnings that (1) exceed a certain annual threshold and/or (2) trigger income

tax, contributions to Canada’s public pension plans, or unemployment insurance premiums.

These data therefore, capture any employment earnings of paid employees, as well as the

incorporated unemployed. Omitted from these data will be earnings from unincorporated self

employment. The consequences of this deficiency are discussed below. The data also establish

a province of residency for the individual, through the location from where the T-4 was issued.17

         Employers issue ROE forms to employees in insurable employment18 whenever an

earnings interruption occurs. Earnings interruptions result from events such as strikes, layoffs,

quits, dismissals, retirement and maternity or parental leave. The reason for the interruption is

recorded on the ROE form. These forms are the source of measures of job tenure (starting in

1978) at a given establishment.

         Finally, the LEAP is a longitudinal data file on Canadian businesses at the company

level. It is a source of information on the company (employee) size and 3 digit industry of the

jobs in which employee work. These administrative data sources allow us to construct a

comprehensive data set for the study of retirement in Canada.



16
   To obtain this information, therefore, it is necessary that he or she filed a tax return at least once in the sample
period.
17
   T-4’s for some individuals will be issued from offices that are not in their province of residence. It is not possible
to assess the severity of this problem.
18
   Over the sample period, insurable employment covers most employer-employee relationships. Exclusion
includes self-employed workers, full time students, employees who work less than 15 hours per week and earn
less than 20 percent of maximum weekly insurable earnings (20 percent*$750=$150 in 1999). Individuals
working in insurable employment pay Employment Insurance (EI) contributions on their earnings and are
eligible for EI benefits subject to the other parameters of the EI program.



                                                                                                                       13
         The LWF data span the period 1978 through 1996. Earnings histories of this length are

not sufficient, however, to establish individuals’ entitlements to CPP/QPP benefits. Recall that

contributory periods can span back to as early as 1966. The years 1975 through 1977 are filled

in by reference to the T-4 earnings records for these years. T-4 records for the years 1966

through 1974, however, are not available. To predict earnings in these years, cohort specific

earnings growth rates calculated from the 1972, 1974 and 1976 census family files of the Survey

of Consumer Finance19 were applied to a three year average of an individual’s last valid earnings

observations in the LWF sample. This allows us to construct earnings histories back unto 1971.

For the remaining five years, earnings growth rates implied by a cross section age profile

estimated from the 1972 SCF are used, appropriately discounted for inflation and productivity

gains using the Industrial Composite wage for the period 1966-1970.20

         The marital status and any spouse/common-law partners of individuals are identified

through reference to the T-1 family file maintained by Statistics Canada. T-4 earnings histories

for the period 1966-1996 are then constructed for the spouse/common-law partners, following

the procedures used for the sample individuals.

         Finally, two additional pieces of information were added to these data. First, to

determine entitlement for income tested benefits, we need information on non-labour income.

To do this we construct age profiles of family level income by sex/region/industry and

sex/region/marital status cells, for individuals in and out of the labour market respectively,21

using data from the 1986 and 1991 census family files of the Canadian Census.                      The measure of

19
  We use samples of paid workers with positive earnings in the relevant birth cohorts.
20
  The data on the Industrial Composite wage are from Statistics Canada (1983). The obvious limitation of this
backcasting approach is that we will not predict absences from the labour market, which may be important at
younger ages. However, the youngest cohort in our analysis was 30 in 1966. This means that absences for child
bearing, or due to the employment instability of youth, do not play a large role for most members of our data set.




                                                                                                                     14
non-labour income includes investment income and income from private pensions. We then

impute non labour income to individuals using the profile appropriate to their current or

(assumed) future labour market state. The sample and cell definitions that are employed are more

fully described in the Appendix.

           Second, information on the probability of RPP coverage, by 3-digit industry,22 is

computed using cross section samples of males or females from the 1986-1990 Labour Market

Activity Survey (LMAS) and the 1993-1996 Survey of Labour and Income Dynamics (SLID).

In these surveys individuals are asked if they participate in any RPP. These probabilities are

then imputed to individuals in the LWF, matching on the industry codes. Probabilities for the

years 1991 and 1992 are simple linear interpolations. Again the sample definitions for these data

sources are described in the Appendix.

           Our definitions of work and retirement follow from fact that we observe the earnings of

individuals as captured on the T-4 forms, but have no direct information on their labour market

activity. We define work as positive T-4 earnings in two consecutive years. If we observe

positive earnings in one year and zero earnings in the next, the year of positive earnings is

denoted the retirement year. As noted above, T-4’s are not issued to the unincorporated self-

employed so movements from paid employment into this sector will also be labelled as

retirement. 23 These mislabeled transitions induce measurement error in our 0/1 indicator of




21
     The age profiles are appropriately inflated by the CPI for use in future years.
22
    Some industries are aggregated to obtain sufficient sample sizes. Unfortunately, the sample sizes of these data
sets would not permit us to calculate these probabilities exclusively for older individuals.
23
   In 1991, a year in the middle of our sample period, 13.2 percent of working males and 6.8 percent of working
females aged 55 to 64 reported themselves as unincorporated self-employed (1991 Public Use Micordata Files of the
Canadian census). Note that some of these individuals will have worked in this sector from before they turned 55,
and so will never appear in our sample. It is not obvious how the exclusion of this group might affect our
conclusions.


                                                                                                                15
retirement. The result is that we will underestimate the marginal effects of the characteristics of

individuals and their jobs, as well as the IS incentives, on the probability of retirement.24

         Only the first observed “retirement” for each individual is considered. If a person re-

enters the labour market after a year of zero earnings, the later observations are not used. Labour

market return is potentially an important topic, but outside the scope of the current analysis.

Furthermore, first retirements may be more important from the perspective of the fiscal health of

various IS programs. Finally, individuals are only followed until age 64. Therefore, an

individual who has positive earnings in every year up to age 64 will pass out of our sample

before we observe their retirement, and contribute a censored observation. The age 64 cutoff

makes sense given that there is mandatory retirement at this age in most jurisdictions in Canada

over the period we examine.

         Given we identify the year proceeding a year of zero earnings as the retirement year, the

focus of our analysis is the period 1985-1995. We draw separate samples of males and females

aged 55 through 65 who worked in 1985. Each individual contributes observations from this year

to the year of retirement or age 64, whichever comes first. Younger cohorts of individuals are

added as they turn 55 in the years 1986-1991 again conditional on working in that year.25 26 The

sample is selected conditional on working so that the incentives for retirement conditional on

being in the labour force are examined. While it makes sense to insist on some initial labour

market activity in an analysis of retirement, our requirement of earnings in a given one-year

24
   This conclusion follows from the observations that our retirement indicator is dichotomous (i.e., 0/1) and the
measurement error is not “classical”. Furthermore, the error is “one-sided” in that we may mistakenly code a “0” as
a “1” when someone enters unincorporated self-employment, but we will not miscode “1’s” as “0’s”, since we
define working as receiving a T-4 form. In this case, there is attenuation bias in the estimated marginal effects. See
Hausman, Abrevaya, and Scott-Morton (1998).
25
   Individuals with missing age, sex or province variables are excluded.
26
   Agricultural workers and individuals in other primary industries are excluded. We make this exclusion because
our definitions of retirement are based on earnings, and the earnings streams for these workers, given high rates of




                                                                                                                    16
interval will exclude individuals who retain some attachment to the labour market but who

experience an extended period of joblessness.27



IS Incentive Variables

         Our analysis requires careful construction of each individual’s IS incentives. The starting

point is an individual’s IS entitlement. We calculate entitlement on a family rather than an

individual basis, so we also must calculate the IS entitlement of any spouse and common law

partner, in a given year. The calculations incorporate all components of the federal IS system.

         OAS eligibility is primarily determined by age, which we observe directly in the data.

Two complications are the residency requirement and the benefit clawback. The residency

requirement is not implemented because we lack information on place of birth and year of arrival

in Canada. The clawback provisions (starting in 1989) are fully implemented, however, based

on projections of labour and non-labour income.

         Eligibility for the GIS/SPA is determined by age and family income. Age is observed in

our data. We also implement the income test based on projections of labour and non-labour

income.

         We determine CPP/QPP entitlement using individuals T-4 and projected earnings

histories as described above. The drop out provisions for low earnings months up to 15 percent

of the contributory period are fully implemented. Disabilities or time spent in childcare are not

observed, however, and therefore deletions for these reasons are not captured.28 The reforms of


self-employment and special provisions in the Employment Insurance system for fishers and other seasonal workers,
are difficult to interpret.
27
   Depending on when the period of joblessness falls in the calendar year, our sample captures all individuals whose
period lasts 11 months or less, and some individuals whose period is as long as 22 months.
28
  Note that the dropout provisions for childcare came in to effect in 1977 under the QPP and 1978 under the CPP.
The childbearing years of many females in our sample will have been prior to these dates.


                                                                                                                  17
the CPP/QPP system over the period are also accounted for, including the introduction of early

retirement, the retirement test on benefit receipt at ages 60-64 and the actuarial adjustment to

benefits for initiating benefit receipt at ages other than 65, in 1984 and 1987 respectively. Note,

however, that the disability benefit is not included in this calculation, nor is any child benefit

(either disability related or survivor) as there is no information on children in the data set.

        IS entitlement is calculated for both current and future years. To do this we require a

projection of individuals’ (and their spouse/common-law partners’) potential labour and non-

labour income in future years. After experimenting with a number of projection methods,

earnings are projected by applying a real growth rate of zero percent per year to the average of an

individual’s observed earnings in the three years preceding the retirement year.29 Non labour

income is projected following the method outlined above. For each individual, entitlement with

and without the imputed level of non-labour income is calculated and then averaged using as

weights the cell specific probability that non-labour income is positive. Both projected earnings

and non-labour income are net of federal and provincial income taxes. Also deducted are the

employee’s portion of the CPP/QPP payroll tax that they would pay if they worked. In either

case the tax provisions of the year in which the calculation is made are assumed to be in effect in

all future years.

        Since IS entitlement is calculated at the family level we require some assumption about

any spouse/common law partner’s retirement decision. A complete model of family labour

supply is beyond the scope of this paper. The simplifying assumption made here is that any




29
  Within sample evaluation revealed this method a better predictor (in a mean-squared error sense) of future
earnings than methods involving a projection equation that included demographic variables, lagged earnings and
individual fixed effects.


                                                                                                                 18
partner starts collecting entitlements at the earliest age possible under the current rules of IS

programs.30

        Once these calculations are completed we construct the expected net present value of the

family’s Income Security Wealth (ISW) associated with each retirement date. For single

workers this is the sum of future benefits discounted backwards by time preference and survival

probabilities for each possible year of retirement. For married workers we account for the

likelihood of the joint survival of worker and the spouse/common-law partner, and the survivor

provisions of the CPP/QPP and the SPA, as described in more detail in Gruber (1999). We use a

real discount rate of 3 percent and survival probabilities from the age/sex specific Canadian life

tables from Statistics Canada (Statistics Canada 1984).

        The result is a profile of the present discounted value (PDV) of ISW at all possible

retirement dates. This allows us to construct three different incentive variables that are current in

the literature.

        The first, and most commonly used, is the one year accrual which is simply the difference

of ISW between adjacent retirement ages. It reveals the effect of choosing to work an additional

year.

        The second is the peak value accrual introduced by Coile and Gruber (2000). This is the

difference between ISW at the current age and ISW at the financially optimal retirement age, the

age at which ISW is maximized. Relative to the one year accrual the peak value calculation

30
  For most of the sample period this is age 65 for OAS and GIS, age 60 for the Allowance and age 60 for the
CPP/QPP. For CPP/QPP benefits prior to age 65 and any income-tested benefit, the assumption implies a cessation
of the spouse/common-law partner’s employment (i.e., retirement). Gruber (1999) and Baker and Benjamin (2000)
provide estimates of age/employment profiles and employment hazards (the conditional probability of labour market
exit) for older men and women over the sample period. This evidence provides some justification for this
assumption about labour market exit rates in our analysis of the male sample, in which the spouse/common-law
partners are females. On the other hand, this assumption may prematurely remove the male spouse/common-law
partners of individuals in our sample of females from the labour market. This is unlikely to have a large effect on




                                                                                                                19
accommodates non-linearities in the PDV of ISW profile. This captures the idea that continued

work preserves an option to retire in the future, which is valuable if there are significant

increases in ISW at later ages. After the optimal retirement age the peak value calculation

collapses to the one year accrual.

        The final measure is the option value accrual of Stock and Wise (1990). Similar to the

peak value calculation, the comparison is of the current age to an optimal retirement age in the

future, which is defined in terms of utility rather than in terms of dollars of ISW. To implement

this calculation we adopt the indirect utility function used by Stock and Wise, but directly

parameterize it rather than estimating its parameters. The individual’s indirect utility function is

assumed to be

                           R −1                           T
(1)              Vt ( R) = ∑ p s|t d   s −t
                                              ( y s ) + ∑ p s|t d s − t [k ⋅ B s ( R )] g
                                                    g

                           s =t                          s=R


where R is the retirement date, d is the discount rate, p is the probability of being alive at some

future date conditional on being alive today, y is income while working, B is retirement benefits,

g is the parameter of risk aversion, k is a parameter to account for disutility of labour ( k ≥ 1) and

T is maximum life length. Following Stock and Wise (1990), we set k=1.5 and g=0.75, and set

d=0.03 following Coile and Gruber (2000). Sensitivity analysis suggests that the results are not

dramatically different for sensible variations in these parameter values. Relative to the peak

value measure, the option value accrual provides a specific economic rational for the optimal

retirement date accounting for the disutility of work and value of leisure. Its primary

disadvantages are its (possibly incorrect) assumed specification of the indirect utility function,

and that earnings enter directly into the utility calculation and thus will drive some part of the



our estimates, as the independence across spouse/common-law partners in determination of most of the benefits
means that spousal retirement is only a minor contributor to IS incentive calculations.


                                                                                                                20
variation of the option value across individuals. If earnings are in turn correlated with some

unobserved component of tastes for retirement, the identification of the option value effects can

be problematic.


IV.    Empirical Framework

       Our estimating equation relates the retirement decisions of individuals to their

demographic and economic characteristics as well as their ISW. Both the level of ISW and the

different incentive variables enter the equation. The level captures wealth effects: more wealth

through IS programs will lead to increased consumption of all goods, including leisure, if leisure

is a normal good. The incentive variables capture a substitution effect: if there is a large

financial incentive to additional years of work, then individuals will retire later.     The equation

estimated is:

                Rit = δ 0 + δ 1 ISWit + δ 2 ACC it + δ 3 AGE it + δ 4 EARN it +
(2)
                δ 5 APE it + δ 6 SPEARN it + δ 7 SPAPE + δ 8 RPPit + δ 9 X it + υ it .

where Rit is a variable which equals one in the year of retirement and 0 otherwise, ISWit ` is the

expected PDV of ISW in year t, ACC it is one of the incentive variables outlined above, AGE it

represents a set of dummy variables for each age in our sample, and a measure of the difference

in ages across spouse/common-law partners, EARN it and APE it represent cubics in measures of

the individual’s projected earnings in year t and his/her Average Pensionable Earnings (for

CPP/QPP calculations), SPEARN it and SPAPE it are the corresponding variables of any

spouse/common-law partner, RPPit is the measure of the probability of RPP coverage at the 3-




                                                                                                     21
digit industry level,31 and X it are a set of additional control variables, including a dummy

variable for marital status, a quadratic in tenure on the job and a dummy variable which equals

one if tenure is censored at 1978,32 a quadratic in the individual’s and his/her spouse/common-

law partner’s labour market experience measured as the number of years of positive T-4 earnings

between 1975 and year t, 11 industry dummies, dummies for 6 categories of establishment size

and province and year effects.          To capture potential non-linear relationships between earnings

and retirement decisions, a full set of interactions between the cubics in EARN it and APE it , and

SPEARN it and SPAPE it are included. The equations are estimated separately for males and

females as a probit.



V.       Results

Descriptive Statistics

         Descriptive statistics for the male and female samples are presented in table 1 (a full set

of variable definitions is provided in the Appendix). We have 550,839 observations on 110,972

males, and 347,775 observations on 71,066 females. On average, therefore, we observe about

five observations for each individual. The means are calculated over observations in the sample,

rather than individuals. This has implications for the interpretation of some of the statistics. For

example, the probability of RPP coverage is higher than estimates of RPP participation in the

population (see above), but make sense if individuals with high probabilities of RPP coverage

have more stable employment careers and therefore add more observations to the sample.

31
    The standard errors here are potentially biased due to a correlation of the error term across individuals within 3-
digit industry (the “grouped data problem”). Correcting for this bias would lead to larger estimated standard errors
on the parameter on RPP.
32
   Again, the quadratic specification allows a more flexible affect of tenure on the retirement decision than a linear
specification. In the LWF, the tenure variable begins counting in 1978. Therefore, an individual observed in the




                                                                                                                     22
Perhaps the most interesting observations come from comparisons of the male and female

results. The females have lower projected earnings and estimated APE as might be expected, but

tenure and experience are quite similar for the two sexes. This is likely because our tenure and

experience measures are censored in year 1978 and 1975 respectively. Presumably if we could

observe tenure and experience over the full working life the results would be lower for females.

Also, the baseline retirement rates are quite similar for males and females. Females are less

likely to work at the sample ages, but conditional on working at age 55 display similar retirement

patterns.33

        The hazard rates to retirement in our sample are presented in Figures 2 and 3 for males

and females respectively. For both sexes the hazards are relatively flat through the 50’s leading

to a jump at age 60. This is the first age that individuals can claim CPP/QPP benefits. For

males the hazard continues to rise through the 60s, with another pronounced jump at age 64, the

age before mandatory retirement in many jurisdictions. For females the hazard levels off at ages

61 through 63, and then jumps up at age 64, as in the male sample.

        In table 2 we present summaries of our incentive measures by age. We report the median

value, as well as the 10th and 90th percentiles and standard deviation to give some indication of

their variation. For both males and females the one year accrual is positive at the median until

age 60, but then turns sharply negative. This implies that there is an incentive to retire and start

drawing IS benefits at age 61. Given that the main IS program available at this age, the




same job between, for example, 1978 and 1985, has tenure of at least 7 years. The dummy variable for this
censoring helps account for the uncertainty about the exact tenure.
33
   For example, in the 1998 Survey of Consumer Finance data 65 percent of males aged 55-59 were working in the
survey week compared to 46 percent of females. For ages 60 to 64 the rates are 39 percent and 23 percent
respectively.


                                                                                                             23
CPP/QPP, has a retirement test, responding to this incentive would entail some sort of separation

from the current job.34

         The one year accrual represents the change in ISW for an additional year of work. There

are a number of features of the IS system that determine whether it is positive or negative. For

example, ISW could increase through the dropout provisions of the CPP/QPP: an additional year

of work may replace a poor earnings year, or 15 percent of poor years between ages 60 and 64,

in the benefit entitlement calculation.35 This effect is attenuated in the years we examine,

however, due to the low real value of the YMPE in the 1970’s. Set in 1966 to equal average

earnings, the YMPE fell to as low as 67 percent of the Industrial Composite wage by 1973. In

1975 the YMPE was set on course to equal the Industrial Composite again, but this did not

happen until 1987. The result is that poor earnings years during this period may still have been

good years relative to the YMPE, which is what matters for benefits calculation. Therefore, it is

less likely they would be dominated by earnings in years after the YMPE had regained its value.

         Another factor is the actuarial adjustment to benefits starting at age 60. While the

adjustment is intended, on average, to keep the PDV of benefits constant across retirement ages,

it is unlikely that the linear structure of the adjustment in the CPP/QPP achieves this purpose.

Furthermore, the actuarial adjustment interacts with the income testing of GIS and SPA benefits

for some individuals. Higher CPP/QPP benefits available by delaying retirement are partially

offset by lower GIS entitlement (at age 65) through the income test. Therefore, the income test

acts like a tax on those features of the CPP/QPP that adjust the pension entitlement with

continued work. In August 2001, 34.6 percent of OAS pensioners received some GIS benefits.

34
  The SPA would also be available to those eligible.
35
  If the earnings in the extra year of work are higher than the lowest earnings currently included in the CPP
entitlement calculation, then the extra year of work will replace the low earnings year. Between the ages of 60 and




                                                                                                                  24
          The initial positive values at the median (ages 55 through 60) show how the drop out

provisions can increase the PDV of ISW. Starting at age 60 however, the lower value of the drop

out’s and the interaction of the actuarial adjustment with the means testing of the OAS/GIS/SPA

turns the median negative. Median accrual falls to -$4440 for males and -$3404 for females by

age 64. Note also that the percentiles and variance reveal considerable variation in the one-year

accrual across individuals. It is effectively zero by age 56 at the 10th percentile, but remains

positive through age 65 at the 90th.

          The peak value accrual displays a similar patter to the one year accrual, turning from

positive to negative at age 61. As seen in the one-year accrual results there are no strong non-

linearities at the median, so the peak value calculation does not convey much additional

information. Also, note that the peak value and one year statistics are identical once the one-year

accrual turns negative.

          Finally in the last columns are the statistics for the option value accrual. They are in units

of utility and so are hard to interpret. Their most important characteristic is that in contrast to the

two other measures, the option value accrual remains positive, at the median and 1st and 9th

deciles, throughout the age range. This reflects the fact that the optimal retirement age at the

median is about age 71.



Results

          In table 3 we report estimates of equation (1) for males. Moving across blocks we vary

the incentive measures, while moving across columns within blocks we sequentially add control

variables to the estimating equation. The results in the first block are for the one-year accrual.


64, an extra year of work also extends the contributory period, which entitles the worker to drop out more low
earning periods. Fifteen percent of the earning periods in the contributory period may be dropped out.


                                                                                                                 25
In the first column (specification 1) there are no other control variables so the IS variables can

have their maximum impact. The estimate for the level of ISW is, surprisingly, negative,

suggesting that leisure is an inferior good. One explanation of this result is an omitted variable.

For example, higher lifetime earners will have higher levels of ISW, but also may have greater

preferences for work. The accrual variable has the expected negative sign and is quite large. A

$1000 increase in accrual lowers the retirement rate by 2.4 percentage points, which can be

compared to a baseline retirement rate in the male sample of 12.2 precent (table 1).

       In the next column we add the demographic controls, industry, province and year effects,

the firm size dummies and simple (linear) controls for age. The result is a marginal reduction in

the effect of the incentive variable. Note also that the estimated effect of the level of ISW

continues to be negative but is just over half its previous value.

       In the third column we replace the linear age controls with a full set of age dummies.

These will potentially soak up omitted institutional features of the environment as well as any

age specific preferences in a more flexible way. The result is again marginal changes in the

inference (relative to the first column).

       In the fourth column we add the cubics in own and spouse’s projected earnings and APE,

as well as the interactions between the two. This is potentially an important innovation because

ISW is mechanically a function of past earnings, and accrual depends on projected earnings, but

both of these measures of earnings may have independent effects on retirement. In our results,

we do observe quite substantial changes in inference. First, the estimated parameter on the level

of ISW is now positive as expected. This suggests that in previous specifications, ISW was

picking up some independent effect of earnings on retirement. An additional $10,000 in ISW is

estimated to increase the retirement rate by 0.15 percentage points; the expected wealth effect.




                                                                                                      26
         Second, the estimate on the one year accrual variable is now dramatically smaller. An

additional $1000 of accrual decreases the retirement rate by only 0.89 percentage points

compared to 2.4 percentage points in specification 1. This change in inference is consistent then

with the evidence of Coile and Gruber (2000) who use a similar specification, and Chan and

Stevens (2001) who compare simple estimates and fixed effects estimates.36 The incentive

effects of the IS system would appear to be considerably over estimated in specifications which

do not attempt some control for omitted factors which are correlated with lifetime earnings and

individuals’ propensities for work.

         A corresponding set of results for the peak value accrual is presented in the succeeding

columns of the next block. There are some strong similarities to the one year accrual results.

First, the estimate on the level of ISW turns from negative to positive as more controls are added,

although it ends up statistically insignificant in the richest specification (specification 4).

Second, the estimated effect of the incentive variable falls dramatically as the earnings controls

are added. That said, the estimated effects of the IS system are smaller here. For example, in

specification 4 a $1000 increase in peak accrual would decrease the retirement rate by 0.38

percentage points. Reference to table 2 reveals that the main difference between the one year

and peak value accruals is between ages 55 and 59, the peak value predicting a greater slope in

the run up in retirement rates leading to age 60. Reference to the retirement hazard (figure 2)

provides little support for this prediction, however, at least at the mean.

         Finally in the last block are the results for the option value accrual. Note that because the

accrual is measured in units of utility, calibrating the marginal effects in dollar values no longer

makes any sense. The results for this measure stand in some contrast to the previous results.

36
  Chan and Stevens (2001) find a substantial drop in the magnitude of their incentive coefficients when they include
individual fixed effects. If the variation picked up by their fixed effects is driven by differences in earnings histories



                                                                                                                       27
First, the estimated parameter on ISW bounces between negative and positive across

specifications in no systematic pattern. Second, the estimated effect of the incentive variable is

fairly insensitive to specification.

         Results for the female sample are reported in table 4. The pattern of the results for the

one year accrual is very similar to that in the male sample. The estimated effects of the IS

system in specification 4 are also very similar to the male results, although note that the

parameter on ISW is not statistically significant. For example a $1000 increase in one year

accrual lowers the retirement rate by 0.7 percentage points in comparison to 0.89 percentage

points in the male sample.

         The peak value results are also similar to the male counterparts, except that here both the

level of ISW and the incentive variable are statistically insignificant in specification 4. We

observe the same large reduction in the magnitude of the effect of the incentive variable,

however, once the controls for APE and projected earnings are added. Finally, in contrast to the

results for males, the option value results also display this pattern and the IS variables are both

statistically insignificant in specification 4.

         In sum, for males both the one year and peak value accrual estimates vary with changes

in specification in expected ways, and indicate that the IS system has important impacts on

retirement behaviour. The option value estimates are harder to interpret, and change in

unexpected ways with specification. For females, it is only the one year accrual results that

indicate an important role for the IS system. The estimates for peak value and option value

accrual are both statistically insignificant in specification 4. In the subsequent analysis we focus

on the one year and peak value results for males and the one year results for females, although

results for the full set of measures are reported.


across individuals, then our results are consistent with theirs.

                                                                                                      28
Sensitivity Analysis

       Given our argument that identification in retirement models can be problematic, it is

important to provide some additional checks on the inference in tables 3 and 4. In tables 5 and 6

we assess the sensitivity of our inference on a number of margins. One important issue is the

definition of retirement. Our working definition clearly misses some of the various paths

individuals take to this state. For example, individuals may effectively retire but still generate

some earnings through occasional employment. These earnings would lead us to label the

individual as still working.

       To explore the consequences of our choice we adopt two alternatives definitions or

retirement, which capture dimensions of this heterogeneity. In the first we allow for the

possibility that individuals may proceed to retirement through a period of unemployment, funded

by Employment Insurance benefits. This is possible because Employment Insurance benefits

generate a T4U form that is recorded in our data. We model this possibility by pooling

unemployment benefits with earnings for the determination of the retirement year. Retirement

under this definition is the year preceding the first year of zero combined unemployment benefits

and earnings. This definition is more flexible than our standard retirement definition as it allows

for retirement through other programs.

       In the second alternative definition, we designate large reductions of earnings as

retirement, without demanding that the reduction be to zero. To make this operational, we use

the retirement test that applies to all individuals claiming CPP or QPP benefits at ages 60 through

64. The test requires that in the year benefits are claimed, earnings be no more than the

maximum retirement pension: roughly 25 percent of a three year moving average of the YMPE

(roughly average labour market earnings). We define retirement as the year preceding the first




                                                                                                     29
year that earnings falls below the threshold. Note that by this definition a transition from full

time employment to part time work may now be labelled a retirement.

       The results are presented in the second and third rows of the panels of table 5 for males

and table 6 for females. As a point of comparison, in the first row of each table we simply

replicate the estimates from specification 4 in tables 3 and 4. For males, the UI definition leads

to similar or larger estimates of the accrual effects, but now the ISW estimates are negative,

although insignificant for one year and peak value accrual. More importantly the marginal

effects for a $1000 increase in accrual are very similar to the base results for both the one-year

and peak value measures. The estimates for the earnings definition tell a very similar story.

Here the marginal effects for both the accrual and ISW estimates are virtually identical to the

base results. The strong conclusion here is that changing the definition of retirement has very

little effect on the one-year and peak value results for males.

       Greater variation in inference is observed in the results for females. The marginal effect

of one-year accrual is just over half its value in the base results when we use either the UI or

earnings definition of retirement. The estimated effect of the level of ISW also varies across

these definitions. The results for peak value are more robust in the sense that the accrual effects

are small and statistically insignificant regardless of the definition of retirement that we use. The

estimates for the level of ISW vary across definitions as they did in the one-year results.

Therefore, for females we do observe some sensitivity of the inference to the definition of

retirement. This may be due to the fact that there are histories of movements in and out of part

time work for some females in these cohorts, or that due to the lower earnings of females, dips

below the earnings threshold do not represent such significant falls in earnings.




                                                                                                     30
       In the next rows of each table we determine whether the inference varies in sensible ways

as we attempt to isolate those individuals who should be relatively more responsive to IS

program parameters. The IS system will be only one element of retirement income for some

individuals. For example, RPP income and/or RRSP income may also play an important role. In

these cases we might expect that the parameters of the relevant RPP and/or RRSP rules would

also affect retirement behaviour, and so IS program parameters would be less important. To

make this idea operational we split the sample by the imputed probability of RPP coverage.

Those with a probability of less than 0.5 are denoted as “RPP low”, while the remainder of the

sample is denoted “RPP high”. Note we are implicitly assuming that the assignment of

individuals to these two groups is exogenous to any preferences for retirement that also affect

any behavioural response to the IS system.

       The results are reported in rows 4 and 5 of tables 5 and 6. As expected we observe larger

behavioural effects for both males and females in the RPP low group. These are the individuals

who are predicted to be more dependent on IS income and so their labour supply decisions are

more sensitive to program rules. The proportionate differences in the accrual effects are largest

for the one-year measure, while the proportionate changes in the effect of ISW tend to be very

similar for the one-year and peak value accrual specifications.

       In the next rows we take a different approach. Here we divide the sample into quartiles

based on average earnings at ages 50 through 54 (that is, prior to the sample observations). For

both males (one year and peak value) and females (one year), we see larger behavioural effects

among low income individuals, although the relationship is not monotonic. Again the

assumption is that these individuals will be more dependent on IS income in their retirement

years and consequently their retirement decisions are more dependent on IS program parameters.




                                                                                                  31
This systematic variation in the estimates across individuals by their predicted dependency on

the IS system provides us greater confidence that we are capturing the behavioural effects of IS

program parameters.



VI.    Conclusions

       This paper provides estimates of the retirement incentives of the Canadian IS system

using a unique data source. Our results suggest that this system has substantive effects on the

retirement decisions of males and females in Canada. The estimated effects are larger and more

robust for males. Also, we obtain the largest effects when we use relatively myopic measures of

the incentives.

       We also contribute more generally to the retirement literature by evaluating the

identification of the incentive effects we estimate. Controlling for lifetime earnings in a flexible

way leads to substantially smaller estimates of these behavioural effects. These results add to the

evidence in Coile and Gruber (2000) and Chan and Stevens (2001) that identification in

retirement models can be problematic.

       Finally, we examine the sensitivity of our inference to differences in sample and the

definition of retirement. This exercise provides additional confirmatory evidence of the effects

of pensions on retirement, and show that our results are not sensitive to our chosen definition of

retirement.

       These results potentially have important implications for IS policy. Evaluation of

proposed pension reforms must account for the dynamic effect of the reformed system on

retirement decisions. Reforms may change not only the distribution of retirement income and

fiscal balances, but also the timing of retirement decisions.




                                                                                                   32
References


Baker, Michael, “The Retirement Behaviour of Married Couples: Evidence From the Spouse's
       Allowance”, Journal of Human Resources, 37, Winter 2002.

Baker, Michael and Dwayne Benjamin, “How do Retirement Tests Affect the Labor Supply of
       Older Men?”, Journal of Public Economics, 71, January 1999a, 27-51.

Baker, Michael and Dwayne Benjamin, “Early Retirement Provisions and the Labor Force
       Behaviour of Older Men: Some Evidence from Canada”, Journal of Labor Economics,
       17, October 1999b, 724-756.

Baker, Michael and Dwayne Benjamin, “Public Pension Programs and Labor Force
       Attachment”, (with Dwayne Benjamin), in W.C. Riddell and F. St-Hilaire (eds.) Adapting
       Public Policy to a Labor Market in Transition, Montreal: IRPP, 2000, 287-315.

Baker, Michael, Emily Hanna and Jasmin Kantarevic, “The Married Widow: Marriage Penalties
       Matter!”, May 2001

Burbidge, J., Social Security in Canada. Canadian Tax Paper No. 79, Canadian Tax Foundation,
      1987.

CCH Canadian Limited, Canadian Employment Benefits and Pension Guide Reports, North
     York, ON: CCH Canadian Limited, 2001.

Chan, Sewin, and Ann Stevens, "Retirement Incentives and Expectations", NBER Working
       Paper 8082, January 2001.

Coile, Courtney and Jonathan Gruber, “Social Security and Retirement,” NBER Working Paper
        7830, August 2000.

Compton, Janice, “Determinants of Retirement: Does Money Really Matter? Department of
      Finance Working Paper 2001-02, 2001.
Gunderson, Morley and James Pesando, “Retirement Incentives Contained in Occupational
      Pension Plans and their Implications for the Mandatory Retirement Debate”, Canadian
      Journal of Economics, 21, 1988, 244-264.

Gunderson, Morley and James Pesando, “Does Pension Wealth Peak at the Age of Early
      Retirement?”, Industrial Relations, 30, 1991, 79-95.

Gruber, Jonathan, “Social Security and Retirement in Canada,” in Social Security and Retirement
       Around the World, J. Gruber and D. Wise, eds. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
       1999, 73-100.




                                                                                            33
Gruber, Jonathan, “Disability Insurance Benefits and Labour Supply”, Journal of Political
       Economy, 108, 2000, 1162-1183.

Hausman, J, Abrevaya, J., and F. Scott-Morton, “Misclassification of the Dependent Variable in
     a Discrete Response Setting”, Journal of Econometrics, 50, 1998, 239-295.

Pesando, J.E. and S.A. Rea, Public and Private Pensions in Canada: An Economic Analysis.
      Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1977.

Picot Garnett and Zhengxi Lin, “Are Canadians More Likely to Lose Their Jobs in the 1990s?”.
       Analytical Studies Branch Research Paper No. 96. Ottawa: Statistics Canada, 1997.

Statistics Canada, Historical Statistics of Canada, 2nd edition. Catalogue No. E86-103, Ottawa,
        series E86-103, 1983.

Statistics Canada, Life tables, Canada and provinces' 1980-1982. Catalogue No. 84-532, Ottawa,
        1984.

Statistics Canada, Permanent Layoffs, Quits and Hirings in the Canadian Economy. Catalogue
        No. 71-539-XIB. Ottawa, 1998.

Stock, James H. and David A. Wise, “Pensions, the Option Value of Work, and Retirement,”
        Econometrica, Vol. 58, No. 5, pp. 1151-1180, 1990.

Tompa, Emile, “Transitions to Retirement: Determinants of Age of Social Security Take Up,”
      SEDAP Research Paper No. 6, 1999.




                                                                                              34
                                            Appendix

Census Data

       The data are from the 1986 and 1991 public use microdata files. In each year, males or

females who are 54 and older are selected. Non-labour income is defined as the sum of

“Investment Income of census family or non-family person” plus “Retirement pensions and other

money income of census family or non-family person” (recorded separately as “Retirement

Pensions, Superannuations and Annuities of census family or non-family person” and “Other

Money Income of census family or non-family person” in the 1991 sample). Separating

individuals who work (weeks and earnings greater than 0) and don’t work (weeks and hours

equal to 0), the probability non-labour income is positive and its conditional mean are calculated

for the following cells:

Males who are Employed: region (East; Ontario; West) by industry (Manufacturing;

Construction; Transportation and Communications; Wholesale and Retail Trade; FIRE and

Business Services; Government, Health and Education Services; Accommodation, Food,

Beverage and Other Services) by age(54-55, 56-57, …,60-61, 62-64 65+),

Males Who are Not Employed: region (East; Ontario; West) by marital status (married,

spouse/common-law partner’s age < age-1; married, spouse/common-law partners age = age1+/-

1; married, spouse/common-law partner’s age > age+1; not married) by age (54-60, 61-63, 64-

66,...73-75, 76+),

Females who are Employed: region (East; Ontario; West) by industry (Manufacturing,

Construction, Transportation and Communications; Wholesale and Retail Trade; Finance

Insurance and Real Estate (FIRE) and Business Services; Government, Health and Education




                                                                                                35
Services; Accommodation, Food, Beverage and Other Services) by age (54-55, 56-57, …, 60-61,

62-64 65+),

Females Who are Not Employed: region (East; Ontario; West) by marital status (married,

spouse/common-law partner’s age < age-1; married, spouse/common-law partners age = age1+/-

1; married, spouse/common-law partner’s age > age+1; not married) by age (54-60, 61-63, 64-

66, …, 73-75, 76-80, 81+).



LMAS and SLID Data

       These data are cross section samples from the 1986-1990 LMAS and the 1993-1996

SLID. In each year, samples of males or females, aged 23-69, who are paid workers in jobs in

the month of September of the indicated year are constructed. The RPP coverage probabilities

are then calculated by 3-digit industry. Probabilities for 1991-1992, the two years not covered

by the LMAS or SLID, are simple linear interpolations of the 1990 and 1993 data.



List of Variables from LWF data


Agediff: A variable recording the difference in age between an individual and his/her
       spouse/common-law partner (in years).

AGE55-AGE64: A dummy variable that equals 1 if an individual is the indicated age and 0
     otherwise. Age55 is the excluded variable.

APE: a variable recording an in estimate of an individual’s current Average Pensionable
       Earnings.

Experience: A variable recording the number years since 1975 that an individual has had positive
       T-4 earnings.

Married: A dummy variable that equals 1 if the individual is married and 0 otherwise.

RPP: A variable that ranges between 0 and 1 recording the proportion of workers in an
      individual’s 3-digit industry that is a member of an RPP.


                                                                                                  36
Tenure: A variable recording the number of years since 1978 that an individual has been with the
       current firm.

Tenure Censored: A dummy variable that equals 1 if an individual has been with his/her current
       firm continuously since 1978.

Y85-Y95: a dummy variable that equals 1 in the indicated year and 0 otherwise. Y90 is the
      excluded variable.

S04-S500p: a dummy variable that equals 1 for the indicated size of the workforce at the place of
      work and 0 otherwise. Categories are 0-4,5-19,20-49,50-99,100-199,200-499,500+.
      S5099 is the excluded variable.

IND1-IND10: A dummy variable that equals 1 for the indicated industry of employment and 0
      otherwise. IND1 is the excluded variable. The ten are:
             IND1 – manufacturing (SIC 100 to 399)
             IND2 – construction (SIC 400 to 449)
             IND3 – storage and transportation (SIC 450 to 499)
             IND4 – wholesale trade (SIC 500 to 599)
             IND5 – retail trade (SIC 600 to 699)
             IND6 – finance, insurance, real estate (SIC 700 to 769)
             IND7 – business services (SIC 770 to 809)
             IND8 – government services (SIC 810 to 849)
             IND9 – education, health and social services (SIC 850 to 909)
             IND10 – accommodation, food, and other services (SIC 910 to 999)

NF:    A dummy variable that equals 1 if resident of Newfoundland and 0 otherwise.

PEI:   A dummy variable that equals 1 if resident of PEI and 0 otherwise.

NS:    A dummy variable that equals 1 if resident of Nova Scotia and 0 otherwise.

NB:    A dummy variable that equals 1 if resident of New Brunswick and 0 otherwise.

QU:    A dummy variable that equals 1 if resident of Quebec and 0 otherwise.

ON:    A dummy variable that equals 1 if resident of Ontario and 0 otherwise
       (excluded variable).

MB:    A dummy variable that equals 1 if resident of Manitoba and 0 otherwise.

SA:    A dummy variable that equals 1 if resident of Saskatchewan and 0 otherwise.

AB:    A dummy variable that equals 1 if resident of Alberta and 0 otherwise.




                                                                                               37
BC:    A dummy variable that equals 1 if resident of British Columbia and 0
       otherwise.

TERR: A dummy variable that equals 1 if resident of Yukon or Northwest Territories
      and 0 otherwise.




                                                                                     38
Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                               Males                               Females
                                      Mean             Standard           Mean            Standard
                                                       Deviation                          Deviation
Retired                              0.122              0.328             0.130            0.336
Probability of RPP                    0.585             0.256             0.433            0.263
Married                              0.564              0.466             0.422            0.494
Tenure                               8.683              4.521            8.607             4.430
Tenure Censored                      0.438              0.496             0.374            0.484
Experience                           13.865             3.371            13.109            3.737
Spouse/common-law partner’s          5.295              6.875            5.561             7.273
Experience
Age                                  58.968             2.676            58.732              2.640
Age Difference                        1.958             3.709            -0.738              2.735
Projected Earnings                   28634              38007            17068               12172
Projected Spousal Earnings            4935               1151             6433               19389
APE                                  29767               7585            20616               10656
Spouse/common-law partner’s           8298              12092            12110               15824
APE
Observations                         550,839                             347,775
Individuals                          110,977                             71,066

Notes: The reported statistics are means (averages) calculated over all observations in the male and female data sets,
respectively (rather than over all individuals). All dollar values are in 1998 Canadian dollars. APE is Average
Pensionable earnings. Definitions of all variables are provided in Appendix.




                                                                                                                   39
Table 2: The Distribution of Different Measures of Income Security Wealth Accrual

                                       One-Year Accrual                           Peak Value Accrual                         Option Value Accrual
Age      N       Median     Median      1st       9th         Std.      Median       1st      9th         Std.     Median        1st       9th       Std.
                  ISW                  Decile    Decile       Dev.                 Decile    Decile       Dev.                Decile     Decile      Dev.
Male Sample
55     60286     157853       1636       586       2504        707        4824      1608      13433      4807       22972      9203      36292      15214
56     63460     165216       1418        6        2622        954        3720       255      11940      4787       21426      9714      33320      14399
57     65700     171713        971        0        2685       1066        2190        0       10133      4391       18998      8645      29810      13679
58     66687     177573        632        0        2745       1128        1354        0        8087      3797       16512      6954      26440      12733
59     66761     182815        420        0        2826       1179         925        0        6087      3119       14063      5390      23148      11750
60     60578     188676        49       -1929      2443       1622         77      -1929      4212       2985       12216      4203      20365      10169
61     52427     193976       -388      -2237      1840       1571        -386     -2237       2456      2525       10449      3223      17573       9890
62     44954     195554      -1024      -3041      1110       1598       -1024     -3041      1484       2229       8757       2197      14907      9350
63     38168     197002      -1651      -3792       580       1754       -1651     -3792       756       2095        7144      1256      12412       8789
64     31818     188842      -2196      -4440       149       1931       -2196     -4440       205       1975        5589       564      10077       7871
Female Sample
55      43104     155089        915        152       2050        699       3905       1055     10341       3758      14659       4095      27767       9819
56      43870     147083        865        141       2079        734       3451        672      9466       3598      13850       4662      24947       8777
57      44122     145894        825         63       2124        783       2699        327      8148       3281      12261       4309      22115       7748
58      43482     148384        757          0       2145        831       1935         81      6642       2857      10719       3632      19456       6810
59      42452     152285        701          0       2197        877       1170          0      5127       2488       9175       2852      16967       6094
60      36937     156092        164      -1487       2099       1390        293      -1484      4016       2568       7936       2196      14936       5556
61      30662     160337        -63      -1722       1651       1335        -41      -1722      2824       2214       6848       1776      13016       5253
62      25357     165506       -518      -2248       1029       1340       -515      -2246      1769       1908       5730       1274      11070       4822
63      20839     169825      -1040      -2846        669       1441      -1038      -2846      1070       1768       4661        779       9211       4149
64      16950     173793      -1406      -3404        399       1580      -1405      -3404       538       1666       3585        363       7665       3878

Notes: N=number of observations, ISW=Income Security Wealth, Std. Dev.=standard deviation. All dollar values in 1998 Canadian dollars. Definitions of the
different measures of Income Security Wealth accrual are provided in the text.




                                                                                                                                                        40
Table 3: Estimates of the Retirement Probits with Various Measures of Income Security Wealth Accrual Male Sample

                                        One-Year Accrual                            Peak Value Accrual                          Option Value Accrual
                               1          2         3            4          1          2         3            4          1          2         3            4
                             -0.010     -0.006      -0.006     0.009       -0.012    -0.016      -0.017     0.004     -0.005      0.021       0.021      -0.010
ISW                         (0.0004)   (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.0004)   (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.003)   (0.0004)    (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.003)
$10,000 Increase             -0.20%    -0.11%      -0.11%      0.15%      -0.23%    -0.30%      -0.31%      0.07%
                             -1.335     -1.178      -1.231     -0.524     -0.645     -0.599      -0.601     -0.218     -0.344     -0.308      -0.308     -0.286
Accrual                     (0.012)    (0.022)     (0.023)    (0.025)    (0.006)    (0.010)     (0.010)    (0.014)    (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.011)
$1,000 Increase             -2.40%     -2.08%      -2.16%     -0.89%     -1.20%     -1.08%      -1.09%     -0.38%

Demographic Controls          NO         YES        YES        YES         NO         YES        YES        YES         NO         YES        YES        YES
Linear Age                    NO         YES        NO         NO          NO         YES        NO         NO          NO         YES        NO         NO
Age Dummies                   NO         NO         YES        YES         NO         NO         YES        YES         NO         NO         YES        YES
Industry Controls             NO         YES        YES        YES         NO         YES        YES        YES         NO         YES        YES        YES
Firm Size Controls            NO         YES        YES        YES         NO         YES        YES        YES         NO         YES        YES        YES
Province Controls             NO         YES        YES        YES         NO         YES        YES        YES         NO         YES        YES        YES
Year Controls                 NO         YES        YES        YES         NO         YES        YES        YES         NO         YES        YES        YES
Earnings Controls             NO         NO         NO         YES         NO         NO         NO         YES         NO         NO         NO         YES

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. All dollar values in 1998 Canadian dollars. Definitions of the different measures of Income Security Wealth accrual are
provided in the text. The different control variables are described in the appendix.




                                                                                                                                                               41
Table 4: Estimates of the Retirement Probits with Various Measures of Income Security Wealth Accrual Female Sample

                                        One-Year Accrual                            Peak Value Accrual                          Option Value Accrual
                               1          2         3            4          1          2         3            4          1          2         3            4
                             -0.003     0.001       0.000      0.004      -0.003     -0.006      -0.006     0.004      0.006      0.041       0.042      0.002
ISW                         (0.001)    (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.004)    (0.001)    (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.004)    (0.001)    (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.004)
$10,000 Increase            -0.06%      0.01%       0.01%      0.12%     -0.05%     -0.12%      -0.11%      0.13%
                             -1.739     -1.814      -1.899     -0.206     -0.783     -0.838      -0.828     -0.009     -0.532     -0.592      -0.592     -0.021
Accrual                     (0.020)    (0.030)     (0.031)    (0.036)    (0.009)    (0.014)     (0.014)    (0.016)    (0.005)    (0.006)     (0.006)    (0.014)
$1,000 Increase             -3.20%     -3.26%      -3.39%     -0.70%     -1.51%     -1.58%      -1.56%     -0.03%

Demographic Controls          NO         YES        YES        YES         NO         YES        YES        YES         NO         YES        YES        YES
Linear Age                    NO         YES        NO         NO          NO         YES        NO         NO          NO         YES        NO         NO
Age Dummies                   NO         NO         YES        YES         NO         NO         YES        YES         NO         NO         YES        YES
Industry Controls             NO         YES        YES        YES         NO         YES        YES        YES         NO         YES        YES        YES
Firm Size Controls            NO         YES        YES        YES         NO         YES        YES        YES         NO         YES        YES        YES
Province Controls             NO         YES        YES        YES         NO         YES        YES        YES         NO         YES        YES        YES
Year Controls                 NO         YES        YES        YES         NO         YES        YES        YES         NO         YES        YES        YES
Earnings Controls             NO         NO         NO         YES         NO         NO         NO         YES         NO         NO         NO         YES

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. All dollar values in 1998 Canadian dollars. Definitions of the different measures of Income Security Wealth accrual are
provided in the text. The different control variables are described in the appendix.




                                                                                                                                                               42
Table 5: Sensitivity Analysis - Males

                            One-Year Accrual              Peak Value Accrual           Option Value Accrual
                           ISW         Accrual            ISW         Accrual            ISW        Accrual
Base                      0.009         -0.524           0.004         -0.218           -0.010       -0.286
                         (0.003)       (0.025)          (0.003)       (0.014)          (0.003)      (0.011)
                          0.15%        -0.89%            0.07%        -0.38%

Estimates by Alternative Definitions of Retirement
UI Def                    -0.002          -0.723         -0.005         -0.212          -0.024         -0.354
                         (0.003)         (0.026)        (0.003)        (0.015)         (0.003)        (0.011)
                         -0.03%          -1.06%         -0.07%         -0.32%

Earnings Def              0.007           -0.466         0.003          -0.166          0.006          -0.044
                         (0.003)         (0.026)        (0.003)        (0.013)         (0.003)        (0.012)
                          0.15%          -0.95%          0.06%         -0.34%

Estimates by Predicted Probability of RPP Participation
RPP Low                   0.013           -0.620         0.006          -0.234          -0.014         -0.377
                         (0.005)         (0.040)        (0.005)        (0.021)         (0.005)        (0.016)
                          0.23%          -1.06%          0.11%         -0.41%

RPP High                  0.008           -0.399         0.003          -0.192          0.007          -0.047
                         (0.004)         (0.032)        (0.004)        (0.018)         (0.004)        (0.016)
                          0.13%          -0.65%          0.05%         -0.32%

Estimates by Age 50-54 Income Quartile
1st Quartile              0.030           -0.437         0.029          -0.115          0.013          -0.313
                         (0.006)         (0.058)        (0.006)        (0.028)         (0.007)        (0.031)
                          0.59%          -0.81%          0.56%         -0.22%

2nd Quartile              0.021           -0.099         0.017          -0.126          0.005          -0.160
                         (0.007)         (0.054)        (0.007)        (0.032)         (0.008)        (0.033)
                          0.35%          -0.16%          0.28%         -0.20%

3rd Quartile              0.024           0.254          0.025          0.073           0.008          -0.221
                         (0.007)         (0.053)        (0.007)        (0.033)         (0.007)        (0.032)
                          0.40%           0.43%          0.42%          0.12%

4th Quartile              -0.001          -0.032         -0.003         -0.054          -0.002         -0.015
                         (0.007)         (0.052)        (0.007)        (0.030)         (0.007)        (0.019)
                         -0.02%          -0.05%         -0.04%         -0.09%


Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Marginal effects are reported below the standard errors were applicable.
They represent the percentage point increase implied by the corresponding coefficient for an increment of $1,000 for
the accrual measures and $10,000 for the ISW measures. All dollar values in 1998 Canadian dollars. Definitions of
the different measures of Income Security Wealth accrual are provided in the text. All estimates are for specification
4 (see tables 3 and 4).




                                                                                                                   44
Table 6: Sensitivity Analysis - Females

                           One-Year Accrual               Peak Value Accrual           Option Value Accrual
                          ISW         Accrual             ISW         Accrual           ISW         Accrual
Females
Base                      0.004           -0.206         0.004          -0.009          0.002          -0.021
                         (0.004)         (0.036)        (0.004)        (0.016)         (0.004)        (0.014)
                          0.12%          -0.70%          0.13%         -0.03%

Estimates by Alternative Definitions of Retirement
UI Definition             -0.005          -0.233         -0.004         0.026           0.000          0.038
                         (0.004)         (0.038)        (0.004)        (0.017)         (0.004)        (0.015)
                         -0.08%          -0.34%         -0.06%          0.04%

Earnings Definition       0.014           -0.195         0.013          -0.014          0.021          0.060
                         (0.004)         (0.040)        (0.004)        (0.020)         (0.005)        (0.016)
                          0.30%          -0.42%          0.28%         -0.03%

Estimates by Predicted Probability of RPP Participation
RPP Low                   0.010           -0.222         0.010          -0.021          0.005          -0.052
                         (0.005)         (0.050)        (0.005)        (0.022)         (0.005)        (0.019)
                          0.19%          -0.41%          0.19%         -0.04%

RPP High                  -0.008          -0.189         -0.007         0.003           -0.002         0.038
                         (0.007)         (0.055)        (0.007)        (0.026)         (0.007)        (0.024)
                         -0.12%          -0.30%         -0.11%          0.00%

Estimates by Age 50-54 Income Quartile
1st Quartile              0.011           -0.511         0.011          -0.067          0.007          -0.052
                         (0.008)         (0.112)        (0.008)        (0.032)         (0.008)        (0.028)
                          0.24%          -1.09%          0.24%         -0.15%

2nd Quartile              0.017           -0.258         0.015          -0.077          -0.001         -0.161
                         (0.008)         (0.086)        (0.008)        (0.044)         (0.009)        (0.034)
                          0.30%          -0.45%          0.27%         -0.14%

3rd Quartile              0.006           -0.354         0.000          -0.260          -0.021         -0.224
                         (0.009)         (0.076)        (0.009)        (0.042)         (0.010)        (0.037)
                          0.09%          -0.56%          0.00%         -0.41%

4th Quartile              -0.005          -0.120         -0.011         -0.044          -0.010         -0.183
                         (0.009)         (0.071)        (0.007)        (0.028)         (0.009)        (0.036)
                         -0.06%          -0.17%         -0.13%         -0.26%


Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Marginal effects are reported below the standard errors were applicable.
They represent the percentage point increase implied by the corresponding coefficient for an increment of $1,000 for
the accrual measures and $10,000 for the ISW measures. All dollar values in 1998 Canadian dollars. Definitions of
the different measures of Income Security Wealth accrual are provided in the text. All estimates are for specification
4 (see tables 3 and 4).




                                                                                                                   45
                                                              Figure 1: CPP, OAS, and GIS Benefits in the 1980s and 1990s


                                       900

                                       800

                                       700
                                                                                                                                                                                         CPP MAX
                                       600
                                                                                                                                                                                         OAS
                                       500
                                                                                                                                                                                         GIS Single
                                       400

                                       300

                                       200




    Benefit Levels (nominal dollars)
                                       100

                                        0




                                             1980
                                                    1981
                                                           1982
                                                                  1983
                                                                         1984
                                                                                1985
                                                                                       1986
                                                                                              1987
                                                                                                     1988
                                                                                                            1989
                                                                                                                   1990
                                                                                                                          1991
                                                                                                                                 1992
                                                                                                                                        1993
                                                                                                                                               1994
                                                                                                                                                      1995
                                                                                                                                                             1996
                                                                                                                                                                    1997
                                                                                                                                                                           1998
                                                                                                                                                                                  1999




                                                                                                     Years




Notes: CPP benefit is maximum pension for that year. GIS benefits are for single claimant. Source is http://www.hrdc-
drhc.gc.ca/isp/studies/trends/stats_e.shtml




                                                                                                                                                                                                      46
                                                  Figure 2: The Conditional Probability (Hazard) of Retirement at Different Ages Calculated
                                                                                 from the Female Sample


                                           0.25




                                            0.2




                                           0.15




                                            0.1




   Conditional Probability of Retirement
                                           0.05




                                             0
                                                  55        56        57        58        59         60       61        62         63         64
                                                                                               Age


Notes: The conditional probability of retirement (hazard) is the probability of retirement at a given age, conditional on working at an
age one-year younger.




                                                                                                                                                   47
                                                 Figure 3: The Conditional Probability (Hazard) of Retirement at Different Ages Calculated from the
                                                                                           Male Sample


                                          0.25




                                           0.2




                                          0.15




                                           0.1




  Conditional Probability of Retirement
                                          0.05




                                            0
                                                 55         56          57         58          59         60          61          62         63       64
                                                                                                    Age


Notes: The conditional probability of retirement (hazard) is the probability of retirement at a given age, conditional on working at an
age one-year younger.




                                                                                                                                                           48
