                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     PUZZLES OVER INTERNATIONAL TAXATION OF CROSS BORDER FLOWS OF
                            CAPITAL INCOME


                                              John Whalley


                                          Working Paper 8662
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8662


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2001




A first draft of this paper was presented at a conference on World Tax Competition and held at IFS, London,
May 2001. I am grateful to conference participants, and especially Ron Davies and Jim Hines for helpful
comments. Hui Huang has provided outstanding research assistance, and Mike Devereux provided helpful
comments and literature suggestions on an earlier draft. I acknowledge ESRC for grant support for this work.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.


© 2001 by John Whalley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Puzzles Over International Taxation Of Cross Border Flows Of Capital Income
John Whalley
NBER Working Paper No. 8662
December 2001
JEL No. F2, H2, H3



                                               ABSTRACT

        I discuss the tax treatment of transborder capital income, focussing on prevailing arrangements
rather than de novo design of optimal tax arrangements. These comprise unilateral reliefs from double
taxation under credit or exemption systems, and treaty reliefs (largely following the OECD model treaty)
which jointly lower withholding tax rates on interest, dividends, and royalties in both host and source
countries. I suggest that these arrangements involve both seemingly non-strategic unilateral actions and
cooperative arrangements which are difficult to reconcile both with tax competition literature and with
national interest. I pose four puzzles in this regard. The first is that from a national welfare point of view,
the unilateral reliefs in use seem inferior to no relief since with competitive markets investors equate the
private return on investments at home and abroad, while tax revenues largely accrue to the foreign
government. Private returns are equated, but national returns are not. The second is that tax treaties only
have lump sum effects between national governments if the more common credit arrangements of
unilateral reliefs apply and if tax rates are similar in host and source countries (approximately the OECD
situation). This raises the issue of why governments negotiate them. The third is the sharp contrast to
international treaty arrangements for goods flows under the WTO; and the fourth is the absence of side
payments in tax treaties. The picture emerging is that making sense of present arrangements from a
national welfare point of view and in terms of efficient instrument design seems difficult. The gap relative
to optimal tax considerations also seems large.




John Whalley
Centre for the Study of Globalisation and Regionalisation
University of Warwick
Coventry CV4 7AL
United Kingdom
and NBER
J.Whalley@warwick.ac.uk
1.      INTRODUCTION

The theme of this collection of papers is worldwide tax competition.2 Here I focus on the tax
treatment of transborder flows of capital income because, in my view, arrangements actually in
use in this area are characterized as much by cooperation, through treaties, as by competition.
Tax treaties are negotiated pairwise between countries (typically following the OECD model
treaty). Under these, pairs of countries agree to mutually reduce withholding tax rates on bilateral
flows of interest, dividends, and royalties to rates below those applying in the absence of treaties.
Different tax rates apply to these three categories, and also between different pairs of countries.
These treaties clearly represent cooperative behaviour by national governments. Also, unilateral
reliefs from double taxation seemingly embody no strategic response to taxes abroad, and have
remained invariant to tax redesign in host countries for many years and there is no indication that
countries rearrange these reliefs to reflect the actions of other countries. They are offered by
source countries and typically involve a foreign tax credit, although in some countries systems of
exemption from domestic taxes operate if taxes are paid abroad.


Somewhat surprisingly there seems to be relatively little that has been written by academic
economists on this combined system of reliefs and the cross country cooperation in tax
arrangements that seem so prevalent. An early paper by Hamada (1966) shows how in the two
(non small) country case, source and host countries have incentives to use retaliatory tax policies
toward income generated by transborder investments. Hamada characterizes a Nash equilibrium
in the 2 country tax game in ways which are closely related to Johnson’s earlier (1954)
characterization of a 2 country tariff game involving goods flows. He sets out the resulting non-
cooperative (Nash) tax arrangements, suggesting that incentives to cooperate across countries in
this area are large and this should occur through tax treaties. Hamada, however, neither
characterizes the form that treaties should take nor discusses unilateral reliefs.


In other older literature, outside of Peggy Musgrave’s (1969) discussion of US tax treatment of
foreign source income, a later book by Adams and Whalley (1977), and a lengthy discussion and



See the recent survey of theories of tax competition in Wilson (1999). Razin and Slemrod (1990) is the source for
key pieces on tax treatment of international capital income.
evaluation of US tax treatment in the area by Ault and Bradford (1990), there is little which
seeks to evaluate arrangements actually in place in this area. What is more common is discussion
of optimal tax treatment of capital in the presence of factor mobility; such as in Gordon (1986);
or discussion of the content of legal texts of actual agreements, mainly by lawyers, and much
appearing in the Bulletin of the Bureau for International Fiscal Documentation (see (1999) for a
recent sample issue).


Rather than attempting to characterize optimal tax treatment by country (either jointly or singly),
here I discuss arrangements actually in place in this area and pose four puzzles which seem to be
raised by these arrangements, yet that the literature has seemingly largely overlooked. The first is
that it is hard to find a clear rationale for any system of unilateral reliefs (either credit or
exemption) in terms of national interest. This is because in the simple case where domestic and
foreign tax rates are the same, if domestic investors equate the net of tax return on investments
made domestically and abroad, then under a system of either credit or exemption unilateral
reliefs foreigners receive the tax proceeds on foreign investments while the domestic government
receives taxes on domestic investments. Private returns across investment vehicles may be
equalized, but national returns are not. National interest seems to point to neither foreign tax
credits nor deductions for foreign taxes paid.


This first puzzle might strike readers as well known and hence somewhat obvious, but from my
reading of the literature it does not seem to be clearly stated in quite this form. Bond and
Samuelson (1989) in a paper following on from Hamada and comparing credit and exemption
systems come close to such a statement; and Bruce (1992) comes even closer in a paper
evaluating why foreign tax credits are offered. But its central statement as a puzzle as to why any
recognition is given to foreign taxes in domestic tax codes is not set out in the literature I am
familiar with.


The most commonly offered rationale for these reliefs is that in some countries, such as the US,
constitutional provisions exclude double taxation, and seemingly in all forms. This may be a
convincing legal rationale, but it is hardly economic justification. Some academic writings have
actually defended these reliefs by appealing to a general principle of international equity
(Richman (1963) and Musgrave (1969)). But no notion of national welfare or interest seems to
                                                     2
be involved, and the question of why countries use these various types of unilateral reliefs seems
to be little discussed and not well understood.


The second puzzle I discuss is that with a system of unilateral reliefs in place, double tax treaties
in most cases (i.e. where countries use the more commonly applied credit system of unilateral
reliefs and where domestic tax rates are similar across countries) do little to lower the combined
tax rates that investors face. Where rates are identical across countries, the effect of bilateral
treaties on combined rates (along with unilateral credit reliefs) is zero. This suggests that to the
extent that non treaty rates are similar, double tax treaties largely have only lump sum effects in
transferring revenues across countries, and in addition largely between tax authorities in the
countries. Given that countries are either net recipients of foreign investment from source
countries or net investors in these countries abroad, the direction which these transfers take is
then given by the net directional flow of investment. This raises the issue of why they are
negotiated if the effects are largely lump sum, and what their rationale is if there are alternative
instruments for making lump sum transfers.


The third puzzle I raise concerns the sharp asymmetries in institutional arrangements across the
forms of policy cooperation towards goods flows impediments through the GATT/WTO and
capital flows impediments under double tax treaties. Mundell (1957) long ago argued an
equivalence between goods and factor flows in the sense that impediments to goods flows
stimulate factor flows, and impediments to factor flows stimulate goods flows. The implication
was that what can be achieved from autarchy by allowing for goods flows (factor price
equalization, given common international goods prices) can similarly be achieved by allowing
for factor flows from autarchy with goods immobility (goods price equalization, given common
international factor prices).3 This equivalence, one might have thought, would extend to the
forms that policy cooperation takes in each of the two areas.


But cooperation in the two areas could hardly be more different; equivalence in cooperative
forms does not seem to hold. GATT/WTO arrangements involve multilateral rules and


Subsequent literature, such as Markusen (1983) has focussed on whether goods and factor flows are complements or
substitutes.

                                                           3
negotiations under which key principles such as MFN (non discrimination) are committed to, and
dissimilar tariffs are reduced, not harmonized. The issue of special treatment for developing
countries also takes centre stage. In contrast, tax treaties are bilateral and no multilateral
disciplines apply; tax rates are typically negotiated to be similar in both directions; and as
developing countries are net recipients of FDI and their tax rates are high, developed-developing
country treaties are fewer. The puzzle here is why are there these glaring differences in
institutional form if goods and factor flows are analytically equivalent?


The fourth puzzle I raise concerns the form that tax treaties take, and, specifically, the absence of
side payments. To be fair, the absence of side payments in international treaties is a puzzle in
many areas, including in trade and environmental treaties. But if tax treaties are difficult to
negotiate because one partner to a potential bilateral agreement is a net payer of capital income
to the other, side payments would seem the obvious mechanism to support a cooperative
agreement. Putting on one side the lump sum argument above, forgone gains from cooperation
due to the absence of side payments result from the non-existence of treaties between many
developing and developed countries. One can also ask why are tax treaties not linked formally to
other international arrangements (such as trade treaties to intellectual property arrangements) to
provide for logrolling (or implicit side payments) via concessions on other issues. Why are they
stand alone largely symmetric tax rate agreements, which often one party to the agreement is
reluctant to negotiate in the first place, or renegotiate subsequently.


In the next section I set out in more detail what current arrangements in this area are, and
highlight the limited literature discussion from economists of what explains the presence of these
arrangements.4 The sections that follow then set out in more detail the four puzzles I raise. I then
discusses some possible resolutions for each of them. A final section presents concluding
remarks as to where international cooperation in this area may be headed in light of these
observations. The paper poses these puzzles more so than resolves them, with some possible
reasons tentatively advanced for the seemingly paradoxical structure of these arrangements.
Devising more convincing explanations is left as a task for future research.



Although Slemrod’s (1988) paper touches indirectly on some of the issues raised here.

                                                             4
2.       CURRENT INTERNATIONAL TAX TREATMENT OF CAPITAL INCOME


Current international tax treatment of capital income combines taxation under personal and
corporate taxes as set out in the national tax codes of source countries, along with unilateral
reliefs from double taxation in source countries5 and treaty reliefs bilaterally negotiated between
source and host countries which lower withholding tax rates on transborder capital income
originating in both countries. The world to which this regime applies is one in which there are
significant two way investment flows between most industrialized countries, and the net flows of
capital income compared to the gross flows are often relatively small.


Unilateral Reliefs
Most countries around the world (and states within countries) build policy on the principle that
income earned from investment should not be taxed in two states, and hence some form of relief
from what would otherwise be double taxation should be given. Such reliefs are typically
implemented in one of two forms; granting a credit against domestic taxes owing for (all or part
of) foreign taxes paid (a foreign tax credit), or exempting foreign source income from domestic
taxes if taxes have been paid abroad.6 Credit systems are far more pervasive than exemption
systems.


Thus, putting on one side the differences in tax rates on interest, dividends, and royalties that
apply in practice across most countries, if t H is the home country tax rate, and t F is the foreign
country tax rate; then under a credit system the effective marginal tax rate on investment abroad,
t E , is given by
         t E = max (t H , t F )     credit system                                                                   (1)



Why unilateral reliefs are only operated by source countries and not by host countries is a further puzzle that I do not
go into here. Source country reliefs lower taxes in source countries on the basis of taxes previously paid in host
countries. Host country reliefs, were they to operate, would lower host country taxes on the basis of taxes to be paid
later in source countries.




                                                               5
while under an exemption system,
        tE = tF                   exemption system                                                          (2)
If t H = t F , these two systems are equivalent in impact.


Table 1 documents the form the systems in use in some of the more major OECD countries take.
It first sets out whether the sample countries operate credit or exemption systems. Here, among 5
European and 2 North American countries, only one country operates an exemption system.
Table 1 also lists the non treaty withholding tax rates that countries use on the three categories of
royalties, interest and dividends. Bilaterally negotiated treaties lower these rates, but as can be
seen non treaty rates vary across countries and also in some cases across types of income.
Withholding tax rates in the 25% is a common figure which often thought to loosely characterize
this treatment across OECD countries.




See the discussion in Adams and Whalley (1977); Ault and Bradford (1990) provide a comprehensive discussion of
and rationale for US arrangements; Hines (1994) discusses credit and deferral arrangements. Hartman (1984, 1985)
discusses the impacts of US tax policies on foreign investment.




                                                           6
                                                     Table 1


             Systems of Relief and Non Treaty Withholding Tax Rates on Payments
                         by Subsidiaries to Foreign Parent Companies1

Country                   Unilateral                Royalties                Interest                Dividend
                         Relief From
                        Foreign Double
                           Taxation
Belgium                     Credit                     15%                     15%                        25%3
Canada                      Credit                     25%                     25%                        25%
France                    Exemption                  33 1/3%                   15%                        25%
Germany                     Credit                   26.38%                   26.38%                     26.38%
Italy                       Credit                    22.5%                   12.5%2                      15%
UK                          Credit                     22%                     22%                        22%
USA                         Credit                     30%                     30%                        30%
1
  Source: Guides to European Taxation Vol. 1: The Taxation of Patent Royalties, Dividends and
Interest in Europe published by the International Bureau for Fiscal Documentation, Amsterdam.
2
  For dividends from certain shares issued in 1982 and 1983 the rate in 20%.
3
  In various special cases other rates can apply.

Treaty Reliefs
Treaty reliefs from double taxation are bilaterally negotiated arrangements between pairs of
countries. These co-exist with the unilateral reliefs offered individually by countries and
discussed above. Under these treaties three categories of foreign source income are identified
(interest, dividends, and royalties) and different mutually lowered tax rates both can be and are
negotiated for each of these. Typically treaties are renegotiated from time to time, but these
renegotiations are relatively infrequent (in some cases 20-30 years) and renegotiations of one
treaty do not overlap with those of others. They generally involve an agreement by the two
countries involved to jointly lower the withholding tax rates which they each apply to specific
forms of capital income leaving the country (typically, interest, royalties, and dividends). A
variety of other provisions also enter such treaties, including agreements by national revenue
authorities to exchange information.7 The majority of treaties follow, to varying degrees of




See the discussion of exchange of information clauses in tax treaties in Bachetta and Espinosa (2000).
closeness, a model treaty established some years ago under OECD auspices, now known as the
OECD model treaty.8


Table 2 sets out the tax rates which apply under seven bilateral treaty country pairs for the three
categories of income set out above. These treaties are quite complex in practice,, with, in some
cases, different tax rates applying within a category depending on special conditions.
Withholding tax rates on bond interest may, for instance, differ from those on bank interest. The
size of foreign ownership can also influence tax rates, although Table 2 shows them only for the
wholly owned subsidiary case.


Table 1 indicates that OECD countries have non treaty withholding tax rates with a mean value
of around 25% on capital income paid abroad, and so bilateral treaties lower these rates and often
sharply. They also often involve different rates on the various categories of income. In some
cases (category flows between particular pairs of countries) 0% tax rates prevail, and these rates
are common in inter EU treaties, as Table 2 shows.


The bilateral nature of these treaties can also have a significant effect on both the composition
and volume of global capital flows.9 Countries such as Holland (not included in Table 1 and 2),
for instance, are generally thought to have negotiated especially low tax rates in their treaties;
which makes them a focal point for a network of international flows. Thus taxes may be lower if
payment goes from A to C via B, rather than directly from A to C. Countries with low treaty
rates are often also thought to be better connected to tax haven jurisdictions (such as the




See the paper by Mintz and Tulkens (1991) which sets out the OECD model treaty and evaluates its impacts in
effectively harmonizing corporate tax regimes. They argue the treaty increases tax exporting but reduces capital
flight.

See the discussion of this point in Adams and Whalley (1977).




                                                            8
Netherlands Antilles), where effectively zero tax rates may apply on income for which
repatriation to its ultimate source country is deferred.




                                                      9
                                                                    Table 2

               Summary of Tax Treaties Between Developed Countries as they Affect Multinational Enterprise
                              Withholding Tax Rates on Dividends, Interest, and Royalties


Country of                                             Country of Location of Parent Company
Location
of                   Belgium             Canada             France           Germany           Italy            UK           USA
Subsidiary
Company          D      I      R    D      I      R    D      I      R   D      I    R     D    I      R    D   I    R   D    I     R


Belgium          -      -      -    15     15     10    0    15      0   0      0      0   0    15     5    0   15   0   5   15     0

Canada          15    0,151    10   -      -      -     5    0,10    0   15 0,15 10 15         0,15    10 10 0,10 10     5   0,10   0

France           0   10~152    0    5      10     0     -     -      -   0      0      0   0   0,10    5    0   0    0   5   0,15   5

Germany          0     0,15    0    15 0~25 10          0    0,25    0   -      -      -   0   0~25    5    0   0    0   5   0,25   0

Italy            0     15      5    15     15     10    0    10      5   0     10      5   -     -     -    0   10   8   5   15     10

UK               0     0,15    0    0     0,10    10    0     0      0   0      0      0   0   0,10    8    -   -    -   0    0     0

USA              5     0,15    0    5     0,15    0     5    0,15    5   5    0,30     0   5   0,15    10   5   0    0   -    -     -


1
    A comma designates 2 rates; in this case 0 and 15%.
2
    A ~ denotes a range, within which multiple rates can apply.
3.     WHY GRANT UNILATERAL RELIEFS?


The first puzzle raised by this characterization of the prevailing international tax regime for cross
border capital income may be stated simply. It is that it is seemingly hard to explain why on the
basis of national economic interest countries grant unilateral reliefs.


The reason for posing this puzzle in this way is that will other things being equal (asset risk
characteristics, for example) private investors invest across locations so as to equalize their
private return on investments. As a result, private returns to investors will be equalized across
domestic and foreign opportunities, but the national returns to investments are not. The country
to which taxes are paid to is not of any great consequence to investors, but it is clearly of major
consequence nationally. Thus, from a national point of view, investments made at home generate
tax revenues; while under a system of reliefs as under an exemption system (or alternatively,
under a foreign tax credit with similar tax rates at home and abroad) no taxes accrue to the
domestic treasury.


This can be shown in the following way. I consider a case where r D and r F denote the gross of
tax rates of return on domestic and foreign investments, and t D and t F the domestic and foreign
tax rates (assumed for simplicity in this case to be equal). There is a unilateral system of reliefs
operating in country D, domestic investors placing funds abroad pay taxes at rate t F to the
foreign government, but since t D = t F the unilateral credit relief means that no further taxes are
paid to the domestic government.


Investors will equate net of tax rates of return on the two alternative investments, and the
equilibrium condition in capital markets in this case is that

            (      )    (
          rD 1− tD = rF 1− tF   )                                                                (3)
which is what is required for global efficiency of resource allocation. Private returns to
investments across the two sources are equalized, but national returns from the viewpoint of
country D are not equalized, since these returns are
       domestic investments            rD                                                        (4)
        foreign investments                   (
                                         rF 1− tF      )
        Global efficiency and national welfare are at odds in this case because national and
private returns differ; and seemingly, a unilateral credit system does not serve national interest.
In the small open economy case, where the size of capital flows has no impact on worldwide
rates of return, it is also not desirable from a national point of view to allow either a foreign tax
credit or an exemption.


With neither an exemption nor credit system of unilateral reliefs in place, private returns across
investment options are
        domestic investments                  ( )
                                         rD 1− tD                                                   (5)

        foreign investments              rF   (1 − t )(1 − t )
                                                   F       D



If private returns across investment sources are equalized this implies in this case that
                (
        rD = rF 1− tF   )                                                                           (6)
In this case, the national returns are
        domestic investments             rD                                                         (7)
        foreign investments                   (
                                         rF 1− tF      )
and so relative private and social returns across the two investment sources are the same. Not
allowing any credit or exemption reliefs involves a deviation from global efficiency conditions,
but it is the national interest that is at issue here and that is best served by such an arrangement.


National interest in this case thus suggests that all investments should generate the same national
(i.e. gross of national tax) return per $ invested, irrespective of location of the investment. A
foreign tax credit or tax exemption for capital income previously taxed in a foreign country
conflicts with this principle by equating private, not national returns. Unilateral reliefs thus seem
difficult to justify on national interest grounds.


This may seem a relatively simple point and I thought prior to writing this piece was one which
was well understood, but somewhat surprisingly there seem to be few clear or concise statements
of it in the literature. Richman (1963) and Musgrave (1969) both frequently referenced as key
pieces in the older literature on tax treatment of foreign investment income have discussions of

                                                           12
how principles of inter-nation equity provide guidance as to appropriate tax treatment of foreign
source income in national tax codes. The principle advanced is one under which investors should
be treated the same no matter in which country they invest and hence supports the presence of a
foreign tax credit, but this discussion is seemingly in conflict with national interest for the
reasons I set out above and is hard to understand in application to this area. Ault and Bradford
(1990) provide a comprehensive discussion of current (then) US practice, but as far as I can see
provide no discussion of national interest in the form stated above. Bond and Samuelson (1989)
provide an extension to Hamada’s earlier paper which they use to discuss foreign tax credits
versus deductions of foreign tax. They note that capital exporting countries generally prefer tax
deductions because less tax is surrendered to the foreign country, a point similar to that made
here, but do not take their discussion further focussing instead on the trade bias implications of
different systems. Bruce (1992) seems to be the lone piece which makes the same argument as
here. Bruce poses the dual puzzle of why it is that capital importing countries tax the income of
foreign owned capital since the domestic return to capital must rise to yield the same net of tax
return, reducing gains from trade, as well as why capital exporting countries give foreign tax
credits. He suggests that differential monitoring costs for home and foreign investments might
account for these arrangements.              In optimal tax literature, neither Gordon (1986)10 nor
subsequent contributions seems to provide any analysis of actual arrangements currently in place
when discussing optimal treatment of foreign investment income, and make no comments on
unilateral reliefs.


Why then do national governments grant such treatment if it is seemingly contrary to national
interest? One simple answer would seem to be the philosophical belief that double taxation is
bad, and that reliefs from all forms of double taxation are merited to avoid compounding of
taxes. In the US case, this is reflected in constitutional provisions which expressly require relief
from double taxation at national and state level.11 In federal states such as the US and Canada
such provisions are also aimed at limiting tax competition between jurisdictions and more clearly
defining allowable tax fields to be used by each level of government in cooperative taxing


Also see the early optimal tax contribution by Horst (1980).

See also the discussion of formula apportionment in Gordon and Wilson (1986).

                                                               13
arrangements (tax sharing agreements). The idea is to engage in cooperative rather than non-
cooperative behaviour on jurisdictional tax rates, so as to yield joint gains.


At international level, if all countries are small no incentives to cooperate in this way apply. In
the non small case (as clearly applies to the US and the EU) incentive effects arise and things
become more complicated. But even in this case, the unilateral reliefs one finds in place today
are not arrangements that have been jointly negotiated between governments. They have arisen at
different times and in different ways, even though they may have the appearance of a jointly
evolved system. Unilateral reliefs in one country remain unchanged when other countries change
their policies. Strategic response in terms of reliefs is not something that seems to characterize
the area. There is also no division of a larger tax field in this case between members of a union,
as occurs in a federal structure. There is also no meaningful wider constitutional structure
between nation states that provides a framework for narrower cooperation on unilateral reliefs. In
short, to suggest that unilateral reliefs as presently seen in OECD countries reflect some process
of strategic response seems to be wide of the mark.


One could perhaps argue that given the large size of two way investment flows relative to net
flows between OECD countries, this system represents implicit collusion between countries
around a focal point which has been established over the years. No one country is prepared to
depart from their own system of unilateral reliefs for fear that others would do so raising taxes
abroad on their own investments. Put slightly differently, foreign tax credits may transfer
revenues abroad, but if everyone does it at the same time countries accept a swing and
roundabouts argument and the net flows are small compared to the gross. This is, of course,
unsatisfactory as an explanation since the single country incentive to depart remains.


This, then, is the first puzzle. Why are unilateral reliefs given if they are seemingly so clearly
against the national interest?




4.     WHY GRANT TREATY RELIEFS?



                                                      14
The second puzzle I raise concerns the negotiation by pairs of governments of bilateral double
tax treaties of the form described above; the granting of treaty reliefs.12 The puzzle here is that if
there are pre-existing unilateral reliefs in each country, putting on one side for the moment the
possibility of obtaining deferral advantages by holding funds in tax havens, a negotiated tax
treaty which lowers tax rates on bilateral flows of capital income may have little or no effect on
the economic behaviour of investors. More specifically, where source countries use a credit
system of unilateral reliefs, and tax rates at home and abroad for simplicity, are the same, a
bilateral tax treaty will only have lump sum effects. If countries have similar non treaty
withholding tax rates on interest, dividends and royalties, the effects of negotiated bilateral tax
treaties will predominantly be to generate lump sum transfers between governments, more so
than to affect the behaviour of investors. Table 1 suggests that there are differences in tax rates
involved by country, and so to see treaties as purely lump sum is perhaps overly strong, but I
would argue that the broad thrust of the puzzle remains.


This feature of treaties and their interaction with unilateral reliefs can be seen as follows. If
t D and t F are the tax rates in domestic and foreign countries (assumed the same), and r D and
r F are the rates of return in the two countries, in the absence of any treaty but in the presence of
unilateral reliefs private returns on investments made domestically and abroad, private returns
are
         domestic investments                       ( )
                                               rD 1− tD                                                         (8)

         foreign investments                   rF   (1 − t )
                                                         D



If a treaty is then negotiated under which withholding tax rates on income paid abroad are
                 (     )
reduced by λ < t F , then in the presence of a credit system of reliefs private returns from these
two investment types become
         domestic investments                       ( )
                                               rD 1− tD                                                         (9)

         foreign investments13                 rF   (1 − λ − t ) + λr
                                                               D        F




See Janeba (1995) for other recent literature on this set of issues.

Here, the domestic tax rate applies to gross foreign source income, before the foreign tax credit is granted.

                                                                   15
Private returns remain unaffected by the treaty in the case where t D = t F , but returns to national
governments are affected since λ is effectively transferred from the host country to the source
country.


Why then do countries that are net recipients of inward foreign investment negotiate what are, in
effect, lump sum transfers to other governments? Why make transfers in this way when other
instruments are available?


Some explanations are that both investors and governments think that, despite the argument
above, tax treaties nonetheless do affect economic behaviour. This can be because of the use of
tax haven type intermediaries to shelter deferred taxable income from host countries, so that
lowered host country tax rates affect economic behaviour. Transfer pricing and other related
devices can also come into play in moving funds in and out of such deferral vehicles and again
host country tax rates will matter. And differences, though not that large, do exist in withholding
tax rates across OECD countries, and in such a world treaties do change effective tax rates that
investors face. Also, if two way investment flows relative to net flows are large, the transfers
involved may be relatively small.


A further argument is that tax treaties are negotiated for more than their tax rate provisions.
Exchanges of information, such as those relating to holders of bank accounts abroad, can be a
powerful incentive for a seemingly lump sum transferring country to negotiate such agreements.
Also, linkage between tax treaties and other inter government agreements can be a powerful
factor in driving countries into such a negotiation.
Canada, for instance, has for many years been a significant net payer of interest, dividends, and
royalties to the United States. As such, lowered withholding tax rates under the Canada-US
treaty hurts Canadian interests. But at the same time, Canada gains far more by way of offset
from the presence of the US foreign tax credit (some estimates suggest that this provision alone
in the US tax code may be worth a considerable portion of Canadian GDP). If negotiating a
treaty helps preserve the US foreign tax credit it may become worth negotiating. And if the tax
treaty is part of wider cross border policy linkage which underpins NAFTA and other such
arrangements, it may again be worthwhile. Treaties can be a way of providing for implicit (and

                                                       16
non cash) side payments missing in other treaty arrangements, such as in trade. But once again
the puzzle as to the national interest involved in negotiating these arrangements on a standalone
basis remains.




5.   WHY ARE GOODS AND FACTOR FLOW TREATIES SO DIFFERENT?


A third puzzle with tax arrangements towards crossborder flows of capital income involves the
sharply differing form that international cooperative arrangements take in the seemingly two
closely areas of flows of goods and flows of factors. As mentioned in the introduction, some
years ago Mundell (1957) in a classic paper pointed out the seeming equivalence between goods
and factor flows. This equivalence can be stated in the terms that free flows of goods and
common goods prices, under certain conditions, will lead to factor prices being equalized across
countries; while free flows of factors and common factor prices across countries will tend to lead
to goods prices being equalized across countries. What can be achieved with goods flows can
seemingly be equally achieved by factors flows.


Yet while analytically equivalent in this sense, the institutional arrangements for international
cooperation with respect to goods and factor flows could hardly be more different. In the goods
area both multilateral and regional/bilateral arrangements coexist under multilateral and regional
trade treaties. The dominant multilateral component under the World Trade Organization (WTO)
has its origins in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) as negotiated in 1947,
under which signatories agree to broad principles which were meant to restrain governments in
their use of trade policies. Non-discrimination (Most Favoured Nation States, or MFN) is the
most significant of these; but other principles such as national treatment (no discrimination
against foreign goods within economies) also enter.


These principles are also accompanied in the 1947 treaty by a best endeavours commitment to
try to lower trade barriers through negotiated progressive liberalization. This has lead to the eight
negotiating Rounds which have been undertaken under GATT/WTO auspices in the post war
years. A dispute settlement procedure completes the structure, with procedures for complaints,

                                                     17
panels, and eventually GATT/WTO authorized retaliation. But nowhere in this structure are there
common tariff rates which apply to both directions of trade flows, or different rates for different
types of flows, and unsynchronised bilateral agreements as characterize the tax area.


Thus the tax area, in contrast, appears chaotic in its negotiated outcome. No general set of
principles has been agreed, or even contemplated by tax authorities. No system of rights and
obligations of governments one towards another in their tax policies applies. Bilateral not
multilateral agreements predominate. The negotiation of treaties does not take place
simultaneously. Pairs of countries exist between whom there are no tax treaties (especially
developing countries). Different tax rates apply to interest, dividends, and royalties; incentives
are created to tranship via low treaty rate routes; and other seemingly strange features exist.


Why all these differences? Perhaps the first place to start is to note that theories of how
cooperation arises and how it is sustained are relatively sparse in the economics literature.
Bargaining solution concepts and their axiomatic underpinnings are set out in a Handbook paper
by Thompson (1994), who stresses the widespread use of Nash (1950) bargaining as the
fundamental solution concept, as well as the more recent use of Kalai-Smorodinsky (1975)
solution concepts, but there is no particular reason why bargaining on trade and investment flow
policies should produce a similar institutional outcome.


But beyond this, one also notes the perceived severity of the problem to be solved in the trade
case which was to lead to the GATT/WTO. The GATT in 1947 was meant to be the arrangement
(along with the unratified International Trade Organization) that was to prevent a repeat of the
1930’s and help avoid a post war global recession. Major steps were needed, and major
institutional innovation resulted. Later, with the formation of the EU and the EU/US negotiations
in the Dillon, Kennedy, and Tokyo Rounds the proof of success from negotiated cooperation
became accepted as real. In the international tax area no such pressures either existed earlier, or
now exist. The 1930’s was not thought to be the outcome of tax competition. An international
multilateral tax agreement was not seen as needed to prevent the world reverting to a new
recession.



                                                     18
Also, once established the GATT/WTO was seen as a separate pillar of the global policy system.
Global trade negotiations were to only reflect trade interests and trade concerns; the intrusion of
other issues (such as environment and labour standards today) has been a recent development.
Trade institutions evolved reflecting largely only trade concerns. In the tax area, concessions on
tax policy are much more prone to be implicit side payments used to achieve other objectives and
hence linked to other parts of the international regime. Signing a tax treaty may be a way to get
closer to a trade deal; concessions in a tax treaty were something that could be offered in a multi
topic deal.


These and more reasons then provide some loose indications as to why tax and trade
arrangements have evolved in such different ways in the post war years despite the formal
equivalence set out above. But the puzzle stated above remains.




6.     WHY NO SIDE PAYMENTS IN TREATIES?


A final puzzle I pose in this area is why tax treaties exist with no side payments. One of the
themes emerging from cooperative game theory literature is the need for side payments to
support cooperative solutions, including bargained outcomes. This is central, for instance, to
Thompson’s (1994) survey of bargaining literature referenced above. The implication is that
without side payments cooperative arrangements may be unsupportable, and hence one might
think that side payments would be a central part of tax treaty arrangements.


The absence of side payments shows itself in a relative absence of bilateral treaties between pairs
of countries between whom investment flows are close to being unidirectional. Thus, developing
countries are recipients of direct foreign investment with little or no reverse flow. Developing
countries typically have higher corporate tax rates than developed countries, and so an OECD
model style treaty with a developed country is perceived to provide the majority of benefits to
the developed country, and so few are negotiated between these countries. Side payments,
however, would seem an obvious mechanism to support such treaties.



                                                    19
This absence of side payments it should be noted is not confined to international tax treaties, but
characterizes other international cooperative arrangements. Trade arrangements in the WTO
have no side payments (at least in cash). International environmental agreements also have
(effectively) no side payments (see the discussion in Whalley and Zissimos (2001)).


So why no side payments in the tax area? One reason is probably the political unacceptability of
payments of cash by one country to another to lower their tax rates. The idea of, say, the US
paying Canada (a net recipient of inward bilateral investment) to lower tax rates seems difficult
for politicians to convincingly defend.


Another is the linkage of tax treaties to other elements of the international regime mentioned
earlier. Specifically, if tax treaties themselves play the role of implicit side payments in order for
non-tax treaties to be concluded, the absence of side payments in them becomes perhaps more
explicable. This would be the idea that, say, Canada-US trade negotiations are facilitated by a
renegotiation of the Canada-US double taxation treaty at around the same time.


At the end of the day, however, game theorists would probably argue that side payments
constitute a further instrument for achieving negotiated cooperation; and their absence can
seemingly only potentially limit the gains from cooperation. Insofar as developed-developing
country tax treaties are effectively precluded by the absence of supporting side payments there
seems to be merit in this argument and hence substance to the puzzle.




7.     CONCLUDING REMARKS


This paper discusses international taxation of investment income, but does so in terms of existing
arrangements rather than optimal tax considerations. It characterizes this regime as a series of
unilateral reliefs by country from double taxation in the form of foreign tax credit or exemption
arrangements, and a bilateral network of treaty reliefs which lower withholding tax rates on
interest, dividends, and royalties. The thrust of the paper is to argue that making sense of these



                                                     20
arrangements in terms either of national interest or in terms of arrangements which maximize
gains from cooperation seems difficult. This argument is made by posing four puzzles.


The first is that under either credit or exemption unilateral reliefs private returns to investments
across domestic and foreign assets may be equalized in markets, but social returns are not.
Where domestic and foreign tax rates are the same, taxes on domestic investments accrue to the
home government, but taxes on investments abroad go to the foreign government. The second
concerns tax treaties. Where domestic and foreign tax rates are again the same, under credit
unilateral reliefs treaties only have lump sum effects. They transfer revenues between
governments depending on the net directional flows involved. The third concerns the differences
between tax and trade treaties, which sharply diverge in form even though goods and factor
flows are often thought to be analytically similar. The fourth concerns the absence of side
payments in treaties, which seemingly limit gains from cooperation.


The paper poses these puzzles, and offers some thoughts on how the puzzles can be reconciled
suggesting that the present regime is some distance both from national interest and optimal tax
literature. The paper also notes the seeming limited literature discussion of these arrangements.


So what does all this suggest for where this regime may be headed under the forces of
globalization and tax competition? The first observation is that the structure of this regime has
been largely the same for many decades and has large elements of cooperation which have
prevailed to stabilize the system and leave it unchanged, even if domestic corporate tax rates
have fallen. There are more treaties, but the system shows no signs of major change, nor is there
a sense of crisis, system implosion, or other set of strains which would bring major change. The
second is that even if hard to explain, the system does embody cooperative elements which most
tax competition literature seem to point to as the obvious accommodation to competitive
pressures. Some game theorists seem to argue that cooperation is hard to establish, needs some
accepted focal point, but once established becomes resilient to all but major system shocks.
Perhaps this system fits such a characterization, and tax competition debate will leave it largely
intact.



                                                    21
8.     REFERENCES

Adams, J.D.R. and J. Whalley (1977), The International Taxation of Multinational Enterprises in
      Developed Countries, Westport, Conn: Greenwood.

Ault, H.J. and D.F. Bradford (1990), “Taxing International Income: An Analysis of the US
       System and its Economic Premises” in (ed.) A. Razin and J. Slemrod Taxation in the
       Global Economy, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 1-46.

Baccheta, P. and M.P. Espinosa (2000), “Exchange of Information Clauses in International Tax
      Treaties”, International Tax and Public Finance, Vol. 17, pp. 275-293.

Bond, E.W. and L. Samuelson (1989), “Strategic Behaviour and the Rates for International
      Taxation of Capital”, Economic Journal, 99(398), December, pp. 1099-1111.

Bruce, N. (1992), “Why are There Foreign Tax Credits?” National Bureau of Economic
       Research Working Paper, July 1992.

Gordon, R. (1986), Taxation of Investment and Saving in a World Economy”, American
      Economic Review, Vol. 76, December, pp. 1086-1102.

Gordon, R.H. and J. D. Wilson (1986), “An Examination of Multi-Jurisdictional Corporate
      Income Taxation under Formula Apportionment”, Econometrica, Vol. 54, November, pp.
      1357-73.

Hamada, K. (1966), “Strategic Aspects of the Taxation of Foreign Investment”, Quarterly
     Journal Economics, pp. 361-375.

Hartman, D. (1984), “Tax Policy and Foreign Direct Investment in the United States”, National
      Tax Journal, Vol. 37, pp. 475-87.

Hartman, D.G. (1985), “Tax Policy and Foreign Direct Investment”, Journal of Public
      Economics, Vol. 26, pp. 107-121.

Hines, J.R. (1994), “Credit and Deferral as International Investment Incentives”, Journal of
       Public Economics, Vol. 55, No. 2, October, pp. 323-347.

Hines, J.R. (19 ), “The Case against Deferral: A Deferential Reconsideration”, National Tax
       Journal, Vol. 52, No. 3, pp.385-404.

Horst, T. (1980), “A Note on the Optimal Taxation of International Investment Income”,
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 44, June, pp. 793-798.

Janeba, E. (1995), “Corporate Income Tax Competition, Double Taxation Reliefs, and Foreign
       Direct Investment”, Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 56, pp. 311-325.



                                                 22
Johnson H.G. (1954) "Optimal Tariffs and Retaliation" Review of Economic Studies, vol. 21, pp.
      142-53.

Kalai E. and M. Smorodinsky (1975) "Other Solutions to Nash's Bargaining Problem",
      Econometrica, vol. 43, pp. 513-518.

Mintz, J.M. and H. Tulkens (1991), “The OECD Convention: A “Model” for Corporate Tax
       Harmonization” in (ed.) Prud’homme R. Public Finance with Several Levels of
       Government, Foundation Journal Public Finance, the Hague, 1991.

Markusen, J. (1983), “Factor Movements and Commodity Trade as Complements”, Journal of
      International Economics, Vol. 14 No. 3-4, May, pp. 341-356.

Mundell, R.A. (1957), “International Trade and Factor Mobility”, American Economic Review,
      Vol. 47(3), June, pp. 321-35.

Musgrave, P. B. (1969), United States Taxation of Foreign Source Income: Issues and
      Arguments, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Nash J.F. (1950) "The Bargaining Problem" Econometrica, vol. 28, pp. 155-62.

Razin, A. and J. Slemrod (ed.) (1990), Taxation in the Global Economy, University of Chicago
       Press, Chicago.

Richman, P.B. (1963), Taxation of Foreign Investment Income: An Economic Analysis,
      Baltimore, Johns Hopkins Press.

Slemrod, J. (1988), “International Capital Mobility and The Theory of Capital Income Taxation”
      in (ed.) H.J. Aaron, H. Galper, and J.A. Peckman, Uneasy Compromise: Problems of
      Hybrid Income-Consumption Tax, Washington D.C., Brookings.

Thompson W. (1994) "Cooperative Models of Bargaining" in ed. R.J. Aumann and S. Hart
     Handbook of Game Theory, vol. 2, 1994, Elsevier Science B.V.

Wilson, J.D. (1999), “Theories of Tax Competition”, National Tax Journal, Vol 52, No. 2, June,
      pp. 269-304.




                                                 23
