NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ATTRITION BIAS IN ECONOMIC RELATIONSHIPS
ESTIMATED WITH MATCHED CPS FILES
David Neumark
Daiji Kawaguchi
Working Paper 8663
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8663
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2001

Neumark is Professor of Economics at Michigan State University, and a Research Associate of the NBER.
Kawaguchi is a Ph.D. candidate in the Department of Economics at Michigan State University. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2001 by David Neumark and Daiji Kawaguchi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Attrition Bias in Economic Relationships Estimated with Matched CPS Files
David Neumark and Daiji Kawaguchi
NBER Working Paper No. 8663
December 2001

ABSTRACT
Short panel data sets constructed by matching individuals across monthly files of the Current
Population Survey (CPS) have been used to study a wide range of questions in labor economics. Such
panels offer unique advantages. But because the CPS makes no effort to follow movers, these panels
exhibit significant attrition, which may lead to bias in longitudinal estimates using matched CPS files.
Because the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) uses essentially the same sampling frame
and design as the CPS, but makes substantial efforts to follow individuals that move, we use the SIPP to
construct “data-based” rather than “model-based” corrections for bias from selective attrition. The
approach is applied to a couple of standard economic relationships that have been studied with the
CPS–specifically union wage differentials and the male marriage wage premium.
The results for the longitudinal analysis of union wage effects reveal negligible and statistically
insignificant evidence of attrition bias. In contrast, the longitudinal analysis of the marriage premium for
males finds statistically significant evidence of attrition bias, although the amount of bias does not seem
to be serious in an economic sense. We regard the evidence as suggesting that in many applications the
advantages of using matched CPS panels to obtain longitudinal estimates are likely to far outweigh the
disadvantages from attrition biases, although we should allow for the possibility that attrition bias leads
the longitudinal estimates to be understated.

David Neumark
Department of Economics
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824
and NBER
neumarkd@pilot.msu.edu

Daiji Kawaguchi
Department of Economics
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824

I. Introduction
Short panel data sets constructed by matching individuals across monthly files of the
Current Population Survey (CPS) have been used to study a wide range of questions in labor
economics. Relative to more conventional panel data sets such as the National Longitudinal
Survey (NLS) or Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), panels constructed from the CPS
have numerous advantages, including: larger samples; panels that are not restricted to narrow
subsets of years or age cohorts; the availability of geographic information; and quick release of
data to researchers. There are, however, two offsetting disadvantages. One, which is not the
focus of this paper, is the more limited scope of the CPS, providing–in analyses of wages–pairs
of observations 12 months apart, with less extensive information than conventional panels. The
second disadvantage, which is the focus of this paper, is that matched CPS panels exhibit rather
severe attrition. Unlike other conventional panel data sets, in conducting the CPS no effort is
made to follow individuals that move. Consequently, typically only 70 to 80 percent of
observations can be matched across CPS surveys over a 12-month interval. This constitutes a
very high attrition rate, especially over such a short period, making it entirely plausible that
estimated relationships based on matched CPS files suffer from substantial biases due to
selective attrition.
We use the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) to assess the extent of
attrition bias in estimates of behavioral relationships using matched CPS files. The SIPP is
uniquely suited to this purpose because it uses essentially the same sampling frame and design as
the CPS but makes substantial efforts to follow individuals that move. This permits the SIPP to
be used to construct two alternative data sets with which to study attrition bias such as that which
occurs in the CPS. The first is a standard SIPP panel that follows as many individuals as
p. 1

possible if they move. The second is a SIPP panel that mimics the CPS in dropping individuals
that move. For any particular empirical application for which matched CPS files have been used,
the estimates from these two constructed SIPP data sets can be compared to estimate the bias
from attrition related to moving. This provides an approach to studying this particular form of
selection bias in matched CPS samples that relies on observed behavior of individuals who
“selected out” of the CPS sample, in contrast to the typical approach that would attempt to model
the attrition decision−with well-known identification problems. The approach is applied to a
couple of standard economic relationships that have been studied with the CPS.1
II. Matched CPS Files
II.A. Past Uses of Matched CPS Files
Short panel data sets constructed by matching individuals across monthly files of the CPS
have been used to study a wide range of questions in labor economics. Recent examples of
policy analyses using matched CPS data include: exchange rate changes and employment
stability (Goldberg, et al., 1999); the effects of the minimum wage on employment and
enrollment of teenagers and on family poverty (Neumark and Wascher, 1996; Neumark, et al.,
1998); the impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) on transitions out of poverty
(Neumark and Wascher, 2001); and nursing retention (Schumacher, 1997). Recent examples of
behavioral analyses using matched CPS data include: analysis of wage growth of immigrants
versus non-immigrants (Duleep and Regets, 1997); the effects of compensating differentials and
sex segregation on the sex wage gap in earnings (Macpherson and Hirsch, 1995); the effects of

1

Matched CPS samples have also been used to study outcomes for families, and the approach we take
with the SIPP can also be applied to families. While the paper focuses on the analysis of individuals, we
have done some preliminary work applying the approach to families. This is potentially more
problematic, as changes in family structure are strongly associated with moving.

p. 2

unions on wages (Freeman, 1984); unmeasured skills and inter-industry wage differentials
(Shippen, 1999); and earnings mobility (Gittleman and Joyce, 1996).
II.B. Advantages of Matched CPS Files
Relative to more conventional panel data sets such as the NLS panels or the PSID, panels
constructed from the CPS have five principal advantages.2 First, whereas conventional panels
restrict sample sizes because they face large expenses from the collection of longitudinal data,
CPS panels provide much larger samples. For example, the monthly CPS covers approximately
50,000 workers. Many studies using the CPS rely on the Outgoing Rotation Group (ORG)−the
subset of the sample in each month for which the “Earners Study” is administered, providing
information on wages, etc. Since CPS respondents are in the sample for four months, out for
eight, and then back in for four, and the Earners Study is administered in the fourth and the last
month, it is possible to match up 1/8 of the sample in any month with Earners Study information
one year later.3 Thus, for any one year, it is in principle possible to match up about 75,000
observations with observations one year later (50,000 × 1/8 × 12 months). In contrast, the
National Longitudinal Surveys have drawn samples of about 5,000 individuals (in the Original
Cohorts) to 12,000 individuals (in the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, with a military
oversample), the SIPP yields panels about 1/2 to 1/5 as large (depending on the year), and the
PSID began as a sample of about 5,000 families but has grown to about 8,700 as the families of
offspring of the original sample members are integrated into the survey (Hofferth, et al., 1996).
Second, whereas conventional panels (most prominently, the National Longitudinal
Surveys) target and follow a specific cohort as it ages, new CPS panels can be constructed for
2

These advantages do not necessarily all arise with respect to each existing panel, but at least some of
them always do.
3
Welch (1993) discusses the matching of respondents across CPS surveys.

p. 3

each year over a long period of time, permitting the analysis of an array of policy approaches that
have been used over a period of many years, while still affording the statistical advantages of
panel data. More generally, coverage of long time spans permits researchers to more adequately
control for changes in the economic (or other) environment that may mediate the relationship
that is being studied. Third, because the CPS samples the entire population rather than a specific
cohort, it permits richer analyses across the age distribution. Fourth, because of the large sample
sizes, and because of the ready accessibility of geographic information (which is often
suppressed in conventional panel data sets), state-level or even city-level variation in policy can
be exploited in empirical analysis (e.g., Adams and Neumark, 2000),4 and subgroups defined by
demography, occupation, etc., can be more reliably analyzed. Fifth, CPS data are made available
to researchers very quickly, with many files typically available within one or two months after
their collection. This makes these data uniquely well-suited for analysis of recent or current
issues. In contrast, NLS panels on particular age groups are available for a limited subset of
possible sample periods, depending on when a survey of a particular cohort was begun. PSID
and SIPP files are produced with a very long lag; as of January 2001, the most recent SIPP files
available were for 1996, and the most recent PSID files were for 1997. For topical policy
analysis (for example, studying welfare reform) these constraints can be severely limiting, and
they may also hamper behavioral research studies to the extent that these could benefit from
recent data.
II.C. Disadvantages of Matched CPS Files
A principal disadvantage of panels constructed from matched CPS files is that these
panels exhibit rather severe attrition. Unlike other conventional panel data sets, in conducting
4

Since January 1996, the design of the CPS has resulted in the large- and medium-sized metropolitan

p. 4

the CPS no effort is made to follow individuals or families that move to a new address.
Consequently, depending on the year considered, only 70 to 80 percent of observations can be
matched across monthly CPS samples 12 months apart, such as would be required with the
ORGs. This reflects a very high attrition rate over a one-year period. By way of comparison, in
the NLSY, which began in 1979, over 80 percent of eligible participants were still responding in
the late 1990s. For the Mature and Young Women cohorts of the NLS, begun in 1968, over 50
percent of participants were responding after almost 30 years of interviewing (Zagorsky and
Rhoton, 1999).5 For a more direct comparison, the PSID lost 12 percent of its respondents
between 1968 (its year of inception) and its second round interviews in 1969 (Fitzgerald, et al.,
1998).
The relatively high attrition in panels created from matched CPS files makes it plausible
that estimates based on these files are biased because of attrition that is nonrandom, even
conditional on the observable control variables. This could occur quite naturally because the
decisions of individuals to move may be, in part, related to the behavior that is being studied. As
an example, consider longitudinal estimation of the union wage premium. Suppose first that
individuals who experience a wage decline are more likely to move. (Recent evidence reported
by Fitzgerald, et al. (1998), studying attrition in the PSID, suggests that those who recently
experienced unfavorable economic events were most likely to attrit.) Suppose, as nearly all
evidence suggests, that the true effect of being represented by a union is to increase wages.
Finally, consider the estimation of a first-difference regression of changes in wages on changes

areas in the sample being self-representing (Bureau of the Census, 1997).
5
This lower attrition is not only because movers are followed, but also because continuing efforts are
made to find individuals who were non-respondents in one or even more than one survey year (e.g.,
Rhoton, 1984).

p. 5

in union status (and other controls), and for simplicity suppose that sample consists only of those
who do not change union status, and those who switch into union jobs.
Given that unions increase wages and wage gains deter moving, there is more attrition of
individuals with negative wage shocks among those who do not switch into union jobs than
among those who switch into union jobs, as the latter on average experience a wage gain that
offsets the negative shock and deters attrition. In a regression context, this implies that the error
term in the wage change equation is negatively correlated with a dummy variable indicating a
switch to union status, and hence the positive impact of unionization in the wage change
equation is understated in the sample of non-attriters.
If we also consider those who move out of union jobs (for whom the variable measuring
the change in union status would be minus one), then the same qualitative conclusion follows.
There will be more attrition among these individuals than among those who do not switch, as
their union status change complements the negative wage shock in inducing attrition. Hence the
negative impact of leaving a union job is understated in the sample of non-attriters, so again the
gains from unionization are understated.
If instead attrition is associated with wage gains, the same bias results. In this case, for
workers switching into union jobs there is more attrition of those with positive shocks compared
with those who do not switch–as the union change complements the positive wage shock–
leading to understatement of the positive union wage impact. And in the case of those switching
out of union jobs there is less attrition of those with positive wage shocks than among those who
do not switch, again leading to understatement of the costs of leaving a union job. Thus, overall,

p. 6

in either case attrition leads to those with more extreme wage changes selecting out of the
sample, which tends to moderate the estimated effects of a change that actually affects wages.6
To see this concretely in terms of the usual selection-bias framework, suppose that–as in
Freeman (1984) and Jakubson (1991)–a usual wage equation is specified for the log wage,
denoted by lwit, where the subscripts i and t index individuals and years (t=1,…,T). This is
specified as a function of control variables Zit, including human capital and other individual-level
controls, individual unobserved heterogeneity Ci, as well as the union status variable Uit. Then
the regression model is:

lwit = α + Zitβ + γ⋅Uit + Ci + εit .

(1)

To eliminate the influence of Ci, which may be correlated with Zit or Uit, the firstdifference model is estimated:

∆lwit = ∆Ζitβ + γ⋅∆Uit + ∆ εit .

(2)

It is assumed that E(εit| Zi,UNIONi) = 0, where Zi = [Zi1, ... , ZiT] and UNIONi =
[UNIONi1, ... , UNIONiT], so that other than attrition bias, OLS estimation of equation (2) would
yield unbiased estimates.

6

Similarly, then, if unions decrease wages, the effect is biased towards zero. To consider one case,
suppose those with negative wage shocks attrit. Then among those who switch to union jobs, there is
relatively more attrition among those with negative wage shocks, moderating the negative effect of
unions.

p. 7

There is also an indicator for attrition (Ait), which is assumed to be a function the same
control variables, and the wage shock. If we assume there is no other error term in the attrition
equation (in order to keep the notation to a minimum), and suppose that wage declines are
associated with attrition, the equation for the propensity to attrit (A*) can be written as:

Α∗it = ∆Ζitβ’ + γ’⋅∆Uit +τ’·∆ εit , 7

(3)

where γ’ < 0 (assuming that γ > 0), τ’ < 0, and the elements of β’ have the opposite signs of the
elements of β.
Because we observe only the subsample of non-attriters (Α∗it < 0), the function we
estimate with equation (2) is:

E(∆lwit|∆Zit, ∆Uit, ∆εit > −{(1/ τ’)·(∆Ζitβ’ + γ’⋅∆Uit)})
= ∆Zitβ + γ⋅∆Uit + E(∆εit|∆Zit, ∆Uit, ∆εit > −{(1/ τ’)·(∆Ζitβ’ + γ’⋅∆Uit)}) .8

(4)

When ∆Uit = 1, because γ’ and τ’ are both negative, ∆εit can be a larger negative number
while still satisfying the inequality ∆εit > −(1/ τ’)·( ∆Ζitβ’ + γ’⋅∆Uit) in equation (4), compared
with the case when ∆Uit = 0. Thus, the attrition selection bias induces a negative correlation
between ∆Uit and ∆εit, implying that the least squares estimate of γ in equation (2) is biased

If we appended an independent error term uncorrelated with the control variables and ∆εit to equation (3),
none of the conclusions would change, although the equations that follow would be more cumbersome.
Similarly, attrition can depend on exogenous variables other than Z that satisfy the same conditions as Z.
8
Note that the condition for non-attrition (and hence inclusion in the sample) is τ’·∆εit < −(∆Ζitβ’ +
γ’⋅∆Uit), but the inequality gets reversed because we divide through by τ’, which is negative.
7

p. 8

downward. Note that if γ’ is zero, this negative correlation is not induced and there is no attrition
bias (attrition is random with respect to changes in union status). On the other hand, when γ’ is
larger in absolute value (so that a change in union status is more strongly associated with
attrition), the bias is likely to be more severe.
If instead attrition is associated with wage gains, then τ’ and γ’ are greater than zero (and
the signs of β’ are reversed). In this case the inequality defining inclusion in the sample in
equation (4) is ∆εit < −(1/τ’)·(∆Ζitβ’ + γ’⋅∆Uit). When ∆Uit = 1, because β’ and τ’ are both
positive, ∆εit can be a larger negative number while still satisfying the inequality, compared to
when ∆Uit = 0. Thus, the attrition selection bias again induces a negative correlation between
∆Uit and ∆εit, implying that the least squares estimate of γ in equation (2) is biased downward.
The fact that the bias goes the same way regardless of the direction of effect of changes
in wages on attrition may seem counter-intuitive. Figure 1 provides a diagrammatic illustration
of the attrition bias that provides the underlying intuition. To simplify, suppose β’ = 0. In the
top panel, observations are likely to attrit when ∆lw is low. As shown by the plot of the density
of ∆ε, and the “cut points” below which attrition occurs, when ∆U = 1 observations attrit only
when shocks (∆ε) take on large negative values; thus observations with relatively large negative
shock remains in the sample. In contrast, when ∆U = −1, even small negative shocks cause the
observation to attrit, so that only observations with positive shocks or small negative shocks
remain in the sample. As this discussion shows, ∆U and ∆ε are negatively correlated in the
remaining sample. A similar discussion applies when observations are more likely to attrit when
∆lw is high, as illustrated in the lower panel of Figure 1. Again, we can see that ∆U and ∆ε are
negatively correlated in the sample of non-attriters. Note that this analysis concerns selection
p. 9

into attrition on unobservables rather than observables. Fitzgerald, et al. (1998) demonstrate that
correction for biases from selection on observables, even when this selection is endogenous, can
be accomplished by weighted least squares.9
III. Estimating the Bias from Selective Attrition
III.A. The Conventional Approach to Attrition Bias
The usual method to correct regression estimates for selection bias from attrition would
be to implement a sample selection correction, following the seminal work on this topic in the
context of wages and labor supply by Heckman (1974 and 1979). However, if identification of
such a model is not to be dependent on functional form and the assumed distributions of the
errors, at least one variable that drives attrition but not the behavior of interest (in this particular
context, changes in wages) is required (Olsen, 1980). In studying behavior at the individual
level, such assumptions are often quite problematic. This is exacerbated in the present context
because the CPS is not a particularly rich data set, and therefore lacks information on unusual
variables that might provide identification. Thus, the paper takes a different approach that
provides evidence on attrition bias without requiring the specification of a joint model of attrition
and the behavior of interest.
III.B. Using the SIPP to Estimate and Account for Attrition Bias
The SIPP is used to assess the extent of attrition bias in estimates of behavioral
relationships using matched CPS files. The SIPP is uniquely suited to this purpose because it has
many features similar to the CPS files. Indeed, the March CPS and the SIPP are very close
substitutes (with each having certain advantages) as the source of annual income and poverty

9

In addition, a good deal of research (reviewed in Mack and Petroni, 1994) has explored the construction
of weights to account for attrition and nonresponse generally in the SIPP.

p. 10

estimates in the United States (Citro and Kalton, 1993, pp. 85-6).10 However, whereas the
matched CPS files provide a “quasi-panel,” in the sense that the surveyors simply return to the
same address to interview the people who currently reside there, the SIPP follows individuals
who change their address. More specifically, SIPP interviewers attempt to interview in person
everyone who remains within 100 miles of a SIPP primary sampling unit, and interviewers are
instructed to conduct telephone interviews with movers who do not satisfy this criterion (Citro
and Kalton, 1993, p. 92). Because of this difference in sampling strategies, many individuals
that would be lost in matched CPS files can be followed in the SIPP.
This permits the SIPP to be used to construct two alternative data sets with which to
study attrition bias. The first is the standard SIPP panel that follows as many individuals as
possible as they move. The second is a SIPP panel that mimics the CPS in dropping individuals
that move. For any particular empirical application for which matched CPS files have been used,
these two constructed SIPP data sets can be used to estimate the same relationship studied with
the CPS. The estimates with and without the movers included can be compared to estimate the
attrition bias in the estimated relationship, and the results for the sample with the movers
included can provide estimates in which attrition bias is mitigated. Thus, using the SIPP data in
this manner provides an approach to studying attrition bias in matched CPS samples, based on a
method that relies on observed behavior of individuals that “selected out” of the CPS sample, in
contrast to the model-based approach to attrition.
To see more explicitly how the SIPP data can be used, denote by M the set of individuals
who move over a one-year period in the SIPP, beginning from some specified wave and month
of a SIPP panel, and denote by N the non-movers. Assume for now, for purposes of discussion,
10

Coder and Scoon-Rogers (1996 ) discuss many of the differences and similarities.

p. 11

that all movers are captured and included in M. Then continuing with the earlier example,
estimating equation (2) for the set N mimics what is done with the CPS data. If the SIPP data are
chosen judiciously, the results should match results from the CPS quite well, although there may
be some differences of measurement.11 Such estimates provide the baseline for the analysis,
although they will be compared with corresponding CPS estimates for the same sample period to
establish the comparability of the SIPP data.
The simplest way to gauge the extent of attrition bias is then to estimate equation (2)
using the larger set M+N–i.e., adding in the movers–as these estimates should be free of attrition
bias. The differences in the estimates of γ and β measure the bias from attrition (differences in
intercepts are generally of little interest).
A stringent test for attrition bias can be constructed. Now letting Ait denote those who
move–and therefore “attrit” from the CPS-type sample−equation (2) can be augmented to include
Ait and interactions of this indicator with all of the included variables:

∆lwit = α’’Ait + ∆Zitβ + ∆Zit⋅Aitβ’’ + γ⋅∆Uit + γ’’⋅∆Uit⋅Ait + νit .

(5)

In this specification, if the estimates of β’’ and γ’’ are not significantly different from
zero, then the hypothesis that the parameters β and γ are equal in the two subsamples cannot be
rejected. Any subset of these parameters can also be tested (most notably the union effect in this

11

For example, income is measured on a monthly rather than an annual basis (in the March CPS), which
introduces some differences in the classification of families as poor. (See Coder and Scoon-Rogers,
1996.)

p. 12

application).12 One potential problem is that such tests are potentially over-restrictive, in that
there could in principle be a significant difference between the two subsamples, but because of
the smaller size of the set of movers, the estimates based on the full sample (M+N) and the
sample of non-movers only (N) might still be statistically indistinguishable. As a matter of
practical consequence, then, this would indicate that estimates from matched CPS samples do not
exhibit significant attrition bias. Of course, this problem does not arise if the data fail to reject
the restrictions that β’’ and γ’’ equal zero. But in cases where the restrictions are rejected, care
must be taken to compare the estimates using M+N and N to assess whether the attrition bias is a
concern.
Constructing a test is non-trivial because the samples are non-independent. One
approach is to estimate the regression for M+N, and to then estimate the regression for N, first
unconstrained and then restricting the coefficients (or some pertinent subset of them) to equal the
estimates for M+N. This is intuitively appealing but will understate the p-values by failing to
account for sampling variation in the estimates from M+N. Another approach is to apply the
Hausman test framework. For example, denote by gM+N the estimate of γ from the pooled sample
and by gN the estimate from the sample of non-movers. Then, under the null of no attrition bias,
gN and gM+N are both consistent estimates of γ, but the latter is efficient, while under the
alternative of attrition bias, gM+N is consistent but gN is inconsistent. Thus, as desired, the test of
the null that (gM+N − gN) equals zero is a test of the null of no attrition bias. This is not quite the
usual Hausman set-up, in which the estimate that is efficient under the null is the one that is
inconsistent under the alternative. But the essential idea underlying such tests still applies−i.e.,

12

This closely parallels what Falaris and Peters (1998) call the “comparison method,” for obvious reasons.
See also Becketti, et al. (1988).

p. 13

that the covariance between an efficient estimator and its difference with respect to an inefficient
estimator, both of which are consistent under the null, is zero. However, this requires that the
estimate using M+N is efficient, so specification tests for heteroscedasticity must be
implemented and weighted least squares (WLS) used if necessary.
Of course, one could argue that if it is possible to recover from the SIPP data estimates
that do not exhibit attrition bias, research should just use the SIPP instead of matched CPS files.
In some cases, this is a reasonable position. But recall all of the advantages of the CPS relative
to the SIPP that were discussed earlier.
The discussion to this point has been in the context of one particular application, namely
the use of matched CPS files to study the effects of union status on wages. But the goal of this
research is to try to provide some general information, rather than simply improving on existing
estimates in one particular study. Therefore, these same methods will be applied to another
context, in particular the effects of marriage on wages of men (see, e.g., Korenman and
Neumark, 1991). Because address changes associated with marriage are likely and the effects of
marriage may be different for those who change address at the time of marriage, longitudinal
estimates of the marriage premium obtained only from a set of individuals without address
changes may be particularly prone to attrition bias.
These two applications were chosen because the changes on which they focus–changes in
jobs (which we assume often accompany changes in union status), and marital status transitions–
seem relatively likely to be associated with moving. Hence, they may provide estimates toward
the upper range of the effects of attrition bias in matched CPS samples, although that is only
speculation. As a consequence, if these applications as a whole yield little evidence of attrition
bias in matched CPS files, the combined evidence should prove relatively reassuring with respect
p. 14

to the use of these files. On the other hand, evidence of attrition bias would suggest caution in
drawing conclusions from matched CPS files, without attempting to verify, in the particular
context being studied, that attrition bias was unlikely to be a concern. If instead applications
were considered in which attrition bias was unlikely–on a priori grounds–to be a substantive
concern, the results would be relatively uninformative. Aside from this, the paper focuses on
applications for which matched CPS files have been used to address topics that have been of
broad interest to labor economists.
III.C. Prior Work on Attrition in Matched CPS Files and Other Panels
Previous research has looked at some evidence on the effects of non-matches in CPS
panels, although the emphasis has been different from that in the present study, and the analysis
more limited. Specifically, Peracchi and Welch (1995) consider the question of
representativeness of the cross-section and panel data sets resulting from matching CPS files,
using the March files from 1979 to 1991. For the analysis of cross-sectional files, they compare
matched and unmatched families or individuals. They do find some differences in terms of both
demographic characteristics and labor market outcomes. Their ability to study bias in the panel
files is more limited, of course, since they do not have longitudinal data on unmatched workers.
They study this question in two ways. First, they use bounds analysis treating this as a selection
problem; and, second, they use grouped data to obtain what the authors characterize as “indirect”
information about whether match failure creates any bias in these panels. Their findings suggest
that for the only transitions they study–those among labor force states–biases are small. While
this is a valuable contribution, in the absence of data on unmatched individuals or families the
evidence is suggestive but not decisive. The present study, by recovering data on unmatched
individuals or families, should be more informative and provide more direct evidence.
p. 15

Furthermore, the evidence will focus specifically on bias in the estimates of behavioral effects,
which differs from issues regarding representativeness of the samples.
Other recent research has studied attrition in conventional panels. MaCurdy, et al. (1998)
fully explore the role of attrition in the NLSY, focusing on its effects on representativeness of the
data. They also look at differences between those who attrit “permanently,” and those who attrit
temporarily (missing some waves of the survey but returning later). Similarly, Fitzgerald, et al.
(1998) study the changing representativeness of the PSID. The approach in the present study
differs from the approach taken in these papers by asking about the impact of attrition bias on
estimates of behavioral relationships.
Research by Falaris and Peters (1998) is closer to what we do. They use data from three
NLS cohorts and the PSID to examine how survey attrition affects estimates of models of
schooling choices. Falaris and Peters estimate regressions using data on (1) people who always
respond to the surveys (“stayers”); (2) people who miss some surveys but re-appear in later
waves (“intermittent” attriters); and (3) permanent attriters. They further subdivide their
subsamples of attriters into people who attrit after the observed behavior is measured (in this
case, after age 25), and people who attrit earlier, precluding measurement of this behavior unless
they are intermittent attriters. In their particular context, late attrition is much more common,
and more of it is permanent. Paralleling the estimation and testing of equation (5), they test
whether the same statistical model describes the behavior of stayers and different types of
attriters. Their findings focus on family background effects on schooling choices (highest grade
completed and age of school completion), for which they generally find little effect of attrition
on the model estimates. However, while similar in spirit, the work in this paper differs in two
important ways. First, the behaviors Falaris and Peters study, and the key explanatory variables,
p. 16

do not seem like obvious candidates for variables that are likely to be intimately related to
moving or other sources of attrition, although this is of course speculative. Second, in this study
we are most interested in the behavior that would otherwise emerge after the attrition. Falaris
and Peters can draw such inferences for the intermittent attriters, but it seems likely that this
group is most like the non-attriters, so it may not be surprising that they find relatively few
differences. Regardless of the substantive importance of these differences, the present study
differs fundamentally in focusing on matched CPS files−a potentially valuable alternative source
of panel data about which serious questions regarding attrition arise.
IV. Data Set Construction
The central question that determines whether our approach is informative is how well the
SIPP does at tracking movers. It would be ideal to track all movers, since in that case it would
be possible, in principle, to divide the SIPP sample into the two “ideal” subsamples–one
representing individuals or families that the CPS tracks, and one representing those individuals
and families that the CPS fails to track. This ideal goal cannot be achieved, but it is obviously
important to assess how close to it one can get with the SIPP, since the research will only be
informative if a reasonably high fraction of movers is tracked.
A second requirement for the SIPP analysis to be informative regarding non-matching in
the CPS is that this non-matching must be strongly related to moving, since this is the main
dimension on which the SIPP does better than the CPS. An early study of this question using
1979-1983 CPS data (for households) indicated that 42 percent of non-matched households are
movers; the next largest share is non-interviews (Pitts, 1988). The research by Peracchi and
Welch also suggests that moving is an important component of non-matching, concluding that
“the main source of attrition in the CPS is failure to follow people of college age in matched
p. 17

households and young households who move” (p. 160). The remainder of this subsection
describes the construction of the individual-level data sets–in particular the methods of following
individuals in the SIPP–and assesses the extent to which these conditions hold.
The original SIPP data sets were obtained from the Data Extraction System, which is
maintained by the U.S. Census Bureau on the Internet. The core files of the 1990, 1991, 1992,
and 1993 SIPP panels are used in this analysis. In each SIPP panel, respondents are surveyed
three times in a year (with each interview referred to as a wave), and the interview collects
information from respondents covering the previous four months, with most data available on a
monthly basis. The most common CPS files used in constructing panels from matched monthly
files are the ORG files, corresponding to the 4th and 16th months in the CPS sample, because
these months include information on labor market earnings; certainly these files would be used in
a CPS-based study of union- or marriage-related wage differentials. Thus, to use SIPP data
corresponding to the CPS data as closely as possible, attention was similarly restricted to data
from the 4th and 16th months of each of these four SIPP panels, using the first and fourth
interviews.
The SIPP data are used to try to identify individuals who would have attrited in the CPS
because of a change of address. Of course, there is also attrition in the SIPP, and it is of interest
to know the reasons for this attrition, because if a good deal of attrition in the SIPP is attributable
to changes of address, the SIPP data are less useful for the research. Thus, the first task is to
determine the reason for attrition in the SIPP panels. To discuss this, it is necessary first to
define some of the terms regarding data collection in the SIPP. Two data collection instruments
are used in the SIPP: a control card and a questionnaire. An interviewer uses a control card that

p. 18

is issued for each address unit throughout the longitudinal survey. A questionnaire is used to
collect the data, with a new questionnaire used for each interview.
The first step is to determine if a specific observation is interviewed in the specific
months used (months 4 and 16). Item 36B in the control card, which is coded for each interview
month, is used to determine interview status and, as noted above, corresponds to the address unit.
This same item also provides the reason for attrition. The codes for this item are given in Table
1.
In addition to these codes, the code 00 is assigned for an observation that is out of the
sample at the time of interview. Empirically, over the course of the panel, the code 00 is
observed following codes 02-06, 16, 22-26, and 01. It is not possible to assign the reason for
attrition for observations for which the code 01 is followed by 00, as these are cases in which
observations are dropped after an interview without a specific reason being provided. However,
in the other cases the reason for attrition can be identified. Specifically, the reason for attrition
between month 4 and month 16 can be ascertained by tabulating item 36B for each month
conditional on the code 00 for the next month, using the following algorithm:

1. Tabulate item 36B at month 16.
2. Tabulate item 36B at month 15 if item 36B at month 16 = 00.
3. Tabulate item 36B at month 14 if item 36B at month 16 = 00 and item 36B at month15=00.
…, until month 4 is reached.

This algorithm is used to identify the reason for attrition for the last month prior to the
code switching to 00. These reasons for attrition are grouped into the categories relevant for the
p. 19

research, as follows: category A−household did not move but cannot be contacted, corresponding
to item 36B codes 02-06; category B−deceased, out of country, corresponding to item 36B codes
16 and 23; and category C−household moved and cannot be contacted, corresponding to item
36B codes 22, 24, 25, and 26.
With these categories, the data can be broken down as follows. First, those who move
and are tracked by the SIPP can be classified straightforwardly as movers tracked by the data,
using the “address ID” that simply keeps track of the number of address changes of individuals
followed in the survey. On the other hand, observations in Category C are movers who are not
successfully tracked by the SIPP, while categories A and B include observations that attrit for
reasons unrelated to moving. The full classification of observations is reported in Table 2.
For each year, the table begins by reporting the number of observations in the sample by
the 4th month. In 1990, for example, there are 58,249 such persons, of whom 58,149 are
interviewed in the 4th month, which is our starting sample. Of these individuals, 50,504 are
interviewed in the 16th month, while 7,109 attrit, for an attrition rate of 12.2 percent. In addition,
for an additional 536 observations there is an individual identified in the SIPP as an interviewee
in month 16, but the demographic information on this individual does not match that in month 4,
leading us to discard these observations.
The fourth and fifth rows of the table present the critical information on how many of the
observations retained from month 4 to month 16 move. As the table shows, again focusing on
1990, 43,291 are non-movers and 7,213 are movers. The first sample is the one that “mimics”
the CPS, in that it loses all attriters, whether because of moves or other reasons. The overall
attrition rate from this sample−defining attriters as those who really attrit in the SIPP, plus the
movers who are tracked−is 24.6 percent ({7,213+7,109}/58,149), very similar to CPS attrition
p. 20

rates over the course of a 12-month period. The observations that are not followed in the SIPP
are then broken into the three categories described above, revealing that 3,800 attrit for reasons
unrelated to moving (categories A and B), while 2,474 attrit for reasons related to moving
(category C); 835 cannot be classified. The table also gives an indication of the reasons for
attrition related to moving. In just under two-thirds of the cases, the respondent has moved and
the address is unknown. In a handful of cases the address is known, but the address is within the
county yet outside the limit to which a SIPP interviewer will travel and the phone interview
failed.13 The “other” category includes the remaining cases (including, for example, moves
outside the county and outside the limit of a SIPP interviewer, for which a phone interview
failed).
These numbers indicate that of the 9,687 movers (7,213 of whom are followed, plus the
2,474 category C individuals), 75.3 percent are successfully followed in the SIPP. Comparable
numbers for 1991, 1992, and 1993 are, respectively, 72.9 percent, 75.0 percent, and 74.4
percent−figures that are quite robust. These percentages are central to this research. It is in
principle conceivable that attrition bias is more severe with respect to the movers that are not
tracked by the SIPP; while the research will not implement standard selection type corrections to
explore this question, it will compare observables for the tracked and non-tracked movers.
Nonetheless, it seems quite clear that recovering nearly three-quarters of the movers should give
a relatively firm idea of the extent of attrition bias from moving.
At the same time, in the estimation of equations (2) and (5) using the SIPP, the
observations for movers that are tracked by the SIPP are weighted up to represent the subsample
of attriters. For example, corresponding to the figures just cited, each observation is multiplied
13

According to the 1990 SIPP User’s Guide, only 4 percent of the population is outside this limit.

p. 21

by a weight of approximately 1.33 (1/.75). Otherwise the resulting estimates (of equation (2),
especially) would not represent the appropriately-weighted average of coefficients for nonmovers and movers. This assumes, of course, that whether a mover is tracked in the SIPP is
random.
The evidence in Table 2 demonstrates the feasibility of using the SIPP data at the
individual level to construct (1) data sets that mimic CPS panels constructed from matched
monthly CPS files, and (2) data sets that recover a substantial percentage of movers who are lost
in CPS-type matches. This offers considerable potential with regard to testing for attrition bias
in behavioral relationships estimated using matched CPS panels.
V. CPS-SIPP Matching Comparisons
In this section we assess whether the SIPP data are informative about biases from attrition
in economic relationships estimated with the CPS data. First, suppose (as assumed earlier) that
the SIPP captures all “would-be” attriters in the CPS. Then the artificial match using the SIPP
that mimics the CPS match–i.e., the match that throws out all movers–should have similar
features to the actual CPS match. In particular, the characteristics of those who are matched
should be similar across the two data sets, as should the characteristics of those who are not
matched.
Information useful in assessing how well these conditions hold in the individual data is
reported in Table 3. Columns (1)-(3) report results for the matched CPS data, for the same years
covered in the previous table.14 The first column reports descriptive statistics for the full set of

14

Details on the matching in the CPS, and the procedures chosen to maximize comparability between the
CPS and SIPP data, are given in the notes to the table. Madrian and Lefgren (forthcoming) compare the
performance of several methods of matching in the CPS and recommend the use of household number,
household ID, line number, race, sex, and age, based on tradeoffs between false matches and keeping the

p. 22

CPS observations (as of the first observation in the potential match), and the following two
columns break these out by those matched 12 months later, and those unmatched. Overall, the
match rate is 74.1 percent. Non-matched observations are more likely to be non-white (with the
proportion black higher by .035), and slightly less likely to be female (by .018). Non-matched
observations are considerably less likely to be married (by .19) and unionized (by .051). In
terms of education, the differences are less pronounced, with the proportions generally within .01
except for college graduates. Non-matched observations tend to be younger, especially within
the 15-30 age range. (These features of the data were very similar in each year of CPS data
used.) Finally, non-matched observations have hourly wages that are lower by about 16 percent,
consistent with lower rates of marriage and unionization, a higher proportion black, and younger
ages.
The next three columns ((4)-(6)) report comparable figures for the SIPP, first reporting
overall descriptive statistics, then those for the match that mimics the CPS, with descriptive
statistics for those who could not be followed plus the movers (the “CPS non-match”), and then
those who could be followed and did not move (the “CPS match”). The estimates indicate that
the CPS and SIPP display very similar characteristics. The descriptive statistics in column (1)
and column (4) match up quite closely. Furthermore, the CPS-type match based on the SIPP
data corresponds closely to the actual CPS match. The estimates in column (2) are similar to
those in column (5), while those in column (3) and similar to those in column (6). Finally, the
differences between those matched and not matched are similar, as revealed by a comparison of
the differences between columns (5) and (6) with the differences between columns (2) and (3).
In particular, columns (5) and (6) reveal that non-whites and women are less likely to be
match rate sufficiently high. The matching method employed for the CPS data in this paper is almost

p. 23

matched, by similar amounts to the differences between columns (2) and (3) (e.g., .030 vs. .035
for blacks, and .013 vs. .018 for women. Similarly, as with the actual CPS match, married
individuals are considerably less likely to be matched (.142, vs. .190 in the actual CPS match), as
are union members (.049 vs. .051). There are small differences by education, and again, as for
the actual CPS match, younger individuals are less likely to be matched, with the magnitudes of
the differentials similar across the artificial and actual CPS matches. As the last row shows,
there is also a similar wage gap (17 percent in this case).
While this appears to establish that the CPS-type match using the SIPP mimics the actual
CPS match well, the methods used in this study to estimate the effects of attrition bias rely on the
movers who can be followed in the SIPP being representative of the non-matches in the CPS.
Column (7) reports figures useful in assessing whether this holds, reporting descriptive statistics
for the movers who are followed in the SIPP. The ideal here would be for the numbers in
columns (7) and (2) to be similar. Even if this does not hold, it would be desirable for the
numbers in column (7) to be more like those in column (2) than in column (3), indicating that the
followed movers are more like the CPS attriters than the CPS non-attriters. These conditions
hold for the most part. The proportions black, native/Asian, married, and union members in
column (7) are relatively close to those in column (2), and certainly closer than they are to those
in column (3). The age distributions are also quite similar for the matched movers in the SIPP
and the non-matches in the CPS. With respect to wages, this condition holds quite closely, as the
average wage for matched movers is quite close to that for non-matches in the CPS. The only
variables for which the numbers in column (7) are closer to those in column (3) are the
proportion female and education, although for these variables the differences between the
identical to the method they recommend, except for the use of household number.

p. 24

matched and unmatched observations were relatively small in the first place.
Of course ultimately these conditions need to hold for the unobservables conditional on
the observables, rather than necessarily holding for the observables themselves. Since that is
impossible to test, all one can do is look at the observables. And even here, observables that
change over time cannot be measured for the attriters. In what sense, then, do comparisons of
distributions of some of the observables tell us something about the distributions of the
observables? Suppose we are estimating a generic regression using the CPS data

yi = xiβ + ηi ,

(6)

for the sample of non-attriters (Ai = 0). (This can be interpreted as our wage change regression.)
Because of attrition related to wage changes, it is possible that E(ηi|xi, Ai = 0) ≠ 0, which can
bias the estimates of β. The only way the sample of non-attriters gives us unbiased estimates is
if E(ηi|xi, Ai = 0) = E(ηi|xi) = 0, which we do not want to assume to be true.
However, our approach is informative if the CPS data and the CPS-match using the SIPP
data are representative of the same sample, and hence are expected to yield similar estimates, and
if the matched movers in the SIPP are representative of CPS attriters. For the first condition to
hold, we require that E(ηi|xi, Ai = 0) is the same in the two data sets (and that β is also the same).
For the matched movers in the SIPP to be representative of CPS attriters, we require that E(ηi|xi,
Ai = 1) is the same for CPS attriters and the matched movers.
All we can compare across the two data sets, though, are the conditional distributions of
xif|Ai = 1 and xif|Ai = 0, where the ‘f’ superscript indicates the subset of variables in x that are
fixed over time and hence fully observable for both attriters and non-attriters. If we are willing
p. 25

to assume that the joint distributions of the unobservables and the observables are identical in the
two data sets, then if the distributions of the observables in the two data sets are identical, the
distributions of the unobservables conditional on the observables are also identical. Note that
this discussion focuses on necessary but not sufficient conditions. In particular, we have not
examined whether the distributions referred to above are identical, but only the means. Also, we
have not examined the distributions of time-varying variables, which are observable only for
non-attriters. But we believe this brief discussion outlines what is implicitly in researchers’
minds when they look at distributions of the available observables to try to learn something
about representativeness of data sets selected on some characteristic or behavior.
VI. Assessing the Attrition Bias
VI.A. Union Wage Premium
Our first analysis focuses on the estimation of union wage premia using matched CPS
files. As a preliminary, Table 4 reports some information relevant to this analysis. The first
panel describes the sample construction, beginning with the matched samples (column (3) in
Table 3 for the CPS data, and columns (6) and (7) for the SIPP data). Focusing on those aged 16
and over reduces the sample by about one-quarter, and requiring employment in months 4 and
16, by private firms or government, reduces it by a bit more than half. The second panel reports
basic descriptive statistics. These are quite close in the two data sets, although some differences
are expected in part because the CPS data refer to a week while the SIPP data refer to a month,
and in part because of other slight differences in the surveys. The third panel first compares
transitions across union status in the two data sets, showing that changes are slightly more
common in the CPS. Finally, the last two rows ask whether, in terms of these transitions, movers
and non-movers in the SIPP look very different. The probabilities of changes in union status are
p. 26

virtually identical among non-movers and movers, despite our expectations that union status
changes would be associated with moving.
Table 5 reports the regression results. We begin in the first three columns by reporting
cross-section (OLS) and first-difference estimates using the matched CPS files. The crosssection estimate of the union wage premium is .160. The first-difference estimate is a good deal
lower, at .044. By way of comparison, Freeman (1984) reports a cross-sectional estimate of .19
and a longitudinal estimate of .09, using matched May CPS data for 1974 and 1975 (see his
Table 6), and Jakubson (1991) reports a cross-sectional estimate of .179 and a longitudinal
estimate of .080, using PSID data from 1976 to 1980. The specifications are not identical and
the years are different, but qualitatively the results are similar, although our longitudinal estimate
is below the estimates in these studies.
Next, to establish whether the SIPP data using the CPS match provide a good baseline,
the same specifications are reported in columns (4)-(6) using the SIPP data but excluding
matched movers. The estimates are uniformly higher by about .02 to .03, but otherwise the
pattern in going from OLS to first-difference estimates is the same.
The crux of the analysis comes in the remaining eight columns. Columns (7)-(10) report
the same set of estimates, but now using all of the matched SIPP data (i.e., adding in the matched
movers). The OLS estimates are very close to those using the SIPP match that mimics the CPS,
with the estimate of the union premium lower by a trivial .004. The first-difference estimates
differ by only .001 or .002. Similarly, the Hausman tests reported in columns (8)-(10) do not
indicate that there is attrition bias in the estimates using the CPS match with the SIPP data, in
turn suggesting that there is no serious bias from attrition in the longitudinal estimate of the
union premium using matched CPS files.
p. 27

Nonetheless, the slightly higher fixed effects estimate with the matched movers included
suggests that those individuals who move may experience greater gains to becoming union
members than the average individual. To explore this more fully, columns (11)-(14) report
estimates of the specification augmented to include a dummy variable for attriters (matched
movers), and more importantly an interaction between this dummy variable and the union
variable, paralleling equation (5) in the text. In this specification the union-attrition interaction
identifies the differential effect of changes in union status for those who move, as the attrition
variable is time-invariant. The first-difference estimates reveal that the estimated impact of
unionization is only slightly larger for attriters than for non-attriters, by .01, and the differential
is not significant. A downward bias in the non-mover sample–or equivalently larger effects for
attriters–is a reasonable expectation, for the same reasons discussed in relation to equations (1)(4) and Figure 1.
VI.B. Marriage Wage Premium for Men
Our second analysis focuses on the estimation of marriage premia for men using matched
CPS files. Table 6 parallels Table 4, providing descriptive statistics for the analysis sample. The
descriptive statistics are very similar across the CPS and SIPP samples. The bottom panel
compares marital status transitions across the two data sets, showing that changes are slightly
more common in the SIPP sample. Although the differences in levels are small, the relative
importance of the differences are not negligible; for example, only 2.67% of the CPS sample
experienced a transition, compared with 3.85% of the SIPP sample, and it is the subsamples of
changers that identify the marriage premium in the first-difference estimation. Finally, the last
rows of the table show the relationship between changes in marital status and moving. Here, the
differences are pronounced. In particular, 13.04% of movers changed marital status, compared
p. 28

with only 2.24% of non-movers. This difference clearly indicates that marriage or divorce is
likely to be associated with change of residence.
Table 7–which has the same structure as Table 5–reports the regression results. Looking
at the CPS data, in the first three columns the cross-sectional estimate of the marriage premium
is .142, while the fixed effects estimate is near zero and statistically insignificant.15 By way of
comparison, also looking at men Chun and Lee (2001) report a cross-sectional estimate of .117
using March CPS data from 1999 restricted to those aged 18 to 40, and Gray (1997) reports a
cross-sectional estimate of .058 and a fixed-effects estimate of .014 using NLSY79 data from
1989 to 1993, for those aged 24-34.
The estimation results using the SIPP data with the CPS match are reported in columns
(4)-(6). The results are almost identical to the results using the CPS sample. This assures that
the SIPP data with the CPS match serve well as a baseline to evaluate attrition bias. The key
results using the SIPP sample that includes the matched movers are reported in columns (7)-(14).
The cross-sectional estimate in column (7) is close to the estimate based on the SIPP data with
the CPS match (.146 vs. .156). However, the first-difference estimates, ranging from .014 to
.018, are a bit larger (and positive), although not statistically significant. The significance of the
difference in the estimates based on the SIPP data using the CPS match vs. the SIPP data with
the full match are formally tested using the Hausman test, and the equivalence of the estimates is
rejected at the 5% level in the FD estimates without weighting, and nearly rejected based on the
weighted estimates. The higher longitudinal first-difference estimates using the full match in the
15

These results suggest that the marriage premium found in the cross-sectional estimate is due to selection
rather than a productivity effect or discrimination. However, Korenman and Neumark (1991) note that if
the marriage premium grows over time (perhaps because marriage is associated with greater human
capital investment), we may find no effect of marriage in a short first difference, because the effective

p. 29

SIPP imply that the estimates based only on non-movers are subject to attrition bias that
understates the effects of marriage, which is, again, as expected. The finding of more evidence
of attrition bias in estimating marriage premia is not surprising if we remember (based on Table
6) that the probability of moving is much higher for those who change marital status.
Nonetheless, while the formal statistical test tends to point to attrition bias, the
longitudinal estimates using the CPS match vs. the full match are not substantively different,
suggesting that in this particular context, at least, the attrition bias we do find is not much of a
concern. For a closer examination of the attrition bias, the results reported in columns (11)-(14)
allow us to test the equivalence of the marriage premium between movers and non-movers. The
first-difference estimates indicate positive and marginally significant increases in wages for
workers who marry and move, compared with no effect (a relatively precise estimate of zero) for
non-movers.
The analysis of the marriage premium for males suggests that using matched CPS files to
obtain longitudinal estimates of this premium entails some risk of underestimating the premium,
due to attrition bias. However it is important to note that the large drops in the estimated
marriage premium from around 0.15 in the cross-sectional estimates to 0 to .02 in the
longitudinal estimates were found regardless of the sample used for estimation, and that the size
of the attrition bias, which is at most around .02, is small in comparison.
VII. Conclusion
While matching CPS panels is a popular means of forming panel data sets permitting
longitudinal estimation, because the CPS does not follow residential movers these panel data sets
suffer high attrition. This paper analyzes whether this attrition leads to bias in the longitudinal
change in years married is very small. They present evidence consistent with this latter explanation,

p. 30

estimation of some standard behavioral relationships in labor economics: the effects of unions on
wages; and the marriage wage premium for males. This question is explored using SIPP data to
first mimic the CPS by excluding all residential movers, and then exploiting the fact that the
SIPP successfully follows many movers to construct a data set with far less attrition. To the
extent that the SIPP panels including movers constitute a random sample of the population,
comparison of results using the “CPS-style” match with the SIPP, and using the full match,
should be informative regarding the extent of attrition bias in these estimated relationships.
Because the CPS and SIPP are very similar surveys aside from this difference in attrition due to
moving, this analysis of attrition bias in the SIPP should be informative about attrition bias in the
CPS.
The results for the longitudinal analysis of union wage effects reveal negligible and
statistically insignificant evidence of attrition bias despite the high attrition rate in the matched
CPS files. In contrast, the longitudinal analysis of the marriage premium for males finds
statistically significant attrition bias. The amount of bias, however, does not seem to be serious
in an economic sense.
There is no way to draw definitive conclusions about whether these results generalize to
other applications using matched CPS files. However, one point that is reassuring is that we
found little evidence of attrition bias even in a case where attrition was very strongly related to
the identifying information (changes in marital status). Thus, we regard the evidence as
suggesting that in many applications the advantages of using matched CPS panels to obtain
longitudinal estimates are likely to far outweigh the disadvantages from attrition biases, although
we should allow for the possibility that attrition bias leads the longitudinal estimates to be
although that is not the focus of this paper.

p. 31

understated.
In contrast, we suspect that attrition bias is likely to be more severe when the change in
the dependent variable caused by the change in the independent variable of interest largely
determines whether there is attrition in matched CPS panels. In such a case, a healthy suspicion
of attrition bias is probably warranted, and it may be possible to use the data and methods we
have proposed in this paper to assess the extent of attrition bias.

p. 32

References
Adams, Scott, and David Neumark. 2000. “Do Living Wage Ordinances Reduce Urban
Poverty?” NBER Working Paper No. 7606.
Becketti, Sean, William Gould, Lee Lillard, and Finis Welch. 1988. “The Panel Study of Income
Dynamics after Fourteen Years: An Evaluation.” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 6, No. 4, pp.
472-92.
Bureau of the Census. 1997. CPS Technical Paper 63: Design & Methodology (Washington, DC:
U.S. Bureau of the Census).
Citro, Constance F., and Graham Kalton. 1993. The Future of the Survey of Income and
Program Participation (Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press).
Chun, Hyunbae, and Injae Lee. 2001. “Why Do Married Men Earn More: Productivity or
Marriage Selection?” Economic Inquiry, Vol. 39, No. 2, April, pp. 307-19.
Coder, John, and Lydia Scoon-Rogers. 1996. “Evaluating the Quality of Income Data Collected
in the Annual Supplement to the March Current Population Survey and the Survey of Income
and Program Participation.” U.S. Bureau of the Census.
Duleep, Harriet Orcutt, and Mark C. Regets. 1997. “Measuring Immigrant Wage Growth Using
Matched CPS Files.” Demography, Vol. 34, No. 2, May, pp. 239-49.
Falaris, Evangelos M., and H. Elizabeth Peters. 1998. “Survey Attrition and Schooling Choices.”
Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 33, No. 2, Spring, pp. 531-54.
Fitzgerald, John, Peter Gottschalk, and Robert Moffitt. 1998. “An Analysis of Sample Attrition
in Panel Data.” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 33, No. 2, pp. 251-99.
Freeman, Richard B. 1984. “Longitudinal Analyses of the Effects of Trade Unions.” Journal of
Labor Economics, Vol. 2, No. 1, January, pp. 1-26.
Gray, Jeffrey S. 1997. “The Fall in Men’s Return to Marriage: Declining Productivity Effects or
Changing Selection?” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 32, No. 3, Summer, pp. 481-504.
Gittleman, Maury, and Mary Joyce. 1996. “Earnings Mobility and Long-Run Inequality: An
Analysis Using Matched CPS Data.” Industrial Relations, Vol. 35, No. 2, April, pp. 180-96.
Goldberg, Linda, Joseph Tracy, and Stephanie Aaronson. 1999. “Exchange Rates and
Employment Instability: Evidence from Matched CPS Data.” American Economic Review, Vol.
89, No. 2, May, pp. 204-10.
Heckman, James J. 1979. “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error.” Econometrica, Vol.
47, No. 1, January, pp. 153-61.
p. 33

Heckman, James J. 1974. “Shadow Prices, Market Wages, and Labor Supply.” Econometrica,
Vol. 42, No. 4, July, pp. 679-94.
Hofferth, Sandra L., Wei-Jun J. Yeung, and Frank P. Stafford. 1996. “Panel Study of Income
Dynamics.” ICPSR, February.
Jakubson, George. 1991. “Estimation and Testing of the Union Wage Effect Using Panel Data.”
Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 58, No. 5, October, pp. 971-91.
Korenman, Sanders, and David Neumark. 1991. “Does Marriage Really Make Men More
Productive?” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 26, No. 2, Spring, pp. 282-307.
Macpherson, David A., and Barry T. Hirsch. 1995. “Wages and Gender Composition: Why Do
Women's Jobs Pay Less?” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 13, No. 3, July, pp. 426-71.
Mack, Stephen, and Rita Petroni. 1994. “Overview of SIPP Nonresponse Research.” U.S. Bureau
of the Census.
MaCurdy, Thomas, Thomas Mroz, and R. Mark Gritz. 1998. “An Evaluation of the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth.” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 33, No. 2, Spring, pp. 346436.
Madrian, C. Brigitte, and Lars J. Lefgren. “A Note on Longitudinally Matching Current
Population Survey (CPS) Respondents.” Forthcoming in Journal of Economic and Social
Measurement.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2001. “Using the EITC to Increase Family Earnings:
New Evidence and a Comparison with the Minimum Wage.” National Tax Journal, Vol. LIV,
No. 2, June, pp. 281-317.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 1996. “The Effects of Minimum Wages on Teenage
Employment and Enrollment: Estimates from Matched CPS Data.” Research in Labor
Economics, Vol. 15, pp. 25-63.
Neumark, David, Mark Schweitzer, and William Wascher. 1998. “The Effects of Minimum
Wages on the Distribution of Family Incomes: A Non-Parametric Analysis.” NBER Working
Paper No. 6536.
Olsen, Randall J. 1980. “A Least Squares Correction for Selectivity Bias.” Econometrica, Vol.
48, No. 7, November, pp. 1815-20.
Pitts, A. 1988. “Matching Adjacent Years of the Current Population Survey.” Mimeograph,
Unicon Research Corporation, Santa Monica, CA.

p. 34

Peracchi, Franco, and Finis Welch. 1995. “How Representative Are Matched Cross-Sections?
Evidence from the Current Population Survey.” Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 68, No. 1, July,
pp. 153-79.
Rhoton, Patricia. 1984. “Attrition and The National Longitudinal Surveys of Labor Market
Experience: Avoidance, Control and Correction.” Center for Human Resource Research, The
Ohio State University.
Schumacher, Edward J. 1997. “Relative Wages and Exit Behavior among Registered Nurses.”
Journal of Labor Research, Vol. 18, No. 4, Fall, pp. 581-92.
Shippen, Ben S. 1999. “Unmeasured Skills in Inter-industry Wage Differentials: Evidence from
the Apparel Industry.” Journal of Labor Research, Vol. 20, No. 1, Winter, pp. 161-69.
Welch, Finis. 1993. “Matching the Current Population Surveys.” In Joseph Hilbe, Editor, Stata
Technical
Bulletin Reprints, Volume 2 (Santa Monica, CA: Computing Resource Center), pp. 34-40.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2000. Introductory Econometrics (Cincinnati, OH: South Western
College Publishing).
Zagorsky, Jay, and Pat Rhoton. 1999. “Attrition and the National Longitudinal Surveys’ Women
Cohorts.” Center for Human Resource Research, The Ohio State University.

p. 35

01
02
03
04
05
06
09
10
11
12
13
14
15

Table 1: Codes for SIPP Item 36B
Interviewed
16
Entire household institutionalized
No one home
17
Demolished
Temporarily absent
18
House or trailer moved
Refused
19
Converted to permanent business
Unable to locate
20
Merged
Other Type A
21
Condemned
Vacant
22
Deleted (sample adjustment, error)
Occupied by persons with usual residence
23
Entire household deceased, moved
elsewhere
24
Moved, address unknown
Unfit or to be demolished
25
Moved within a county beyond limit (cannot
be reached by telephone)
Under construction, not ready
Converted to temporary business
26
All sample persons re-listed on new control
card
Unoccupied site for mobile home
Permit granted, construction not started

Table 2: Classification of Individual Data by Moving and Attrition Status
Year
1990
1991
1992
1993
Entered sample by 4th month
58249
37478
51380
52092
58149
37424
51235
51995
Interviewed at 4th month
Interviewed at 16th month, given
interviewed at 4th month (SIPP match):

All years
199199
198803

50504

32281

45042

45511

173338

Non-movers1 (“CPS sample”)
Movers

43291
7213

27863
4418

38682
6360

39172
6339

149008
24330

Month 4 to month 16 attriters:

7109

4836

5753

6068

23766

3800

2613

2918

3281

12612

149
164
2839
9
131

122
91
2028
3
87

102
148
2194
5
95

168
206
2427
0
81

541
609
9488
17
394

508
2474

282
1644

374
2123

399
2176

1563
8417

1582

1068

1473

1574

5697

68
824
835

68
508
579

47
603
712

54
548
611

237
2483
2737

Attrition not related to moving
No interview, Type A (HH not moved but
can’t be contacted):
No one home
Temporarily absent
Refusal
Unable to locate
Other
No interview, Type B (deceased, out of
country), entire household out-of-scope
Attrition related to moving
No interview, Type C (HH moved and
can’t be contacted):
Moved, address unknown
Moved within county beyond limit
(phone interview failed)
Other
The reason cannot be assigned2

Inconsistent match based on demographic
536
307
440
416
1699
information:
1. When an observation’s address code is not changed but the state code is changed, the observation is
treated as a non-mover (45 cases in pooled sample).
2. Coded as not matched or not in sample by 16th month; reason cannot be determined.

Data source
Interviewed and
information for
matching available

Table 3: CPS and SIPP Match Comparisons, Individual Data, All Years Pooled
CPS
SIPP
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
293332

(7)

198803

Total
293332

Nonmatch
76087

Match
217245

Total
198803

Non-match + movers
(CPS non-match)
49795

Non-movers
(CPS match)
149008

Matched
movers
24330

0.106
0.042
0.520

0.132
0.052
0.506

0.097
0.038
0.524

0.123
0.039
0.519

0.146
0.047
0.510

0.116
0.037
0.523

0.122
0.047
0.523

Married

0.557
[226227]

0.415
[56947]

0.605
[169280]

0.559
[151759]

0.452
[37277]

0.594
[114482]

0.448
[17572]

Union

0.162
[118108]

0.124
[31174]

0.175
[86929]

0.157
[85510]

0.122
[22586]

0.171
[62924]

0.110
[11944]

HS drop out
HS graduate
Some college
College graduate

0.223
0.362
0.221
0.195
[225663]

0.231
0.359
0.228
0.182
[56773]

0.220
0.363
0.218
0.199
[168890]

0.254
0.359
0.192
0.190
[151974]

0.263
0.357
0.201
0.179
[37326]

0.258
0.360
0.189
0.193
[149008]

0.231
0.340
0.218
0.211
[17601]

0.229
0.121
0.109
0.118
0.176
0.113
0.089
0.045

0.251
0.180
0.162
0.122
0.136
0.068
0.047
0.034

0.221
0.100
0.091
0.116
0.190
0.129
0.104
0.049

0.236
0.123
0.112
0.119
0.173
0.110
0.085
0.042

0.251
0.171
0.170
0.124
0.131
0.070
0.049
0.032

0.232
0.107
0.092
0.117
0.187
0.123
0.097
0.045

0.278
0.185
0.201
0.133
0.119
0.049
0.024
0.011

Observations
N
Descriptive
statistics
Black
Native/Asian
Female

Age 0-14
Age 15-23
Age 24-30
Age 31-37
Age 38-50
Age 51-63
Age 64-75
Age 76-90

Hourly rate
11.023
9.846
11.446
10.992
9.752
11.435
9.736
of pay (calculated)
[118103]
[31174]
[86929]
[83928]
[22078]
[61850]
[11688]
CPS data are from 1990-1991, 1991-1992, 1992-1993, and 1993-1994 matches, based on Outgoing Rotation Group files. Data
from the 4th and 16th months in the SIPP surveys from the 1990, 1991, 1992, and 1993 panels are used, to correspond to the CPS
data. There are four rotation groups (sub-panels of a particular panel) in the SIPP, and the fourth months for these fall in
February, March, April, and January for rotation groups 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively. Thus, CPS data from January through April
were used to be consistent with interview months of the SIPP sample. CPS matching was based on household identification
number, line number (individual identifier within household transcribed by interviewer), race, sex, and age. If an observation had
a missing value for any of these variables, it was dropped. Individuals are allowed to age 0 to 2 years between interviews. These
procedures follow Peracchi and Welch (1995). Non-unique matches (10 in 1993 and 20 in 1994) were, however, classified as
non-matches, with no further effort made to match these observations (in contrast to Peracchi and Welch, 1995). Characteristics
are those reported in the 4th month of survey. Variable definitions are as follows: married equals 1 if an individual is married and
spouse is present, 0 otherwise; and union equals 1 if an individual is a union member, 0 otherwise. In some cases the number of
observations used to calculate statistics are in square brackets under the statistics. The numbers of observations are reduced for
marital status and education because the marriage and education questions are only asked for those over age 15, and for the
education question there is additional missing information. The sample universe for the union membership question is those
employed in private or government sectors. In neither data set are matches ever based on data known to be allocated.

Table 4: Union Wage Premium Analysis, Sample Details and Descriptive Statistics
SIPP sample
CPS sample
Sample construction
Total matched observations
Age>=16
Employed at both month 4 and 16
Employed by private firms or government
Wage is available for both month 4 and 16
Union membership status is available for both month 4 and 16
All explanatory variables for wage regression are available
CPS match
Matched movers

217245
166239
90937
76579
76165
76165
76005
-

173338
129528
73309
63139
61882
61882
61882
52694
9188

Descriptive statistics
Union
Hourly rate of pay (calculated)
Hours worked per week
Weekly earnings
Monthly earnings
Weeks worked in a month

0.208
11.68
38.71
475
-

0.193
11.55
39.17
1993
4.285

Union transitions (%)
Not covered - not covered
Not covered - covered
Covered - not covered
Covered - covered

74.53
4.68
4.22
16.57

76.88
3.86
4.25
15.01

Non-movers
Movers
No change in union status
91.89
91.88
Change in union status
8.11
8.12
Weeks worked in a month in the SIPP is reported in integer values. Thus, reported values are either rounded up or down if
workers worked a fraction of a week. Over-frequent rounding downward by interviewees may have made the calculated hourly
rate of pay higher for the SIPP sample.

5.352
(0.011)
Yes

-

0.160
(0.003)
0.098
(0.001)
0.036
(0.000)
-0.059
(0.001)
-0.104
(0.005)
-0.261
(0.003)
-

(1)
OLS

-

-

-

-

0.001
(0.003)
-0.032
(0.006)
-

0.044
(0.005)
-

CPS
(2)
FD

-

-

-

-

0.001
(0.003)
-0.030
(0.004)
-

(3)
FD
WLS1
0.045
(0.005)
-

5.435
(0.015)
Yes

-

-

5.405
(0.014)
Yes

-

-

-

Table 5: Union Wage Premium Regression Estimates
SIPP, CPS match
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
OLS
FD
FD
OLS
FD
FD
WLS1
WLS1
0.185
0.071
0.074
0.181
0.072
0.075
(0.004)
(0.008)
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.007)
(0.006)
0.090
0.091
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.035
0.011
0.010
0.036
0.013
0.010
(0.001)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.000)
(0.008)
(0.007)
-0.057
-0.027
-0.024
-0.057
-0.031
-0.029
(0.001)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.001)
(0.036)
(0.003)
-0.116
-0.118
(0.006)
(0.006)
-0.262
-0.252
(0.004)
(0.004)
SIPP
(10)
(11)
FD
OLS
WLS2
0.076
0.188
(0.006)
(0.004)
0.091
(0.001)
0.011
0.035
(0.007)
(0.001)
-0.030
-0.057
(0.003)
(0.001)
-0.118
(0.006)
-0.252
(0.004)
-0.045
(0.018)
-0.011
(0.012)
-5.412
(0.014)
Yes
Yes
0.010
(0.017)
-

-

-

0.036
(0.002)
-0.032
(0.004)
-

0.071
(0.006)
-

(12)
FD

0.013
(0.016)
-

-

-

0.009
(0.007)
-0.029
(0.004)
-

(13)
FD
WLS1
0.075
(0.006)
-

0.013
(0.008)
-

-

-

0.008
(0.007)
-0.029
(0.004)
-

(14)
FD
WLS2
0.075
(0.006)
-

Year and month
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
dummy variables
Test of hetero4.46
4.09
3.52
3.81
scedasticity
(<0.01)
(<0.01)
(<0.01)
(<0.01)
(p-value)
Hausman test
0.113
0.303
0.583
Observations
76005
76005
76005
52694
52694
52694
61882
61882
61882
61882
61882
61882
61882
61882
0.350
0.321
0.325
0.321
R2
FD and FD WLS denote first-difference and first-difference weighted least squares. For each first-difference estimation, a test for heteroscedasticity was implemented through a
regression of the squared residual on the predicted dependent variable and its square. The results from this auxiliary regression were used to obtain the weight used in standard
weighted least squares (WLS1), in particular, the inverse of the square root of the predicted variance (see Wooldridge, 2000, pp. 259-60). In WLS2, the underrepresentation of movers
because of attrition related to moving is corrected through up-weighting observations on movers by the factor 1.346; since the number of matched movers is 24330 and there are 8417
attriters due to moving, each matched mover represents 1.346 such attriters ({24330 + 8417}/24330). Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Standard errors of OLS estimates are
robust against individual clustering. Union is the dummy for union coverage. Experience is potential experience. The number of observations reported is twice the number of
individuals in the data set. In columns (11)-(14) all variables shown in the table are interacted with the dummy variable for move, to ensure that the coefficient on Union×Move does
not reflect differences in other coefficients; without these additional interactions, though, the results for Union×Move were nearly identical. The Hausman test is calculated for the
single variable “Union,” using the formula H=(gcps-gsipp)2/(Var(gcps)-Var(gsipp)), where gcps and gsipp are the estimated coefficients of union using the SIPP (CPS match) and the full SIPP
match. The reported test statistic has a χ2 distribution with 1 degree of freedom; the 5% critical value is 3.84.

Constant

Union×Move

Move

Female

Black

Experience2/100

Experience

Education

Union

Data source

Table 6: Male Marriage Premium Analysis, Sample Details and Descriptive Statistics
SIPP sample
CPS sample
Sample construction
Total matched observations
103325
82735
Age>=16
77231
60260
Employed at both month 4 and 16
48498
39367
Employed by private firms or government
38707
32409
Wage is available for both month 4 and 16
38451
31752
Marital status is available for both month 4 and 16
38451
31752
All explanatory variables for wage regression are available
38355
31752
CPS match
27022
Matched movers
4730
Descriptive statistics
Married
Hourly rate of pay (calculated)
Hours worked per week
Weekly earnings
Monthly earnings
Weeks worked in a month

0.699
1340
41.44
573
-

0.664
1317
42.08
2410
4.286

Marriage transitions (%)
Not married - not married
Not married – married
Married - not married
Married - married

28.48
1.60
1.07
68.85

31.11
2.44
1.41
65.04

No change in marital status
Change in marital status
See notes to Table 4. Married is the dummy variable for married and spouse present.

Non-movers
97.76
2.24

Movers
86.96
13.04

5.327
(0.015)
Yes

-

0.142
(0.005)
0.090
(0.001)
0.043
(0.001)
-0.069
(0.001)
-0.140
(0.008)
-

(1)
OLS

-

-

-

0.002
(0.004)
-0.041
(0.008)
-

-0.003
(0.013)
-

CPS
(2)
FD

-

-

-

-0.000
(0.004)
-0.035
(0.006)
-

-0.002
(0.013)
-

(3)
FD
WLS

5.385
(0.019)
Yes

-

0.156
(0.007)
0.083
(0.001)
0.041
(0.001)
-0.065
(0.002)
-0.156
(0.009)
-

-

-

-

0.006
(0.011)
-0.025
(0.006)
-

-0.006
(0.018)
-

-

-

-

0.006
(0.018)
-0.020
(0.005)
-

-0.007
(0.018)
-

5.368
(0.018)
Yes

-

0.146
(0.006)
0.084
(0.001)
0.042
(0.001)
-0.066
(0.002)
-0.159
(0.009)
-

-

-

-

0.013
(0.010)
-0.033
(0.005)
-

0.018
(0.012)
-

-

-

-

0.011
(0.011)
-0.029
(0.005)
-

0.014
(0.013)
-

Table 7: Male Marriage Wage Premium Regression Estimates
SIPP, CPS match
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
OLS
FD
FD
OLS
FD
FD
WLS1
WLS1

-

-

-

0.013
(0.011)
-0.030
(0.005)
-

0.016
(0.013)
-

0.149
(0.006)
0.084
(0.001)
0.041
(0.001)
-0.065
(0.002)
-0.159
(0.009)
-0.010
(0.028)
-0.056
(0.014)
5.376
(0.018)
Yes

SIPP
(10)
(11)
FD
OLS
WLS2

0.049
(0.024)
-

-

0.011
(0.010)
-0.031
(0.005)
-

0.005
(0.014)
-

(12)
FD

0.040
(0.026)
-

-

0.009
(0.011)
-0.028
(0.005)
-

-0.000
(0.015)
-

(13)
FD
WLS1

0.037
(0.025)
-

-

0.010
(0.011)
-0.028
(0.005)
-

-0.000
(0.015)
-

(14)
FD
WLS2

Year and month
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
dummy
variables
Test of hetero3.07
3.60
2.93
1.89
scedasiticity
(<0.01)
(<0.01)
(<0.01)
(0.016)
(p-value)
Hausman test
4.877
3.165
3.473
Observations
76710
76710
76710
54044
54044
54044
63504
63504
63504
63504
63504
63504
63504
63504
0.341
0.310
0.313
0.313
R2
See notes to Tables 5 and 6. In columns (11)-(14) all variables shown in the table are interacted with the dummy variable for move, to ensure that the coefficient on Married×Move
does not reflect differences in other coefficients; without these additional interactions, though, the results for Married×Move were nearly identical. The Hausman test is calculated for
the single variable “Married.”

Constant

Married×Move

Move

Black

Experience2/100

Experience

Education

Married

Data source

Figure 1: Diagrammatic Illustration of Attrition Bias
∆lw = α ∆ U + ∆ ε , α > 0 , Cov (∆U, ∆ε) = 0
Case 1

Attrition more likely if ∆lw is low

attrit if ∆ U = −1
attrit if ∆ U = 0

f (∆ ε)

attrit if ∆ U = 1

−

0
⇒

Case 2

+

∆ε

Cov (∆U, ∆ε | Non - Attrition) < 0

Attrition more likely if ∆lw is high

attrit if ∆ U = 1

f (∆ ε)

attrit if ∆ U = 0
attrit if ∆ U = −1

−

0
⇒

Cov (∆U, ∆ε | Non - Attrition) < 0

+

∆ε

