                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT AND THE OPERATIONS OF MULTINATIONAL
                   FIRMS: CONCEPTS, HISTORY, AND DATA


                                            Robert E. Lipsey


                                          Working Paper 8665
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8665


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2001




This paper was prepared for the Handbook of International Trade, edited by James Harrigan, to be published
by Blackwell. I am indebted for comments and suggestions to James Harrigan and other members of the
National Bureau’s International Trade and Investment program and to Ned Howenstine and Obie Whichard
of the Bureau of Economic Analysis of the U.S. Department of Commerce. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Robert E. Lipsey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Foreign Direct Investment and the Operations of Multinational Firms:
Concepts, History, and Data
Robert E. Lipsey
NBER Working Paper No. 8665
December 2001
JEL No. F21, F23



                                               ABSTRACT

        The concept and measurement of foreign direct investment have changed over time, and what is
measured by balance of payments flows and stocks is quite different from what is implied by theories of
direct investment. The industrial distribution of stocks of FDI, the most widely available measure, is only
poorly related to the distribution of FDI production, and changes in stocks are poorly related to changes
in production.
        FDI flows have grown in importance relative to other forms of international capital flows, and
the resulting production has increased as a share of world output, but it was still only about 8 per cent at
the end of the 20th Century. The United States began its role as a foreign direct investor in the late 19th
Century, while it was still a net importer of capital. It became the dominant supplier of direct investment
to the rest of the world, accounting for about half of the world’s stock in 1960. Since then, other countries
have become major direct investors. The U.S. share is now less than a quarter of the world total and the
United States has become a major recipient of FDI from other countries.




Robert E. Lipsey
National Bureau of Economic Research
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor, Suite 5318
New York, NY 10016-4309
(212) 817-7961
rlipsey@gc.cuny.edu
1. Introduction

The term “Foreign Direct Investment,” or “FDI,” encompasses two related but different sets of

topics or activities, explained by different theories and by different branches of economics. The

first might be referred to as the international finance, or macro, view. The second might be

referred to as the industrial organization, or micro, view.

        The macro view sees FDI as a particular form of the flow of capital across national

borders, from home countries to host countries, measured in Balance of Payments Statistics.

Those flows give rise to a particular form of stocks of capital in host countries, namely the value

of home country investment in entities, typically corporations, controlled by a home country

owner, or in which a home country owner holds a certain share of voting rights. The variables of

interest are the flow of financial capital, the value of the stock of capital that is accumulated by

the investing firms, and the flows of income from the investments.

        The micro view tries to explain the motivations for investment in controlled foreign

operations, from the viewpoint of the investor. It also examines the consequences to the

investor, and to home and host countries, of the operations of the multinationals or of the

affiliates created by these investments, rather than the size of the flows or the value of the

investment stocks or investment position. These consequences arise from their trade,

employment, production, and their flows and stocks of intellectual capital, unmeasured by the

capital flows and stocks in the balance of payments, although some proxies for the flow of

intellectual capital are part of the current account. These motivations and consequences are

intrinsically related to the investing firms’ control of the affiliates and the ability of the

multinationals to coordinate the activities of parents and affiliates.




                                                                                                 1
       The micro view is the older one, preceding interest in direct investment as a form of

capital flow. It was reflected in concerns about the consequences of foreign control for the host

economy, represented by book titles such as The American Invaders, (1901), or The American

Invasion (1902), two of the earliest titles listed by Wilkins (1970). It was also reflected in one of

the earliest research studies of U.S. direct investment, which attempted to explain the

motivations behind firms’ expansion into foreign countries (Southard, 1931).

2. Concepts of Foreign Direct Investment

What is a Foreign Direct Investment Entity?

Firms and individuals have many different possible ways of holding assets in foreign countries.

Which of these are considered direct investment and which firms are considered multinational

enterprises depends on the definition of a “foreign direct investment entity”.

       What constitutes a foreign direct investment entity has been defined differently for

balance of payments purposes and for studies of firm behavior. It has also been defined in

different ways by different countries and the definition has changed over time. The definition of

foreign direct investment as a capital flow and a capital stock has changed correspondingly.

       The dominant current definition of a direct investment entity, prescribed for balance-of-

payments compilations by the International Monetary Fund (1993), and endorsed by the OECD

(1996), avoids the notion of control by the investor in favor of a much vaguer concept. “Direct

investment is the category of international investment that reflects the objective of a resident

entity in one economy obtaining a lasting interest in an enterprise resident in another economy.

(The resident entity is the direct investor and the enterprise is the direct investment enterprise).

The lasting interest implies the existence of a long-term relationship between the direct investor




                                                                                                   2
and the enterprise and a significant degree of influence by the investor on the management of the

enterprise” (IMF,1993, p 86).

       While the concept is vague, the recommended implementation is specific. “… a direct

investment enterprise is defined in this Manual as an incorporated or unincorporated enterprise

in which a direct investor, who is resident in another economy, owns 10 % or more of the

ordinary shares or voting power (for an incorporated enterprise) or the equivalent (for an

unincorporated enterprise) (IMF, 1993, p. 86).

       The IMF definition is governing for balance-of-payments compilations, but there is a

different, but related, concept and a different official definition in the United Nations System of

National Accounts, the rule book for compiling national income and product accounts, that

retains the idea of control, and reflects the micro view more. In these accounts, which measure

production, consumption, and investment, rather than the details of capital flows, there is a

definition of “foreign-controlled resident corporations.”   Foreign-controlled enterprises include

subsidiaries more than 50 % owned by a foreign parent. “Associates” of which foreign

ownership of equity is 10-50 %, “…may be included or excluded by individual countries

according to their qualitative assessment of foreign control…” (Inter-Secretariat Working Group

on National Accounts, 1993, pp. 340-341). Thus, from the viewpoint of a host country, and for

analyzing production, trade, and employment, control remains the preferred concept.

       In the United States, the first official survey of outward direct investment, conducted by

the U.S. Department of Commerce for the end of 1929, sought to measure “…the amount of

capital involved in the extension of American enterprise into foreign countries…” (U.S.

Department of Commerce, 1930, p. 1). In that survey, “Foreign ‘direct investments,’ as herein

considered, include those commercial and industrial properties situated abroad and belonging to



                                                                                                3
residents of the United States and its Territories, from which a return is normally expected. They

are called ‘direct investments’ to distinguish them from ‘portfolio investments’ acquired through

the purchase of foreign securities publicly offered and through the international securities

movement; by definition, therefore, pure ‘interest capital’ and capital that moves incidental to a

migration of labor are, in large part, excluded. Investments of the ‘portfolio’ type are included

when they are a part of the holding of American commercial and industrial corporations. Pure

‘interest’ capital is included when invested in American-controlled corporations operating

abroad” (ibid), pp. 1-2). The survey asked U.S. companies for the value of “…investments in

lands, buildings, factories, public utilities, warehouses, shops, stocks of goods, wharves, marine

equipment, and other property in foreign countries… that are owned in whole or in part by your

company or by an affiliated or subsidiary corporation.” (ibid, p. 51).

       The next survey, for 1936, again emphasized the interest in “the international extensions

of American business enterprise” ( U.S. Department of Commerce, 1938, p.2). The control

aspect of the definition was made more explicit, referring to “…those foreign corporations or

enterprises which are controlled by a person or small group of persons (corporate or natural)

domiciled in the United States, or in which such person or group has an important voice ….The

factor of control has been purposely emphasized in the definition, since it is considered to be the

most significant basis for classifying investments. However, no hard and fast quantitative

measurement of control has been devised. Minority interests have been included in these data in

considerable number and volume. The reason, of course, is that the degree of control is not

measured exactly by the percentage of common stock held. In no case has an investment holding

of less than 10 % been included in this category, and interests of less than 20 % are few in

number and small in value…” (ibid, pp. 2-3). It was later emphasized that using a 50 % criterion



                                                                                                4
“…would be to miss its qualitative aspect…the quantitative basis fails to measure accurately the

vital ties and connections between American and foreign corporations. The qualitative measure

may also lead one into some errors because it is difficult to gage the force of character and

leadership of the individuals associated with the enterprises…” (ibid, p. 45).

       The outward survey for 1950 ( U.S. Department of Commerce, 1953) provided a more

precise definition, covering four categories of FDI:

       1. “Foreign corporations, the voting securities of which were owned to the extent of

           25% or more by persons or groups of affiliated persons, ordinarily resident in the

           United States.”

       2. “Foreign corporations, the voting stock of which was publicly held within the United

           States to an aggregate of 50 % or more, but distributed among stockholders, so that

           no investor, or group of affiliated investors, owned as much as 25 %.”

       3. “Sole proprietorships, partnerships, or real property (other than property held for the

           personal use of the owner) held abroad by residents of the United States.”

       4. “Foreign branches of United States corporations.”

By this time the Department had moved away from criteria requiring judgments as to degree of

control toward those that could be implemented mechanically, perhaps because the number of

firms involved had become too large for handicraft judgments. However, the idea behind the

definition still stressed control and the thought that control was a determinant of behavior.

       In recent years, the U.S. Department of Commerce has followed what are now the IMF

guidelines. The latest inward direct investment benchmark survey defines direct investment in

those terms and uses the 10 % criterion. In contrast to the 1950 rules, the survey publication

states that “Direct investment refers to ownership by a single person, not to the combined



                                                                                                 5
ownership of all the persons in a country” (U.S. Department of Commerce, 2001, p. M-4).

However, “person” is fairly broadly defined, to encompass various types of organizations and

even “associated groups.” The latter are “…two or more persons who exercise their voting

privileges in a concerted manner – by the appearance of their actions, by agreement, or by an

understanding – in order to influence the management of a business enterprise ( idem). Thus, a

little leeway seems to be left for the collectors of data, beyond the 10 % criterion, to interpret the

idea of influence.

       The abandonment of the idea of control is not the only respect in which the measures of

direct investment depart from the theoretical models of the phenomenon. A single “direct

investment enterprise” can be part of several different multinational firms, possibly from several

countries. Duplication is avoided in investment flow and stock data by allocating the financial

aggregates of an affiliate to the various owners according to the extent of their ownership. In this

respect, the concerns of the producers of the balance of payments have come to outweigh those

of the analysts of firm behavior.

       Another respect in which this seems to be the case, again related to balance-of-payments

definitions, is that the residence of a transactor, rather than of the ultimate owner, determines its

nationality. Thus, a firm incorporated in the United States that owns an affiliate or affiliates

outside the country, is classified as a U.S. parent company even if it is controlled by a foreign

firm. For that reason, a U.S. firm could be identified as both a U.S. parent and a U.S. affiliate of

a foreign firm. In 1994, U.S. parents “…that were ultimately controlled by a foreign parents

accounted for …11 % of the assets and for 14 % of the sales of all U.S. parents (U.S. Department

of Commerce, 1998a, p. M-7, footnote 8). If nationality is a determinant of firm behavior or,

probably more important, if status as a parent rather than an affiliate is a determinant of behavior,



                                                                                                   6
this treatment may blur the analysis of U.S. parent activities and of the activities of foreign

affiliates of U.S. firms.

         The ownership that defines the scope of a direct investment relationship includes indirect

as well as direct ownership. Direct investment enterprises include branches of a parent investor,

subsidiaries, defined as incorporated enterprises more than 50 % owned by the direct investor,

and associates, defined as incorporated enterprises owned 10-50 %. A subsidiary or associate of

a subsidiary is a direct investment enterprise of the parent, as is a subsidiary of an associate, even

though the parent’s interest could be below 10 %. An associate of an associate is not part of the

parent’s direct investment enterprise, although it is part of the first tier associate’s enterprise

(IMF, 1995, pp. 150-151). The United States requires direct and indirect ownership adding up to

at least 10 per cent (U.S. Department of Commerce, 1998a, Form BE-10B(LF)).

         One type of direct investment enterprise that creates problems with the interpretation of

FDI data is what are called, in the Balance of Payments Manual, Special Purpose Entities, or

SPEs. They include such categories as “…holding company, base company, regional

headquarters …” and have as their function “…administration, management of foreign exchange

risk, facilitation of financing of investments…” and their transactions are treated in the same way

as those of other direct investment enterprises, with one exception. “…for SPEs created with a

sole purpose of serving in a financial intermediary capacity …transactions recorded under direct

investment are limited to those associated with permanent debt and equity (IMF 1993, p. 87).

Some implications of different treatments of SPEs are described later in the section on FDI

flows.




                                                                                                      7
       Scholars studying multinational firms, rather than flows of capital, have set out more

confined definitions. The early Harvard studies, under the direction of Raymond Vernon,

confined their research to firms listed among the 500 largest U.S. corporations among which

“… the U.S. parent system held equity interests in manufacturing enterprises located in 6 or

more foreign countries, such equity interest in each case amounting to 25% or more of the total

equity (Vaupel and Curhan, 1969, p. 3). Mira Wilkins (1970) defined “American multinational

enterprise” as “the U.S. headquartered company that does business in two or more foreign

countries,” and a “genuine” multinational manufacturing corporation as one that “…had direct

investments in more than just sales abroad, that adapted to and respected foreign local traditions,

and acted under foreign rules and regulations in the nations abroad where they operated” (p. ix).

       Scholarly discomfort with the treatment of direct investment flows as capital flows goes

back a long time. Kindleberger (1969), in his lectures on U.S. multinationals, started out by

saying that “Direct investment used to be thought of by economists as an international capital

movement….But economists trying to interpret direct investment as a capital movement were

struck by several peculiar phenomena. In the first place, investors often failed to take money

with them when they went abroad to take control of a company; instead they would borrow in

the local market. Capital movement would take place gross…but not net. Or the investment

would take place in kind, through the exchange of property-patents, technology, or machinery-

against equity claims, without the normal transfer of funds through the foreign exchange

associated with capital movements….Direct investment may thus be capital movement, but it is

more than that (pp.1-3). The same idea, that there was something more, was expressed by John

Dunning (1970) at around the same time.”…something other than money capital is (or may be)

involved in international direct investment. This might simply be informal managerial or



                                                                                                8
technical guidance; on the other hand it could incorporate the dissemination of valuable

knowledge and/or entrepreneurship in the form of research and development, production

technology, marketing skills, managerial expertise, and so on; none of which usually

accompanies investment” (p. 4).


What is a parent?

A multinational firm consists of a parent firm and the affiliates it owns or controls. Most of the

home country surveys from which we know about FDI are surveys of affiliates. Very few

countries make any effort to survey their parent firms, the main exceptions being The United

States, Sweden, and Japan. Surveys by host countries, usually taking the form of tagging

foreign-owned establishments in their economic censuses, rarely ask anything about parent firms

except their nationality. Again, the United States is an exception in that a few other questions

about parents are included in the inward surveys, including the name of the parent and its

industry.

       The term, “parent,” was used in the 1950 U.S. outward survey to describe “…the owners

of a reportable interest…” in foreign-owned corporations and “…collectively, individual holders

of stock which in total constituted a reportable interest,” which, for individual holders in that

survey, was 50 % (U.S. Department of Commerce, 1953, p. 36). The individual holders’

investments accounted for about 10 % of the total. The other 90 % was referred to as the value

of investments by “reporters” (ibid, Appendix Table 10).

       The 1966 U.S. outward investment survey was much more explicit about the domestic

side of the multinationals. It was the first to include a form specifically relating to the U.S. firm

involved, referring to it as the “reporter,” rather than the parent firm. Information was collected

on the reporter’s industry, type of organization, assets, liabilities, net income, R&D expenditures,

                                                                                                 9
and natural resource exploration and development costs. The reporter was explicitly instructed

to include in its answers data for “domestic subsidiaries or affiliates operating in the United

States and usually part of the reporter’s consolidation” (U.S. Department of Commerce, 1975, p.

243). However, no information was requested for any firm of which the reporter was a

subsidiary, a serious omission that was corrected in the 1977 survey.

       The 1977 U.S. outward survey elevated the role of the parent to something more like

equality with that of affiliates, requiring a much fuller set of data and defining the parent more

broadly and consistently from an economic point of view. Although the term “reporter’ was still

used in the forms, the instructions referred explicitly referred to the “U.S. Parent.” The major

change in definition was to require consolidation in the parent reports. It required an

incorporated U.S. parent to be “the U.S. parent corporation whose voting securities are not

owned more than 50 % by another U.S. corporation,” and including “down each ownership chain

from that U.S. corporation any U.S. corporation…whose voting securities are more than 50 %

owned by the U.S. corporation above it” (U.S. Department of Commerce, 1981, pp. 3-4). The

problem that the change in definition was intended to solve was that the reporters in earlier

surveys were sometimes U.S. corporations’ holding company subsidiaries that had been created

specifically to own foreign operations, but had no domestic operations of their own. Treating

these as parents would give a distorted picture of the relationships between U.S. parent and

foreign affiliate operations. One result of the change was that the “parents” of 1977 and later

years are not comparable to the “reporters” of 1966, and comparisons of “reporter” data for 1966

with “parent” data for later years are biased.

       Parents, as defined in U.S. data, are almost certainly not comparable to parents as

reported in Japanese data. Consolidation of company accounts is less common in Japan than in



                                                                                                10
the United States, and there is no way to be sure that the reporting parents are not just fragments

of much larger conglomerates. The Swedish surveys, which have been collected by a private

research organization, do ask for consolidated reports by parent firms. Unlike the U.S. outward

investment surveys they exclude Swedish firms that are affiliates of foreign firms and also

foreign investment undertaken by private individuals (Swedenborg, 1979, pp. 244-245).



What is an FDI Flow?

The definition of FDI flows has changed over time as the definition of FDI enterprises has

changed. One such change for the United States, for example, was the elimination from the U.S.

outward direct investment universe of foreign firms with large, but diffused, ownership by U.S.

citizens. That reclassification resulted in the reclassification of the investment flows to and from

these firms as portfolio investment and the elimination of the retained earnings of these firms

from the U.S. accounts altogether. However, when the change in definition was adopted, in

1977, it was not carried back to earlier years, so that historical flow data reflect the earlier

definition of FDI.

        Direct investment capital flows are made up of “… equity capital, reinvested earnings,

and other capital associated with various intercompany debt transactions” (IMF, 1993, p. 87).

The last category is the most troublesome, covering “…the borrowing and lending of funds -

including debt securities and suppliers’ credits – between direct investors and subsidiaries,

branches, and associates.” The latter includes “…Intercompany transactions between affiliated

banks (depository institutions) and affiliated financial intermediaries (e.g.,security dealers) –

including SPEs with the sole purpose of serving as financial intermediaries…” However, the

latter are now to be included in direct investment only if they are “…associated with permanent



                                                                                                   11
debt (loan capital representing a permanent interest) and equity (share capital) investment or, in

the case of branches, fixed assets. Deposits and other claims and liabilities related to usual

banking transactions of depositary institutions and claims and liabilities of other financial

intermediaries are classified, as appropriate, under portfolio investment or other investment (IMF

1993, p.88). This last distinction was in recognition of the ambiguities that had developed in the

division of investment between direct investment and other types.

       In 1998, the BEA made a major change in the treatment of U.S, affiliates that were

primarily financial intermediaries, “…established mainly to facilitate the foreign securities and

financing businesses of their U.S. parents or to facilitate foreign borrowing by their U.S.

parents….” The capital flows associated with these activities were “…sizable and volatile.” No

lasting interest or desire to influence the management of an enterprise was involved in these

transactions and it was decided that they should be treated as portfolio flows rather than direct

investment flows. This treatment was described as in accord with the IMF guidelines mentioned

above. It involved three groups of U.S. affiliates “…that had characteristics of financial

intermediaries: (1) Financial affiliates located in the Netherlands Antilles, (2) financial affiliates

whose U.S. parents are depository institutions, and (3) financial affiliates whose U.S. parents are

securities dealers” (U.S. Department of Commerce, 1998b, pp. 119-120).

       The effect of the revised treatment was substantial. In 1997, for example, the net outflow

of direct investment from the United States was reduced by $11 billion, leaving a revised total of

$119 billion after other adjustments. The inward flow was reduced by $54 billion, leaving a

revised total of $108 billion. A similar change was made on the inward investment side,

excluding intercompany debt positions with financial affiliates whose ultimate beneficial owners

were depositary institutions or finance or insurance firms (Bach, 1998, p. 52).



                                                                                                 12
       A major effect of the change was on the reported volatility of FDI flows. These financial

intermediary flows fluctuated far more widely than the remaining FDI flows, at least in 1994-

1997, the period for which the revisions were published. On the outward investment side, the

changes in the financial intermediary flow ranged from a negative $2 billion to a positive $11

billion, while the revised total, excluding the financial intermediaries, varied from negative $75

billion to negative $122 billion, with no changes of direction. On the inward side, the financial

intermediary flows, all negative, ranged from $-1 billion to $-54 billion, while the revised flows

(inflows), excluding the intermediaries, all positive, increased in every year, from $46 to $108

billion (Bach, 1998, Table 3).

       Another way of describing the volatility of the financial intermediary flows is by

comparing the average annual changes to the average annual flows. The average annual change

in the outward flow for the financial intermediaries was over 100% of the average flow for the

period, while the average change in the adjusted outflow was only 16% of the average adjusted

outflow. On the inward side, the average change in the intermediaries’ inflow was 120% of the

average inflow while the average change in the inflows excluding the intermediaries was 24% of

the average adjusted inflow. Thus, the financial intermediaries’ flows were 5 to 6 times as

volatile as the rest of the direct investment flows.

       The question of how to treat financial intermediary subsidiaries was not a new one. The

United States outward investment total for many years showed a negative investment in the

Netherlands Antilles that reached a peak of $-25 billion in 1984. That was 12 % of the reported

outward direct investment total, and over 40 % of the reported investment in trade and services,

excluding petroleum services (Lipsey, 1988, Table 8.A.1). These large investments in the

Netherlands Antilles were a result of the U.S. withholding tax on interest paid by U.S. firms on



                                                                                              13
borrowing abroad. U. S. parent firms set up affiliates in the Netherlands Antilles to borrow in

European capital markets, free of the tax on interest payments, and relend the proceeds to their

parents. In this way, a portfolio flow, mainly bond issues, was magically converted into a direct

investment flow by passing through the affiliates. Since the direct investment flow was of parent

firms borrowing from their affiliates, it became a negative element in the U.S. outward

investment position.


Do Investment Stocks Reflect the Economic Activity of Multinational Firms?

The only virtually universal measure of the activities of multinational firms outside their home

countries is the amount of direct investment, or the “direct investment position,” of a country, as

calculated from direct investment stock data or cumulated flows of direct investment. These are

the FDI data derived from balance of payments statistics. They do not purport to measure the

size of multinational firms or their foreign affiliates, or their activities in their host countries.

They measure only the value of the parent firms’ financial stakes in their foreign affiliates.

However, because of their wide coverage of countries, they are often used in analyses of the

impacts of MNC activities on, for example, trade, or host country, home country, or parent

employment or output.

        Given this use of one concept of FDI to represent another, it would be useful to know

how closely the investment position data are related to, for example, the economic activity of

affiliates. One reason to expect that the relation might not be close is that the investment

position data are based on the immediate sources and destinations of investment. In contrast,

U.S. surveys of the operations of U.S. firms abroad and foreign firms in the United States are

based on the ultimate sources and final destinations of investment. An example of the difference

is that, for example, of 234 affiliates in the United States with ultimate beneficial owners (UBOs)

                                                                                                   14
that were Italian in 1987, 74 reported that their immediate parent was in a country other than

Italy. Of 19 affiliates with South African UBOs, 17 reported other immediate parentage and of

123 affiliates of Saudi Arabian UBOs, 105 reported other parent locations (U.S. Department of

Commerce, 2001, p. M-12).

       The same problem could affect the industry distribution of investment positions and

affiliate activities. The investment position may report a holding company in an intermediate

country as the source or destination of an investment that originated in an industrial firm or is

intended for an industrial affiliate. The problem has become more serious over time because

“…U.S. parent companies have been funneling an increasing share of their direct investments

abroad through holding companies. In 1982, foreign affiliates classified as holding companies

accounted for only 9 percent of the U.S. direct investment position abroad, but by 2000, they

accounted for 23 percent…” (Borga and Mataloni, 2001, p. 23).

       Another problem with the reported stocks of FDI is that they are mostly cumulations of

past direct investment flows and take no account of changes in currency values and asset values

since the original investments were made. One exception to this is the FDI stock estimates for

the United States, which come in three variants, historical cost, current cost, and market value.

They all take account of currency value changes and, as is explained later, the current cost

estimates take account of price changes on fixed assets and the market value estimates take

account of equity price changes.

       An examination of the relation of FDI stock to FDI activity was performed for the United

States, the only country for which the comparison can be made by industry and location for a

variety of activity measures (United Nations, 2000b, Annex D). It showed that in 1989, the

distribution of the U.S. outward FDI stock across host countries was strongly correlated with the



                                                                                               15
distribution of affiliate sales. The distribution of the U.S. inward FDI stock across countries of

origin was similarly well correlated with the sales and employment of those countries’ affiliates

in the United States. However, changes in the country distribution of U.S. outward FDI were not

closely related to changes in the location of sales and employment. The country distribution of

changes in inward investment was weakly related to changes in the country distribution of

employment(r =.37) and not related at all to changes in the country distribution of sales (r= .015).

Thus it appeared that the country distributions of outward and inward investment stocks in one

year were related to the country distributions of sales and employment, but changes in country

distributions were poor indicators of changes in employment and sales.

       Tests of the relation of the outward stock of FDI to measures of FDI activity for recent

years are reported in Appendix Tables 7 through 10. If one wished to estimate the distribution of

factor inputs or sales across both countries and industries from data on FDI stocks, the results

would be quite inaccurate. Across 12 industry groups and 58 countries, less than 30 % of the

variation is explained, even for sales. 16 % is explained for property plant, and equipment

(PP&E), and 10 % for employment (Appendix Table 8). Thus, while the distributions of

aggregate FDI stocks, and stocks within broad industries, are fairly well related to the

distributions of input and sales measures across countries, they are only weakly related to the

distributions across even broad industry groups. For a finer level of industry detail, 63 industries

and nine countries, only about 10 % of the variation in sales is explained, and the relationship is

even weaker for PP&E (4 %) and employment (2 %).

       Absolute changes in aggregate and total manufacturing U.S. outward direct investment

stocks between 1982 and 1998 are quite closely related, across countries, to absolute changes in

affiliate PPE and sales (Appendix Table 9), but the relations are much weaker for relative



                                                                                              16
changes in these variables. Again, if we examine the relationships across both countries and

broad industry groups, or across country groups and detailed industries, they fall apart. None of

the rsqs is above .30 and most are below .20 (Appendix Table 10).

       Thus, while the investment stocks tell us something about the country of location of FDI

activity or changes in it, in the aggregate and within industries, they tell us very little about what

kind of activity is taking place, or what they tell us is often wrong.

3. History

A Brief History of FDI and its Importance in International Capital Flows

FDI is sometimes thought of as originating with American firms, and some of its characteristics

as we know it today developed mainly in American companies. However, Mira Wilkins has

called attention to its antecedents far back in history. “…in 2500 B.C., Sumerian merchants

found in their foreign commerce that they needed men stationed abroad to receive, to store, and

to sell their goods…the East India Company, chartered in London in 1600, established branches

overseas…In the mid-seventeenth century, English, French, and Dutch mercantile families sent

relatives to America and to the West Indies to represent their firms. So too, in time, American

colonists found in their own foreign trade that it was desirable to have correspondents, agents,

and, on occasion, branch houses in important trading centers to warehouse and to sell American

exports…” (1970, p. 1).

       Wilkins describes the Virginia Company, chartered by King James I in 1606 to establish

the first permanent English settlement at Jamestown, as “…the first foreign direct investment in

America…” (1989, p. 6). By 1624 it was bankrupt. She identifies 1875-1914 as the period of

“…the rise of truly large-scale foreign investments in the private sector” (p. 609) including

“…more foreign direct investments than most subsequent commentaries have recognized” (p.



                                                                                                17
613). Wilkins divides direct investments into two types. “One involved investments that carried

the potentials of control, but had a fragile, negligible, sometimes virtually nonexistent ‘home

office’ organization with little capacity beyond that of raising capital. These companies had no

experience in operations at home to project abroad…. The second type of direct investment, akin

to today’s multinational enterprises, provided the extension into the United States of a company

and its operating organizational talents- its own ‘ package’ of skills, experience, technology,

management, and marketing experience” (pp. 613-614).

       In view of the current interest in multinationals and direct investment, it is striking that

they play a minor role in descriptions of the period before 1913, the time of perhaps the largest

total international investment flows in history, relative to output and fixed investment. Most

writings about capital movements either did not mention direct investment at all (Iverson, 1936)

or treated it as a minor form of international investment. Hobson (1914, p. 25) did describe

“…an enormous rise in the importance of the international company, in railways, mining,

tramways, water, gas, electricity, banking, insurance, finance, land plantations…” and even

manufacturing, “…but there it is still somewhat rare.” The consensus was probably well

summarized by Arthur Bloomfield’s appraisal that “portfolio investment was a far more

important component of long-term capital movements before 1914 than direct investment”

(1968, p. 3). He noted one exception, China, among developing country recipients of

investment, and one, the United States, among developed country investors. Another exception

was apparently Japan as an investor, the counterpart of China as a recipient, as indicated in a

number of sources cited in Wilkins (1986, pp. 3-4). Bloomfield suggested that before 1914, “…

the concept of direct investment (in its present-day sense) was not clearly distinguished from

other (noncontrolling) equity investments in foreign private enterprises (Bloomfield, pp. 3-4).



                                                                                               18
       Svedberg (1978) challenged the idea that direct investment flows to developing countries

were negligible before 1914. He claimed that it was an illusion stemming from the typical

methods of estimating investment flows and stocks. These relied heavily on public flotations of

securities and therefore missed many direct investments that did not pass through such

exchanges. Svedberg estimated that some 44 to 60 % of the $19 billion of accumulated

investment in developing countries in 1913-14 was in the form of direct investment. Mira

Wilkins, too, argued that “foreign direct investments… have often been shortchanged in the

literature of U.S. economic history…” (1989, p.xi).

       For more recent years, the International Monetary Fund has published comprehensive

worldwide estimates of gross and net flows of direct investment since 1970, gross flows of

portfolio and other investment since 1980, and net flows since 1970. Portfolio investment

includes equity securities, debt securities in the form of bonds, money market instruments, and

financial derivatives, such as options, all excluding any of these included in direct investment or

reserve assets. The category of “Other investment” includes trade credit, loans, financial leases,

       The data on gross direct investment flows indicate that direct investment has been an

increasing part of total investment flows since the 1970s and early 1980s, when they were less

than 15 %. By the first half of the 1990s they accounted for 30 % of total outflows and they

stayed at that level in the second half of the decade (Table 1). The largest source of gross direct

investment flows since the 1980s has been Europe, followed by the United States. Japan was the

next major source until the 1990s, when it was overtaken and passed by Developing Asia

(Lipsey, 1999, Appendix Table 6A.2 and Appendix Table 2 of this paper). A large part of

European outflows has stayed within Europe; inflows into Europe were more than half of

outflows in the 1970s and 1980s (Lipsey, 1999, Appendix Tables 6A.2 and 6A.3). That pattern



                                                                                              19
persisted into the 1990s, with inflows two thirds or more of outflows (Appendix Tables 2 and 3).

The United States, too, has been a major recipient of direct investment inflows, with the result

that its former position as a major net provider of direct investment to other countries has almost

disappeared. In the 1980s the United States was a net recipient of direct investment from abroad,

turned back to being a net supplier in the early 1990s, and again became a net recipient in the

second half of the 1990s. Europe and Japan were more consistent, both being net suppliers,

while Developing Asia and Latin America were steady net recipients (Lipsey, 1999, Appendix

Table 6A4 and Appendix Table 4 of this paper). Thus, a large part of the gross flows of direct

investment are among the developed countries.

       It is difficult to compare gross or net flows of direct investment with fixed capital

expenditures for the world as a whole, but a comparison can be made for the OECD countries.

Among 22 countries from 1970 through 1995, the average ratios of inward FDI flows to gross

fixed capital formation were below 10 % in 20 countries, and they were below 5 % in most of the

countries. When gross inflows in a five-year period were related to fixed capital formation in the

subsequent five-year period, the coefficient was negative, although not statistically significant. It

did not appear that FDI inflows were a major source of financing for capital formation in these

countries. Gross outflows were negatively and significantly related to capital formation in the

following period, but net flows were not related to capital formation at all (Lipsey, 2001). Thus

there is some suggestion that outward direct investment competes with domestic plant and

equipment expenditures for funds, as was found also for a group of U.S. companies by Stevens

and Lipsey (1992), but it is surprising that neither gross nor net inward FDI flows offset that

competition.




                                                                                               20
       Another way of judging the importance of FDI in the world economy is to ask how much

of world production and employment are accounted for by the foreign operations that result from

FDI, or “internationalized production.” In the late 1950s, when a large part of the outward stock

of FDI was owned by U.S. firms, internationalized production might have represented about 2 %

of world output. By the late 1970s or early 1980s, after the period of rapid growth in U.S.-

owned production abroad, the share reached 5 %. As U.S. firms’ operations abroad were

reduced in the 1980s, those of other countries, particularly Germany and Japan, increased, but

the pace of internationalization for the world as a whole was slower. In the 1990s, American

firms resumed the growth of their overseas activities and the worldwide pace of

internationalization rose again. By the late 1990s, about 8 % of world production was

internationalized (United Nations 2000b).

       These shares of output may not appear as large as one might expect from the volume of

discussion of “globalization.” One reason for a different impression is that direct investment and

the resulting production are concentrated in two visible and closely watched sectors,

manufacturing and petroleum. In the case of the United States, for example, in the mid-1990s,

these sectors accounted for about 18 % of GDP, but for three quarters of U.S.-owned overseas

production. U.S.-owned affiliate production abroad was about 17 % of home production in

manufacturing, 100 % in petroleum, but only 2 % in all the other industries combined, which

accounted for over 80 % of total U.S. output (Lipsey, 1998). Since the manufacturing and

petroleum sectors are the source of most tradables, multinational firms account for a large

proportion of international goods trade. In manufacturing, for example, exports by

manufacturing affiliates of firms the United States, Japan, and Sweden, were about 10 % of

world manufactured exports in the mid-1990s. Since those three countries accounted for only



                                                                                               21
about a third of the stock of outward FDI, if their affiliates’ export propensities were not far from

the average, the total internationalized share of manufactured exports might be somewhere

around 30 %.

       In mining, of which petroleum is a large part, the output of foreign affiliates of U.S. firms

alone was almost a quarter of world output in 1977, but fell below 20 % by 1990. The decline

was much larger in developing countries, from 23 to 10 % (Mataloni and Goldberg, 1994, and

United Nations, 1993), as several Middle Eastern countries nationalized what had formerly been

U.S.-owned properties.

       The share of internationalized production in world manufacturing output is much higher

than the share in total output. It was about 11&1/2 % in 1977, when the share in total output was

around 5 %. By 1990 it was over 16 % when the share in total output was less than half of that,

and it has probably risen somewhat since then (Lipsey, 1998, pp. 12-13).

       The share of world employment absorbed by internationalized production is far smaller

than the share of production itself. It was probably not much above 1 % in the late 1990s, as

compared with 8 % for production. The implication is obviously that output per worker was

seven or eight times as high in internationalized production as in world production in general, the

consequence of some combination of greater capital intensity and higher productivity (United

Nations 2000b).



The United States as a Direct Investor and Recipient of Direct Investment

The United States has been, since its earliest days as a foreign investor, exceptionally focused on

direct investment. Frank Southard, in one of the first studies of U.S. direct investment,

commented about that early start. “…it was the two decades just prior to the opening of the



                                                                                               22
present century (the 20th) that saw a startling development: the export of capital in significant

amounts by American corporations for the establishment of European plants and sales

organizations at a time when the United States was steadily importing capital” ( 1931,p. xiii). In

1897, the United States, still predominantly a net recipient of capital from abroad, rather than a

supplier of capital, held more than 90 % of its outward investment in the form of direct

investment (Lewis, 1938, p. 605). By 1914, that share had declined to three quarters, but it was

still far above the proportion in foreign investment in the United States (ibid), and in worldwide

investment. World War I was the beginning of major U.S. portfolio investment abroad, much of

it in the form of loans to foreign governments that exceeded private financing. By the end of the

war, in 1919, direct investment had been reduced to a little over half of U.S. private investment

abroad, and to less than a quarter of total investment, including intergovernmental loans (ibid, p.

447). Both direct and portfolio investment grew rapidly during the 1920s, but that period

differed from earlier ones in that portfolio investment accounted for a majority of the outward

flow. By 1929, the value of U.S. private portfolio investment abroad was greater than that of

direct investment for the first time (Lewis, pp. 450, 605).

        The Great Depression of the 1930s reversed this movement toward the portfolio form that

had taken place in the 1920s. Half of the foreign loans extended in the late 1920s went into

default (Mintz, 1951, p. 6). U.S. holdings of securities of securities, even valued at par rather

than market, were reduced by almost 30 %, or by almost 50 % if defaulted bonds were valued at

market prices. Short-term credits were also reduced almost by half (Lewis, 1938, p. 454). By

1940 direct investment again accounted for more than half of U.S. private investment abroad, and

that remained true through 1970 (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1975, series U26-U39).

U.S. government loans to foreign countries had expanded again during World War II and by



                                                                                               23
1950 the stock of such loans was almost twice the total private investment stock. Thus the

restored dominance of direct investment in 1950 applied only to private investment.

         By the late 1970s, the stock of direct investment, measured in the traditional way at book,

or historical cost values, had fallen to between 40 and 50 % of total private investment abroad,

where other types of assets were measured at market values, where possible (Table 2). There was

some suspicion that historical cost valuation might seriously distort the valuation of direct

investment, and in 1991, the BEA began to offer two alternative valuation methods (Landefeld

and Lawson, 1991). One, referred to as “current-cost” valuation, attempted to apply inflation

accounting to the asset side of the balance sheets of U.S.-owned affiliates abroad and foreign-

owned affiliates in the United States. The tangible assets of affiliates were revalued, using a

perpetual inventory calculation for plant and equipment and current price indexes for other forms

of tangible capital.   The “market valuation” method revalues, instead, the equity part of the

parent’s investment in affiliates, using broad stock price indexes for foreign countries and the

United States.

         By the current cost valuation, the share of direct investment in U.S. private investment

abroad was still close to 60 % in the late 1970s as compared with about 45 % by the historical

valuation (Table 2). After that, the direct investment share fell, almost continuously, to about one

quarter in 1997-99. Although the share fell in almost every year, most of the decline took place in

the burst of portfolio and short-term lending that took place before and during the Latin American

crisis of the early 1980s. Both the current-cost and historical valuations showed a direct

investment share of 20 to 25 % in U.S. outward investment in the late 1990s, but the market value

share, propelled by the rise in stock prices, produced a direct investment share of 35-40 % (Table

2). Some part of the reduction in the share of direct investment in the outward stock of private



                                                                                                 24
foreign investment stemmed from large upward revisions, by about 30 %, in the estimates for

purchases of foreign securities. The revisions stemmed mainly from two sources. One was a

U.S. Treasury Benchmark Survey of U.S. Portfolio Investment Abroad at yearend 1997, which

indicated a 20 % discrepancy between previous estimates and the survey results in the brief period

since the previous survey in 1994. The other was an adjustment for U.S. portfolio investment that

took place in the course of foreign acquisitions of U.S. firms, when the purchasing firms paid U.S.

stockholders with stock in the foreign acquirers (Bach, 2000, pp. 70-72).

         Not only did the United States have an exceptional share of its foreign investment in

direct investment, but it also accounted for a large part of the world’s stock of outward direct

investment. In 1960, almost half of the world’s outward stock of direct investment was owned by

investors based in the United States. No other country came close to that share; the next ranking

holder was the UK, at 18 %, followed by the Netherlands at 10 % and France at 6 % (United

Nations, 1988, Table 1.2). By 1999, the U.S. share had fallen to less than a quarter. The UK, The

Netherlands, and France remained important, the first two with reduced shares. Germany and

Japan, with only 2 % of the total between them in 1960, accounted for 15 % in 1999. Even

developing countries, which had been the homes for only 3 % of the outward stock as late as

1980, owned 10 % of it in 1999 (United Nations, 2000a). Thus, the ability of firms to operate in

foreign countries had become much more widely diffused among home countries over those 40

years.

         Another indicator of that diffusion was the change in the direct investment balance of the

United States. In the late 1970s, U.S. direct investment abroad was about four times the value of

foreign direct investment in the United States, both measured at current values. By 1997-99,

foreign direct investment in the United States had reached over three quarters of the level of U.S.



                                                                                               25
direct investment abroad. The net U.S. direct investment position, which had been a little over

$200 billion in 1977-79, was only about $240 billion in 1997-99, when gross outward investment

was five times as large.

4. Data On Foreign Direct Investment

There are two general types of data on foreign direct investment. One is the financial data from

balance-of –payments accounting. These record inward and outward flows of direct investment

and the resulting stocks. The stocks are the value of stocks of direct investment outside each

home country owned by residents of that country and the value of stocks in each country that are

owned by residents of other countries.

        The second type of data is on the operations of FDI affiliates in their host countries and

the operations of their parents in their home countries. Operations could include their sales,

production, employment, wages, assets, expenditures for plant and equipment, and R&D

expenditures. None of these characteristics are revealed by the financial data from the balance-

of-payments. They are obtained from surveys of parent companies, in their home countries, or ,

in their host countries, from surveys of affiliates, often by identifying foreign-owned

establishments in economic censuses.



Data on FDI Flows and Stocks

The only data on direct investment that cover virtually all countries are the balance of payments,

or financial data. These are reported to the International Monetary Fund and are published, for

example, in IMF (2000a). The reports are separated into outward (“Abroad”) and inward (In

Reporting Economy”) flows, divided between reinvested earnings and other direct investment

flows. Notes are provided explaining the sources of data for each country. In the past, many



                                                                                                 26
countries did not record reinvested earnings, but coverage has improved in recent years. The

worldwide discrepancy between outward and inward direct investment flows, which should be

zero if all flows were recorded fully and consistently by both sides, has been no higher than 8% in

any year from 1993 to 1999, as contrasted with 40 or 50% for portfolio investment.

        The Balance of Payments Yearbooks also call for the reporting of inward and outward

stocks of direct investment, as part of their tabulations of the international investment position of

each country. Most developed countries report their inward and outward stocks of FDI, but many

developing countries do not. The IMF data, in summary form, are also available in International

Financial Statistics, for example, IMF (2000b).

        The quality of international data on FDI flows for measuring what is called for in balance

of payments accounting was reviewed in IMF (1986) as part of the search for an explanation and

cure for the enormous world balance of payments discrepancies. The world current account

discrepancy did fall for a while, but it returned to well over negative $100 billion in 1999 (IMF

2000a). The discrepancy for direct investment, which had been fairly small during most of the

1990s, jumped to $64 billion in 1999, about 7&1/2 % of the reported outflow.

        A deficiency of all the IMF compilations is that political considerations apparently dictate

the omission of data for two important entities, Taiwan, and until 1998, Hong Kong. However,

Taiwan does publish its data in the IMF format.

        A source of inward and outward FDI flow and stock data that covers almost all countries

is the UNCTAD World Investment Report (WIR), for example, United Nations (2000a). These

reports began with United Nations (1973), (1978), (1983), and (1988), and have been published

annually since 1991. They provide annual data from 1990 to 1999 and at five-year intervals

before that. There are also extensive notes on sources and listings of items omitted in various



                                                                                                27
countries’ reports. Annex B includes listings for each country covered indicating what items are

omitted, sources of data, and major revisions. There are also tables of ratios of FDI flows to

Gross Capital Formation and of FDI stocks to GDP. In contrast to the IMF reports, the WIR has

consistently included information on FDI in and by Taiwan and Hong Kong.

        A source of financial data on FDI that covers quite a few countries is the OECD

International Direct Investment Statistics Yearbook, covering 28 countries in its latest edition

(OECD 2000), although not with complete data for all of them. It includes data on inflows and

outflows and on inward and outward stocks, or the “direct investment position.” A major

advantage over the compilations of the IMF and UNCTAD is that there are data for most

countries by broad industrial sectors and also by partner country, in a uniform format.

        Data on direct investment flows and the international direct investment position of the

United States are published regularly in articles in the Survey of Current Business and have been

summarized in a series of publications by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The period

beginning in 1950 was covered, with substantial country detail, and a little industry information,

especially starting in 1966, in U.S. Department of Commerce (1982). Recent editions have

included greater industry detail.

        The traditional way of measuring inward and outward investment stocks at historical

valuations came under increasing criticism in the 1980s. It did not take account of changes in

prices and did not match the treatment of fixed capital in the U.S. National Income and Product

Accounts. As a result, the BEA, in 1991, began to publish its U.S. investment position data in

two alternative valuations, as mentioned earlier. One was a “current-cost” valuation, in which

inflation accounting was applied to the assets of U.S. affiliates abroad and foreign affiliates in the

United States. Affiliate tangible assets were revalued using a perpetual inventory calculation for



                                                                                                 28
plant and equipment and current price indexes for other types of tangible capital. The other

method, described as “market valuation,” revalues, instead, the liability side, in particular, the

equity portion of the parent investment in affiliates. It uses broad equity price indexes for foreign

countries to value the equity portion of U.S. assets abroad and equity price indexes for the United

States to value the equity portion of foreign assets in the United States.

        As is pointed out in the article announcing the new measures (Landefeld and Lawson,

1991), there are limitations to these measures, although not as great as those of the historical

valuations. The new measures are the only ones now reported in the articles on the international

investment position of the United States. The inward investment measures at current cost are

probably the most accurate of the four, two inward and two outward. The BEA produces price

measures for U.S. plant and equipment expenditures, and the only possibly major problem is that

the composition of plant and equipment expenditures by foreign affiliates in the United States is

not known in detail and could differ from that of other firms in the United States. The outward

investment measure at current cost must make do with available foreign price indexes for capital

goods. These do not exist for all the host countries, and even where they do, are not collected and

calculated in comparable ways. The market value measures rely on the assumption that the

market values of what are mainly privately-owned companies follow those of broad stock price

indexes. The composition of these indexes may differ substantially with respect to industry,

country, in the case of outward investment, and in other respects from the composition of the

equities that are part of direct investment.




                                                                                                29
Data on FDI Operations

The balance of payments data suffer from two incurable problems. One is that, as described

earlier, they trace only the immediate sources and destinations of investment, rather than the

ultimate ones. A more serious one is that they contain no information on the economic activity

of FDI affiliates and their parents. Thus they tell nothing about the characteristics of the parents,

such as their industry, their size, employment, sales, assets, or technological activities. It is

therefore difficult to use them to study the reasons for companies to invest in production abroad

or the choices they make in such investing. The financial data also tell nothing about the

economic activities of the affiliates. It is therefore difficult to use them to analyze the impacts of

the affiliates’ operations on their host countries or on the parents and their home countries. The

only possible sources of information on the operations of parents are surveys carried out in their

home countries. Information on the operations of affiliates can be collected from surveys of

parent firms in their home countries or my surveys of affiliates in the host countries, done either

specifically to examine foreign-owned operations or as part of economic censuses by tagging

foreign-owned firms or establishments.

       The most comprehensive data, by far, on FDI operations are those for the United States.

Annual data on the operations of both U.S. nonbank affiliates abroad and foreign nonbank

affiliates in the United States are published in articles in the Survey of Current Business. More

complete data, and particularly more U.S. parent data, are published in reports published every

year by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). The most complete sets of information,

include banking, appear in the BEA’s benchmark surveys, which are usually conducted every




                                                                                                    30
five years. The latest inward survey is U.S. Department of Commerce (2001), covering 1997,

and the latest outward survey is U.S. Department of Commerce (1998a).

        Among the items included are balance sheets, income accounts, employment, exports, to

affiliates and to others, imports, and R&D expenditures and employment. The benchmark

surveys include more topics and more country and industry detail than the annual surveys.

        The United States also provides measures of the production, or gross product, of U.S.

parents and affiliates and of foreign affiliates in the United States. That measure of FDI activity

is preferable to sales or employment, partly because of its comparability with national accounts

concepts, such as GDP. For U.S. affiliates abroad it is calculated for only majority-owned ones

(MOFAs), because the survey form for other affiliates, which account for between 12 and 17 %

of total activity, depending on the measure used, lacks the required information (U.S.

Department of Commerce, 2000c, Tables II.A-1 and III.A-1).

        The estimates are built up by summation of factor costs and indirect taxes rather than by

subtraction of intermediate inputs from gross output. They match the gross product measures in

the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPAs) fairly well in concept. One difference is

that depreciation is reported only at book value instead of the NIPA’s current value, using

economic service lives and replacement cost valuation (Mataloni and Goldberg, 1994, p. 42).

The effect is on the distinction between depreciation and profits within affiliates, rather than on

total gross profit.

        On the inward side, the BEA and the Census Bureau have matched reporting firm

identifications to identify foreign-owned U.S. establishments They can thus provide U.S.

economic census establishment data divided between domestically-owned and foreign-owned

establishments. These have been published for 1987 and 1992 for most U.S. industries, in U.S.



                                                                                              31
 Department of Commerce (1992) and (1997), and the linked data for 1997 are expected to be

 published in 2002. For years between 1987 and 1992, only manufacturing is covered, in a series

 of annual publications. The industry and geographical detail are extensive, but only a few items

 such as numbers of establishments, employment, and wages, are reported. An important

 distinction between these data and the BEA survey data is that the matched data are on an

 establishment basis, rather than an enterprise basis. A large enterprise often combines

 establishments belonging to several industries, possibly including both manufacturing and

 wholesale trade or manufacturing and mining, in the case of petroleum, the establishment data

 provide a more accurate account of the industry distribution of foreign-owned employment,

 sales, and other variables.

         A broader assessment of the quality of U.S. data on FDI, dealing with concepts as well as

 arithmetic accuracy, is given in Stekler and Stevens (1991).

         The OECD has begun to publish some data for inward investment operations in member

 countries, in, for example, OECD (1999). Response is not complete, but the publication attempts

 to cover numbers of foreign-owned enterprises and their production, turnover, value added,

 wages and salaries, R&D expenditures and employment, and trade.

         Operations by Swedish firms abroad beginning in 1965 can be studied from surveys

conducted at approximately five-year intervals by the Industriens Utredningsinstitut of Stockholm

(now known as The Research Institute of Industrial Economics). Publications reporting on these

surveys are listed in the references to Swedenborg (2001). The surveys included questions on

employment, wages, fixed capital, trade, R&D expenditures, and other topics, mostly relating to

foreign affiliates, but with some information about parents and about the relations between

parents and affiliates..



                                                                                              32
        The Swedish Central Bureau of Statistics (Statistics Sweden) has been publishing data

starting in 1990 on employment at home and abroad in Swedish-owned enterprise groups having

subsidiaries abroad. The data are reported by detailed industry and by country, but not cross-

classified, except to distinguish manufacturing from service industries (Sweden, Statistics

Sweden, 2000a). A survey of R&D expenditures and R&D personnel input in Sweden and abroad

in the twenty largest Swedish manufacturing groups and in foreign-owned enterprises in Sweden

was conducted for 1997 (Sweden, Statistics Sweden, 2001).

        A limited report on operations of foreign firms in Sweden was published annually by the

Central Bureau of Statistics, starting with 1987. A much more extensive survey and analysis for

1970 appears in Samuelsson (1977). Beginning in 1994, the scope of reporting was expanded,

although the survey remained voluntary. As in the outward survey, the main question is on

employment, classified by industry and country of origin (Sweden, Statistics Sweden, 2000b).

For 1997, a supplementary report included data on profits, liquidity, exports and export intensity,

and value added (Sweden, Statistics Sweden, 2000c).

        Information on the operations of both German firms abroad and foreign firms in

Germany is has been published in a series of reports by the Deutsche Bundesbank, at two-year

intervals, such as in Deutsche Bundesbank (1999). The country and industry detail are extensive,

but the list of variables is short, limited to numbers of firms, employment, annual turnover, and

assets, with some breakdown by type of asset.

        For Japan, the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI, now METI), has

published a series of annual and benchmark surveys of outward FDI since the 1970s. They

contain a great deal of information on parent and affiliate operations, but suffer from low

response, fluctuating over time and varying, within a survey, from question to question. The



                                                                                              33
coverage and other quality aspects of these surveys have been discussed in Ramstetter (1996), and

some of the individual MITI publications are listed there.

        Recently, there have been efforts, supported by Japanese official agencies, to improve the

quality of the MITI data. A paper by Fukao, Yuan, and Sakishita (1999) estimated missing data

from survey forms to produce better approximations to total employment and sales by Japanese

affiliates and their distribution over host countries and industries.

        The United Kingdom does not conduct regular surveys of its firms’ outward FDI

activities. A major one- time survey was conducted for the Reddaway (1967) and (1968) reports,

but it was not repeated. Inward FDI activities can be followed by using economic census data,

where foreign ownership is tagged.

        France does not publish any readily available public data on the outward FDI activities of

its firms. The French government has issued, since the 1970s, a series of reports on numbers of

foreign-owned firms and their employment, wages, capital, and exports and, for each measure, the

share in the French economy. The data are disaggregated by industry, country of origin, and

location within France. The latest report, covering January 1, 1998, was summarized in France,

SESSI (2000).

        Canada is one of the world’s major recipients of FDI and has a long history of collecting

data on it, mainly on sales, exports, imports, and financial aspects. An early survey for 1964 and

1965 was published in Canada (1967). Employment, hours of work, and wages were added in

some later surveys, such as Canada (1979), but the main source of data remains the reports under

the Corporations and Labour Unions Returns Act, published by Statistics Canada in recent years.

For the period of operation of the Foreign Investment Review Act, from 1974 to 1985, detailed




                                                                                              34
data were published for individual firm applications to invest in Canada. These appeared in the

annual reports of the review agency, the last of which was Canada (1985).

        A collection of the available data on production at home and abroad by home country

multinational firms and of production in many host countries by foreign-owned firms was

assembled in Lipsey, Ramstetter, and Blomström (1998). Detailed source notes appeared in

Lipsey, Blomström, and Ramstetter, (1995). Among the host countries covered in Asia were

China, India, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, Taiwan, and Thailand, and in Latin

America, Brazil, Mexico, and Uruguay. Developed host countries covered were Australia,

Canada, Japan, Norway, the United Kingdom, and the United States. A broader collection of

indicators of multinational activity other than production is provided in United Nations (2001).

        There have been several extensive surveys of the literature and research on multinational

firms and FDI, fairly comprehensive at the time they were written. Two of the most extensive in

coverage are Caves (1996) and Dunning (1992).




                                                                                             35
References

Bach, Christopher L., “U.S. International Transactions, Revised Estimates for 1986-97,” Survey
of Current Business 78, No. 7, (1998):47-57.

_________________, “U.S. International Transactions: Revised Estimates for 1982-99,” Survey
of Current Business 80, No. 7, (2000):70-77.

Bargas, Sylvia E., “Direct Investment Positions for 1999: Country and Industry Detail,” Survey
of Current Business 80, No. 7, (2000):58-69.

Borga, Maria, and Raymond J. Mataloni, Jr., “Direct Investment Position for 2000: Country and
       Industry Detail,” Survey of Current Business 81, No. 7, (2001):16-29.

Bloomfield, Arthur I., Patterns of Fluctuations in International Investment Before 1914,
Princeton Studies in International Finance No. 21, (1968) Princeton, NJ, Princeton University,
International Finance Section.

Canada, Foreign-Owned Subsidiaries in Canada, Dominion Bureau of Statistics and Department
of Trade and Commerce, May, 1967.

______ , Compendium of Statistics on Foreign Investment, Foreign Investment Review Agency,
May, 1978.

______ , Domestic and Foreign Control of Manufacturing, Mining, and Logging Establishments
in Canada, 1974, Statistics Canada, January, 1979.

______ , Foreign Investment Review Act, Final Annual Report, 1984-85, Investment Canada,
September, 1985.

Caves, Richard E., Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis, 2nd Edition, Cambridge
Surveys of Economic Literature, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1996.

Deutsche Bundesbank, Kapitalverflechtung mit dem Ausland, Statistische
Sonderveröffentlichung 10, Frankfurt am Main, June, 1999.

Dunning, John H., Studies in International Investment, London, George Allen & Unwin, Ltd.,
1970.

______________ , Multinational Enterprises and the Global Economy, Wokingham, England,
Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 1992.

Edelstein, Michael, Overseas Investment in the Age of High Imperialism: The United Kingdom,
1850-1914, New York, Columbia University Press, 1982.




                                                                                           36
France, SESSI (Service des Statistiques Industrielle), “Les entreprises étrangère dans l’industrie
francaise: Une forte implantation”, Les 4 Pages des statistique industrielle, No. 132, juin (2000).

Fukao, Kyoji, Tangjun Yuan, and Makoto Sakishita, “Estimating Total Overseas Business
Activities of Japanese Companies from Extrapolations of Panel Data Underlying the Basic and
Annual Surveys,” in Japan, Institute for International Trade and Investment, Ed. (1999), (in
Japanese).

Hobson, C.K., The Export of Capital, London, Constable, 1914.

Howenstine, Ned G., “Gross Product of Foreign Affiliates of U.S. Companies,” Survey of
Current Business 57, No.2, February, 1977.

________________, and William J. Zeile (1994), “Characteristics of Foreign-Owned U.S.
Manufacturing Establishments,” Survey of Current Business 74, No. 1, January, (1994):34-59.

IMF (International Monetary Fund, “Final Report of the Working Party on the Statistical
Discrepancy in World Current Account Balances,” Washington, DC, December, 1986.

____________________________ , Balance of Payments Manual, 5th Edition, Washington, DC,
International Monetary Fund, 1993.

____________________________ , Balance of Payments Compilation Guide, Washington, DC,
International Monetary Fund, 1995.

____________________________ , Balance of Payments Statistics Yearbook, Washington, DC,
International Monetary Fund, 2000a.

____________________________ , International Financial Statistics Yearbook, Washington,
DC, International Monetary Fund, 2000b.

Inter-Secretariat Working Group on National Accounts, System of National Accounts: 1993,
Brussels/Luxembourg, New York, Paris, Washington, DC, Eurostat, IMF, OECD, United
Nations, and World Bank, 1993.

Iversen, Carl, Aspect of the Theory of International Capital Movements, Copenhagen, Levin and
Munksgaard; London, Humphrey Milford and Oxford University Press, 1936.

Japan, Institute for International Trade and Investment, Ed., Analytical Research Based on Data
from the Survey of Overseas Business Activities, Survey , Survey Research on Harmonizing
Globalization based on the 1997 Survey of Overseas Business Activities, Tokyo, Institute for
International Trade and Investment, 1999.

Kindleberger, Charles P., American Business Abroad: Six Lectures on Direct Investment, New
Haven and London, Yale University Press, 1969.



                                                                                             37
Landefeld, J. Steven, and Ann M. Lawson, “Valuation of the U.S. Net International Investment
Position,” Survey of Current Business 71, No. 5, May, 1991.

Lewis, Cleona, America’s Stake in International Investments, Washington, DC, Brookings
Institution, 1938.

Lipsey, Robert E., “Changing Patterns of International Investment in and by the United States,”
in Martin Feldstein (ed.), The United States in the World Economy, Chicago, University of
Chicago Press, 1988, pp. 475-545.

_____________ , “Foreign-Owned Firms and U.S. Wages,” Cambridge, MA, NBER Working
Paper No. 4927, November 1994.

______________ , “Outward Direct Investment and the U.S. Economy,” in Martin Feldstein,
James R. Hines, Jr., and R. Glenn Hubbard, (eds.), The Effects of Taxation on Multinational
Corporations, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1995, pp.7-41.

______________ , “Internationalized Production in Developed and Developing Countries and in
Industry Sectors,” NBER Working Paper No. 6405, February, 1998.

______________ , “The Role of FDI in International Capital Flows,” in Martin Feldstein, (ed.),
International Capital Flows, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1999, pp.307-362.

______________ ,”Interpreting Developed Countries’ Foreign Direct Investment,” in Deutsche
Bundesbank, (ed.), Investing Today for the World of Tomorrow, Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 2001,
pp. 285-325.

Lipsey, Robert E., Magnus Blomström, and Eric D. Ramstetter, “Internationalized Production in
World Output,” NBER Working Paper No. 5385, Cambridge, MA, National Bureau of
Economic Research, December (1995).

______________, ________________, and _______________ , “Internationalized Production in
World Output,” in Robert E. Baldwin, Robert E. Lipsey, and J. David Richardson, (eds.),
Geography and Ownership as Bases for Economic Accounting, NBER Studies in Income and
Wealth, Vol. 59, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1998, pp.83-138.

_______________ , Eric D. Ramstetter, and Magnus Blomström, “Outward FDI and Parent
Exports and Employment: Japan, the United States, and Sweden,” Global Economic Quarterly 1,
No. 4, 2000.

Lowe, Jeffrey H. (1990), “Gross Product of U.S. Affiliates of Foreign Companies, 1977-87,”
Survey of Current Business 70, No. 6, June, (1990): 45-53.

Mataloni, Raymond J., Jr., “Real Gross Product of U.S. Companies’ Majority-Owned Foreign
Affiliates in Manufacturing,” Survey of Current Business 77, No. 4, April, (1997):8-17.



                                                                                           38
_____________________ (2000), “U.S. Multinational Companies: Operations in 1998,” Survey
of Current Business 80, No. 7, (2000): 26-45.

Mataloni, Raymond J, Jr., and Lee Goldberg, “Gross Product of U.S. Multinational Corporations,
1977-91,” Survey of Current Business 74, No. 2, February, (1994):42-63.

Mintz, Ilse, Deterioration in the Quality of Foreign Bonds Issued in the United States, 1920-
1930, New York, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1951.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development), OECD Benchmark
Definition of Foreign Direct Investment, 3d Edition, Paris, OECD, 1996.

_____ , Activities of Foreign Affiliates in OECD Countries, Paris, OECD, 1998.

_____ , Measuring Globalisation: The Role of Multinationals in OECD Economies, 1999
Edition, Paris, OECD, 1999.

_____ , International Direct Investment Statistics Yearbook, 1999, Paris, OECD, 2000.

Ramstetter, Eric D., “Estimating Economic Activity by Japanese Transnational Corporations:
How to make sense of the Data?” Transnational Corporations 5, No.2, August (1996):107-143.

Reddaway, W.B., in collaboration with J.O.N. Perkins, S.J. Potter, and C. T. Taylor, Effects of
U.K. Direct Investment Overseas: An Interim Report, Occasional Paper 12, Department of
Applied Economics, Cambridge University, 1967.

_____________, in collaboration with S.J. Potter and C. T. Taylor, Effects of U.K. Direct
Investment Overseas: Final Report, Occasional Paper 15, Department of Applied Economics,
Cambridge University, 1968.

Republic of China, Statistical Yearbook of the Republic of China, 2000, Taiwan, Directorate
General of Budget, Accounting, and Statistics, Executive Yuan, Republic of China, 2000.

Samuelsson, Hans-Fredrik, Utländska Direkta Investeringar I Sverige, Stockholm, Industriens
Utredningsinstitut, 1977.

Scholl, Russell B., “The International Investment Position of the United States at Yearend 1999,”
Survey of Current Business 80, No. 7, July, (2000):46-56.

Southard, Frank A., Jr., American Industry in Europe, Boston and New York, Houghton Mifflin
Co., 1931.

Stekler, Lois E. and Guy V. G. Stevens, “The Adequacy of U.S. Direct Investment Data,” in
Peter Hooper and J. David Richardson, Editors, International Economic Transactions: Issues in
Measurement and Empirical Research, Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 55, Chicago,
University of Chicago Press, 1991.

                                                                                            39
Stevens, Guy V.G., and Robert E. Lipsey, “Interactions Between Domestic and Foreign
Investment,” Journal of International Money and Finance 11, No. 1, March, (1992):40-62.

Svedberg, Peter, “The Portfolio-Direct Investment Composition of Private Foreign Investment in
1914, Revisited,” Economic Journal 88, No. 352, December, (1978):763-777.

Sweden, Statistics Sweden, “Swedish owned enterprise groups having subsidiaries abroad 1997,”
Swedish National Board for Industrial and Technical Development (NUTEK) and Statistics
Sweden, Stockholm and Örebro, 2000a.

_____________________, International Business: Foreign owned enterprises 1999, Swedish
National Board for Industrial and Technical Development and Statistics Sweden, Stockholm and
Örebro, 2000b.

_____________________, Utlandsägda företag, Ekonomiska uppgifter 1997, NUTEK and
Statistics Sweden, Stockholm and Örebro, 2000c.

_____________________, Research and Development in international enterprises 1997,
Swedish Institute for Growth Policy Studies (ITPS) and Statistics Sweden, Östersund and
Stockholm, May, 2001.

Swedenborg, Birgitta, Den Svenska Industrins I Utlandet, Stockholm, Industriens
Utredningsinstitut, 1973.

__________________, The Multinational Operations of Swedish Firms: An Analysis of
Determinants and Effects, Stockholm, The Industrial Institute for Economic and Social Research,
1979.

__________________, Svensk Industri I Utlandet: En Analys av Drivkrafter och Effekter,
Stockholm, Industriens Utredningsinstitut, 1982.

__________________, “Determinants and Effects of Multinational Growth: The Swedish Case
Revisited,” in Magnus Blomström and Linda Goldberg, Editors, Topics in Empirical
International Economics, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 2001.

__________________, Göran Johansson-Grahn, and Mats Kinwall, Den Svenska Industrins
Utlandsinvesteringar, 1960-1986, Stockholm, Industriens Utredningsinstitut, 1988.

United Nations, Multinational Corporations in the World Economy, New York, United Nations,
1973.

____________, Transnational Corporations in World Development: A Re-Examination,
Commission on Transnational Corporations, New York, United Nations, 1978.




                                                                                          40
____________, Transnational Corporations in World Development: Third Survey, United
Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations, New York, United Nations, 1983.

____________, Transnational Corporations in World Development: Trends and Prospects,
Centre on Transnational Corporations, New York, United Nations, 1988.

____________, MSPA Handbook of World Development Statistics, Long-Term Socio-
Economic Perspectives Branch, Macroeconomics and Social Policy Analysis Division,
Department of Economic and Social Information and Policy Analysis, New York, United
Nations, 1993.

_____________, World Investment Report, 1998: Trends and Determinants, New York and
Geneva, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 1998.

_____________, World Investment Report, 1999: Foreign Direct Investment and the Challenge
of Development, New York and Geneva, United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, 1999.

______________, World Investment Report, 2000; Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions and
Development, New York and Geneva, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
2000a.

______________, Measures of the Transnationalization of Economic Activity, New York and
Geneva, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 2000b.

U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970,
Washington, DC, Government Printing Office, 1975.

U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, The Operations of Federal Agencies in Monitoring,
Reporting On, and Analyzing Foreign Investments in the United States, Hearings before a
Subcommittee of the Committee on Government Operations, 95th Congress, 2nd Session,
September 19, 20, and 21, 1978, Washington, D.C., U. S. Government Printing Office, 1978.

U.S. Department of Commerce, American Direct Investments in Foreign Countries, Trade
Information Bulletin No. 731, Washington, DC, GPO, 1930.

_________________________, American Direct Investments in Foreign Countries – 1936,
Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce, Economic Series- No.1, Washington, DC, GPO,
1938.

_________________________, Direct Private Foreign Investments of the United States: Census
of 1950, A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business, Office of Business Economics,
Washington, D.C. GPO, 1953.

_________________________, U.S. Direct Investment Abroad, 1966, Final Data, Bureau of
Economic Analysis, Washington, D.C., U.S. Department of Commerce, 1975.

                                                                                            41
_________________________, U.S. Direct Investment Abroad, 1977, Bureau of Economic
Analysis, Washington, D.C., U.S. Department of Commerce, April, 1981.

_________________________, Selected Data on U.S. Direct Investment Abroad, 1950-1976,
Washington, D.C., Bureau of Economic Analysis, February, 1982.

_________________________, U.S. Direct Investment Abroad, 1982 Benchmark Survey Data,
Bureau of Economic Analysis, Washington, D.C., U.S. Department of Commerce, December,
1985.

_________________________, U.S. Direct Investment Abroad: Balance of Payments and Direct
Investment Position Estimates, 1977-81, Bureau of Economic Analysis, November, 1986.

_________________________, Foreign Direct Investment in the United States: Establishment
Data for 1987, Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census, June, 1992.

_________________________, Foreign Direct Investment in the United States: Establishment
Data for 1997, Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census, May, 1997.

_______________________________, U.S. Direct Investment Abroad: Balance of Payments
and Direct Investment Position Estimates, 1982-88, Bureau of Economic Analysis, September,
1995.

_______________________________, U.S. Direct Investment Abroad: 1994 Benchmark
Survey, Final Results, Bureau of Economic Analysis, May, 1998a.

_______________________________, “U.S. Direct Investment Abroad: Detail for Historical
Cost Position and Related Capital and Income Flows, 1997,” Survey of Current Business 78, No.
10, October, (1998b):117-156.

_______________________________, “Foreign Direct Investment in the United States: Detail
for Historical Cost Position and Related Capital and Income Flows, 1999,” Survey of Current
Business 80, No. 9, September (2000a):31-60.

_______________________________, “U.S. Direct Investment Abroad: Detail for Historical
Cost Position and Related Capital and Income Flows, 1999,” Survey of Current Business 80, No.
9, September, (2000b):61-90.

_______________________________, U.S. Direct Investment Abroad: Operations of U.S.
Parent Companies and Their Foreign Affiliates, 1998 Preliminary, Washington, D.C., Bureau of
Economic Analysis, 2000c.

_______________________________, U.S. Direct Investment Abroad: Balance of Payments &
Direct Investment Position Estimates, 1982-1999, Washington, D.C., Bureau of Economic
Analysis, 2000d.

                                                                                       42
_________________________________, Foreign Direct Investment in the United States: Final
Results from the 1997 Benchmark Survey, Washington, D.C., Bureau of Economic Analysis,
2001.

Vaupel, James W., and Joan P. Curhan, The Making of Multinational Enterprise, Boston,
Division of Research, Graduate School of Business Administration, Harvard University, 1969.

Wilkins, Mira, The Emergence of Multinational Enterprise: American Business Abroad from the
Colonial Era to 1914, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 1970.

___________, “Modern European Economic History and the Multinationals,” Journal of
European Economic History 6, No. 3 (winter) (1977):575-95.

___________, “Japanese Multinational Enterprise Before 1914,” Business History Review, No.
60 (summer) (1986).

___________, The History of Foreign Investment in the United States to 1914, Harvard Studies
in Business History, No. 41, Cambridge, MA and London, Harvard University Press, 1989.




                                                                                       43
                      Tables


    Table 1. Share of Direct Investment in Total
        World Capital Outflow, 1970-1999
                    (Percentage)

Excluding Hong Kong &Taiwan

1970-74                                          5.8
1975-79                                         18.0
1980-84                                         11.6
1985-89                                         20.7
1990-94                                         25.4

Excluding Hong Kong but including Taiwan

1990-94a                                        29.7
1995-99                                         29.6
1995                                            34.0
1996                                            28.7
1997                                            29.6
1998                                            29.5
1999                                            28.6

Including Hong Kong & Taiwanb

1998                                            29.6
1999                                            29.3
a
  Revised data.
b
  Total world capital flow does not include portfolio
investment and other investment from Hong Kong.

Source: Lipsey (1999) and Appendix Table 1.




                                                        44
 Table 2. Share of Direct Investment in U.S. Inward and Outward Private Investment and Inward
                            FDI Stock Relative to Outward, 1976-1999
                                           (Percentage)

                          Share of Direct Investment                 Inward as Percentage of
  Year              Outward                        Inward              Outward FDI Stock
           Market   Current   Book        Market Current    Book    Market Current      Book

  1976        .       60.4         48.4     .      25.3     18.0        .      21.4        22.5
  1977        .       60.0         47.1     .      27.7     19.3        .      22.5        23.7
  1978        .       57.2         43.2     .      28.5     19.7        .      24.2        26.1
  1979        .       57.5         43.1     .      28.6     19.7        .      26.3        29.0
  1980        .       56.0         41.4     .      32.3     23.8        .      32.8        38.6
  1981        .       50.6         36.4     .      34.2     25.5        .      40.4        47.6
  1982      30.6      42.1         28.8   24.3     31.3     23.5      57.5     49.4        60.0
  1983      29.7      35.3         24.6   22.6     27.0     20.7      55.9     54.5        64.6
  1984      28.9      34.4         24.7   21.7     26.5     21.0      63.7     64.2        75.5
  1985      35.3      34.4         25.2   21.9     24.0     19.1      56.9     66.6        77.4
  1986      38.9      32.7         24.5   21.8     22.5     18.4      51.5     70.3        81.5
  1987      39.2      34.3         26.3   22.2     23.2     19.2      53.6     70.0        80.7
  1988      39.0      32.2         24.3   23.4     23.8     19.7      56.5     78.2        90.7
  1989      39.7      30.5         23.2   26.0     23.5     19.5      64.2     84.6        96.6
  1990      36.0      32.1         24.8   25.9     24.6     20.3      73.7     81.9        91.7
  1991      37.1      31.4         25.0   28.7     24.3     20.1      80.9     82.9        89.6
  1992      35.7      31.6         25.9   28.0     23.2     19.2      86.8     81.4        84.3
  1993      36.6      28.9         24.1   28.2     23.3     19.3      74.8     82.0        82.8
  1994      35.2      28.6         23.8   26.0     22.3     18.2      71.0     78.6        78.4
  1995      36.2      27.8         23.3   27.8     20.6     17.0      76.9     76.8        76.6
  1996      35.5      26.2         22.3   28.6     19.5     16.3      80.5     75.3        75.2
  1997      35.2      24.4         21.0   29.8     17.6     15.1      92.2     78.0        79.2
  1998      37.4      24.9         21.8   33.1     17.3     15.2     100.8     76.9        78.3
  1999      37.6      23.5         20.7   36.0     18.4     16.5     107.1     84.5        87.1


Source: Appendix Tables 1 and 2.




                                                                                      45
                          Appendix Tables


        Appendix Table 1. World Investment Outflows, 1990-1999
                       (Millions of U.S. Dollars)

                   Direct       Portfolio        Other
     Period                                                    Totalc
                Investmenta   Investmentb     Investmentb

      1990          243,012         187,348        205,411       635,771
      1991          198,259         333,194        164,231       695,684
      1992          211,378         353,007        175,953       740,338
      1993          245,564         535,832        177,941       959,337
      1994          286,163         337,297        202,183       825,643
    1990-1994       236,875         349,336        185,144       771,355
      1995          361,886         409,836        244,538     1,016,260
      1996          396,785         651,301        267,472     1,315,558
      1997          469,610         740,049        317,707     1,527,366
      1998          680,768       1,016,928        565,727     2,263,423
      1999          851,317       1,388,102        682,819     2,922,238
    1995-1999       552,073         841,243        415,653     1,808,969
      1998          680,768      1,042,420a       575,997a    2,299,185a
      1999          851,317      1,362,635a       694,629a    2,908,581a


a
  Including Hong Kong.
b
  Excluding Hong Kong, except as noted.
c
  Excluding Hong Kong Portfolio Investment and Other Investment, except
as noted.

Sources: IMF (2000) and earlier issues; United Nations (2000) and earlier
issues; Republic of China (2000).




                                                                            46
    Appendix Table 2. Sources of Direct Investment Outflows
                   (Millions of U.S. Dollars)

               United                        Developing Latin
    Period               Japan Europe
               States                          Asia    America

     1990      29,951   48,050   139,955         17,000   1,067
     1991      31,378   31,487   114,490          9,837   1,357
     1992      48,730   17,390   113,020         18,415   1,913
     1993      83,951   13,834   103,586         30,728   2,759
     1994      80,167   18,089   134,564         35,444   3,475
    1990-94    54,835   25,770   121,123         22,285   2,114

     1995      98,750   22,508   176,736         42,534   4,001
     1996      91,883   23,442   208,355         48,147   3,194
     1997     105,017   26,059   249,122         49,879   7,988
     1998     146,053   24,625   435,645         30,490   8,499
     1999     150,900   22,267   610,390 a       38,884   8,236
    1995-99   118,521   23,780   336,050         41,987   6,384


a
    Excluding Norway

Sources: IMF (2000) and earlier issues; United Nations (2000)
and earlier issues; Republic of China (2000).




                                                                  47
Appendix Table 3. Destinations of Direct Investment Inflows
                (Millions of U.S. Dollars)

               United                        Developing Latin
    Period               Japan Europe
               States                          Asia    America

     1990      47,918    1,760   104,310         21,479    7,666
     1991      22,010    1,298    84,954         22,588   11,873
     1992      20,975    2,760    88,646         28,416   14,308
     1993      51,363      119    88,195         49,847   12,940
     1994      46,121      912    85,972         65,134   27,457
    1990-94    37,677    1,370    90,415         37,493   14,849

     1995      57,776       39   138,554         70,256   28,802
     1996      86,503      200   135,882         85,247   42,434
     1997     106,035    3,200   164,505         91,677   63,026
     1998     186,315    3,268   282,211         85,757   70,201
     1999     275,535   12,308   396,612 a       93,499   87,171
    1995-99   142,433    3,803   223,553         85,287   58,327


a
    Excluding Norway

Sources: See Appendix Table 2.




                                                                   48
        Appendix Table 4. Net Inflows of Direct Investment
                   (Millions of U.S. Dollars)

              United                              Developing Latin
    Period              Japan      Europe
              States                                Asia    America

     1990     17,967    -46,290    -35,645         4,479     6,599
     1991      -9,368   -30,189    -29,536         12,751   10,516
     1992     -27,755   -14,630    -24,374         10,001   12,395
     1993     -32,588   -13,715    -15,391         19,119   10,181
     1994     -34,046   -17,177    -48,592         29,690   23,982
    1990-94   -17,158   -24,400    -30,708         15,208   12,735

     1995     -40,974   -22,469     -38,182        27,722   24,801
     1996      -5,380   -23,242     -72,473        37,100   39,240
     1997       1,018   -22,859     -84,617        41,798   55,038
     1998      40,262   -21,357    -153,434        55,267   61,702
                                              a
     1999     124,635    -9,959    -213,778        54,615   78,935
    1995-99    23,912   -19,977    -112,497        43,300   51,943


a
    Excluding Norway

Source: Appendix Tables 2 and 3.




                                                                      49
                    Appendix Table 5. U.S. Private Investment Abroad, 1976-1999
                                      (Millions of U.S. Dollars)

        Direct Investment, Valued at         Foreign Other Private Total, with Direct Investment Valued at
Year
       Market     Current      Book         Securities  Claims       Market        Current       Book

1976            .  222,283 136,809      44,157              101,452            .     367,892      282,418
1977            .  246,078 145,990      49,439              114,818            .     410,335      310,247
1978            .  285,005 162,727      53,384              160,201            .     498,590      376,312
1979            .  336,301 187,858      56,769              191,520            .     584,590      436,147
1980            .  388,072 215,375      62,454              242,295            .     692,821      520,124
1981            .  407,804 228,348      62,142              336,260            .     806,206      626,750
1982     226,638   374,059 207,752      74,046              439,983     740,667      888,088      721,781
1983     274,342   355,643 212,150      84,723              565,834     924,899    1,006,200      862,707
1984     270,574   348,342 218,093      88,804              575,769     935,147    1,012,915      882,666
1985     386,352   371,036 238,369     119,403              589,235   1,094,990    1,079,674      947,007
1986     530,074   404,818 270,472     158,123              674,730   1,362,927    1,237,671    1,103,325
1987     590,246   478,062 326,253     188,589              726,825   1,505,660    1,393,476    1,241,667
1988     692,461   513,761 347,179     232,849              850,984   1,776,294    1,597,594    1,431,012
1989     832,460   553,093 381,781     314,294              948,124   2,094,878    1,815,511    1,644,199
1990     731,762   616,655 430,521     342,313              961,002   2,035,077    1,919,970    1,733,836
1991     827,537   643,364 467,844     455,750              946,697   2,229,984    2,045,811    1,870,291
1992     798,630   663,830 502,063     515,083              922,326   2,236,039    2,101,239    1,939,472
1993   1,027,547   723,526 564,283     853,528              928,267   2,809,342    2,505,321    2,346,078
1994   1,067,803   786,565 612,893     948,668            1,016,098   3,032,569    2,751,331    2,577,659
1995   1,307,155   885,506 699,015 1,169,636              1,135,716   3,612,507    3,190,858    3,004,367
1996   1,526,243   986,536 795,195 1,467,985              1,307,489   4,301,717    3,762,010    3,570,669
1997   1,778,189 1,058,735 871,316 1,751,183              1,526,993   5,056,365    4,336,911    4,149,492
1998   2,173,547 1,207,059 1,014,012 2,052,929            1,586,301   5,812,777    4,846,289    4,653,242
1999   2,615,532 1,331,187 1,132,622 2,583,386            1,753,811   6,952,729    5,668,384    5,469,819


Source: Bargas (2000), and Scholl (2000).




                                                                                               50
            Appendix Table 6. Foreign Non-Official Assets in the United States, 1976-1999
                                     (Millions of U.S. Dollars)

            Direct Investment, Valued at      U.S.       Other       Total, with Direct Investment Valued at
  Year
            Market     Current    Book      Securities   Claims        Market        Current        Book

  1976              .   47,528     30,770      61,941       78,218              .      187,687      170,929
  1977              .   55,413     34,595      58,797       85,761              .      199,971      179,153
  1978              .   68,976     42,471      62,464      110,307              .      241,747      215,242
  1979              .   88,579     54,462      72,797      148,547              .      309,923      275,806
  1980              . 127,105      83,046      90,227      175,574              .      392,906      348,847
  1981              . 164,623     108,714      93,590      223,262              .      481,475      425,566
  1982       130,428 184,842      124,677     118,746      286,785       535,959       590,373      530,208
  1983       153,318 193,708      137,061     147,657      376,837       677,812       718,202      661,555
  1984       172,377 223,538      164,583     190,598      430,391       793,366       844,527      785,572
  1985       219,996 247,223      184,615     295,822      487,526     1,003,344     1,030,571      967,963
  1986       272,966 284,701      220,414     405,881      573,797     1,252,644     1,264,379    1,200,092
  1987       316,200 334,552      263,394     424,320      684,604     1,425,124     1,443,476    1,372,318
  1988       391,530 401,766      314,754     493,169      791,164     1,675,863     1,686,099    1,599,087
  1989       534,734 467,886      368,924     649,405      871,337     2,055,476     1,988,628    1,889,666
  1990       539,601 505,346      394,911     613,096      932,590     2,085,287     2,051,032    1,940,597
  1991       669,137 533,404      419,108     716,303      947,470     2,332,910     2,197,177    2,082,881
  1992       693,177 540,270      423,131     797,186      988,175     2,478,538     2,325,631    2,208,492
  1993       768,398 593,313      467,412     917,950    1,039,919     2,726,267     2,551,182    2,425,281
  1994       757,853 617,982      480,667     975,379    1,181,927     2,915,159     2,775,288    2,637,973
  1995     1,005,726 680,066      535,553   1,329,893    1,284,951     3,620,570     3,294,910    3,150,397
  1996     1,229,118 743,214      598,021   1,702,023    1,361,821     4,292,962     3,807,058    3,661,865
  1997     1,639,765 825,334      689,834   2,240,922    1,626,392     5,507,079     4,692,648    4,557,148
  1998     2,190,990 928,645      793,748   2,742,169    1,682,354     6,615,513     5,353,168    5,218,271
  1999     2,800,736 1,125,214    986,668   3,170,044    1,806,944     7,777,724     6,102,202    5,963,656


Source: Bargas (2000), Scholl (1990) and (2000).




                                                                                                 51
Appendix Table 7. The Relation (Adjusted R-square) of U.S. Affiliate Sales,
 Employment, and PP&E to U.S. Outward FDI Stock Across Countries:
                     Total and 12 Industry Groups


                                   Sales      Employment        PP&E
Regression
                                   1998         1998            1994

All Industries                     0.79           0.59           0.82

   Petroleum                       0.51           0.85           0.98
   Manufacturing                   0.91           0.85           0.88
      Food                         0.88           0.58           0.79
      Chemicals                    0.69           0.58           0.76
      Metals                       0.89           0.64           0.88
      Nonelectrical machinery.     0.93           0.89           0.84
      Electrical machinery         0.70           0.51           0.72
      Transportation equipment     0.46           0.69           0.78
      Other Mfg.                   0.66           0.79           0.85
   Wholesale                       0.96           0.58           0.87
   Finance (excl. Banking)         0.76           0.56           0.64
   Services                        0.91           0.78           0.70
   Other Industries                0.47           0.37           0.87


Source:
Outward FDI Stock: U.S. Department of Commerce (2000d).
Affiliate Sales and Employment: U.S. Department of Commerce (2000c).
Affiliate PP&E: U.S. Department of Commerce (1998a).




                                                                              52
Appendix Table 8. The Relation (Adjusted R-Square) of U.S.
Affiliate Sales, Employment, and PP&E to the U.S. Outward
          FDI Stock Across Countries and Industries


Regression                      Adj. R2       No. of Obs.

                           63 Industry Groups X 9 Countries
Sales (1998)                   0.1020             304
Employment (1998)              0.0167             442
PP&E (1994)                    0.0411             196

                          58 Countries X 12 Industry Groups
Sales (1998)                  0.2915              419
Employment (1998)             0.0980              579
PP&E (1994)                   0.1551              339


Source: See Appendix Table 7.




                                                              53
  Appendix Table 9. The Relation (Adjusted R-Square) of Changes in U.S. Affiliate
   Sales, Employment, and PP&E to Changes in U.S. Outward FDI Stock Across
                        Countries by 12 Industry Groups

                                Absolute Changes             Relative Changes
Regression
                               Adj. R2   No. of Obs.        Adj. R2    No. of Obs.

                                                Sales (1982-98)
All Industries                  0.7282       48              0.3910        48
   Petroleum                   -0.0617       18               0.1332       18
   Manufacturing                0.8371       41               0.4741       41
       Food                     0.7925       17              -0.0593       13
       Chemicals                0.5335       32              0.0897        31
       Metals                   0.7540       20              0.4941        17
       Nonelectrical mach.      0.8944       31               0.5125       14
       Electrical machinery     0.6513       26               0.1779       20
       Transportation equip.    0.4088       19               0.0765        6
       Other Mfg.               0.4869        7              0.0985         6
   Wholesale                    0.8013       26              0.7974        26
   Finance (excl. Banking)      0.6707       19               0.1398       19
   Services                     0.9175       31               0.4073       30
   Other Industries             0.0999        5              0.4838         4

                                                PP&E (1982-94)
All Industries                 0.7166        49             0.1256         49
   Petroleum                   0.9610        12             0.1605         13
   Manufacturing               0.8092        38             0.2032         37
       Food                    0.4990        22             0.9732         16
       Food (w/o Turkey)                                    0.0408         15
       Chemicals               0.6422        32             0.3400         30
       Metals                  0.4954        18            -0.0760         14
       Nonelec.                0.6329        23             0.3290         12
       Electric                0.6727        22             0.5593         15
       Transportation          0.7494        18             0.8585          3
       Other Mfg.              0.7709        11             0.8574          9
   Wholesale                   0.8765        22             0.8161         22
   Finance (excl. Banking)     0.6383        15             0.0262         13
   Services                    0.5896        25             0.7521         23
   Other Industries            0.7436         6            -0.2390          6




                                                                                54
(Continue Appendix Table 9)

                                  Absolute Changes               Relative Changes
   Regression
                                 Adj. R2   No. of Obs.          Adj. R2    No. of Obs.

                                                Employment (1982-98)
   All Industries                 0.1335         52            0.2326           52
      Petroleum                  -0.0250         34            0.0066           33
      Manufacturing               0.3219         49            0.5490           48
          Food                    0.0210         39            0.5408           32
          Chemicals               0.0260         40            0.7148           39
          Metals                 -0.0211         29            0.2217           25
          Nonelec.               -0.0051         40            -0.0500          22
          Electric               -0.0208         33            -0.0161          26
          Transportation         -0.0301         32            0.1265           15
          Other Mfg.              0.3170         19            -0.0434          17
      Wholesale                   0.1381         35            0.3490           35
      Finance (excl. Banking)     0.4273         32            0.1220           28
      Services                    0.7556         40            0.0202           39
      Other Industries           -0.0013         17            -0.0633          16


   Source:
   Outward FDI Stock: U.S. Department of Commerce (2000d).
   Affiliate Sales and Employment: U.S. Department of Commerce (1985) and (2000c).
   Affiliate PP&E: U.S. Department of Commerce (1985) and (1998a).




                                                                                     55
 Appendix Table 10. The Relation (Adjusted R-Square) of
 Changes in U.S. Affiliate Sales, Employment, and PP&E to
Changes in U.S. Outward FDI Stock Across 52 Countries and
                    12 Industry Groups

Regression                      Adj. R2        No. of Obs.

                                    Absolute Changes
Sales (1982-98)                 0.2705            251
PP&E (1982-94)                  0.0605            227
Employment (1982-98)            0.0257            390

                                    Relative Changes
Sales (1982-98)                 0.1212             204
PP&E (1982-94)                  0.2788             176
Employment (1982-98)            0.1808             327


Source: See Appendix Table 9.




                                                             56
