NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE SUPPLEMENTAL SECURITY INCOME PROGRAM AND INCENTIVES TO TAKE UP
SOCIAL SECURITY EARLY RETIREMENT: EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE FROM MATCHED
SIPP AND SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATIVE FILES
Elizabeth T. Powers
David Neumark
Working Paper 8670
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8670
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2001
This research was supported by the Center for Retirement Research at Boston College pursuant to a grant
from the U.S. Social Security Administration, funded as part of the Retirement Research Consortium. The
opinions and conclusion are solely ours and should not be construed as representing the opinions or policy
of the Social Security Administration or any agency of the Federal Government, or the Center for Retirement
Research at Boston College. Linda Bailey and Parker Yi provided research assistance with the public-use
data. We are grateful to Howard Iams and Minh Huynh of the Social Security Administration and Claudia
Sahm of the University of Michigan for help accessing and interpreting administrative records. We also thank
Roger Gordon of the University of Michigan for initially stimulating our thinking on SSI-SSER interactions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2001 by Elizabeth T. Powers and David Neumark. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Supplemental Security Income Program and Incentives to Take Up Social Security Early
Retirement: Empirical Evidence from Matched SIPP and Social Security Administrative Files
Elizabeth T. Powers and David Neumark
NBER Working Paper No. 8670
December 2001
JEL No. J14, J18, H55

ABSTRACT
Features of the Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program and the social security retirement
system may interact in a manner that creates incentives for prospective SSI recipients to take social
security early retirement (SSER). This paper takes a first close look at this issue. The work disincentives
posed by SSI rules and the potential interactions between the SSI and SSER programs are outlined in a
basic theoretical framework. The hypotheses that emerge can be tested using public-use microdata linked
to Social Security Administration records. We first present evidence supporting the hypothesis that SSI
rules induce prospective SSI recipients to substantially reduce work activity (by various measures) prior
to age 65. We then present two types of evidence on SSI-SSER interactions. We do not find a simple
correspondence between generous SSI benefits and SSER use, which might be an expected indirect SSISSER interaction. However, estimates for some specifications for SSER receipt, derived directly from
the theoretical interaction between SSER and SSI rules through the household budget constraint, provide
evidence of a direct interaction between SSER and SSI, with SSI inducing use of SSER for those
individuals for whom the SSI-SSER interaction eliminates the reduction in benefits associated with early
receipt of social security benefits.

Elizabeth Powers
Institute of Government and Public Affairs
1007 West Nevada Street
Urbana, IL 61801
epowers@ntx1.cso.uiuc.edu

David Neumark
Department of Economics
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824
and NBER
neumarkd@pilot.msu.edu

I. Introduction
Perhaps because individuals only become eligible for the Supplemental Security Income
(SSI) program at age 65, there has been little investigation of the possible incentive effects on
behavior prior to age 65, including possible work reductions and increased participation in other
programs. In fact, the incentives imbedded in SSI could lead individuals to withdraw from the
labor market at earlier ages. There may also be important interactions between SSI rules and the
early retirement option in the social security system (henceforth referred to as SSER, for "social
security early retirement"). This paper is the first of which we are aware to investigate how the
SSI and SSER programs interact. The theory laid out below predicts that they will, but this is
under an assumption of knowledge of these government programs on the part of their actual and
prospective participants. Only an empirical analysis can confirm whether these interactions are
important in practice. We use multiple panels of the Survey of Income and Program
Participation (SIPP), linked to confidential Social Security Administration data on earnings
histories and SSI recipiency, to investigate our hypotheses.1
We note at the outset that there is a statutory relationship between SSI receipt and social
security receipt, because SSI recipients are required to claim their social security entitlements.
This phenomenon is not generated by individual behavior, and it is not the focus of this paper.
Rather, there are two paths of interaction considered below. First, we have provided evidence in
earlier work (Neumark and Powers, 1999, 2000) that SSI creates work disincentives for
prospective recipients as they approach the age of SSI-aged eligibility. This is because SSI
effectively places a confiscatory tax on retirement income exceeding very small disregards,

1

Throughout the paper we interchangeably use "SSI" and "SSI-aged" to refer to the program for which
sufficiently poor elderly qualify. We refer to the disability portion of the program as "SSI-disabled."

1

regardless of whether it is from private or public sources, including social security.2 Therefore a
potentially important incentive for working today–additional pension income tomorrow–is
eliminated by SSI rules. We have speculated in past work that a by-product of decreased work
may be an increased reliance on SSER to meet consumption needs following a reduction in labor
supply. We therefore first ask whether generous SSI benefits, in addition to discouraging labor
supply near the age of eligibility, encourage the use of SSER.
We then rely on more explicit modeling of the unified budget constraint facing an older
low-income individual when both SSI and SSER are considered. We show that SSI rules should
encourage SSER participation by nullifying the actuarial reduction in the SSER benefit once age
65 is reached, for those who will participate in SSI. We formulate and test this specific
hypothesis, which we regard as a more direct test of an interaction between SSI and SSER.
The two approaches and their related concerns are qualitatively different. The
examination of whether SSI's incentives to diminish work activity prior to age 65 are also
reflected in increased SSER use is an exploration of what can be thought of as an indirect
linkage between the programs, due to effects of SSI rules on prospective recipients' work
behavior prior to age 65. That is, SSI rules reduce work incentives, in turn leading to SSER
participation (if eligible). Therefore, in the first set of analyses, we treat SSER participation just
like any other measure of work activity. While this indirect approach is certainly consistent with
a person perceiving a unified SSI-SSER budget constraint, by no means is it definitive. For
example, we may fail to find that SSI induces SSER use because people go on SSER for a wide
variety of reasons, many unrelated to SSI, so the effect is simply not detectable in the data.

2

Additionally, there is an asset test for eligibility for SSI, which may discourage saving (Neumark and
Powers, 1998) and therefore the labor supply needed to meet saving goals.

2

The second type of evidence, which we consider the primary evidence on SSI-SSER
interactions presented in this paper, hones in on the question of direct program interactions. The
hypothesis underlying this exploration is that prospective recipients face a "unified" budget
constraint that incorporates both SSI and SSER program rules. The test for direct program
interactions is likely to be more informative because it focuses explicitly on asking whether those
individuals for whom SSER should be more attractive because of how SSI and SSER interact are
in fact more likely to take SSER. What unites these analyses is the fact that regardless of
whether linkages are direct or indirect, if they exist researchers and policymakers should be
mindful of the unintended consequences of changes in SSI on the social security system, and
vice versa.
The use of Social Security Administration records greatly enhances the empirical
evidence that can be brought to bear on this issue. In the case of the indirect influence of SSI
rules on SSER receipt, we are better able to characterize the likelihood that an older individual,
not yet aged 65, takes up SSI in old age, because we are able to access the individual's program
history for a substantial number of years. In contrast, a SIPP panel typically follows a household
for a couple of years, and participation probabilities must be inferred from the cross-section
when only public-use data are available. In the analysis of direct program interactions, we are
able to characterize the critical portion of the unified SSI-SSER budget constraint faced by an
individual reasonably well, while only a crude guess could be surmised using public-use SIPP
data alone. Because we know each sample member's entire social security earnings history, we
can ascertain whether they face a government old-age transfer determined at the margin by SSI
or social security (the significance of which is explained below).

3

Because SSI is a welfare program, this topic is of general interest for understanding the
retirement process of very low-income people (especially its timing) and the potential supports
that enable retirement. If work plans are made contingent upon the structure of public programs,
changes to SSER or SSI rules could have a substantial impact on retirement patterns among this
group. While the issue of spillovers between programs has been studied in other contexts, it has
been ignored in the case of SSI and the social security retirement system.3
Changes to SSI generosity or social security early retirement rules are predicted to have
spillover effects on the other program. Hypothetical examples include an increase in the age of
early retirement and an increase in SSI benefits. Since the availability of SSER allows potential
SSI recipients to act on work disincentives, enhancing the value of SSI participation, an increase
in the age of early retirement may reduce SSI participation. Increased SSI benefits for elderly
recipients might not only increase SSI use but also have a positive impact on SSER take-up.
In fact, policy changes of direct relevance to SSER are currently underway, including a
change in the normal retirement age. Beginning with the 1938 birth cohort, the normal
retirement age is scheduled to rise gradually, topping out at age 67 for 1959 and later birth
cohorts. The early retirement age will remain at 62 indefinitely under current law, and this
lengthening of the early retirement period causes a reduction in the value of SSER benefits
received, as the actuarial reduction will increase. Our model predicts that such a change will
contribute further to the downward trend in SSI receipt among the elderly that has been
occurring since the program's inception in 1974. While this longstanding trend has been driven

3

Most of the economics literature on program interactions involving cash welfare has focused on
Medicaid policy. Yelowitz (1998) finds that the value of Medicaid increases SSI-disabled participation.
Blank (1989) and Yelowitz (1995) find evidence that the value of Medicaid also increases AFDC
participation. McGarry (1996) finds little influence of Medicaid on SSI-aged participation, however.
Kubik (1999) and Garrett and Glied (2000) find evidence that households' participation in SSI-disabled is
related to financial incentives posed by the AFDC and SSI programs.

4

by increasingly generous social security benefits and the increasing affluence of newer cohorts of
elderly generally, future declines could in part result from decreasing effective generosity of
public programs to the very low-income elderly, due to policymakers' failure to consider SSERSSI program interactions.
The next section presents the relevant institutional detail on the SSI and SSER programs.
Section III presents the theoretical framework and resulting hypotheses. This is followed by a
discussion of the data and empirical specifications for the hypothesis tests. Section V presents
the empirical findings. The results of these tests are summarized and discussed in Section VI.
The relevant previous literature is discussed at appropriate points throughout the paper.
II. Program Background
Social Security
The 1935 Social Security Act provided monthly benefits to retired workers aged 65 and
over and a lump-sum death benefit to the estates of these workers. Since 1961, both men and
women as young as 62 have been allowed to collect benefits if fully insured (defined as attaining
40 or more quarters of social security covered earnings). Until recently, age 65 was the "full
retirement age." For most workers, the benefit is based upon a primary insurance amount (PIA)
computed from their average indexed monthly earnings (AIME). An early retiree faces an
actuarial reduction to their PIA. If an individual chooses to work and receive social security
benefits prior to the full retirement age, his benefits are no longer reduced. However, in the era
of our sample, benefits were reduced by $1 for every $2 in earnings over a given threshold.4

4

The threshold at the time of the law change was $9,600. While Congress ended the so-called "earnings
test," these benefit reductions were in fact offset by actuarially adjusted benefit increases upon attainment
of the full retirement age, a feature that was little understood by recipients or policymakers (Gruber and
Orszag, 1999).

5

Because the actuarial reduction in benefits for early retirement is larger the greater the
time elapsing between the actual and full retirement ages, increases in the full retirement age
currently underway affect the benefits of early retirees to varying degrees, depending on their
birth cohort. Beginning with the 1938 birth cohort, the full retirement age rises above age 65,
reaching age 67 for cohorts born in 1960 or later, while the age of early retirement remains fixed
at 62. Thus, while a worker born prior to 1938 faces an actuarial reduction for age-62 retirement
of 20%, a worker born in 1960 who retires at age 62 faces a reduction of 30%. This difference
by age cohort is solely the result of applying the actuarial reduction to a lengthier period of early
retirement.5
Supplemental Security Income
The SSI program was begun in 1974 to provide a uniform federal safety net for the
elderly and disabled. The concern of this paper is with the elderly component, which sufficiently
poor individuals may participate in upon attaining age 65. While SSI is largely a federal
program, state variation exists in policy and administration. The federal government sets
eligibility criteria and maximum benefit levels for individuals and couples in the federal portion
of the program. Since some states (those with more generous safety nets prior to 1974) were
required, and other states chose, to supplement the basic federal benefit, there is also cross-state
benefit variation. Wealth holdings also affect eligibility. In the federal program, couples'
resources–after exclusions of specific items like home equity–may not exceed $2,000; for
individuals the figure is $1,000 (Social Security Administration, 2001).
The federal SSI benefit is generous relative to other welfare programs and the SSI
program comprises a potentially substantial source of income for the elderly poor. Federal SSI,
5

Some members of our sample belong to birth cohorts affected by these changes and consequently face a
full retirement age between 65 and 66. This is accounted for in our computations.

6

when combined with Food Stamps, brings an elderly household's resources to a substantial
fraction of the federal poverty line. State supplements can also be large. For example, in
January 1991 (which is within our sample period) the maximum monthly federal benefit was
$407 for an individual and $610 for a couple. At that time, the highest state benefit for couples
was in California, which resulted in a maximum combined benefit of $630 for individuals and
$1,167 for couples.
SSI benefits are reduced with other sources of retirement income. $20 per month of
unearned, non-transfer income, $65 of earned income, and one-half of earnings exceeding $65,
are disregarded in computing the SSI benefit.6 The disregards are not indexed for inflation, nor
are they differentiated by household type (couple or individual).7 In most cases, the monthly SSI
benefit is determined by the formula:
(1) SSI benefit = Guarantee - ½ Max{earned income-Min{earned income, $65},0}
- Max{unearned income - Min{unearned income, $20},0}
- {means-tested transfer income}.
The guarantee is the benefit amount paid when there is no other income. Earned income
refers to the current earnings of the SSI recipient. Unearned income includes income from
private pensions, public pensions such as social security, interest income, and the like. Meanstested transfer income (e.g., Veterans Benefits) offsets SSI income dollar-for-dollar and none of
it is disregarded. These deductions for other income are first applied to the federal benefit
amount. If there is any excess income, it is deducted from the state supplemental payment

6

In addition, certain home energy and support and maintenance assistance, Food Stamps, most federallyfunded housing assistance, state assistance based on need, one-third of child support payments, and
income received infrequently or irregularly are excluded.
7
While some states vary their disregard amounts from the federal level, it proved too difficult to
incorporate this information in our analyses, given the idiosyncratic way in which different disregards are
applied and the detailed knowledge about income sources that is needed to use them appropriately.

7

(Social Security Administration, 1994, pp. ii-iii). When the computed SSI benefit is positive, the
person or couple is eligible for the program.8
The number of SSI-aged recipients has been falling over most of the program's history.
By 1998, 1.4 million elderly participated in SSI, down from 2.3 million in 1975 (Social Security
Administration, 1999, Table 7.A3, p. 287).9 The downward trend is due to the increasing
affluence of the elderly, increasing social security coverage of the population, and increasing
value of social security benefits claimed. SSI recipients are required to apply for all public
benefits for which they may be eligible, including social security, and most SSI recipients are
eligible for at least a modest social security benefit. By September 1993, near the end of our
sample period, 65% of aged SSI recipients received social security benefits and 22% received
some other unearned income. However, SSI recipients have little else to rely upon. Only 2.1%
reported any earned income, while almost none reported private pension income (1994 Green
Book, Tables 6-16 and 6-17).
Due to receipt of social security, the average SSI-aged benefit payments actually received
by households are fairly low. In September 1989, the average federal payment to all elderly
households on SSI was $163, with an average state supplement payment of $133 (49.6% of aged
federal SSI recipients received a state supplement–1990 Green Book, p. 717). Perhaps because
many elderly could collect only small SSI benefits, or are precluded from participating in SSI at
all due to their social security benefits, take-up of SSI by the poor elderly is quite low.
Zedlewski and Meyer (1989) estimate that only about 30% of the elderly poor receive SSI
benefits. McGarry (1996) analyzes SSI participation and attributes much of the low take-up by

8

Due to the benefit computation rules, it is possible for individuals to receive a state benefit without
receiving a federal SSI benefit. Only federal payment status is recorded in SSA databases.
9
The era of our sample, 1984-1993, is fairly stable however, with roughly 1.5 million elderly
participating each year.

8

potential eligibles to the quite modest cash benefits for which most elderly poor would actually
qualify.
III. Theoretical Models of SSI and SSER Use
In this section, we lay out the theoretical framework underlying the linkages between SSI
and SSER. To illustrate most of our points, we use a simple model in which leisure and
consumption are choice variables but saving is not allowed. The results in this case are then
contrasted with a model in which saving is possible. Finally, the implications of possible
extensions to the models are briefly discussed. The theoretical discussion proceeds in two
phases. In the first phase, we review the incentive to participate in SSI and the concomitant
work disincentives of the SSI program. In the second phase, we discuss how SSI and SSER
rules interact in the budget constraint to enhance incentives to participate in SSER. The
technical background to the discussion is contained in Appendix A.
SSI Participation and Work Disincentives
Consider a simple model in which people live for two periods. In the first period the
worker chooses how much to work and consume. In the second period, consumption is financed
solely by pension benefits and welfare. Financial resources cannot be transferred between
periods. Pension benefits–which may be from both private and public sources–are determined as
an increasing function of first-period earnings. Since all income is consumed each period, once
the first-period leisure choice is known, the other choices are determined. First-period work
hours affect second-period retirement income by increasing social security and private pension
benefits.
We introduce an SSI policy into this framework. An SSI policy is characterized by a
maximum benefit level (G), an amount of pension income that is disregarded before the benefit

9

is computed (D), and a rate at which pension income in excess of D is reduced (in the case of
SSI, this rate has always been 100%). In the first period, the person is not age-eligible for SSI.
In the second period, the person is age-eligible and could be income-eligible, so long as
retirement income is not too high.
The worker's global optimum is found by considering his actions in each of the scenarios
involving SSI participation. Each scenario is described by the decision to participate or not, as
well as whether second-period income is above or below the disregard. Budget constraints and
the first-order conditions associated with the local optima are presented in Appendix A. Work
effort is affected by SSI policy in determining both local and global optima, and it is
straightforward to show that a more generous SSI policy discourages work effort, due to the
implicit confiscatory tax on pension income imposed by SSI in period 2. In two scenarios, the
SSI guarantee has no effect on behavior. First, in the local optimum with nonparticipation, SSI
policy is irrelevant. Second, the SSI guarantee has no effect on labor supply in the local
optimum where a participant's income exceeds the disregard amount. In this instance, the
person's labor supply depends solely on consumption needs in period 1, because there is no way
to influence period 2 resources by adjusting first period labor supply (it is G+D regardless).
Because of the inability to transfer resources, the size of the SSI guarantee can have no impact on
first-period consumption and hence on work decisions. Finally, in the case of participation with
income below the disregard, the Appendix demonstrates that labor supply is negatively related to
the guarantee.
What is actually observed, of course, is the global optimum. It is straightforward to
demonstrate that an increase in the SSI guarantee widens the gap between the lifetime utility
value associated with SSI-participation versus non-participation outcomes. Since all choices

10

involving SSI participation are associated with lower labor supply, the fact that an increase in G
widens the portion of the budget constraint over which participation is attractive implies that the
increase in G will also decrease labor supply globally.
The Budget Constraint under SSI and SSER Rules and Incentives to Participate in SSER
Now consider the addition of an SSER program to this model, in which the person can
begin participating during period 1. This policy is described by a benefit, B0, to which the
individual is entitled at the full retirement age in the second period; an actuarial reduction rate to
be applied in the case of early retirement (β); and an implicit tax rate on the earned income of
SSER recipients (τ).
It is evident from examining the budget constraints associated with the various
permutations of SSI and SSER participation that it will be advantageous to participate in SSER
and SSI together. When the worker participates in SSI in period 2 (focusing on the simplest
case, where second-period nonwelfare income will exceed the modest disregard), his total period
2 resources are determined by the SSI benefit schedule. There is no advantage to deferring
social security receipt, because the actuarial benefit reduction for early retirement is effectively
removed in the second period by the SSI program. Therefore, the worker's SSER decision is
made solely on the basis of whether he can obtain higher utility in period 1 as a consequence of
taking up SSER. This depends entirely upon the tradeoff between the SSER benefit and the tax
rate on earnings above the SSER disregard, and the worker's preference for leisure versus
consumption in period 1. Appendix A presents the various cases and argues that for the sort of
low-wage workers who are potentially eligible for SSI-aged, utility is higher using SSER and
SSI together. This is most obvious in the case where workers are not subject to the SSER
earnings tax: for any choice of work hours, the worker is always better off receiving earnings

11

plus the SSER benefit (βB0+wh) rather than earnings alone (wh), and in either case secondperiod consumption will be G+D.
Because the net government transfer is determined by SSI policy in period 2, early
retirement is "costless," in the sense that the actuarial reduction in benefits that would normally
give an early retiree pause are lifted when the second period is reached. The exception is if the
individual faces a very low level of retirement income that falls short of the SSI disregard level.
In this unlikely event, the agent is in the traditional situation of trading off receiving some social
security benefits today against the actuarial reduction for early retirement.
Note that this direct interaction between SSI and SSER is independent of the size of the
SSI benefit. If two agents living in different states with differing SSI generosity levels both face
a government transfer in retirement that is determined by the SSI program, it would be to the
advantage of both of them to participate in SSER. Of course, while this is true for individuals,
the transfer margin is more likely to be determined by SSI in states with more generous SSI
supplementation, all else constant. Therefore, this could contribute to a positive relationship
between SSI benefit generosity and SSER take-up in the data, controlling for other factors.
However, in our more direct implementation of the test for this effect, we compute whether a
specific couple or individual's government transfer in retirement is prospectively determined by
the SSI program.
Other Considerations and Extensions
It is interesting to note that incentives for using SSI and SSER are different in a simple
model allowing saving. As we have mentioned, SSI has an asset as well as income test. In this
case, when weighing whether to participate in SSI, the agent decides if it is worth having to

12

consume sufficiently more today and consequently less in the future in order to maintain asseteligibility for SSI.
Even in a model permitting saving but not a choice of labor supply, the effective
neutralization (after age 64) of SSER's usual actuarial reduction in social security benefits still
serves to make SSER relatively more attractive. However, in contrast to the model just
presented, the possibility of collecting SSER cannot alleviate–and in fact serves to aggravate–the
problem of intertemporal distortion brought about by SSI. This is because in a model with
saving and an asset limit in the SSI program, the problem is one of allocating too much
consumption to the first period in order to meet the asset test. Not surprisingly then, in a model
allowing both labor choice and saving, the predicted effect of SSI benefits on labor supply is
ambiguous. While we have presented empirical evidence (Neumark and Powers, 1998) that the
SSI asset test may discourage saving, we believe that the predominant problem individuals face
is maintaining income just prior to retirement, while responding to the labor supply disincentives
of SSI, in which case SSER is relatively more attractive to those who will be eligible for SSI
(although ultimately this is an empirical question).
The models discussed to this point simplify but convey the basic insights for
understanding the interactions of SSI and SSER. Some potentially important issues cannot be
addressed easily in this framework. One possibility is beginning SSI participation after (rather
than at) age 65, which we only address through the empirical implementation and do not attempt
to model explicitly. Similarly, the age of retirement could in principle be treated as endogenous,
although since labor supply is so heavily taxed by both the SSI and SSER programs (in the
sample period), we suspect that the essential qualitative predictions would be unchanged.

13

In addition, there are several relevant sources of uncertainty, including health, family
structure, and job stability. Those facing a high probability of adverse health shocks have a
greater incentive to ensure SSI eligibility because SSI automatically brings Medicaid coverage.10
In the pre-retirement period, individuals may be uncertain of their future marital status and
options to continue working. The prospect of widowhood introduces uncertainty about the size
of the future benefit payment and consumption needs. Those facing high probabilities of job loss
might engage in precautionary saving to prevent a "zero consumption" outcome. These
precautionary savings may be sufficient to render them ineligible for SSI (at least at age 65),
even though others with equal permanent income might make choices that assure SSI eligibility.
In a world of certainty, people intending to participate in SSI might display low work effort and
low saving throughout much of their lives. However, due to uncertainty, people may delay
committing to an SSI-participation strategy until sufficient information is revealed or, put
another way, until they are reasonably close to the eligibility age.
Family structure is also ignored in these simple models. Husbands and wives may
determine their labor supplies jointly and presumably saving decisions are made collectively. In
the "male chauvinist" model (Killingsworth, 1983), the wife regards the husband's labor supply
(and income) as exogenous to her labor supply decision. This implies that when analyzing
married men, we need not be concerned with wives' labor supply. However, there is some
evidence against this model, more consonant (in some circumstances) with joint decision making
(e.g., Lundberg, 1988). Consequently, we include exogenous factors affecting the wife's labor
supply in the husband's labor supply specification.

10

However those with sufficient quarters of covered earnings are eligible to purchase Medicare coverage
at modest premiums after age 65.

14

IV. Data and Implementation
Hypothesis Tests and Empirical Specifications
The first approach to studying the interactions between SSI and SSER is a simple indirect
test of whether more generous SSI encourages SSER participation. In this first set of tests, SSER
is treated as a measure of work activity (with SSER use corresponding to less work), following
the difference-in-differences framework developed in Neumark and Powers (2000). The
parallels in the framework highlight the idea that the work reductions spurred by SSI (as reported
in that paper) are to some extent enabled by SSER participation. Of course, another means of
preserving consumption is by running down assets to maintain consumption, which also serves
the purpose of meeting the asset test for SSI eligibility (Neumark and Powers, 1998). In
addition, it is entirely possible to work and take SSER, which may weaken the relationship
between SSER receipt and conventional measures of work activity. These qualifications imply
that we might fail to detect this simple relationship between SSER and SSI policy in the data,
even if SSI and SSER interact as outlined in the previous section, and despite evidence of work
disincentive effects of SSI.
For this analysis, we need to classify sample members according to two major
characteristics: whether they live in a state with a generous SSI supplementation policy, and
whether they have characteristics indicating that they are sufficiently likely to participate in SSIaged in the future. Our cutoff for generous states is that their supplement exceed 20% of the
federal benefit. To sharpen the distinction, observations from households residing in states that
supplement, but by less than 20%, are discarded.
The construction of the variable indicating whether a sample member is a likely future
SSI participant or not is more involved. In previous work, we estimated an SSI participation

15

equation using public-use data from the SIPP on SSI recipiency for the contemporaneous sample
of elderly. To determine the threshold probability value for "likely participant" status, we
selected a cutoff value; for most of our previous analyses, and in this paper, we classify as "likely
participants" those whose predicted probability of participation is at the 90th centile or higher.
There are several potential sources of inaccuracy in such imputations. First, there is an
implicit assumption that the model of SSI participation is unchanging from one birth cohort to
the next. Particularly since SSI is a relatively new program (only 10 years old at the outset of
our sample), this assumption could be problematic. Second, from the limited information
provided in the SIPP, we do not know whether a person over age 64 is truly an SSI-aged
participant, or if they came onto the program earlier through SSI-disabled. Since SSI-disabled
participation is no doubt governed by a very different process, this is also a potentially serious
problem. In this paper, we are able to remedy these shortcomings by using longitudinal
administrative data on each individual in our sample. The administrative data allow us to track
sample members' future SSI use and to properly define SSI receipt as the SSI-aged or SSIdisabled variety, based upon whether the age at first receipt of benefits exceeds 64.
In our original analysis of labor supply (Neumark and Powers, 2000) we used
classifications of generous states and likely participants to conduct several types of "difference"
comparisons. The "simple difference" specification examines only the activities of likely future
SSI recipients, and tests whether their choices vary significantly with the generosity of their
states' SSI benefits. This is a reduced-form estimate of the effect of the SSI benefit guarantee on
the behavior of the sample members for whom SSI policy is relevant. It is desirable to introduce
a control group into the analysis if unobserved, state-varying characteristics are thought to affect
behavior independently. The "difference-in-difference" specification also uses only samples of

16

likely participants, but introduces differences in the behavior of younger sample members across
more and less generous states as a further control. A second version of a "difference-indifference" specification estimates the response of older likely participants to variation in
generosity, using the behavior of older unlikely participants as a control. Finally, the
"difference-in-difference-in-difference" specification compares the differences across states
between the responses of likely participants of different ages, using the unlikely participant
differences as a control.
In the indirect test of an SSI-SSER interaction we apply similar analyses using receipt of
SSER as the dependent variable. We first briefly revisit the evidence on labor supply effects,
since we now have an expanded sample and administrative information not previously available
to us. We are able to estimate four "difference" models for our labor supply measures, but since
SSER can only be received between the ages of 62 and 64, the set of feasible specifications is
curtailed in this instance. For likely participants in this age group, we compare SSER use across
more or less generous states in the same "simple difference" specification. We then introduce
the remaining group of 62-64 year-old unlikely SSI participants into the analysis as a control
group (corresponding to the second difference-in-difference). It should be noted that all
specifications include, in addition to the interaction terms of interest, further controls for likely
participant status, age, cohort (i.e., SIPP panel), SSI generosity, own and spouse characteristics,
and state unemployment rates.
The second approach–which we regard as the more substantive empirical contribution of
this paper–is a test for a "direct" interaction between SSI and SSER. That is, do the sample
members behave as if they face (and understand and respond to) a budget constraint that
accounts for the SSI and SSER interaction? If so, then by nullifying the actuarial reduction in

17

the social security benefit for early retirement after age 64 for those whose old-age government
transfer is determined on the margin by SSI, SSI policy should encourage SSER participation.
This provides more direct and therefore more convincing evidence that some people make a
deliberate choice to complement SSI participation with SSER use, precisely because of the
interaction embedded in the program rules.
Using a sample of individuals aged 62-64, we estimate the probability that person i aged t
living in state s participates in SSER as a function of their government transfer after age 64 being
determined at the margin by SSI policy, and other variables. That is,
(2)

SSERist = αMist + Xβist.
Mist is a dummy variable equal to 1 when non-SSI income after age 64 is expected to

surpass the SSI disregard but to fall short of the SSI income-eligibility cutoff (equal to the
guarantee plus the disregard, G+D), so that SSI determines the individual's government transfer
after age 65. X includes variables affecting resources that are thought to govern the SSER
decision independently of these incentives (e.g., health, educational attainment, race, sex, marital
status, and accumulated social security and pension wealth). For couples, information on
spouses is also included in X to capture factors underlying joint retirement decisions.
An important question is what income concept to use in the computation of "M." Since
expected income at age 65 is partly determined by SSER participation, estimates of α will be
inconsistent if expected non-SSI income at age 65 is used. Because expected non-SSI income at
age 65 will be lower if SSER is taken, M will more often take on the value 1, and the bias will be
towards accepting the hypothesis that α is positive. To remove this source of bias, a proxy value
of M is constructed based on the social security benefit an individual would be owed if he
stopped working after age 61. This removes the systematic relationship between SSER and M,

18

although M may still be measured with error, likely biasing the estimate of α toward zero and
hence against finding our hypothesized result. For every member of our sample of 62-64 yearolds, social security records provide a complete earnings history that can be used to determine
the exact amount of this hypothetical benefit. We improve the accuracy of the social security
benefit for married men by incorporating information on the spouse's earnings record. The
maximum SSI benefit varies with state and marital status, while the disregard is assumed not to
vary. Note that we have no information on these individuals' potential retirement income from
other sources, another source of error in M.
Therefore, the value of the binary variable M is determined by the individual's
work/earnings history, their marital status, and their state's SSI supplement. State SSI generosity
is the most compelling exogenous source of identifying information, providing variation in M for
individuals with identical work histories and family statuses, who may still face different
marginal government transfers in old age due to state variation in SSI benefits.
It is important to recognize that SSER participation preceding SSI participation could be
(and probably is) a common pattern for reasons other than those hypothesized. For example,
poor health (or unobserved characteristics) could lead to an inability or reluctance to work from
age 62 onwards, increasing the likelihood of both SSER and SSI participation. Therefore, in
both approaches, we have been careful to distinguish the effects of policy from other influences,
both by exploiting the state-level variation in SSI benefits that is exogenous to the individual and
by controlling for other important individual characteristics.

19

Matched SSA-SIPP Samples
We use multiple public-use panels from the SIPP. The particular panels are from 1984,
1990, 1991, and 1993.11 For comparability with our previous work, we begin by looking at labor
supply using samples of 40-64 year-old male household heads (defining 60-64 year-olds as the
"old" individuals for whom labor supply effects of SSI might appear) in the difference analyses
of work activity. Obviously, we are always restricted to the 62-64 year-old subgroup when
analyzing SSER receipt, since sample members of other ages are ineligible. While the analysis
is restricted to men, we match spouse information and include information about wives that may
be relevant for husbands' choices in all specifications.
The Social Security Administration allowed us access to SIPP-matched confidential data
on covered earnings and SSI use. The SSA data usually correspond to wave 1 or 2 of the SIPPs.
Typically, about 10% of SIPP adults fail to match to the earnings record database due to
reporting errors in the social security number.12 We have each sample member's complete social
security covered earnings history from 1951-1999. In principle, given a complete earnings
history, each sample member's hypothetical age-61 benefit can be computed with a high degree
of accuracy.
We also have a record of each sample member's SSI administrative activity from 19741999. Access to the SSI record provides several advantages. First, the SIPP self-reports of SSI
use may be less accurate than the SSA's records. Second, as mentioned above, by using the age
at first benefit receipt, we are able to better distinguish between SSI-aged and SSI-disabled

11

There were no SIPPs conducted in 1994-1995. The 1996 public-use data have only recently become
available.
12
Communication from Howard Iams, Division of Policy Evaluation, Social Security Administration.

20

cases.13 Third, because the SSA file follows panel members for as many as 15 years after the
Census Bureau has finished with them, we are able to determine SSI-aged receipt (over a
reasonable horizon) for men who are younger than 65 when they are surveyed in the SIPP; of
course, this is increasingly true the older is the sample member during the survey and the earlier
the SIPP panel.
There are limitations of the administrative data. First, we were not able to obtain the
separate administrative file on actual social security receipt. Thus, we use self-reported social
security recipiency from the SIPP, which may be subject to error. Second, when there are
disputes or mistakes about benefit eligibility or amounts, upon resolution the SSI administrative
file is altered to reflect the history of SSI receipt for individuals as it should have been, not as it
actually unfolded. This generates errors in the recorded timing of payments. Given our focus on
the aged (in contrast to the disabled), whose eligibility rules are fairly cut-and-dried, this should
not generate substantial errors. Finally, it should be noted that we were only allowed access to
SIPP-matched observations, not the universes of SSI applicants and/or recipients and social
security earners.
Table 1 presents statistics for the samples used in the analyses. These fall into three age
groups, 40-64 (we briefly re-examine the work activity of 40-64 year-olds), 62-64 year-olds,
whose SSER participation we study, and those 65 and over, who are used in one instance to
estimate the likelihood of SSI participation. The sample statistics for the largest group of 40-64
year-olds are broken down by SIPP panel. Work activity measures include social security
covered quarters, employment, and hours. Total covered quarters increase over the panels,
reflecting the secular increase in social security coverage of workers. They are highest for the
13

The distinction is still not be perfect. For example, a person may have received SSI-disabled, made a
full recovery, and then come into SSI-aged. We would record that person as "SSI-disabled" since their

21

62-64 year-old sample. The change in covered quarters serves as a measure of recent work
activity. It is evident from the smaller changes for the 62-64 year-olds that work activity slows
at these ages, while the average change is positive but small for the elderly group. Employment
and hours follow similar patterns, with high levels for the young group and dramatically
declining levels across the older groups.
Characteristics of the sample men and their spouses also vary across subsamples as one
would expect. Older cohorts have less education (e.g., 41% of the 1984 subsample has
graduated high school as opposed to 53% of the 1993 sample, while only 36% of the pooled 6264 year-old sample has and only 28% of the elderly). Similar patterns hold for spouses'
educational attainment. Use of another welfare program, Food Stamps, is fairly similar across
panels. However, it is much lower for the 62-64 year-old and 65-and-older groups, suggesting
welfare use is less prevalent in older cohorts.
There is variation in macroeconomic factors across the panels. The 1984 sample faces
the highest average state unemployment rate, at 7.6%, while the 1990 sample average is just
5.5%. There is considerable variation in the proportion of sample members facing a generous
state supplement, as we define it. Just under 20% of the 1984 sample resides in a generous state.
This rises to approximately 30% in the other panels. A bit over one-quarter of the 62-64 year-old
subsample members reside in generous states.
Finally, for the older samples, we note that a bit over 1% of the 62-64 year-olds we track
through the administrative data are observed to receive a first SSI payment after age 64. We also
examine using the 65-and-over (65+) group to impute participation probabilities from the crosssection. While 3.4% of the 65+ group report receiving SSI income to the SIPP, 4.9% are

first payment was received prior to age 65.

22

recorded as being in current payment status in the administrative record.14 It is possible that
there is confusion among this elderly group about which old-age payments come from which
programs, since SSI could easily be confused with "social security" (they are administered from
the same local offices). Some of these sample members are also on SSI-disabled (3.0% of the
65+ group have a first SSI payment recorded at age 65 or later).
Patterns of Social Security and SSI Receipt
Figures 1 and 2 present the age patterns of SSI and social security receipt, using the
sample of all male household heads older than 39. The social security information is from a
person-level question in the public-use SIPP file, while the SSI participation information is from
the SSA. Figure 1 confirms for our data the well-known fact that social security receipt grows
rapidly after age 61. Beneficiaries, presumably in the disability and survivors' programs, account
for the 12.3% of 61 year-old sample members reporting social security benefits. From ages 62
through 64, the ages of SSER, the receipt rate rises by more than 20 percentage points. A
comparable increase occurs at age 65, when people opt into the system at the full retirement age.
95% of sample members of age 70, when benefit receipt can no longer be voluntarily delayed,
are social security beneficiaries.
Figure 2 illustrates the frequency of SSI receipt according to the age at first payment of
an SSI benefit. It is important to note at the outset that SSI receipt is rare: only 1,382
observations from pooled SIPP samples of heads aged 40 or older match to the SSI
administrative file at all, a number which includes rejected applicants who never received a
payment. Further, in only 270 cases can the observation be identified as an "SSI-aged" recipient,
based on an age at first receipt exceeding 64. The question of interest here is how soon after age
14

The 1% figure for later SSI receipt for 62-64 year-olds is held down because some of these individuals
are observed for only short periods beyond age 64. In the empirical analysis that follows we require a

23

64 people typically participate in SSI. The longer the typical delay after the eligibility age of 65,
the more tenuous the link between early retirement benefit receipt or the labor market
disincentives posed by the SSI program. In addition, a spike at the delayed retirement age of 69
would suggest that people only become aware of the SSI program upon the mandatory receipt of
their delayed social security benefits. In contrast, the spike at age 65 that dominates Figure 2
indicates that the hypotheses of this paper are at least plausible on the surface.
V. Empirical Findings
Differences Analyses
Recall that a sample member is assigned to the "treatment" group if he is a likely future
SSI recipient living in a generous state. Table 2 presents the findings from two probits that use
alternative information on SSI participation to construct the dependent variable. The first
column presents the findings from probits relying entirely on SIPP public-use data on sample
members over 64 to estimate SSI participation. The results are similar to Neumark and Powers
(2000), with slight differences due to the addition of public-use data for 1993 and the inclusion
of information on the men's spouses. Except for the panel dummies and spouse age (not reported
in the table), all coefficients are estimated to be significantly different from zero at the 5% level,
and the signs are as one would hypothesize. More education of both the man and his spouse
(even at levels below high school completion) decreases the participation probability. The
divorced, widowed, or separated variable has a negative influence on SSI use, indicating that of
the unmarried men 65 or older in the sample, those who once had a spouse are less likely to use
SSI than the men who never married. Living in a state with a generous SSI benefit and a higher
state unemployment rate increases the probability of participation. Blacks are apparently more
likely to participate in SSI than others. We also include a dummy variable indicating whether (at
minimum of three years of information on the post-64 period in the administrative data.

24

the time of the survey) the respondent had ever been authorized to receive Food Stamps. Aside
from conveying information about past income, this indicates prior experience with welfare
programs, which may be associated with superior knowledge about programs or less stigma over
use. As expected, exposure to Food Stamps is estimated to increase the probability of SSI
participation.
As we have noted, the administrative data can be used both to construct a longitudinal
measure of SSI participation for selected sample members and to better identify SSI-aged
participation. To reduce the problem of right-censoring in the data, the sample is restricted to
sample members who reach at least age 67 by the end of the administrative record in 1999. The
dependent variable equals one if a sample member is recorded as first receiving SSI at age 65 or
later. The second column presents findings when the longitudinal information on sample
individuals' subsequent SSI participation is exploited.
The longitudinal and cross-section estimates display some differences. The coefficient of
benefit generosity is very similar in magnitude to the cross-section estimates. Estimated effects
of own and spouse education are also significantly different from zero with the expected signs,
but the magnitudes are smaller in absolute value than previously, as is also true for many of the
other coefficient estimates. One expects many of the explanatory variables to have less power
due to measurement error when looking over a longer horizon. For example, the unemployment
rate in the sample year is not perfectly correlated with the unemployment rate at the time of
future SSI participation and it does not significantly predict an individual's future participation.
Most interestingly, marital and welfare use history at the time of the survey do not help predict
which sample members will ultimately participate in SSI-aged.

25

The first three columns of Table 3 present the findings for labor supply measures,
revisiting our earlier work. The labor supply measures include employment, hours, and the
change in covered quarters over the previous 5 years. Overall, there are some negative effects of
more generous SSI on labor supply, particularly for employment and hours. While the "simple
difference" specification yields insignificant coefficients, employment, hours, and the
accumulation of covered quarters (using the administrative longitudinal information on SSI
receipt) appear to be reduced based on the first difference-in-difference (panel B); the estimated
labor supply effects are uniformly stronger with the longitudinal information. All three labor
supply measures are reduced by SSI in the difference-in-difference-in-difference estimates (panel
D), using cross-section or longitudinal information, with only one exception, and again the
administrative data yield stronger evidence. In short, our earlier results are fairly robust with
respect to the addition of spouse characteristics and another panel of the SIPP, while the use of
longitudinal information on SSI participation strengthens the findings considerably.
A feature of these results with important implications for the analysis of SSER is that the
only significant findings are from specifications exploiting cross-age comparisons. Apparently,
there are differences in the level of work activity of older individuals across states that are
correlated with SSI, but not caused by it, which obscure the SSI effects on the older group.
Given the age-eligibility restrictions of SSER, this means that the most compelling
specifications–in terms of those that reveal evidence of labor supply effects that might be
reflected in a parallel fashion in SSER use–are infeasible to estimate.
The last column of Table 3 presents estimates of the key coefficients for the relevant
models when the dependent variable is SSER receipt. We restrict attention to those with 40 or
more covered quarters of social security earnings, since those with fewer than 40 quarters are not

26

eligible for SSER. Due to sample age restrictions, only two specifications (those contrasting
likely participants in more vs. less generous states, and those contrasting likely versus unlikely
participants in more vs. less generous states) can be implemented. Only in one case is there
support for the hypothesis that SSER and SSI are interlinked through work activity effects.
However, the magnitude of this coefficient appears unreasonably large (a rise in the probability
of SSER participation of 57% is predicted for a likely participant due to living in a generous SSI
state, while the participation rate for the entire sample of likely participants aged 62-64 who are
SSER-qualified is only 45.8%).
Testing for a Direct Effect
Finally, we present results from the specification of SSER participation as a function of
the sample member's expected location on the "government transfer" schedule at age 65 and
beyond. Recall that the dummy variable M in equation (2) equals one if the individual is
predicted to face a post-64 government transfer marginally determined by SSI. The value of M
is computed by imputing each man's age-62 SSER benefit from his actual earnings history
(reported in the administrative data).15 If the man is married, M can also be defined with respect
to the couple's joint prospective government transfer, which is also influenced by the wife's
earnings record. The wife's benefit is equal to the benefit owed her as a worker or one-half of
her husband's benefit, whichever is larger. If the wife has fewer than 40 covered quarters, her
social security benefit as a worker is set to zero.
Because the SIPP does not contain good information about other sources of retirement
income, M is measured with error. Private income, which might actually place a person on the
"autonomous" portion of the budget constraint (for which M=0), is ignored. We again drop men
15

The computation of the benefits of retirees is described in Section 2A of Social Security Administration
(1999).

27

with fewer than 40 covered quarters of social security earnings from the sample because they are
not SSER-qualified. Before presenting the formal analysis, we note that in the raw data (based
on the simplifying assumption that wives' benefits equal one-half of their husbands'), 75% of
SSER-qualified sample members whose net government transfer is determined by SSI policy
participate in SSER at age 64, in contrast to 68% of the group whose government transfer is
determined at the margin by the social security benefit.
Table 4 presents the findings from the SSER participation probits (reported as simulated
probability changes) that incorporate this feature of the budget constraint. The first column
reports sample statistics. The first probit results we report are based on the simplifying
assumption that wives' benefits are equal to one-half of their husbands'. In this case, as reported
in the second column, the position on the budget constraint affects SSER as hypothesized, as the
estimated coefficient of M is significant and positive, indicating an 11 percentage point higher
probability of SSER participation for those whose post-65 retirement benefit is determined on
the margin by SSI. The other significant variables are the age and education of the man. There
is a pronounced trend towards SSER participation with age, and more educated men are less
likely to retire early. Wives' characteristics are included, but all coefficients are insignificant and
are not reported.
A potentially important issue is that M may simply be indicating low lifetime income or
poor health, and individuals with a more tenuous lifetime attachment to the labor force may
simply drop out of the labor market earlier and take up SSER. Because we have the entire
history of social security earnings for each person in the sample, however, we have unusually
good control variables for lifetime earnings capacity. In the third column the actual record of
covered earnings (for each separate year from 1951 through age 61) is included in the

28

specification for each sample member. A dummy variable indicating that the person is in poor
health is also included and has an extremely large, positive, influence on SSER use. However,
the positive effect of M on SSER receipt is robust with respect to these additional variables.
Assuming the spouse's benefit is one-half of the husband's oversimplifies the husband's
retirement problem, since women in these cohorts are increasingly working and entitled to higher
benefits. As an alternative, we use the wives' social security earnings records to compute the
benefit that would be owed them if they were to stop working in the sample year, or at age 61,
whichever comes first. We use the higher of this value or one-half of the man's benefit to
recompute the total social security retirement benefit for couples. We cut off the computation for
wives at age 61 out of the same concerns about endogeneity and SSER/SSI participation which
led us to cut off the husbands' earnings computation at age 61. The sample statistics in the first
column of Table 4 indicate that the percentage of men classified as having a net government oldage transfer that is prospectively determined by SSI policy is reduced from 49.4% to 39.9% of
the sample when the information on wives' earnings records is exploited to compute their
benefits.
The findings using spouse's benefit computations in M are presented in the fourth column
of the table. The coefficient of the position on the SSI-SSER budget constraint is positive, but
cut in half in magnitude and no longer significant. It appears that men with relatively highearning spouses are more inclined to take up SSER, and some of these men–precisely because
they have high-earning spouses–are incorrectly classified as having M equal to one when M is
based on wives' benefits equal to one-half of their husbands' benefits. One explanation is that
there is potential downward endogeneity bias stemming from using actual wives' earnings to

29

compute the benefit. If the husband is planning on going on SSER, the wife may work more
near the age of retirement, which would lead to a negative correlation between SSER and M.
VI. Conclusion
This paper has described the potential interactions of SSI and SSER and presented
evidence of two kinds. First, when SSER is treated like any other measure of work activity in
difference specifications relating work activity to state SSI generosity and prospective future SSI
receipt, little evidence supporting an interaction between the two programs is found. On the
other hand, in an analysis of direct links between SSI and SSER, we do find some empirical
evidence that SSI and SSER interact through a unified budget constraint determining post-age-64
government transfer payments, but only when we make simplifying assumptions about the
computation of the hypothetical "family" (i.e., husband-wife) social security benefit. When we
use information from the wives' earnings histories to estimate their age-61 (or younger) benefit
more precisely, we do not find statistically significant evidence of the hypothesized response of
increased SSER participation when individuals face a government old-age transfer that is
marginally determined by SSI policy, although the sign of the estimate is still in the hypothesized
direction. If endogeneity of wives' work decisions and husbands' SSER participation plans is
important, this lends more credence to the results using the simplified computation.
In the case of the findings from the differences analyses, it may be that there is no
indirect effect of SSI on SSER use, even if a direct effect is present. As noted at the outset,
individuals responding to work disincentives may simply draw on resources that we cannot
observe to support current consumption. However, the differences results certainly do not
preclude the possibility that SSER and work activity are related as expected. We have shown
that the evidence we have previously gathered on SSI and work activity is reasonably robust to

30

sample and specification changes and to the use of administrative information on SSI use
(information that constitutes a substantial improvement over available public-use data). It is also
apparent that our significant results for labor market activity variables generally hinge critically
on inter-cohort comparisons. The infeasibility of estimating SSER specifications that use
younger sample members as a control group could account for the lack of strong support for a
positive association between SSI generosity and SSER use by those likely to turn to SSI in old
age in this particular empirical framework.
The fact that we find positive effects on SSER use of an individual's prospective location
on the part of the government old-age transfer schedule where the transfer is determined by SSI–
thus eliminating the penalty for using early retirement–provides some evidence that SSI and
SSER may interact in the ways proposed. When the influence of wives' benefits in determining
the place on the budget constraint is minimized (by assuming their benefit is always one-half of
the husbands'), we find evidence for the hypothesis that is robust to including such powerful
explanatory factors as the man's entire earnings history and current health status.
This simplifying assumption may be justified if husbands have imperfect information
about wives' benefits (and use half their own benefit as a "rule of thumb" measure), simply
ignore their wives' benefits, or if endogeneity of wives' work patterns with respect to SSER
decisions plays a role. However, taken at face value, if our computations of wives' benefits are
fairly accurate, then a critical group of the husbands following a unilateral decision making rule
(a group that appears relatively more responsive to the value of M) could not actually carry
through with their SSI participation plans as part of a couple. This fact makes the argument that
it is SSI policy that is driving SSER participation less compelling on its face, although it is a

31

reasonable consideration that retirement planning involving multiple programs could well be
subject to considerable error on the part of individuals.

32

References
Blank, Rebecca M., 1989, "The Effect of Medical Need and Medicaid on AFDC
Participation." Journal of Human Resources 24(1), 54-87.
Garrett, Bowen, and Glied, Sherry, 2000, "Does State AFDC Generosity Affect Child SSI
Participation?" Journal of Public Policy Analysis and Management 19(2), 275-95.
Gruber, Jonathan, and Orszag, Peter, 1999, "What to do about the Social Security
Earnings Test?" Issue in Brief, Center for Retirement Research at Boston College, No. 1 (July).
Killingsworth, M.R., 1983, Labor Supply (New York, NY: Cambridge University Press).
Kubik, Jeffrey D., 1999, "Incentives for the Identification and Treatment of Children with
Disabilities: The Supplemental Security Income Program." Journal of Public Economics 73(2),
187-215.
Lundberg, Shelly, 1988, "Labor Supply of Husbands and Wives: A Simultaneous
Equations Approach." Review of Economics and Statistics LXX(2), 224-35.
McGarry, Kathleen, 1996, "Factors Determining Participation of the Elderly in SSI."
Journal of Human Resources Vol. 31(2), Spring, 331-58.
Neumark, David, and Powers, Elizabeth T., 1998, "The Effect of Means-Tested Income
Support for the Elderly on Pre-Retirement Saving: Evidence from the SSI Program in the U.S."
Journal of Public Economics 68(1), 181-206.
Neumark, David, and Powers, Elizabeth T., 1999, "Means Testing Social Security," in
O.S. Mitchell, R.J. Myers, and H. Young, editors, Wharton Pension Research Council Series:
Prospects for Social Security Reform (Philadelphia: The University of Pennsylvania Press), pp.
243-67.
Neumark, David, and Powers, Elizabeth T., 2000, "Welfare for the Elderly: The Effects
of SSI on Pre-Retirement Labor Supply." Journal of Public Economics 78(1&2), 51-80.
Social Security Administration, 1994, State Assistance Programs for SSI Recipients:
January 1994, SSA Publication No. 17-002 (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office).
Social Security Administration, 1999, Social Security Bulletin: Annual Statistical
Supplement, (U.S. Government Printing Office).
Social Security Administration, 2001, State Assistance Programs for SSI Recipients:
January 2001, SSA Publication Number 13-11975 (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office).

33

U.S. Committee on Ways and Means, selected years, Green Book (Washington, DC: US
Government Printing Office).
Yelowitz, Aaron, 1995, "The Medicaid Notch, Labor Supply, and Welfare Participation:
Evidence from Eligibility Expansions." Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(4), 909-39.
Yelowitz, Aaron, 1998, "Why Did the SSI-Disabled Program Grow so Much?
Disentangling the Effect of Medicaid." Journal of Health Economics 17(3), 321-49.
Zedlewski, Sheila R., and Meyer, Jack A., 1989, Toward Ending Poverty Among the
Elderly and Disabled through SSI Reform (Washington DC: The Urban Institute Press).

34

Appendix A: Theoretical Model
Model with SSI Participation
Let Y0 be the amount of old-age pension income that is predetermined at the beginning of
period 1. To simplify, assume Y0 < D (otherwise the worker is automatically ineligible for SSI).
In the basic no-saving model, the worker's problem is to choose first-period work (h) and
consumption (c1) to maximize:
u(c1,1 − h) + δv(c2) .
The budget constraint for period 1 is:
(1)

c1 = wh ,

where w is the wage in period 1. The pension is given by B(wh), with a positive first derivative.
The budget constraint for period 2 depends on whether the individual participates in SSI, and if
so whether or not unearned income is below the disregard. The possible old-age budget
constraints are:
(2a)
(2b)
(2c)

c2 =Y0 + G + B(wh) if SSI participant and Y0 + B(wh) < D
c2 = G + D if SSI participant and Y0 + B(wh) > D
c2 = Y0 + B(wh) if SSI nonparticipant.

Denoting the derivatives of u with respect to its first and second arguments as u1 and u2,
and the derivative of v as v' (and similarly for second derivatives), the interior local optima
corresponding to (2a) and (2c) are characterized by:
(3a)
(3c)

u1(wh,1 − h)w − u2(wh,1 − h) + δv'(Y0 + G + B(wh))B'(wh)w = 0
u1(wh,1 − h)w − u2(wh,1 − h) + δv'(Y0 + B(wh))B'(wh)w = 0 .

The budget constraint (2b) is horizontal, so that there is no possibility of an interior
solution along it. The effects of an increase in G on h along each segment of the budget
constraint are obtained by applying the implicit function theorem to the local first-order
conditions for the local optima in h:
(4a)

∂h/∂G = {−δv''B'(wh)w}/{u11w2 − u12w − u21w + u22
+ δv''[B'(wh)]2w2 + δv'B''(wh)w2}−1 < 0

(4c)

∂h/∂G = 0.

The first case, while unlikely to arise in practice (because it requires unearned income
below the very small $20 disregard), can be easily signed. The numerator is clearly positive
under the assumption that pension income increases in earnings and strict concavity of secondperiod utility, while the denominator is negative under the additional assumption that the firstorder condition of the local optimization problem is downward sloping in h, a standard

35

assumption. Therefore, along each segment of the budget constraint an increase in G either has
no effect on hours or causes a decrease in hours.
The global solution is found by choosing the level of h that maximizes utility across the
three choices. Optimal SSI participation status is then revealed by the global optimum selected.
The budget constraint (2a) is upward sloping, the budget constraint (2b) is horizontal at G + D,
and the budget constraint (2c) is upward sloping with the same slope as (2a). An increase in G
shifts the budget constraints (2a) and (2b) vertically. This makes it more likely that someone
initially on (2c) relocates to the kink point between (2a) and (2b). No one should ever locate on
(2b), as it is horizontal. Someone initially at the kink point between (2a) and (2b) may reduce
labor supply to the segment (2a). Thus, labor supply is clearly decreasing in G, and it is
straightforward but tedious to show, exploiting the first-order conditions and the above
information about the change in work hours with respect to G, that the relative value of
participation versus nonparticipation is increasing in G.
Model with SSI and SSER Participation
We introduce an SSER policy, characterized by a full retirement benefit B0, the actuarial
reduction β for early retirement, and τ, the implicit tax rate on labor earnings while retired. We
assume that the worker must begin receiving social security in the second period, if he has not
elected SSER. There are two possible budget constraints for period 1, depending on SSER
participation:
(1a) c1 = wh, if no SSER participation
(1b) c1 = βB0 + (1 − τ)wh, if SSER participation.
In the second period, the possible budget constraints for SSI nonparticipants are:
(2a') c2 = Y0 + B(wh) + B0, if SSER nonparticipant
(2b') c2 = Y0 + B(wh) + βB0, if SSER participant.
Under SSI participation, there are two additional cases, depending on whether income is
below the disregard ((2c') and (2d')) or above ((2e') and (2f')):
(2c') c2 = Y0 + G + B(wh) + B0, if SSI participant, SSER nonparticipant, and Y0+ B(wh) + B0 <D
(2d') c2 = Y0 + G + B(wh) + βB0, if SSI participant, SSER participant, and Y0 + B(wh) + βB0 < D
(2e') c2 = G + D, if SSI participant, SSER nonparticipant, and Y0+ B(wh) + B0 >D
(2f') c2 = G + D, if SSI participant, SSER participant, and Y0 + B(wh) + βB0 > D .
Since the cases involving being on SSI but below the disregard rarely apply, we ignore
them in the following discussion for simplicity.
First, it is evident from the budget constraints that in common situations it will be
advantageous to participate in SSER for local optima associated with SSI participation. When a
person participates in SSI, the net government transfer is determined at the margin by SSI
program rules, so consumption in the second period is G + D regardless of SSER participation.
Therefore, SSER participation depends entirely on whether the worker obtains a higher period 1
indifference curve as a consequence. If the worker in the SSER program is not subject to a wage

36

tax (i.e., the reduction in benefits for earnings above a particular threshold), clearly he is always
better off by participating in SSER prior to SSI. This case is highly relevant for the population
we study, since given a reasonably generous earnings level before the SSER wage tax sets in,
many likely SSI recipients will not be subject to the SSER wage tax. Even for those subject to
the 50% wage tax, all those with hypothetical earnings in the absence of policy that are below the
value of twice the SSER benefit plus the entire untaxed earnings allowance in SSER would
unambiguously choose to participate in SSER prior to participating in SSI.16
In the case where the worker is subject to a wage tax, only for workers who would
optimally choose to earn an amount above their SSER benefit in the absence of the SSER
program could it possibly be utility-reducing to participate in SSER. But given the disutility of
work, this would be the case only for relatively high earners who are unlikely candidates for
choosing SSI participation as their global maximum.

16

To see this, note that accounting for SSER only, income in the absence of SSER is wh, while income
with SSER is βB0 + wh − .5(wh − 9600). (This assumes a wage tax of 50%, and that the threshold at
which this kicks in is $9600.) As long as the latter budget constraint is above the former, SSER
participation will be chosen. This holds up to the point at which the budget constraints intersect, which is
at income of 2· βB0 + 9,600.

37

Table 1: Sample statistics, by age
Work activity

1984

40-64 year-olds
1990
1991

1993

62-64 yearolds
1984-1993

65 and
older
1984-1993

Covered quarters

96.18
(31.08)

98.96
(35.38)

99.70
(35.95)

103.87
(7.74)

115.99
(41.57)

100.76
(40.12)

Change in covered quarters
over past 5 years

12.93
(5.69)

12.95
(5.61)

12.96
(5.63)

12.80
(5.74)

10.49
(6.69)

4.20
(5.63)

Employed, wave 4

0.839
(0.367)

0.831
(0.375)

0.818
(0.386)

0.829
(0.377)

0.484
(0.494)

0.174
(0.358)

Hours, wave 4

37.44
(19.40)

37.12
(20.32)

36.79
(20.68)

37.00
(19.86)

18.87
(21.72)

5.36
(12.67)

Characteristics of respondents and spouses
Aged 60-64
0.183
(0.387)

0.156
(0.363)

0.145
(0.352)

0.142
(0.349)

1

0

Highest grade completed x high
school education or less

6.21
(5.43)

5.49
(5.54)

5.28
(5.56)

5.04
(5.60)

6.43
(5.23)

6.79
(5.25)

More than high school
education

0.407
(0.491)

0.477
(0.500)

0.501
(0.500)

0.534
(0.500)

0.358
(0.479)

0.281
(0.447)

Black

0.075
(0.264)

0.101
(0.301)

0.071
(0.256)

0.072
(0.258)

0.072
(0.259)

0.084
(0.276)

Never married

0.033
(0.178)

0.048
(0.214)

0.047
0.211

0.045
(0.208)

0.039
(0.192)

0.038
(0.189)

Divorced, widowed, or
separated (and not currently
married)

0.106
(0.307)

0.141
(0.348)

0.138
(0.345)

0.124
(0.330)

0.130
(0.335)

0.192
(0.384)

Ever authorized for food stamps

0.134
(0.341)

0.135
(0.342)

0.130
(0.336)

0.151
(0.358)

0.075
(0.263)

0.059
(0.232)

Spouse age

41.24
(18.99)

37.15
(20.71)

37.52
(20.50)

37.57
(20.45)

48.53
(23.32)

51.84
(29.39)

Spouse highest grade completed
x high school or less

6.36
(5.62)

5.02
(5.66)

4.95
(5.68)

4.61
(5.63)

6.22
(5.58)

5.87
(5.41)

Spouse has more than high
school education

0.27
(0.44)

0.33
(0.47)

0.35
(0.48)

0.38
(0.49)

0.239
(0.427)

0.194
(0.394)

38

State-level characteristics
State unemployment rate
Maximum state SSI supplement
exceeds 20% of federal benefit
Program receipt
SSER receipt

1993

62-64 yearolds
1984-1993

65 and
older
1984-1993

6.71
(1.24)

6.93
(1.36)

6.74
(1.62)

6.91
(1.55)

0.321
(0.467)

0.319
(0.466)

0.288
(0.453)

0.264
(0.441)

0.275
(0.447)

0.088
(0.284)

0.093
(0.291)

0.088
(0.276)

0.546
(0.498)

0.921
(0.254)

1984

40-64 year-olds
1990
1991

7.59
(1.71)

5.51
(0.87)

0.196
(0.397)
0.090
(0.287)

SSI receipt (SIPP)

0.034
(0.179)

Current SSI payee
(administrative record)

0.049
(0.215)

First SSI payment after age 64
(administrative record)

0.011
(0.106)

0.030
(0.163)

Panel dummies
1990 panel

0

1

0

0

0.269
(0.444)

0.276
(0.447)

1991 panel

0

0

1

0

0.169
(0.374)

0.173
(0.378)

1993 panel

0

0

0

1

0.264
(0.441)

0.296
(0.435)

4,753

4,795

3,140

5,389

1,687

7,352

N

Notes: Sample means reported with standard deviations in parentheses beneath.

39

Table 2: SSI participation probits from pooled 1984-1993 SIPP samples of men born before 1932
Men over 64,
public-use
information

Men under 65,
SSA longitudinal
information

Maximum state SSI supplement exceeds 20% of federal benefit

0.011***
(0.003)

0.010***
(0.003)

Highest grade completed x high school education or less

-0.004***
(0.001)

-0.002***
(0.001)

More than high school education

-0.053***
(0.006)

-0.019***
(0.005)

Black

0.011***
(0.003)

0.004
(0.003)

Divorced, widowed, or separated (and not currently married)

-0.015***
(0.004)

-0.002
(0.004)

Ever authorized for food stamps

0.012***
(0.004)

0.003
(0.005)

Spouse highest grade completed X high school or less

-0.002***
(0.0005)

-0.001**
(0.0005)

Spouse has more than high school education

-0.029***
(0.006)

-0.011**
(0.006)

State unemployment rate

0.003***
(0.001)

0.0009
(0.0006)

1990 panel

-0.001
(0.004)

-0.0005
(0.004)

1991 panel

-0.002
(0.003)

-0.003
(0.004)

1993 panel

0.001
(0.003)

-0.002
(0.004)

7,352

4,427

N

Notes: Spouse age is also included in all specifications but is not reported (close to zero and insignificant in every
case). Standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***significant at 1% level; **significant at 5% level;
*significant at 10% level.

40

Table 3: Analysis of work activity and indirect test of effects of SSI on SSER participation

A. Simple-difference estimates
60-64 year-old likely participants
"Likely participant" imputed from
cross-section (n=262)
"Likely participant" based on
longitudinal information (n=231)
62-64 year-old likely participants
"Likely participant" imputed from
cross-section (n=160; n=134 with
40+ quarters)
"Likely participant" based on
longitudinal information (n=155;
n=89 with 40+ quarters)
B. Difference-in-difference estimates
(60-64 year-old likely participants) (40-59 year-old likely participants)
"Likely participant" imputed from
cross-section (n=1,420)
"Likely participant" based on
longitudinal information (n=379)
C. Difference-in-difference estimates
(60-64 year-old likely participants) (60-64 year-old unlikely participants)
"Likely participant" imputed from
cross-section (n=2,057)
"Likely participant" based on
longitudinal information (n=1,908)
(62-64 year-old likely participants) (62-64 year-old unlikely participants)
"Likely participant" imputed from
cross-section (n=1,227; n=1,103
with 40+ quarters)
"Likely participant" based on
longitudinal information (n=1,219;
n=804 with 40+ quarters)

Employment

Hours

5 year change in
covered quarters

-0.035
(0.075)
0.000
(0.103)

0.889
(2.99)
2.73
(4.09)

1.42
(1.04)
1.74
(1.47)

-0.001
(0.008)

2.11
(3.15)

1.818
(1.285)

SSER participation,
(men with 40+
quarters)

-0.106
(0.098)
0.574**
(0.237)

-0.121*
(0.072)
-0.232*
(0.124)

-4.20
(3.04)
-10.23**
(4.77)

-0.095
(0.966)
-2.90*
(1.63)

0.079
(0.079)
-0.127
(0.083)

-0.524
(3.35)
-2.87
(3.66)

0.871
(0.99)
-0.162
(1.08)

-0.081
(0.100)

-0.284
(4.004)

0.643
(1.228)

-0.026
(0.107)
0.092
(0.151)

D. Difference-in-difference-indifference estimates
(60-64 - 40-59 year-old likely
participants) - (60-64 - 40-59 year-old
unlikely participants)
"Likely participant" imputed from
-0.097**
-5.14*
0.038
cross-section (n=13,309)
(0.049)
(2.99)
(0.908)
"Likely participant" based on
-0.244**
-10.95***
-2.63*
longitudinal information (n=3,121)
(0.117)
(5.16)
(1.56)
Notes: Panel dummy variables for 1990, 1991, and 1993 also included in every specification. Standard errors are
reported in parentheses. ***significant at 1% level; **significant at 5% level; *significant at 10% level.

41

Table 4: Direct test of effects of SSI on SSER participation
M - assuming spouse benefit is ½ of
husband's

Sample
statistics
0.494
(0.500)

SSER
Probit
0.107***
(0.028)

SSER
Probit
0.097**
(0.038)

SSER
Probit

M - spouse benefit computed from earnings
record

0.399
(0.490)

State unemployment rate

6.72
(1.60)

0.015
(0.010)

0.006
(0.011)

0.006
(0.010)

Age 63

0.337
(0.473)

0.134***
(0.032)

0.087**
(0.038)

0.103***
(0.035)

Age 64

0.326
(0.469)

0.261***
(0.034)

0.179***
(0.042)

0.223***
(0.038)

More than high school

0.358
(0.480)

-0.176**
(0.080)

-0.152*
(0.089)

-0.167*
(0.087)

Less than high school x number of years

6.47
(5.24)

-0.006
(0.007)

-0.008
(0.008)

-0.007
(0.008)

Black

0.065
(0.246)

-0.089
(0.056)

-0.048
(0.061)

-0.079
(0.059)

Divorced, widowed, or separated

0.120
(0.324)

0.027
(0.093)

-0.006
(0.103)

-0.068
(0.101)

Never married

0.034
(0.181)

0.063
(0.112)

0.063
(0.122)

0.115
(0.120)

In poor health

0.308
(0.461)

0.262***
(0.034)

0.281***
(0.033)

0.049
(0.039)

Spouse characteristics included

Yes

Yes

Yes

Social security earnings history included

No

Yes

Yes

Psuedo-R2

0.07

0.18

0.16

Number of observations
1,502
1,502
1,502
1,502
Notes: M is an indicator for whether on the margin the post-64 government transfer is determined by
the SSI program. Panel dummy variables for 1990, 1991, and 1993 also included in every
specification. Spouse characteristics include dummy variable for spouse's age categories and spouse's
educational attainment. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***significant at 1% level;
**significant at 5% level; *significant at 10% level.

42

Figure 1: Social Security Beneficiary Rates, by Age (Pooled SIPP Samples)
100
90

Percent of age group

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85
age

Figure 2: Frequency of First SSI Payment, by Age
70

Number of Observations

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
20

30

40

50

60
Age at First Payment

43

70

80

90

100

