NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONSUMER RESPONSE TO TAX REBATES
Matthew D. Shapiro
Joel Slemrod
Working Paper 8672
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8672
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2001

The authors gratefully acknowledge comments on the survey design from Richard Curtin, participants at the
University of Michigan summer workshop on behavioral economics, and members of the staffs of the Survey
Research Center, the Federal Reserve Board, and the U.S. Department of the Treasury. They also
acknowledge comments on earlier drafts from Jonathan Parker, N. Gregory Mankiw, and Chang-Tai Hsieh
and financial support of the Survey Research Center and the Office of Tax Policy Research in conducting
the survey. This revision incorporates data collected through October 2001 and replaces the preliminary
version based on data through September 2001. Shapiro is Professor of Economics and Senior Research
Scientist of the Survey Research Center, University of Michigan. Slemrod is Professor of Economics and
Professor of Business Economics and Public Policy, University of Michigan. Both are Research Associates
of the National Bureau of Economic Research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2001 by Matthew D. Shapiro and Joel Slemrod. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Consumer Response to Tax Rebates
Matthew D. Shapiro and Joel Slemrod
NBER Working Paper No. 8672
December 2001
JEL No. E21, E65, C42

ABSTRACT
Many households received income tax rebates in 2001 of $300 or $600. These rebates represented
advance payments of the tax cut from the new 10 percent tax bracket. Based on a survey of a
representative sample of households, this paper finds that only 22 percent of households receiving the
rebate would spent it. Instead, they would either save it or use it to pay off debt. This very low rate of
spending represents a striking break with past behavior, which would have suggested a much higher rate
of spending. The low spending rate implies that the tax rebate provided a very limited stimulus to
aggregate demand.

Matthew D. Shapiro
Department of Economics and
Survey Research Center
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
(734) 764-5419
shapiro@umich.edu

Joel Slemrod
Department of Economics and
Business School
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
(734) 936-3914
jslemrod@umich.edu

Standard economic theory has specific predictions about how consumers will respond to
changes in disposable income. For example, the response of consumers will depend on
whether the changes are expected or unexpected, and on whether they are temporary or
permanent. When the change in disposable income arises from a change in tax policy,
the theory predicts that consumer responses also depend on whether they perceive the
changes in taxes to be accompanied by changes in government spending.
This paper advances survey techniques to estimate the marginal propensity to
consume. In July through September 2001, many households received tax rebates of
$300 or $600. These rebates were advance payments of the tax reduction associated with
the creation of the new, 10 percent income tax bracket. We conducted a survey of a
representative sample of U.S. households during August, September, and October 2001
to determine how the receipt of the rebate checks would change behavior. We find that
only 22 percent of those receiving the rebate reported that it would lead them to mostly
increase spending. This propensity to spend is remarkably low, both from a theoretical
prospective and when compared to previous estimates.
·

The propensity to consume from a permanent tax cut should, in the standard
model, be close to one. Moreover, households that are liquidity constrained
would consume at a high rate even if they perceive the tax cut to be less than
permanent.

·

Previous estimates of the propensity to consume, either from aggregate or
individual data, generally point to a much higher propensity to consume.

Hence, the evidence from the consumer response to the 2001 tax rebate represents a sharp
break with previous evidence. The time-series evidence suggests a propensity to
consume of about one-half even from expected changes in income. The cross-sectional
evidence is more varied, but even for changes in income where theory would suggest a
propensity to consume of close to zero, the evidence typically suggests a high propensity
to consume.
The lower propensity to consume we find cannot be attributed to our survey
methodology. In 1992, we fielded a similar survey question to measure the propensity to
consume from the 1992 changes in income tax withholding. Both the 1992 and 2001
survey questions were included as modules on the University of Michigan Survey
Research Center’s monthly Survey of Consumers, so the procedures for drawing the
sample were the same in both surveys. For the 1992 withholding change, we found that
over forty percent of households would spend the extra current income from the
reduction in withholding, despite the fact that the increase in take-home pay would be
offset by either a lower tax refund or higher final payment. While that behavior is
inconsistent with unconstrained optimization, it is quite consistent with the broad range
of evidence that a high fraction of income goes to households who act myopically or
liquidity constrained with respect to changes in income. Because the methodology used
to study the 2001 rebate so closely mirrors that of the 1992 study, the surprising results of
the 2001 study appear to represent a genuine departure from past behavior and are not an
artifact of our methodology or the specific details of the survey.
Whether consumers behave according to the standard theory has substantial
implications for both the understanding of economic fluctuations and for predictions

2

about the likely impact of changes in government policy. If consumers are foresighted
and unconstrained, their spending behavior may either damp or magnify the response to a
current shock to income depending on the relationship of the income shock to changes in
future income.
There are a number of reasons why households might not increase spending from
a putatively permanent tax rebate. They might not believe that it is permanent, or they
might believe that it would be offset by some other government action (e.g., a cut in a
benefit or a future increase of another tax). In designing the survey, we included
questions to shed light on these hypotheses. Moreover, there is a substantial degree of
heterogeneity in consumer behavior. Again, the survey is designed to elicit information
to systematically account for this heterogeneity. A strength of the survey methodology is
that it allows direct tests of hypotheses that might account for the behavior.
The present study is intended to extend our understanding of consumer response
to fiscal interventions. One goal is simply to assess the extent to which the rebate
induced consumers to spend more than they otherwise would have, on what kinds of
goods, and over what time periods. An equally important objective is to test various
hypotheses about what motivates the variation in behavioral response to the rebate, and to
discriminate among reasonable alternative explanations. For example, a taxpayer who
does not increase spending upon receiving the check may do so because of a Ricardian
belief that it signals no increase in their well-being. Alternatively, someone who
increases spending upon receiving the check may do so because he or she is liquidity
constrained or because the new tax law, of which the rebate is a small part, implies a
large increase in permanent after-tax income.

3

The plan of the remainder of the paper is as follows. Section I describes the
change in tax policy in 2001. Section II gives details of the survey. Section III presents
the results. Section IV surveys the literature on propensity to consume in the context of
these results. Section V presents our conclusions.
I. The Policy
On May 25, 2001, the congressional conference committee approved the Economic
Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001. President George W. Bush signed
the bill into law on June 7, 2001. Under the bill, taxpayers were entitled to a credit in tax
year 2001 up to $300 for single individuals and up to $600 in the case of a married couple
filing a joint return. Most taxpayers received this credit in the form of a check issued by
the Department of the Treasury. These checks were sent out beginning the week of July
23, 2001 and continued until the week of September 24, 2001. Those taxpayers who as
of these dates had not filed their 2000 tax return did not receive the check until the IRS
had processed the 2000 return. These payments were commonly referred to as tax
rebates, although the IRS referred to them as advance payments of a 2001 tax credit.
The tax rebates were substantial, both from the point of view of the representative
household or in aggregate. They amounted to $38 billion, or approximately 0.4 percent
of annual GDP. Median family income in 2000 was about $41,000, so a $600 rebate
represents about 1.5 percent of median annual income and a greater share of disposable
income for the typical household. Because the size of the rebate is capped, it declines as
a fraction of income as income rises once a family receives the maximum rebate.
The rebates are a small part of the overall tax package, although the most
significant part of the tax cuts implemented in 2001. The official revenue estimate

4

produced by the Joint Committee on Taxation put the cost over 11 years at $1.349
trillion. In terms of revenue impact, the largest component was a phased-in reduction in
all of the marginal tax rates. By 2006, the top 39.6 percent bracket would be 35 percent,
the 36 percent bracket would be 33 percent, the 31 percent bracket would be 28 percent,
and the 28 percent bracket would be 25 percent. The new law also included such items as
a phase-out of limitations on itemized deductions and restrictions on personal
exemptions, an expansion of the child and dependent care tax credits, and an increase in
the standard deduction for married couples. The estate and gift tax exemption levels
were gradually increased and the rate structure gradually lowered, leading to a complete
abolition of the estate tax in 2010.1 Clearly, high-income households and those with
large estates had future taxes reduced by substantially more than the amount of the
rebate.
The rebate corresponds to a new 10 percent income tax bracket for a portion of
taxable income that was previously taxed at 15 percent, effective for taxable years
beginning January 1, 2001. The 10 percent bracket applied to the first $6,000 of taxable
income for single individuals, $10,000 of taxable income for heads of household, and
$12,000 for married couples filing joint returns. The tax rebate scheme was designed to
deliver the benefit of the new 10 percent income tax rate in a highly visible way during
calendar year 2001. Thus, the maximum rebate for a married couple filing jointly was 5
percent of $12,000, or $600. The rebates for taxpayers with other marital status were
calculated in the same manner.

1

Strikingly, both the income tax and the state tax were designed to sunset, i.e., return to
pre-2001 law, after December 31, 2010.
5

Although the rebate was an advance credit for a reduction in tax year 2001 tax
liability, its amount was calculated on the basis of taxable income in tax year 2000. In
the case of taxpayers who would have received a lower credit based on actual taxable
income in 2001, the difference was forgiven, and no reconciliation was required. Those
taxpayers who were entitled to receive a larger rebate on the basis of actual 2001 taxable
income could claim it when they filed their 2001 tax year return in calendar year 2002.
Beginning in mid-July, the Treasury sent out notices to families informing of the
amount of their rebate and providing documentation to be used in filing 2001 tax returns.
The actual checks were mailed over 10 weeks, from the weeks of July 23 to September
24. Which week a taxpayer received the check depended on the second to last digit of the
Social Security number.2 The Treasury calculated that 92 million taxpayers would get a
rebate check, with 72 million receiving the full amount, and the rebate checks totaling
$38 billion.

2

In addition, a one percentage point reduction in the 28, 31, 36, and 39.6 percent brackets
was effective on July 1, 2001. Starting at that time, the standard amount of employer
withholding was reduced for taxpayers at the (new) 27 percent bracket and above. (Tax
liabilities were reduced effective January 1, 2001 by reducing the 28 percent rates and
above by 0.5 percentage point.) For a married couple with two exemptions, this
withholding bracket was reached at $55,700 of annual payroll income. See Internal
Revenue Service (2001). For income above that threshold, withholding was reduced by 1
percent of income beginning in July 1. Annual household income of about $56,000 is
about at the 63rd percentile of the income distribution. See U.S. Bureau of the Census,
Census 2000 Supplementary Survey Summary Table P069 (download from Census
Bureau WWW site). Thus, for most households withholding was not changed. For all
but the highest-income households, the decrease in withholding in 2001 was low relative
to the rebate. For example, a married couple would have to have an annual payroll
income of about $175,000 in order for the change in withholding over the last six months
of 2001 to be $600, the usual size of the tax rebate check. Hence, the receipt of the
rebates was confounded by a change in withholding, but this change was significant only
for a few high-income households.
6

II. Survey Methodology
In this paper, we study consumers’ response to the income tax rebates of 2001. We
conducted a survey of a representative sample of households to measure whether or not
they would spend the rebate. Our survey instrument was a rider on the University of
Michigan Survey Research Center’s Monthly Survey, also known as the Survey of
Consumers. The survey’s core content contains questions about expectations of
economy-wide and family economic circumstances that are the basis of the Michigan
Consumer Sentiment Index. The expectations components of the sentiment index can be
used to test for liquidity constraints as an explanation of the pattern of spending.
Additionally, we designed questions to shed light on specific economic or behavioral
hypotheses that could explain the pattern of consumer response. Hence, the survey
approach promises not only to quantify the response of spending to a change in income,
but also to provide evidence on the underlying behavior that drives the spending
response.
The Monthly Survey provides a representative sample of households in the
contiguous 48 U.S. states and the District of Columbia. It is conducted by telephone
throughout the month. The Monthly Survey begins with core questions used to construct
the Consumer Sentiment Index. The core content is followed by several modules
concerning spending and finances. The tax cut module immediately followed the core
content. The Monthly Survey concludes with some questions about household
demographics.
Our survey was conducted in August, September, and October 2001. The first
two months of data were collected while households were in the midst of receiving rebate

7

checks. By October, most households entitled to checks should have received them. The
Monthly Survey provides both a representative sample of adult individuals and of
households. We use the weights that enable us to construct a representative sample of
households. These weights correct, among other things, for the over-sampling of
households with more than one telephone line. They also exclude responses by adult
children residing with their parents on the grounds that these respondents are uninformed
about their families’ finances. See Richard Curtin (no date).
The tax rebate survey module begins by briefly summarizing the policy and the
rebate. The survey then asks whether the household will spend the rebate, save it, or use
it to pay debt. Specifically, the key question was as follows:

Earlier this year a Federal law was passed cutting income tax rates and
expanding certain credits and deductions. The tax cuts will be phased in
over the next ten years. This year many households will receive a tax
rebate check in the mail. In most cases, the tax rebate will be $300 for
single individuals and $600 for married couples.

Thinking about your (family’s) financial situation this year, will the tax
rebate lead you mostly to increase spending, mostly to increase saving, or
mostly to pay off debt?

Respondents are allowed to volunteer that they will not receive the rebate, although they
are not prompted for that response. (This is question A31 of the survey. See the

8

Appendix for the exact wording and order of the survey questions.) This question closely
follows that used by Shapiro and Slemrod (1995) to study the 1992 change in
withholding.3
The remainder of the survey module was designed to elicit responses that would
be useful for testing various theories that explain spending behavior. These questions
were designed within the limits of a telephone survey of the general public. There are
limits—owing to survey costs, the attention span of respondents for a particular question,
and the willingness of respondents to complete the whole survey—on the number of
questions and the length of explanatory material. Moreover, it is necessary to map as
best as possible economic concepts into everyday terms. Because the framing of
questions may have an effect on responses, we attempted to design questions that would
give unbiased responses.
The next question (A32) was designed to elicit (for those who said they would
spend the rebate) whether it was for a particular purchase (a durable for example, but also
a lumpy non-durable such as a trip) or for non-durables. This question illustrates issues
that need to be confronted in crafting the survey. Terms such as “durable” or “lumpy”
have technical meaning to economists, but are not necessarily meaningful to respondents.
Of course, using non-technical terms in the survey leads to questions of interpretation

3

The 1992 question was as follows: “The federal government has recently changed the
amount of income tax that is being withheld from paychecks. On average, the change in
withholding should increase your take-home pay by about $25 per month, or by a total of
about $250 for all of 1992. It also means that next year your tax refund will be about
$250 less than otherwise, or you will have to pay about $250 more in taxes next year than
otherwise. How do you think you will use the extra $25 per month—do you think you
will spend most of it, save most of it, use most of it to repay debts, or what?”
9

when analyzing the responses. We settled on “particular item” and “day-to-day
expenses” to describe these alternatives.
The next questions are relatively straightforward queries about the timing of the
receipt of the rebate and timing of spending. (See A33, A34, and A36. A35 is an
interviewer checkpoint.) Question A37 asks whether the household expects larger,
similar, or smaller tax cuts in future years compared to the rebate. This information is
critical for testing standard theories of consumption behavior. If future, credible, tax cuts
are at least the size of the rebate, then the permanent income model of consumption
would warrant an increase in consumption that could be at least the size of the rebate.
Under the 2001 tax law, the median household will indeed get a tax cut in future years
that is, in nominal dollars, exactly the size of the rebate.4 Many high-income households
will get substantially larger tax cuts. This question also allows us to compare the
respondents’ prediction about their future tax cuts to an estimate of the cuts based on
their economic and demographic circumstances. Behavior could differ from the
permanent income model because respondents perceive the tax cuts to be short-lived.
The Barro/Ricardo hypothesis is that households will integrate the governments’
budget constraint into their own decision-making, and therefore treat a tax cut as an
increase in lifetime resources only if it is matched by a cut in government spending.
Question A42 asks whether respondents think that the tax legislation as a whole will
increase or decrease government spending. The responses to this question can be used to

4

To get a larger tax cut, households will have to reach the income level of the old 28
percent bracket, which as noted above is reached at well above the median level of
income. To get a smaller tax cut, the individual would have to have a decline in income
and have a level of income lower than that of the new 10 percent bracket ($12,000 of
taxable income for a family). The tax cuts are scheduled to disappear in 2011.
10

examine whether the Barro/Ricardo hypothesis accounts for the decision to spend the
rebate. The next question (A43) asks whether the tax legislation would improve the
family’s personal financial situation over the next ten years. This question is designed to
elicit the respondent’s expectation about the permanent impact of the tax cut, potentially
including the changes in government spending asked about in the previous question.5
The survey also includes questions to explore alternative theories of spending
behavior. In particular, we were interested in testing for the importance of rule-of-thumb
behavior in spending or saving the rebate. Designing questions that elicited meaningful
information about such behavioral considerations proved a challenge. One cannot ask
“Into what mental account did you deposit your rebate?” or “Did you add the rebate to
your buffer stock? or “Do you have a spending or saving rule of thumb?” Our approach
to elicit information about the procedures respondents used in forming their spending
plans was first to ask whether the family had a budget (A38) and then to ask whether the
budget had a spending target, a saving target, or a debt repayment target (A39). (Multiple
answers were accepted, but not prompted for.) The specific aim of this question is to see
if a budgetary rule of thumb could account for variations in consumer response to the
rebate. One rule of thumb is to set expenditures and let blips in income add or subtract to
cash balances or, more generally, savings. Another is to save a specific amount of
periodic income (e.g., through a payroll savings plan) and spend the rest. The first rule of
thumb leads to saving an infusion of income while the second leads to spending it.
Neither involves high-frequency reoptimization of spending versus saving decisions.

5

These questions, together with Question A41 that asks about the impact of the rebate on
the economy, are grouped together at the end of the survey module. We grouped together
the questions that bear on the overall impact of the policy.
11

Either could be near-rational, depending on the process followed by shocks to income
and consumption.
Finally, we asked how the respondent financed a hypothetical shock to
consumption needs, specifically whether he or she would finance a major, unexpected car
repair by using savings, by cutting back other expenses, or by borrowing (A40). Cutting
back other spending could indicate liquidity constraints for individuals with little assets.
For individuals with assets, cutting back spending might be interpreted as due to mental
accounting or spending targets.
III. Results
A. Tabular Analysis
Of those that had already received or expected to receive the rebate, only 21.3 percent of
survey respondents said they had or would mostly spend more because of the rebate
check. When the responses are weighted as described in Section II, this figure rises
slightly to 21.8 percent. All subsequent figures in the paper refer to weighted responses.
(The counts of weighted responses in the tables are rounded to the nearest integer. The
percentages are based on unrounded data.) Of those who would not spend, 59 percent
said they would repay debt and 41 percent said they would devote the rebate to increased
saving.
The 21.8 percent figure is far below the percentage that reported spending most of
the increased after-tax income from the elder Bush’s withholding change, and well below
what most other research would suggest. It is in line, though, with what some other
commercial surveys had suggested prior to the rebate program, although the wording of
the question always differed. For example, in a Gallup Poll released on July 24, 2001, 17

12

percent of those surveyed said they would spend the tax rebate, 32 percent said they
would save or invest it, and 47 percent said they would use it to pay off bills.
Table 2 begins our investigation of what explains differences in spending
propensities across households by displaying the responses by the level of income and the
value of stocks owned. 6 The spending fraction shows no trend within the bottom three
income groups. It is higher for the top two income groups. Hence, the commonly
expressed view that lower-income individuals have relative high propensity to spend (see
Paul Krugman, New York Times, October 24, 2001) is not supported by our findings.
Finally, not surprisingly, Table 2 reveals that low-income households were much more
likely than higher-income households to expect not to receive the rebate.
The relationship of the consumer response to the tax rebate and stock ownership
is strikingly non-monotonic. Among the slight majority of respondents that own no
stock, 20.4 percent say they will spend it. Among those who do have a small amount of
stock, the spending percentage is lower than for non-stockholders, but it is higher for
those with more than $50,000 of stock. This pattern can be rationalized as follows. Nonstockholders tend not to be savers, while stockholders are savers. (See Mankiw, 2000,
for the spender/saver dichotomy.) Those stockholders with low wealth are trying to build
wealth and therefore have a powerful saving motive; those with higher wealth may
already have adequate assets, and therefore are spenders on the margin.
To the extent that income is a (negative) indicator of the presence of liquidity
constraints, the results of Table 2 are counter-indicative. Those people who are more

6

High stockholding is not a sufficient statistic for high wealth. Many high-wealth
individuals do not hold stock. See Mankiw and Zeldes (1991). We focus on stock
holdings simply because these are the only data on wealth in the survey.
13

likely to be constrained (i.e., have lower income) are those that are more likely to mostly
save, rather than mostly spend, the rebate. Table 3A pursues this explanation by crosstabulating the spend-or-save responses with the answers to three questions designed to
pick up the presence of liquidity constraints. We believe that a person is more likely to
be liquidity constrained if he or she is financially worse off compared to the previous
year, is financially worse off compared to what is expected for next year, or if they expect
higher income next year. In none of these three cases is there a relationship between the
answer to this question and the answer to the spend-or-save question that would indicate
the importance of liquidity constraints. In fact, to the extent that any patterns emerge,
they run in the reverse direction. People who are in worse financial condition than last
year are less likely to spend more because of the rebate. The most surprising pattern of
results applies to the question about this year’s financial condition compared to what is
expected next year. Here the relationship to spend-save plans is non-monotonic. The
least likely to spend are those who expect to be worse off. That finding in and of itself is
consistent with the liquidity constraint story. But the group second most likely to spend
are those who expect to be better off next year, while the group most likely to spend are
those who expect to be about as financially well off next year as this year. The liquidity
constraint story suggests that the most likely to spend would be those who expect to be
better off next year. The same pattern of results appears when the question asks about
income next year rather than financial condition next year compared to this year.
Table 3B uses the joint distribution of retrospective and expected financial
condition to provide a more powerful test of the liquidity constraint hypothesis. For
example, if liquidity is a key determinant of spending behavior, households who are

14

temporarily in bad financial condition (worse off than last year, but expecting to be better
of next year) should have particularly high spending rates. In contrast, those who are in
temporarily good financial condition (better off than last year, but expecting to be worse
off next year) should have particularly low spending rates. Households in temporarily
bad financial condition have a spending fraction of 16.0 percent, while those in
temporarily good financial condition have a spending fraction of 22.0 percent. The
liquidity constraint hypothesis predicts the opposite pattern. Under the liquidity
constraint hypothesis, one would expect higher spending rates as one reads down the
columns of Table 3B and lower rates as one reads across. These patterns are not apparent
in the results.
In our previous survey-based study of the elder Bush’s withholding change, we
were also unable to relate spend-save intentions with any indicator of liquidity constraint,
and we speculated that the explanation might be related to whether people used budget
rules, or rules of thumb, to govern their behavior. Thaler (1990) argues that such rules of
thumb, or mental accounts, are important for understanding specific decisions by
consumers. Mankiw (2000) suggests that a behavioral dichotomy between spenders and
savers is useful for understanding aggregate behavior and the effects of fiscal policy. Our
questions about budgeting are an attempt to quantify such behavior.
The set of five questions detailed in Table 4 was designed to further investigate
these hypotheses. About two-thirds of households report having a budget. Those who
have budgets are slightly more likely to spend the rebate, though not statistically
significantly so. Among households who have a budget, those who target spending are
more likely to spend the rebate, those who target debt repayment are less likely to spend,

15

and those who target saving are intermediate. (The survey allowed multiple targets to be
mentioned, so the target categories are not mutually exclusive.) These findings are
different that what one might have expected from an economic model of targeting, in
which a household that spends a routine amount would save residual income and vice
versa. The survey evidence is the opposite: target spenders tend to spend on the margin
and target debt payers tend to save on the margin. There is no substantial difference in
spending rates for target savers.
We included a question on the survey asking how a hypothetical unexpected,
nonrecurring expense would be financed. The last group of results in Table 4 shows that
those who would use saving to finance the expense are more likely to spend the rebate
than those who would cut other spending or use credit. Those who would cut back
spending for the unexpected expense might be liquidity constrained. If so, then one
would have expected a high spending rate from the rebate for this group. Again, the
liquidity hypothesis is rejected. Both those who would use saving or use credit for the
unexpected expense are smoothing consumption, yet they spend the rebate at different
rates.
Table 5 provides information about the relationship between spend-or-save plans
and the respondents’ outlook for the economy and fiscal policy. The first set of results
relates the expected size of the tax cut to spending. Very few respondents expect to
receive larger tax cuts, though those who do so do not have particularly high spending.
As discussed in Section II, the tax rebate corresponds to the tax savings from the new 10
percent bracket, currently legislated to be in place for ten years. For most households, the
only tax cut received from the 2001 legislation will be this rate cut. To get the benefit of

16

the phased-in rate cuts on the higher brackets, taxable income will have to reach the level
of the former 28 percent bracket. Hence, presuming the current legislation stays in place,
the future benefit depends on expected future income. Since the higher tax brackets
apply only to levels of income well above the median, most respondents should expect to
receive future tax cuts no larger than their rebate under the 2001 tax law. Moreover,
there is uncertainty about whether the currently legislated rate reductions will be the
future law.
Table 6 takes a closer look at the expected size of the tax cut and its relationship
to spending. It shows the fraction mostly spending the rebate by two objective indicators
of the size of expected future tax cuts: current income level and expectations of future
financial condition. (The expectation variable is for the next year. Though it does not
capture fully the long-run outlook, it does control for whether current income is high or
low relative to the future.) The first three rows of each cell show the fraction of
respondents expecting a larger, same, or lower tax cut. We know from Table 5 that only
a small fraction of respondents expects a larger tax in the future. Reading across columns
of Table 6 shows that households that expect their financial condition to worsen generally
expect smaller future tax cuts; the pattern is clearest for the middle three income groups.
Reading down the panels shows that households that have higher income generally
expect larger future tax cuts. Both these findings accord with current law. Yet, even of
those households with high and rising income that are very likely to see higher tax cuts in
the future, only a fairly low fraction—at most 0.31—say they expect a larger tax cut.
Hence, either they misperceive the current law or expect it to be changed. In either case,

17

this pessimism about future tax cuts might explain the low spending propensity from the
current rebate.
Returning to Table 5, the second panel shows that most households expect the tax
legislation to have no effect on their overall personal finances over the next decade. The
third panel shows that most households are equally pessimistic about the prospects for the
tax cut improving short-run economic performance. There is also no statistically
significant relationship between these expectations and the propensity to spend more
because of the rebate.
The bottom panel of Table 5 investigates the role of expectations of future
government spending. Under the Barro/Ricardo hypothesis, households should not spend
their rebate unless the tax cut is accompanied by a cut in government spending. Only 19
percent of households expect that a cut in government spending will accompany the tax
cuts. This expectation could help explain why, on average, the propensity to spend the
tax rebate is low. Yet in the cross-section, there is little support for the Barro/Ricardo
hypothesis because the spending propensity has no significant relationship with
expectations of future government spending.
Table 7 shows some details about the spending plans of those who expected to
spend the rebate. About 40 percent reported planning to spend the rebate on a particular
item versus 60 percent for day-to-day expenses. Recall that we meant these categories to
contrast durables or other lumpy items with nondurables. The next panel considers the

18

timing of spending. More than three-quarters of the respondents expected to spend the
rebate within a month and few planned to defer it to 2002.7
B. Timing of the Survey and Timing of Receipt of the Rebate
The attacks on New York and Washington on September 11, 2001 occurred during the
data collection period of the survey. The Michigan Consumer Sentiment Index had
already fallen in the early part of September prior to the attack. It bounced up somewhat
after the attack, although it ended the month at a much lower level than at the beginning
of the month. Did the attack have an effect on spending the rebate? Table 8A appears to
suggest that it did. For those who responded to the survey prior to September 11, 18.4
percent said they would spend the rebate. After September 11, the spending rate
increased to 25.1 percent.
Interpreting the effect of singular events, even ones as significant as the attack,
can be misleading. The change in the spending propensity following the attack might, by
coincidence, arise from some other factor. The next panel in Table 8A shows such a
confounding factor. There is a substantial and statistically significant impact of having
already received the rebate on whether a respondent reports planning to spend it. There
are a variety of reasons why a higher spending rate might be reported for those who have
the rebate in hand. The rebate might be more salient if it is hand, though it is not clear
why salience would favor spending over saving. Another possibility is that receiving the
rebate confirms that the household is entitled to it and hence can add it to its lifetime
resources available for spending. Having received the rebate has a large effect on

7

The survey question refers to the lag in spending from the time of survey. The lag in
spending from receipt of the rebate needs to be adjusted up or down depending on
whether the rebate had been received at the time of the survey.
19

spending, though it does not appear to matter whether the rebate was received very
recently or not.
Table 8B shows how timing of survey responses and timing of receipt of the
rebate are confounded. During August, the first month of survey, relatively few
households had received the rebate. By September, the majority had received it. By
October, the overwhelming majority reported having received it.
To sort out these effects, we use a regression analysis. Table 9 reports the results
of estimating a linear probability model for the propensity to spend the rebate.8 In
column (A), the coefficient of the post-attack dummy is 6.7 percentage points and is
statistically significant. Column (B) shows, however, that all the incremental spending
comes from people interviewed in October. Distinguishing pre- and post-attack
September in Column (C) does not change the conclusion that high spending is
associated with being surveyed in October, which happens to be after the attack.
Of course, by October, most respondents had received the rebate. Column (D) includes
controls for having received the rebate. The estimated coefficients of having received the
rebate are sizeable and jointly significant. Moreover, including the dummies for receipt
of the rebate makes the October coefficient shrink and become insignificant. The
September coefficient gets larger in absolute value, but remains insignificant. The postattack variable has a small and insignificant estimated coefficient.

8

The dependent variable in these regressions equals one for those who reported mostly
spending the rebate and zero for those who report saving or paying debt. An alternative
would be to estimate a probit model. But recall that we argued above that the data should
be weighted. Weighting induces heteroskedasticity and therefore renders the probit
analysis inconsistent. Hence, we estimate linear probability models and use
heteroskedastic standard errors for inference.
20

Although the pattern of coefficients on the three receipt dummy variables might
suggest a decay, the difference is not statistically significant (p=0.34). Moreover,
although the month dummies have small t-statistics, they are marginally significant
jointly (p=0.10). In Column (E) we thus present results including the month dummies
and including a single dummy for having received the rebate regardless of timing of
receipt. This is our preferred specification, and it strongly suggests that having already
received the check increases the probability of responding that it would be mostly spent
by nearly 8 percentage points. The last column shows the estimate of the effect on
spending of having received the rebate leaving out the month controls—more than 9
percentage points. Given the marginal significance of the month dummies, this probably
overstates the effect of receipt of the rebate.
About 60 percent of respondents reported receiving the rebate at the time of the
survey. According to Column (E), receipt of the rebate adds 7.9 percentage points to the
spending rate. Hence, one might add 3.2 percentage points (.4 x 7.9) to the spending rate
to correct for the effect of ultimate receipt of the rebate on those who had not received it
at the time of the survey. This would increase the estimated spending rate from 21.8
percent to 25.0 percent.
This analysis demonstrates the utility of the survey approach. The effect of
receipt of the rebate is confounded with the effect of the attack. Our ability to control for
receipt of the rebate among individuals responding to the survey after the attack allows us
to avoid the incorrect inference that the attack changed spending. In contrast, a
researcher with only aggregate time series might well have concluded that the effect of
the attack was significant.

21

The next section presents a more complete econometric analysis of the
determinants of spending the rebate. In light of the results in Table 9, we include controls
for the month of survey and the receipt of the rebate in these equations.
C. Econometric Analysis
The cross-tabulations suggest that the propensity for the rebate to increase spending is
higher for those with higher incomes, is higher for those with more stock market wealth
(although also relatively high for non-stockholders), but is not associated with indicators
of liquidity constraints or how the tax cut legislation affected people’s long-run financial
position. It is correlated with budget rules, but not in a way that one would expect. In
this section we further explore the determinants of the spend-or-save response with a set
of regression analyses. In the analysis, we pool the save response with the repay debt
response and contrast it with the spend response.
The main advantage of this approach is that we can investigate whether the simple
correlations revealed in the cross-tabulations may be picking up, or masking, an
association with a correlated variable. For example, Table 3 reveals that people who
expect to be worse off next year are less likely to use the rebate as an opportunity to
spend more. But, if those who expect to be worse off are generally low-income, then it
may be the association with income, rather than with expected future financial condition,
that is driving the relationship with the spend-or-save response. The regressions are
estimated as linear probability models using the weighted data.
As a baseline, Table 10 presents the results of a regression analysis with only log
income, dummies for levels of stockholding (no stock is the excluded category), for the
respondent being married, for the presence of children in the household, and for levels of

22

education of the respondent (less than high school is the omitted category).9 Tables 11,
12, and 13 focus additionally on each of the three sets of explanations of the spend-orsave response: personal financial condition, budgeting, and the outlook for the economy
and policy.
The positive relationship with income found in Table 2 appears in Table 10 as
well, although it remains statistically insignificant. Relative to non-stockholding,
spending is U-shaped in stockholding, as is found in Table 2.
Being married raises the spending propensity and having children reduces it,
although only with weak statistical significance. The age pattern of the spending
propensity is uneven, with the 50 to 64 year old respondents having lower spending
propensities than younger (but not the youngest) and especially older households.
Education is not significantly related to spending. Since having children or the education
levels have small and insignificant effects on spending, we drop them from subsequent
regressions. Column (B) reports the baseline regression without these covariates.
Table 11 shows that the associations that run counter to the liquidity-constraints
theory that appeared in Table 3 survive the regression framework. Being better off, either
compared to the previous year or the one’s expected condition next year, is positively
associated with a propensity to spend. Column (A) of Table 11 shows that being better
off or in the same financial condition this year relative to last year raises the propensity to
spend by 7.1 and 6.5 percentage points, respectively, relative to those who are worse off
than last year. Column (B) shows that expecting to be better off or in the same financial
condition next year relative to this year raises the propensity to consume by 2.3 and 4.5

9

See Appendix Table 1 for definition of these variables and their means.
23

percentage points, respectively, relative to those who expect to be worse off next year
than this year. Combining both the retrospective and expected financial conditions in
Column (C) has only a small effect on the estimates compared to those in Columns (A)
and (B). Hence, current financial conditions relative to the past and future conditions
have a significant effect on spending, but not in the way one would expect if liquidity
constraints explained behavior. In particular, those with transitorily bad financial
condition have about the same spending propensity as those with transitorily good
financial conditions. The highest spending propensities are associated with those that
have a stable financial condition, retrospectively and going forward.
The regression reported in Column (D) of Table 11 confirms that one’s expected
financial condition has better predictive power for spending than expected income, as
reported in the cross-tabulations of Table 3.
Table 12 shows that whether or not the respondent has a budget is not a
significant determinant of spending the rebate [Column (A)], but conditional on having a
budget, those whose budget targets spending have a higher propensity to spend relative to
other budget rules [Column (B)]. Taken at its face value, this result means that
households abandon their budget rule on the margin, i.e., those who have a spending
target are more likely to spend the rebate.
Table 12, Column (C), provides further evidence that the cross-section differences
in spending propensity are not well predicted by the standard model of consumption
smoothing and liquidity constraints. A liquidity constraint would require households
facing an unexpected expense to cut back other spending. For unconstrained households,
using saving or using credit are both means of buffering consumption against shocks.

24

Yet, Table 4 shows and the regression in Column (C) of Table 12 confirms that in the
survey responses, only those who would use saving as a buffer against an unexpected
expense are particularly likely to spend the rebate. The estimated coefficients of use
credit and use saving are significantly different (p=0.01). Hence, there is a striking
asymmetry between those who buffer shocks with credit and with savings.
Table 13 corroborates the impression gleaned from the cross-tabulations shown in
Table 5 that neither budget rules nor beliefs about the impact of the tax cut legislation on
one’s own, or the country’s, financial standing is montonically related to whether the
consumer spends or saves the rebate. Paradoxically, although not statistically
significantly, those who believe that the tax cuts would worsen or improve their own
personal financial situation were more likely to mostly spend the rebate compared to
those who think it would have no effect; the same pattern is true with respect to how the
tax cuts affect the overall economic situation.
D. Response to a Temporary Tax Cut After the Attack
The University of Michigan Survey Research Center fielded a new survey, How America
Responds, in response to the attacks on New York and Washington, D.C. of September
11, 2001. The aim of the new survey was to study whether there were shifts in economic,
social, political, and psychological attitudes following the attack. The survey included a
version of the question about tax rebates analyzed above. It reads as follows:

This year many households have received a tax rebate check in the mail
amounting to $300 or $600. Suppose the Federal government cut taxes an

25

additional $1000 per household for this year only and sent this $1000
rebate to you (your family) in October of this year.

Thinking about your (family’s) financial situation this year, will the tax
rebate lead you mostly to increase spending, mostly to increase saving, or
mostly to pay off debt?

Respondents were then given the same “Spend,” “Save,” or “Pay Debt” alternatives as in
the main question under study in this paper. Hence, the question is identical except that
the tax rebate is hypothetical, it is $1000 instead of $300 or $600, and it is received only
in one year.
The results are similar to this survey. Only fifteen percent of the respondents
answered that they would mostly spend the rebate. The remainder was roughly equally
split between saving and paying debt. The spending rate for the hypothetical tax cut, like
that for the actual rebate, was not a function of the level of income. Given that the
hypothetical rebate was temporary, a lower spending propensity can be rationalized by
economic theory. Nonetheless, the spending percentage is close to what we find for the
actual rebate. Like our estimate for the actual tax rebate, the spending propensity from
the hypothetical rebate is much smaller than found in earlier studies.
IV. Literature on Propensity to Consume
The standard methodological approach to this question has been to examine aggregate
consumption data for signs of a break in behavior around the implementation date of a
tax policy change. This approach has been applied to the most similar recent policy, the

26

tax rebate of 1975. The Tax Reduction Act of 1975 provided for a 10 percent rebate of
1974 taxes up to a maximum of $200, and totaled $8.1 billion sent out from late April to
mid-June of 1975. The 1975 tax bill also included a smaller, transitory income tax
reduction that was subsequently made permanent, and a one-time Social Security bonus
for retirees with no income taxes to rebate. Blinder (1981) finds that each rebate dollar
raised consumption by about 16 cents in the quarter it was received, and still had
substantial effects five to eight quarters afterwards. Hence, the cumulative effect is
substantially larger than the impact effect and substantially larger than we find.
Modigliani and Steindel (1977) find much smaller effects, however, and Blinder and
Deaton (1985) were unable to precisely estimate the response. Poterba (1988), using
monthly rather than quarterly consumption data, finds that consumption of nondurables
increased by between 18 and 24 percent of the rebate in the month received, but found
that the change in service consumption was negligible. Hence, despite the fact that the
1975 rebate was meant to be a temporary tax reduction, the time-series evidence suggest
propensities to consume at least as great as we find, and substantially greater in the case
of Blinder’s study.
These aggregative studies focus on specific tax rebates as shocks to income. The
literature on the excess sensitivity of consumption to predictable changes in income
examines how consumption responds on average to predetermined movements in
income.10 According to the permanent income model of consumption, consumption
should adjust only when income moves unexpectedly. These studies find, however, that
10

This line of research was begun by Flavin’s (1981) extension of Hall’s (1978) seminal
work. Though there are some econometric difficulties with Flavin’s approach [see

27

consumption responds to predictable changes in income. The estimated aggregate
propensity to consume from expected changes in income is between 40 and 50 percent.
Similarly, there is a large literature on examining the excess reaction of
consumption to income in data on households.11 A series of recent studies have used data
on individuals to examine how the receipt of payments affects spending. The common
thread of these studies is that consumption responds to changes in the timing of payments
not associated with changes in lifetime resources.12 Parker (1999) examines whether
spending changes when take-home pay increases in months after wage earners hit the
earnings ceiling for Social Security payroll taxes. He finds that there is a correlation
between take-home pay and consumption, although the evidence points to myopia or
rule-of-thumb behavior rather than liquidity constraints as the source of the
consumption/income correlation. Souleles (1999) studies spending from tax refunds. He
concludes that almost two-thirds of every dollar of refund is spent within the quarter.
Moreover, households that likely face liquidity constraints (those that are younger, have
high debts, few liquid assets, and low income) quickly increase their spending on
nondurables, while wealthier households quickly spend it on durable goods and may use
part of the refund check later on summer vacations. Stephens (2001) studies whether the
receipt of Social Security checks affects the timing of spending within the month. He
finds a significant burst in spending in the week following receipt of the check. Since the
regularity of these payments provides ample opportunity for households to make

Mankiw and Shapiro (1985)], the finding of excess sensitivity has been confirmed by a
large literature. See Campbell and Mankiw (1989) and its successors.
11
Hall and Mishkin (1982), Shapiro (1984), and Zeldes (1989) are early contributions.
See Browning and Lusardi (1996) for a survey of this literature.
12
Wilcox (1989, 1990) pioneered such studies in an aggregate time series settings.
28

adjustments to avoid the correlation of spending with the receipt of the check, Stephens’s
finding suggests that some behavior other than liquidity constraints explains spending
patterns.
Not all evidence from individual households suggest excess consumption from
predictable changes in income. Hsieh (2001) finds that there is no evidence against
consumption smoothing from changes in income from the large and predictable payments
received by Alaskans from oil royalties. Similarly, Souleles (2000) finds that large and
predictable tuition payments have little impact on parents’ non-tuition expenditures.
The most methodologically similar paper is Shapiro and Slemrod (1995), which
used survey responses to estimate the consumption response to a policy of George W.
Bush’s father. President George H. Bush in 1992 issued an executive order that changed
the income tax withholding rates to increase after-tax income by about $29 per month per
worker, or an aggregate increase of $25 billion in after-tax income. This study concluded
that 43 percent of consumers spent the extra cash flow from the withholding change.
This figure is similar to Campbell and Mankiw’s (1989) estimate, based on aggregate
time-series that 50 percent of income goes to “rule of thumb” consumers. Consistent
with the 2001 evidence, the study revealed no relationship between the response to the
withholding change and indicators of liquidity constraint based on one’s income and
financial condition in the current year compared to the previous year and expectations
about the next year. Shapiro and Slemrod speculated that the results might be consistent
with consumers following some sort of rule of thumb, or near-rational, behavior. The
evidence that this paper presents on budget targeting does suggest that budget rules

29

matter, although if “target spending” means that saving is the residual in a rule of thumb,
this evidence does not support the simplest behavioral model.
Although the 1992 and current surveys are similar in wording and design, the
policy changes were different. We have already emphasized that the 1992 policy change
affected only the timing of tax payments while the 2001 change, if taken at face value,
had a substantial effect on their present value. The 2001 changes also might have been
more salient. They were more heavily discussed in the press and also came in the form of
a single check rather than a series of 10 monthly increments to take-home pay. It is not
obvious, however, that increased salience would generate a higher rate of saving.
V. Conclusions
Only 22 percent of households report that they had spent or expected to mostly spend the
income tax rebate of 2001. This spending rate perhaps needs to be corrected upwards by
as much as 3 percentage points to account for the effect on survey responses of the timing
of receipt of the rebate. Given that the tax legislation in place at the time of the survey
provided for ten years of tax cuts of at least the amount of the rebate for most households
receiving the rebate, the tax rebate apparently corresponds to a substantial increment to
lifetime resources. Hence, standard economic theory would suggest a spending rate close
to one. It is therefore very surprising to find a spending propensity much closer to zero, a
surprise that is compounded by the likelihood that some households are liquidity
constrained, which raises the propensity to consume even out of a temporary tax cut.
The very low propensity to consume is even more surprising in the context of
previous estimates. There is substantial evidence—both from aggregate time series and
from data on households—that the propensity to consume out of changes in income is

30

substantial. Indeed, the propensity to spend in situations where an unconstrained,
forward-looking consumer would smooth consumption is generally found to be
substantially larger than what we find.
Economists are, of course, skeptical of survey responses. We are supposed to be
interested in what people do, not what they say they will do or have done. We have
argued elsewhere [Shapiro and Slemrod (1995)] that this view of the survey evidence is
too limited. In any case, it is very difficult to use time-series or cross-section evidence on
actual behavior to study events such as the tax rebate. It is a single event that affects
most households by the same amount. In the time series, any other aggregate event could
account for changes in spending associated with the timing of the rebate. In the cross
section, most households will face the same shock.
There are also legitimate concerns that the wording of the survey may affect the
results in ways that are difficult to predict. That our survey question has been tested in
the field provides an important defense against these concerns. In 1992, survey
respondents reported a much higher spending rate for a temporary tax withholding
change based on a nearly identical survey instrument. These findings are in line with
other evidence on the propensity to consume. That survey respondents reported low
propensities to consume from the 2001 rebate hence cannot therefore be attributed to the
survey methodology.
What accounts for the very low propensity to consume from the 2001 tax rebate?
The cross-sectional analysis of Section III provides some clues. Respondents are quite
pessimistic about the size of future tax rebates. Even among respondents with high and
increasing income who should benefit substantially from the legislated reduction in

31

marginal tax rates, no more than a 1/3 expect to receive future tax cuts from the 2001
legislation greater than the size of the rebate. Many households who received the rebate
expect to benefit in the future by less than the size of the rebate.
Wealth holding is one of the most powerful predictors of spending propensity in
the cross-section. Those with some stockholdings, but low levels of stock-market wealth,
are particularly likely to save the rebate. This is consistent with a spender/saver model.
Those without stock portfolios may be spenders. Those with stock portfolios, but with a
low value of stock, may be in saving mode as they try to build assets. Those with high
asset values may already have adequate accumulated saving. Moreover, they tend to be
high-income households for whom the size of the rebate is relatively small.
The cross-section results also fail to support some possible theories of the low
propensity to spend. In particular, because we find that propensity to spend the tax cut is
not associated with expectations of lower government spending, the cross-section results
do not support the Barro/Ricardo integration of the household and government budget
constraints.
There are, of course, limitations to the cross-sectional results. First, because the
vast majority of households do not spend the rebate, there is little cross-section variation
in behavior to explain. It is not thus surprising that the R-squared statistics reported in
Tables 11, 12, and 13 are fairly low. Second, and more fundamentally, if there is an
aggregate change in behavior such that spending propensities have shifted downward,
cross-section techniques will be of limited use in pinpointing it. The survey does indicate
that there is a high degree of aggregate pessimism about the size of future tax cuts and the
possibility that government spending will be restrained. These findings can explain a low

32

spending propensity on average even if there is not sufficient variation in these beliefs to
predict which of the few households will actually spend their rebate.
Regardless of the reasons for the low rate of spending, the findings of this paper
have significant implications for the impact of fiscal policy on the economy. First, the
low propensity to consume implies that the 2001 tax rebate will have a very small impact
on aggregate demand. The rebate was added to the 2001 tax bill explicitly to provide a
short-run stimulus. This research suggests that policymakers will be disappointed.
Moreover, the new survey conducted after the terrorist attack suggests that further
temporary tax cuts will be relatively ineffective in stimulating spending.
Second, to the modest extent that spending from the rebate was spent, low-income
households are not less likely to spend. This finding runs counter to the belief that a tax
rebate would be more effective at stimulating aggregate demand were it targeted at lowincome households. It is, though, conceivable that the propensity to consume would be
higher among those households whose income was too low to qualify for the first round
of rebates. This survey does not rule that possibility out.
Third, our finding of a very low propensity to consume raises a cautionary note
about the effectiveness of fiscal policy in general. Consumer behavior appears to have
shifted from what most economists would have expected, both based on economic theory
and earlier evidence. It is possible that key parameters such as the propensity to consume
are contingent on aggregate conditions in ways that are difficult to anticipate or model.
One can speculate about why the spending propensity might have shifted downward
under the circumstances of mid-year 2001. Perhaps the negative wealth shocks of the
previous two years placed consumers in an asset-rebuilding mode. There may be costs to

33

cutting back consumption, such as a force of habit. Such preferences may cause
households to allocate the rebate to saving even if they are saving a very low fraction of
current income. Future research may clarify the causes of the large apparent decline in
the marginal propensity to consume. In the meantime, these findings illustrate the peril
of extrapolating the impact of current policies from past behavior.

34

REFERENCES
Browning, Martin and Lusardi, Annamaria. “Household Saving: Micro Theories and
Micro Facts.” Journal of Economic Literature 34 (December 1996) 1797–1855.
Blinder, Alan S. “Temporary Income Taxes and Consumer Spending.” Journal of
Political Economy 89 (1981) 26-53.
Blinder, Alan S. and Deaton, Angus. “The Time Series Consumption Function
Revisited.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1985:2) 465-511.
Campbell, John Y. and Mankiw, N. Gregory. “Consumption, Income, and Interest Rates:
Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence,” in Olivier Jean Blanchard and Stanley Fischer,
eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989, pp. 185-216.
Curtin, Richard T. “Survey of Consumers.” Survey Research Center, University of
Michigan, no date.
Hall, Robert E. “Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent Income
Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Political Economy 86 (Dec. 1978) 971–
87.
Hall, Robert E. and Mishkin, Frederic S. “The Sensitivity of Consumption to Transitory
Income: Estimates From Panel Data on Households.” Econometrica 50 (Mar. 1982)
461–81.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai. “Do Consumers Respond to Anticipated Income Changes? Evidence
From the Alaska Permanent Fund.” Unpublished paper, Princeton University (September
2001).
Flavin, Marjorie A. “The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations About
Future Income.” Journal of Political Economy 89 (Oct. 1981) 974–1009.
Mankiw, N. Gregory. “The Spenders-Savers Theory of Fiscal Policy.” American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 90 (May 2000) 120-5.
Mankiw, N. Gregory and Shapiro, Matthew D. “Trends, Random Walks, and Tests of the
Permanent Income Hypothesis.” Journal of Monetary Economics 16 (September 1985)
165-174.
Mankiw, N. Gregory and Zeldes, Stephen P. “The Consumption of Stockholders and
Nonstockholders.” Journal of Financial Economics 29 (1991) 97-112.
Modigliani, Franco and Steindel, Charles. “Is a Tax Rebate an Effective Tool for
Stabilization Policy?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1977) 175-209.

35

Parker, Jonathan. “The Reaction of Household Consumption to Predictable Changes in
Social Security Taxes.” American Economic Review 89 (1989) 959-73.
Poterba, James M. “Are Consumers Forward Looking? Evidence from Fiscal
Experiments?” American Economic Review 78 (1988) 413-8.
Shapiro, Matthew D. “The Permanent Income Hypothesis and the Real Interest Rate:
Some Evidence from Panel Data.” Economics Letters 14 (1984) 93-100.
Shapiro, Matthew D. and Slemrod, Joel. “Consumer Response to the Timing of Income:
Evidence from the a Change in Tax Withholding.” American Economic Review 85 (1995)
274-83.
Souleles, Nicholas N. “College Tuition and Household Savings and Consumption.”
Journal of Public Economics 77 (August 2000) 185-207.
Souleles, Nicholas N. “The Response of Household Consumption to Income Tax
Refunds.” American Economic Review 89 (1999) 947-58.
Stephens, Melvin, Jr.“‘3rd of tha Month': Do Social Security Recipients Smooth
Consumption Between Checks?” Unpublished paper, Carnegie-Mellon University (June
2001).
Thaler, Richard H. “Anomalies: Saving, Fungibility, and Mental Accounts.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 4 (1990) 193-205.
Wilcox, David W. “Social Security Benefits, Consumption Expenditures, and the Life
Cycle Hypothesis.” Journal of Political Economy 97 (Apr. 1989) 288–304.
Wilcox, David W. “Income Tax Refunds and the Timing of Consumption Expenditure.”
Economic Activity Section Working Paper No. 106, Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System. Washington, DC, April 1990.
Zeldes, Stephen P. “Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical
Investigation.” Journal of Political Economy 97 (Apr. 1989) 305–46.
Internal Revenue Service. “New Withholding Tables for 2001” Publication 15-T. (June
2001).

36

Appendix: Survey Instrument

A31.

Earlier this year a Federal law was passed cutting income tax rates and
expanding certain credits and deductions. The tax cuts will be phased
in over the next ten years. This year many households will receive a
tax rebate check in the mail. In most cases, the tax rebate will be
$300 for single individuals and $600 for married couples.
Thinking about your (family’s) financial situation this year, will the
tax rebate lead you mostly to increase spending, mostly to increase
saving, or mostly to pay off debt?

1. INCREASE
SPENDING
↓

A32.

2. INCREASE
3. PAY OFF
SAVING
DEBT
GO TO A33

2. DAY-TO-DAY EXPENSES

8. DON’T KNOW

(Have you/Has your family) already received your tax rebate?

1. YES
↓

A34.

8. DON’T
KNOW
GO TO A33

Will the increase in spending be for a particular item that you
otherwise would not have purchased, or will it be spent mostly on dayto-day expenses?

1. PARTICULAR ITEM

A33.

6. (IF VOLUNTEER)
WILL NOT GET REBATE
GO TO A38

2. (IF VOLUNTEER)
YES, SOME DID/SOME DIDN’T
↓

5. NO

8. DON’T KNOW
GO TO A35

Was the tax rebate check received within the last week, more than a
week ago but within the last four weeks, or more than four weeks ago?

1. WITHIN
LAST WEEK

2. MORE THAN WEEK
AGO, BUT WITHIN
LAST FOUR WEEKS

3. MORE THAN FOUR
WEEKS AGO

8. DON’T
KNOW

A35.

INTERVIEWER CHECKPOINT:
1. WILL SPEND REBATE (A31=1) --> GO TO A36
2. ALL OTHERS --> GO TO A37

A36.

When do you plan on spending most of your tax rebate--have you already
spent most of it, will you spend most of it within a month, will you
spend most of it within two months, will you spend most of it before
the end of the year, or will you not spend most of it until next year?
1. ALREADY
SPENT

A37.

2. WITHIN
MONTH

5. NEXT
YEAR

8. DON’T
KNOW

3. SAME
SIZE

5. SMALLER THAN
REBATE

8. DON’T
KNOW

Do you have a (family) budget, or otherwise plan, your spending and
saving?
1. YES
↓

A39.

4. BY END
OF YEAR

Now thinking about the tax cuts you (and your family) expect in future
years, do you think that your (family’s) annual tax cut will be larger
than this year’s tax rebate, about the same size, or smaller than this
year’s tax rebate?

1. LARGER THAN
REBATE

A38.

3. WITHIN
2 MONTHS

5. NO

8. DON’T KNOW

GO TO A40

↓

People budget in different ways. Do you (and your family) generally
try to keep your spending within a certain limit or do you focus more
on trying to save regular amounts of money, or to pay off regular
amounts of debt?
(CHECK ALL THAT APPLY —- DO NOT PROBE FOR ADDITIONAL MENTIONS)

A. SPEND
WITHIN
LIMIT

B. SAVE
REGULAR
AMOUNTS

C. PAY OFF
REGULAR
AMOUNTS
OF DEBT

D. (IF VOLUNTEERED)
DOESN’T BUDGET/
BUDGETS IN
DIFFERENT WAY

Z. DON’T
KNOW

A40.

If (you/your family) had an unexpected expense, such as a one-time car
repair, would you pay for it mostly by taking the money out of savings,
mostly by cutting back on other spending, or mostly by using credit or
borrowing?

1. USE
SAVINGS

A41.

5. WORSEN
ECONOMY

8. DON’T
KNOW

6. NOT HAVE
MUCH IMPACT

8. DON’T
KNOW

Now thinking about the federal tax cut legislation as a whole, not just
this year’s rebate, do you think the tax cuts will lead to increased
future government spending, decreased future government spending, or
will future government spending not change much as a result of the
federal tax cut?

1. INCREASED
SPENDING

A43.

3. USE CREDIT
OR BORROWING

Do you think the tax rebates will improve conditions in the national
economy during the year ahead, will the tax rebates worsen conditions
in the national economy during the year ahead, or will the tax rebates
not have much impact on the national economy during the year ahead?

1. IMPROVE
ECONOMY

A42.

2. CUT BACK ON
OTHER SPENDING

5. DECREASED
SPENDING

6. SPENDING
NOT CHANGE

8. DON’T
KNOW

Thinking of your (family’s) financial situation over the next ten
years, do you think the tax cut legislation will make you better off
financially, make you worse off financially, or will it not make much
difference to your financial situation?

1. BETTER OFF
FINANCIALLY

5. WORSE OFF
FINANCIALLY

6. NOT MAKE
MUCH DIFFERENCE

8. DON’T
KNOW

Final data: August , September, and October Pooled Results
[Revised Nov 14, 2001]

Table 1—Plans To Spend or Save Rebate?

Unweighted
Weighted

(A)

(B)

(C)

Total
Responses
1506
1444

Spend
Rebate
267
256

Save
Rebate
423
376

(D)

(E)

(F)

(G)

Pay Debt
Will Not Don't Know/
Spend
With Rebate Get Rebate Refused Percentage
563
204
49
21.3%
544
223
45
21.8%

Note: The first row gives unweighted responses. The second row gives weighted responses (rounded to nearest whole number). Columns A
through F give number of responses. Column G gives the number in column B divided by the sum of the numbers in column B through D.
Percentages based on unrounded responses.

Table 2—Spend or Save Rebate? Responses by Income and Wealth

Income and wealth
Income
0 to 20,000
20,001 to 35,000
35,001 to 50,000
50,001 to 75,000
More than 75,000
Stock
No stock
1 to 15,000
15,001 to 50,000
50,001 to 100,000
100,000 to 250,000
More than 250,000

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

(E)

(F)

Frequency

Spend
Rebate

Save
Rebate

20.4%
20.1%
17.9%
18.8%
22.9%

23
42
40
63
69

27
74
74
66
95

81
109
103
105
123

132
35
14
10
9

17.6%
18.8%
18.6%
27.0%
24.1%

51.1%
9.3%
11.0%
8.6%
12.1%
7.8%

109
15
25
28
49
30

150
33
43
36
65
48

275
70
73
48
50
27

182
11
11
8
6
4

20.4%
12.8%
18.0%
24.9%
29.8%
28.4%

Pay Debt
Will Not
Spend
With Rebate Get Rebate Percentage

(G)

p-value

0.076

0.004

Note: Tabulations based on weighted responses with “don’t know” and “refused” excluded. Column A gives the frequency of response by rows.
Columns B through E give number of weighted responses (rounded to nearest whole number). Column F gives the number of responses in
Column B divided by the sum of responses in Columns B, C, and D. Column G gives the p-value for the hypothesis that the spend percentages
in Column F are equal. Percentages and p-values based on unrounded responses.

Table 3—Plans to Spend or Save Rebate
A. Responses by Financial Condition
(A)

(B)

(C)

Frequency

Spend
Rebate

Save
Rebate

41.3%
28.9%
29.8%

119
82
55

180
110
85

220
129
189

56
81
85

23.0%
25.6%
16.6%

0.015

Financial condition expected next year
Better Off
Same
Worse Off

39.3%
50.4%
10.3%

96
133
22

127
190
41

251
227
52

57
131
25

20.2%
24.3%
19.4%

0.227

Income expected next year
Higher
Same
Lower

59.2%
28.6%
12.1%

151
79
25

212
105
56

358
116
63

100
96
24

20.9%
26.4%
17.2%

0.053

Financial condition
Financial condition compared to last year
Better Now
Same
Worse

(D)

(E)

(F)

Pay Debt
Will Not
Spend
With Rebate Get Rebate Percentage

(G)

p-value

B. Responses by Retrospective versus Expected Financial Condition
(A)
(B)
(C)
Financial Condition Next Year
Better
Same
Worse
Financial Condition This Year
Better
Same
Worse

23.3%
258
19.9%
101
16.0%
181

23.3%
282
31.8%
244
15.7%
175

22.0%
34
14.4%
50
22.4%
61

Note: Rows are condition this year compared to last year. Columns are condition expected next year compared to this year. First number is cells
are percentage of respondents spending the rebate. The second number is the frequency. See also note to Table 2.

Table 4—Spend or Save Rebate: Responses by Budgeting
(A)

(B)

(C)

Frequency

Spend
Rebate

Save
Rebate

65.6%
34.4%

175
81

236
139

373
168

129
91

22.3%
20.8%

0.555

If budget, Target spending
Yes
No

50.8%
49.2%

95
76

123
109

166
207

75
53

24.7%
19.5%

0.077

If budget, Target saving
Yes
No

39.0%
61.0%

75
96

123
109

121
251

33
95

23.5%
21.1%

0.426

If budget, Target debt repayment
Yes
No

43.6%
56.4%

64
107

70
162

208
164

51
77

18.7%
24.8%

0.043

If budget, Target saving or debt repayment
Yes
No

68.2%
31.8%

111
60

155
77

273
100

77
50

20.6%
25.5%

0.128

How to pay for unexpected expense
Use Savings
Cut Back Spending
Use Credit

50.7%
27.0%
22.4%

158
52
39

243
79
49

209
167
159

82
71
59

25.9%
17.4%
15.7%

Family budgeting
Have budget
Yes
No

(D)

(E)

(F)

Pay Debt
Will Not
Spend
With Rebate Get Rebate Percentage

(G)

p-value

0.001

Note: See note to Table 2. Multiple mentions are allowed for the budget targets, so the responses are not mutually exclusive. The budget target
question also allowed, though did not prompt for, budgeting other ways. Seven respondents (weighted) gave this reply.

Table 5—Spend or Save Rebate? Response by Outlook for Economy and Policy
(A)

(B)

(C)

Frequency

Spend
Rebate

Save
Rebate

16.1%
47.1%
36.8%

40
103
86

43
167
131

92
241
182

NA
NA
NA

22.9%
20.1%
21.6%

0.703

Impact of tax cuts on personal finances
over next 10 years
Better Off
No Change
Worse Off

23.1%
72.0%
5.0%

78
156
16

94
261
13

122
385
29

22
182
11

26.5%
19.5%
27.8%

0.022

Impact of tax cut on economy next year
Improve Economy
Not Much Impact
Worsen Economy

27.2%
62.9%
9.9%

86
132
30

110
228
26

127
357
54

45
134
23

26.7%
18.5%
27.5%

0.003

Impact of tax cut on government spending
Increased Spending
Spending Not Change
Decreased Spending

26.1%
54.7%
19.3%

68
126
51

89
185
82

137
294
90

49
114
30

23.0%
20.9%
22.9%

0.700

Economic and policy outlook
Size of future tax cuts
Larger
Same Size
Smaller

Note: See note to Table 2.

(D)

(E)

(F)

Pay Debt
Will Not
Spend
With Rebate Get Rebate Percentage

(G)

p-value

Table 6—Expected Future Tax Cut and Spending of Rebate:
By Income Group and Expected Future Income

Income
0 to 20,000

Fraction: Larger Tax Cut
Fraction: Same Tax Cut
Fraction: Smaller Tax Cut
Spending Fraction
Frequency

(A)
(B)
(C)
Financial Condition Next Year
Better Off
Same
Worse Off
0.21
0.02
0.18
0.44
0.60
0.26
0.36
0.38
0.56
13.5%
15.8%
50.0%
88
145
30

20,001 to 35,000

Fraction: Larger Tax Cut
Fraction: Same Tax Cut
Fraction: Smaller Tax Cut
Spending Fraction
Frequency

0.18
0.59
0.23
15.9%
94

0.08
0.45
0.47
22.3%
141

0.05
0.42
0.53
7.8%
19

35,001 to 50,000

Fraction: Larger Tax Cut
Fraction: Same Tax Cut
Fraction: Smaller Tax Cut
Spending Fraction
Frequency

0.26
0.44
0.30
13.4%
98

0.14
0.56
0.31
26.3%
103

0.14
0.26
0.60
10.8%
30

50,001 to 75,000

Fraction: Larger Tax Cut
Fraction: Same Tax Cut
Fraction: Smaller Tax Cut
Spending Fraction
Frequency

0.19
0.55
0.26
27.7%
112

0.11
0.49
0.40
27.9%
113

0.05
0.59
0.36
25.3%
22

More than 75,000 Fraction: Larger Tax Cut
Fraction: Same Tax Cut
Fraction: Smaller Tax Cut
Spending Fraction
Frequency

0.31
0.39
0.30
23.8%
122

0.18
0.43
0.40
26.5%
143

0.26
0.36
0.38
17.2%
35

Note—The table show expectations of size of future tax cuts and fraction spending the rebate by income
groups and expectations of future financial condition. The first three rows of each cell show the fraction
expecting a larger, same, or lower tax cut. The fourth row shows the fraction spending the rebate. The
fifth row in each cell gives the frequency of the cell. See also note to Table 2.

Table 7—Plans for Spending Rebate
(A)
Frequency

(B)
Number

Spend rebate on what
Particular Item
Day-to-Day Expense

39.8%
60.2%

100
151

When spend rebate
Already Spent
Within Month
Within 2 Months
By End of Year
Next Year

54.6%
21.6%
7.0%
13.6%
3.2%

133
52
17
33
8

Note: Tabulations based on weighted responses with “don’t know” and “refused” excluded. Column A gives the frequency of response. Column
B gives number of responses.

Table 8—Spend or Save Rebate?
A. Response by Timing of Survey Response or Receipt of Rebate
(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

(E)

(F)

Frequency

Spend
Rebate

Save
Rebate

Timing of Survey Response
Before attack
After attack

49.6%
50.4%

106
150

198
178

272
271

117
106

18.4%
25.1%

When Received Rebate
Not yet
Within last week
1-4 weeks ago
More than 4 weeks ago

40.8%
7.7%
24.0%
27.5%

78
26
63
89

161
27
91
92

236
36
126
140

NA
NA
NA
NA

16.4%
29.2%
22.5%
27.6%

Pay Debt
Will Not
Spend
With Rebate Get Rebate Percentage

(G)

p-value
0.005

0.001

B. Response by Timing of Survey versus Receipt of Rebate
(A)
(B)
Received Rebate Yet
No
Yes
Timing of Survey Response
August
September
October

17.3%
296
13.4%
145
19.4%
54

22.6%
100
22.3%
266
29.2%
344

Note: In panel B, the first number is cells are percentage of respondents spending the rebate and the second number is the frequency. See also
note to Table 2.

August September October Final Pooled Results
Updated Nov 13, 2001

Table 9—Regression Analysis of Spending Rebate:
Timing of Survey and Timing of Receipt of Rebate
(A)
Timing of survey:
After attack

(B)

0.067
(0.025)**

September

0.006
(0.029)
0.092
(0.032)**

October

(C)

(D)

(E)

0.019
(0.041)
-0.003
(0.035)
0.073
(0.052)

0.012
(0.041)
-0.029
(0.037)
0.036
(0.056)

-0.025
(0.031)
0.045
(0.036)

Received Rebate:
Last week

0.130
(0.053)*
0.050
(0.035)
0.084
(0.037)*

1-4 weeks ago
More than 4 weeks ago
Received Rebate
Constant
Observations
R-squared

(F)

0.184
(0.017)**
1200
0.01

0.185
(0.021)**
1200
0.01

0.185
(0.021)**
1200
0.01

0.166
(0.022)**
1187
0.02

0.079
(0.028)**
0.166
(0.022)**
1187
0.02

0.093
(0.025)**
0.164
(0.018)**
1187
0.01

Note: Estimates are linear probability regression with the dependent variable equal to one if the tax rebate is spent and
zero if it is saved or used to repay debt. Estimates are based on weighted data. Heteroskedastic-consistent standard
errors are in parentheses. A * indicates significant at the 5% level; a ** indicates significant at the 1% level. See
Appendix Table 1 for definitions and means of dependent variables.

Table 10—Regression Analysis of Spending Rebate: Covariates
Log income
Stock

1 to 15,000
15,001 to 50,000
50,001 to 100,000
100,000 to 250,000
More than 250,000

Married
Children
Age 30 to 39
Age 40 to 49
Age 50 to 64
Age 65 and over
High School Graduate
Some College
College Graduate and beyond
September
October
Received Rebate
Constant
Observations
R-squared
Note: See Table 9.

(A)
0.028
(0.023)
-0.072
(0.039)
-0.031
(0.042)
0.028
(0.050)
0.054
(0.047)
0.030
(0.057)
0.043
(0.032)
-0.018
(0.032)
0.053
(0.042)
0.078
(0.043)
0.028
(0.042)
0.124
(0.054)*
0.007
(0.065)
-0.003
(0.065)
-0.020
(0.065)
-0.023
(0.032)
0.043
(0.038)
0.075
(0.030)*
-0.202
(0.233)
1059
0.04

(B)
0.023
(0.022)
-0.072
(0.038)
-0.035
(0.041)
0.024
(0.050)
0.051
(0.046)
0.028
(0.056)
0.040
(0.030)
0.050
(0.041)
0.077
(0.042)
0.034
(0.041)
0.132
(0.053)*

-0.024
(0.032)
0.042
(0.038)
0.075
(0.030)*
-0.163
(0.225)
1059
0.04

Table 11—Regression Analysis of Spending Rebate: Financial Condition
Log income
Stock

1 to 15,000
15,001 to 50,000
50,001 to 100,000
100,000 to 250,000
More than 250,000

Married
Age 30 to 39
Age 40 to 49
Age 50 to 64
Age 65 and over
September
October
Received Rebate
Financial condition compared to last year:
Better now
Same

(A)
0.018
(0.022)
-0.071
(0.039)
-0.037
(0.041)
0.024
(0.050)
0.053
(0.046)
0.037
(0.056)
0.040
(0.030)
0.055
(0.041)
0.084
(0.042)*
0.039
(0.041)
0.134
(0.055)*
-0.019
(0.032)
0.048
(0.038)
0.071
(0.030)*

(B)
0.026
(0.023)
-0.077
(0.038)*
-0.034
(0.042)
0.025
(0.050)
0.054
(0.047)
0.021
(0.057)
0.036
(0.031)
0.050
(0.042)
0.080
(0.043)
0.039
(0.042)
0.142
(0.057)*
-0.024
(0.033)
0.039
(0.039)
0.076
(0.030)*

0.071
(0.030)*
0.065
(0.036)

Financial condition expected next year:
Better off

0.021
(0.046)
0.036
(0.046)

Expected income:
Higher
Same
Constant
Observations
R-squared
Note: See Table 9.

-0.166
(0.229)
1056
0.05

(D)
0.023
(0.022)
-0.073
(0.038)
-0.029
(0.041)
0.024
(0.050)
0.056
(0.046)
0.034
(0.056)
0.045
(0.030)
0.045
(0.041)
0.072
(0.042)
0.033
(0.041)
0.130
(0.055)*
-0.026
(0.033)
0.037
(0.038)
0.073
(0.030)*

0.072
(0.031)*
0.069
(0.037)
0.023
(0.046)
0.045
(0.045)

Same

(C)
0.021
(0.023)
-0.078
(0.039)*
-0.037
(0.042)
0.025
(0.051)
0.056
(0.047)
0.030
(0.057)
0.037
(0.031)
0.055
(0.041)
0.088
(0.043)*
0.045
(0.042)
0.146
(0.058)*
-0.018
(0.033)
0.045
(0.038)
0.072
(0.030)*

-0.223
(0.243)
1030
0.05

-0.225
(0.242)
1028
0.05

0.057
(0.041)
0.079
(0.047)
-0.218
(0.234)
1051
0.05

Table 12—Regression Analysis of Spending Rebate: Budgeting
Log income
Stock

1 to 15,000
15,001 to 50,000
50,001 to 100,000
100,000 to 250,000
More than 250,000

Married
Age 30 to 39
Age 40 to 49
Age 50 to 64
Age 65 and over
September
October
Received Rebate
Has budget

(A)
0.027
(0.022)
-0.074
(0.038)
-0.037
(0.041)
0.027
(0.050)
0.048
(0.046)
0.028
(0.057)
0.038
(0.030)
0.045
(0.041)
0.075
(0.043)
0.031
(0.041)
0.135
(0.053)*
-0.022
(0.032)
0.043
(0.038)
0.075
(0.030)*
0.034
(0.028)

Targets spending

(B)
0.037
(0.027)
-0.045
(0.049)
-0.042
(0.048)
0.085
(0.065)
0.040
(0.057)
-0.020
(0.072)
0.036
(0.038)
0.045
(0.051)
0.065
(0.052)
0.016
(0.051)
0.190
(0.071)**
-0.008
(0.042)
0.047
(0.047)
0.098
(0.036)**
0.045
(0.035)
0.014
(0.035)
-0.036
(0.035)

Targets saving
Targets debt payment
Use savings for unexpected expense
Use credit for unexpected expense
Constant
Observations
R-squared

(C)
0.019
(0.022)
-0.071
(0.039)
-0.040
(0.041)
0.016
(0.049)
0.039
(0.046)
0.016
(0.057)
0.035
(0.030)
0.052
(0.041)
0.086
(0.043)*
0.041
(0.041)
0.128
(0.054)*
-0.024
(0.033)
0.034
(0.038)
0.072
(0.030)*

-0.218
(0.228)
1057
0.05

-0.329
(0.268)
701
0.06

0.054
(0.032)
-0.034
(0.036)
-0.128
(0.227)
1043
0.05

Note: See Table 9. For equations with budget targets, “targets other” is the excluded category.

Table 13—Regression Analysis of Spending Rebate: Outlook for Economy and Policy
Log income
Stock

1 to 15,000
15,001 to 50,000
50,001 to 100,000
100,000 to 250,000
More than 250,000

Married
Age 30 to 39
Age 40 to 49
Age 50 to 64
Age 65 and over
September
October
Received Rebate
Future tax cuts larger
Future tax cuts smaller

(A)
0.018
(0.023)
-0.080
(0.037)*
-0.027
(0.042)
0.033
(0.050)
0.076
(0.049)
0.031
(0.058)
0.037
(0.031)
0.043
(0.042)
0.084
(0.044)
0.039
(0.042)
0.140
(0.055)*
-0.014
(0.033)
0.041
(0.039)
0.070
(0.031)*
0.035
(0.039)
0.018
(0.030)

Tax cuts improve own situation

(B)
0.017
(0.022)
-0.073
(0.038)
-0.019
(0.042)
0.031
(0.050)
0.063
(0.046)
0.032
(0.057)
0.036
(0.030)
0.044
(0.041)
0.072
(0.042)
0.029
(0.041)
0.139
(0.054)**
-0.025
(0.033)
0.034
(0.038)
0.072
(0.030)*

(C)
0.025
(0.022)
-0.071
(0.039)
-0.033
(0.041)
0.017
(0.049)
0.055
(0.047)
0.017
(0.056)
0.042
(0.030)
0.035
(0.041)
0.074
(0.043)
0.034
(0.041)
0.125
(0.054)*
-0.033
(0.033)
0.036
(0.038)
0.076
(0.030)*

0.068
(0.031)*
0.092
(0.073)

Tax cuts worsen own situation
Tax cuts improve economy

0.068
(0.031)*
0.098
(0.051)

Tax cuts worsen economy
Tax cuts decrease government spending
Tax cuts increase government spending
Constant
Observations
R-squared
See note to Table 9.

(D)
0.014
(0.024)
-0.067
(0.040)
-0.036
(0.041)
0.021
(0.050)
0.064
(0.047)
0.044
(0.058)
0.044
(0.031)
0.051
(0.042)
0.075
(0.043)
0.027
(0.042)
0.127
(0.056)*
-0.026
(0.033)
0.045
(0.039)
0.066
(0.030)*

-0.132
(0.228)
983
0.05

-0.116
(0.227)
1042
0.05

-0.200
(0.226)
1040
0.05

0.012
(0.033)
0.016
(0.035)
-0.067
(0.248)
1015
0.04

Appendix Table 1—Means of Covariates in Regressions
Independent variables
Log income
Married
Children
Age 30 to 39
Age 40 to 49
Age 50 to 64
Age 65 and over
High School Graduate
Some College
College Graduate and beyond
September
October
Received Rebate
Observations

mean
10.79
.61
.39
.25
.24
.24
.13
.23
.24
.47
.34
.33
.60
1059

Note—Means of covariates in estimates from Table 9, Column (A). Log income is log of household income. All
variables are zero, one dummies: Married is 1 if the respondent is married. Children is 1 if there are children under 18
in the household. The age and education dummies are 1 if the respondent falls in the respective age and education
ranges. The College Graduate and beyond categories includes those with more than 16 years of schooling. September
and October are dummies for survey response in those months (August excluded category). Received rebate is 1 for
households who had received the rebate at the time of the survey.

