NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMPERFECT COMMON KNOWLEDGE AND THE EFFECTS OF MONETARY POLICY
Michael Woodford
Working Paper 8673
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8673
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2001

Prepared for the Festschrift Conference in Honor of Edmund S. Phelps, Columbia University, October 5-6,
2001. I would like to thank Greg Mankiw and Lars Svensson for comments, Charlie Evans for sharing his
VAR results, Hong Li for research assistance, and the National Science Foundation for research support
through a grant to the NBER. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2001 by Michael Woodford. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Imperfect Common Knowledge and the Effects of Monetary Policy
Michael Woodford
NBER Working Paper No. 8673
December 2001
JEL No. D82, E32

ABSTRACT
This paper reconsiders the Phelps-Lucas hypothesis, according to which temporary real effects
of purely nominal disturbances result from imperfect information, but departs from the assumptions of
Lucas (1973) in two crucial respects. Due to monopolistically competitive pricing, higher-order
expectations are crucial for aggregate inflation dynamics, as argued by Phelps

(1983).

And

decisionmakers' subjective perceptions of current conditions are assumed to be of imperfect precision,
owing to finite information processing capacity, as argued by Sims (2001). The model can explain highly
persistent real effects of a monetary disturbance, and a delayed effect on inflation, as found in VAR
studies.

Michael Woodford
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
woodford@princeton.edu

1

Imperfect Information and Price Adjustment

A perennial question in macroeconomic theory is the reason for the observed real effects
of changes in monetary policy. It is not too hard to understand why central-bank actions
can affect the volume of nominal spending in an economy. But why should not variations in
nominal expenditure of this sort, not associated with any change in real factors such as tastes
or technology, simply result in proportional variation in nominal wages and prices, without
any effect upon the quantities produced or consumed of anything? It has long been observed
that wages and prices do not immediately adjust to any extent close to full proportionality
with short-run variations in nominal expenditure, but again, why should not self-interested
households and firms act in a way that brings about more rapid adjustment?
A famous answer to this question is that people are not well enough informed about
changes in market conditions, at least at the time that these changes occur, to be able
immediately to react in the way that would most fully serve their own interests. Phelps (1970)
proposed the parable of an economy in which goods are produced on separate “islands,” each
with its own labor market; the parties determining wages and employment on an individual
island do so without being able to observe either the wages or production decisions on other
islands. As a result of this informational isolation, an increase in nominal expenditure on the
goods produced on all of the islands could be mis-interpreted on each island as an increase
in the relative demand for the particular good produced there, as a result of which wages
would not rise enough to prevent an increase in employment and output across all of the
islands. Lucas (1972) showed that such an argument for a short-term Phillips-curve tradeoff
is consistent with “rational expectations” on each island, i.e., with expectations given by
Bayesian updating conditional upon the market conditions observed on that island, starting
from a prior that coincides with the objective ex ante probabilities (according to the model)
of different states occurring.
This model of business fluctuations was, for a time, hugely influential, and allowed the
development of a number of important insights into the consequences for economic policy

1

of endogenizing the expectations on the basis of which wages and prices are determined.
However, the practical relevance of the imperfect-information model was soon subjected
to powerful criticism. In the Lucas model, equilibrium output differs from potential only
insofar as the average estimate of current aggregate nominal expenditure differs from the
actual value. In terms of the log-linear approximate model introduced in Lucas (1973) and
employed extensively in applied work thereafter, one can write
yt = α(qt − qt|t ),

(1.1)

where 0 < α < 1 is a coefficient depending upon the price-sensitivity of the supply of an
individual good. Here yt denotes the deviation of aggregate (log) real GDP from potential,
qt denotes aggregate nominal GDP, and qt|t the average (across islands) of the expected value
of qt conditional upon information available on that island in period t.
Furthermore, all aggregate disturbances in period t — and hence the volume of aggregate
nominal expenditure qt — become public information (observable on all islands) by date t+1.
This implies that
Et [qt+1|t+1 (i)] = Et [qt+1 ]
in the case of each island i, where Et [·] denotes an expectation conditional upon the history
of aggregate disturbances through date t, and qt+1|t+1 (i) the expectation of qt+1 conditional
upon the information available on island i in period t + 1. Averaging over i, it follows that
Et [qt+1|t+1 ] = Et [qt+1 ].
Then, taking the expectation of both sides of (1.1) for period t + 1 conditional upon the
history of aggregate disturbances through date t, it follows that
Et [yt+1 ] = 0.

(1.2)

Equation (1.2) implies that deviations of output from potential cannot be forecasted a
period earlier by someone aware of the history of aggregate disturbances up to that time.
This means that a monetary disturbance in period t or earlier cannot have any effect upon
2

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

−0.5

−1

−1.5

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Figure 1: Estimated impulse response of nominal GDP to an unexpected interest-rate
reduction. Source: Christiano et al. (2001).
equilibrium output in period t + 1 or later. But if follows that such real effects of monetary
disturbances as are allowed for by (1.1) must be highly transitory: they must be present only
in the period in which the shock occurs. The model was accordingly criticized as unable to
account for the observed persistence of business fluctuations.
Of course, the degree to which the prediction of effects that last “one period” only is an
empirical embarrassment depends upon how long a “period” is taken to be. In the context
of the model, the critical significance of a “period” is the length of time it takes for an
aggregate disturbance to become public information. But, many critics argued, the value of
the current money supply is published quite quickly, within a few weeks; thus real effects of
variations in the money supply should last, according to the theory, for at most a few weeks.
Yet statistical analyses of the effects of monetary disturbances indicated effects lasting for
many quarters.
3

Furthermore, the theory implied that monetary disturbances should not have even transitory effects on real activity, except insofar as these resulted in variations in aggregate nominal
expenditure that could not be forecasted on the basis of variables that were already public
information at the time of the effect on spending. But the VAR literature of the early 1980s
(e.g., Sims, 1980) showed that variations in the growth rates of monetary aggregates were
largely forecastable in advance by nominal interest-rate innovations, and that the monetary
disturbances identified by these interest-rate surprises had no noticeable effect upon nominal
expenditure for at least the first six months. This has been confirmed by many subsequent
studies; for example, Figure 1 shows the impulse response of nominal GDP to an unexpected loosening of monetary policy in quarter zero, according to the identified VAR model
of Christiano et al. (2001). (Here the periods on the horizontal axis represent quarters, and
the dashed lines indicate the +/- 2 s.e. confidence interval for the response.) Although the
federal funds rate falls sharply in quarter zero (see their paper), there is no appreciable effect
upon nominal GDP until two quarters later.
Thus given the estimated effects of monetary disturbances upon nominal spending —
and given the fact that money-market interest rates are widely reported within a day — the
Lucas model would predict that there should be no effect of such disturbances upon real
activity at all, whether immediate or delayed. Instead, the same study finds a substantial
effect on real GDP, as shown in Figure 2. Furthermore, the real effects persist for many
quarters: the peak effect occurs only six quarters after the shock, and the output effect is
still more than one-third the size of the peak effect ten quarters after the shock.
These realizations led to a loss of interest, after the early 1980s, in models of the effects
of monetary disturbances based upon imperfect information — and indeed, in a loss of
interest in monetary models of business fluctuations altogether, among those who found
unpalatable the assumption of non-informational reasons for slow adjustment of wages or
prices. However, this rejection of the Phelpsian insight that information imperfections play
a crucial role in the monetary transmission mechanism may have been premature. For
the unfortunate predictions just mentioned relate to the specific model presented by Lucas
4

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

−0.5

−1

−1.5

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Figure 2: Estimated impulse response of real GDP to an unexpected interest-rate reduction.
Source: Christiano et al. (2001).
(1972), but not necessarily to alternative versions of the imperfect-information theory.
Persistent effects of monetary disturbances on real activity can instead be obtained in a
model that varies certain of Lucas’ assumptions. In particular, one may argue that the Lucas
model does not take seriously enough the Phelpsian insight that informational isolation of the
separate decisionmakers in an economy — captured by the parable of separate “islands” — is
an important source of uncertainty on the part of each of them as to what their optimal action
should be. For in the Lucas model, the only information that matters to decisionmakers,
about which they have imperfect information, is the current value of an exogenous aggregate
state variable: the current level of nominal GDP (or equivalently in that model, the current
money supply). Instead, for the “isolated and apprehensive ... Pinteresque figures” in an
economy of the kind imagined by Phelps (1970, p. 22), an important source of uncertainty
is the unknowability of the minds of others.
5

Here I follow Phelps (1983) in considering a model in which the optimal price for any
given supplier of goods to charge depends not only upon the state of aggregate demand,
but also upon the average level of prices charged by other suppliers. It then follows that
the price set by that supplier depends not only upon its own estimate of current aggregate
demand, but also upon its estimate of the average estimate of others, and similarly (because
others are understood to face a similar decision) upon its estimate of the average estimate of
that average estimate, and so on. The entire infinite hierarchy of progressively higher-order
expectations matters (to some extent) for the prices that are set, and hence for the resulting
level of real activity.
This is important because, as Phelps argues, higher-order expectations may be even
slower to adjust in response to economic disturbances. Phelps (1983) suggests that rational
expectations in the sense of Lucas (1972) are a less plausible assumption when the hypothesis
must be applied not only to estimates of the current money supply, but also to an entire
infinite hierarchy of higher-order expectations. But here I show that higher-order expectations can indeed be expected to adjust more slowly to disturbances, even under fully rational
expectations.1 The reason is that even when observations allow suppliers to infer that aggregate demand has increased, resulting in a substantial change in their own estimate of
current conditions, these observations may provide less information about the way in which
the perceptions of others may have changed, and still less about others’ perceptions of others’
perceptions. Thus in the model presented here, a monetary disturbance has real effects, not
so much because the disturbance passes unnoticed as because its occurrence is not common
knowledge in the sense of the theory of games.
A second important departure from the Lucas (1972) model is to abandon the assumption
that monetary disturbances become public information — and hence part of the information
set of every agent — with a delay of only one period. Were we to maintain this assumption, it
would matter little that in the present model output depends not only upon the discrepancy
1

Previous illustrations of the way that additional sources of persistence in economic fluctuations can be
created when higher-order expectations matter include Townsend (1983a, 1983b) and Sargent (1991). These
applications do not, however, consider the issue of the neutrality of money.

6

between qt and qt|t , but on the discrepancy between qt and higher-order average expectations
as well. For if the monetary disturbance at date t is part of every supplier’s information
set at date t + 1 (and this is furthermore common knowledge), then any effect upon qt+1
of this disturbance must increase not only qt+1|t+1 but also all higher-order expectations by
exactly the same amount. (The argument is exactly the same as in our consideration above
of the effect upon first-order average expectations.) We would again obtain (1.2), and the
criticisms of the Lucas model mentioned above would continue to apply.
Hence it is desirable to relax that assumption. But how can one realistically assume
otherwise, given the fact that monetary statistics are reported promptly in widely disseminated media? Here it is crucial to distinguish between public information — information
that is available in principle to anyone who chooses to look it up — and the information
of which decision-makers are actually aware. Rather than supposing that people are fully
aware of all publicly available information — a notion stressed in early definitions of “rational expectations”, and of critical importance for early econometric tests of the Lucas model2
— and that information limitations must therefore depend upon the failure of some private
transactions to be made public, I shall follow Sims (1998, 2001) in supposing that the critical
bottleneck is instead the limited capacity of private decision-makers to pay attention to all
of the information in their environment.3
In the model presented below, I assume that each decision-maker acts on the basis of his or
her own subjective perception of the state of aggregate demand, that I model as observation of
the true value with error (a subjective error that is idiosyncratic to the individual observer).4
2

Lucas (1977, sec. 9), however, implicitly endorses relaxation of this position, when he suggests that it is
reasonable to suppose that traders do not bother to track aggregate variables closely. “An optimizing trader
will process those prices of most importance to his decision problem most frequently and carefully, those of
less importance less so, and most prices not at all. Of the many sources of risk of importance to him, the
business cycle and aggregate behavior generally is, for most agents, of no special importance, and there is
no reason for traders to specialize their information systems for diagnosing general movements correctly.”
3
A similar gap between the information that is publicly available and the information of which decisionmakers are actually aware is posited in the independent recent work of Mankiw and Reis (2001). The
Mankiw-Reis model is further compared to the present proposal in section 4.3 below.
4
The implications of introducing idiosyncratic errors of this kind in the information available to individual
agents has recently been studied in the game-theoretic literature on “global games” (e.g., Morris and Shin,
2001). As in the application here, that literature has stressed that in the presence of strategic complemen-

7

That is, all measurements of current conditions are obtained through a “noisy channel” in
the communications-theoretic sense (e.g., Ziemer and Tranter, 1995). Given the existence
of private measurement error, agents will not only fail to immediately notice a disturbance
to aggregate demand with complete precision, but they will continue to be uncertain about
whether others know that others know that others know .... about it — even after they can
be fairly confident about the accuracy of their own estimate of the aggregate state. Thus
it is the existence of a gap between reality and perception that makes the problem of other
minds such a significant one for economic dynamics.
Moreover, given the use of a limited “channel capacity” for monitoring current conditions,
it will not matter how much and how accurate of information may be made “public” (e.g.,
on the internet). Indeed, in the model below I assume that all aggregate disturbances are
“public information”, in the sense of being available in principle to anyone who chooses to
observe them with sufficient precision, and in the sense of being actually observed (albeit
with error) by every decision-maker in the entire economy. There is no need for the device of
separate markets on different “islands” in order for there to be imperfect common knowledge.
(Presumably, Phelps intended the “islands” as a metaphor for this sort of failure of subjective
experience to be shared all along — though who can claim to know other minds?) Nor is
there any need for a second type of disturbance (the random variations in relative demand
of the Lucas model) in order to create a non-trivial signal-extraction problem. The “channel
noise” generated by each decision-maker’s own over-burdened nervous system suffices for this
purpose.
This emphasis upon the limited accuracy of private perceptions is in the spirit of recent
interest in weakening the idealized assumptions of rational-decision theory in macroeconomics and elsewhere (e.g., Sargent, 1993). Limitations upon the ability of people (and
animals) to accurately discriminate among alternative stimuli in their environments are better documented (and admit of more precise measurement) than most other kinds of cognitive
tarities, even a small degree of noise in the private signals can have substantial consequences for aggregate
outcomes, owing to the greater uncertainty that is created about higher-order expectations.

8

limitations, having been the subject of decades of investigation in the branch of psychology
known as “psychophysics” (e.g., Green and Swets, 1966). While it might seem that the introduction of a discrepancy between objective economic data and private perceptions could
weaken the predictions of economic theory to the point of making the theory uninteresting,
the type of theory proposed here — which assumes that agents correctly understand the characteristics of the noisy channel through which they observe the world, and respond optimally
to the history of their subjective observations — is still relatively tightly parameterized. The
proposed generalization here of a standard neoclassical model adds only a single additional
free parameter, which can be interpreted as measuring the rate of information flow in the
noisy channel, as in Sims (2001).
Section 2 develops a simple model of pricing decisions in an environment characterized by
random variation in nominal spending and imperfect common knowledge of these fluctuations
for the reason just discussed. It shows how one can characterize equilibrium output and
inflation dynamics in terms of a finite system of difference equations, despite the fact that
expectations of arbitrarily high order matter for optimal pricing policy. Section 3 then derives
the implications of the model for the real effects of monetary disturbances, in the special case
where erratic monetary policy causes nominal GDP to follow a random walk with drift, as
in the Lucas model. It is shown that not only are deviations of output from potential due to
monetary disturbances not purely transitory, but their degree of persistence may in principle
be arbitrarily long. Indeed, arbitrarily long persistence of such real effects is possible (though
less empirically plausible) even in the case of quite accurate individual perceptions of the
current state of aggregate demand. The dynamics of higher-order expectations are also
explicitly characterized, and it is shown that higher-order expectations respond less rapidly
to a disturbance, as argued above.
Section 4 then compares imperfect common knowledge as a source of price inertia, and
hence of real effects of monetary policy, to the more familiar hypothesis of “sticky prices,” in
the sense of a failure of prices to be continuously updated in response to changing conditions.
In the case of a random walk in nominal GDP, the predicted dynamics of output and inflation
9

are essentially the same in the model developed here and in the familiar Calvo (1983) model
of staggered price adjustment — corresponding to any given assumed average frequency of
price adjustment there is a rate of information acquisition that leads to the same equilibrium
dynamics in the imperfect-information model, despite continuous adjustment of all prices.
However, this equivalence does not hold for more generally stochastic processes for nominal
GDP. In the case of positive serial correlation of nominal GDP growth (the more realistic
specification as far as actual monetary disturbances are concerned), the predictions of the
two models differ, and in a way that suggests that an assumption of incomplete common
knowledge of aggregate disturbances may better match the actual dynamics of output and
inflation following monetary disturbances. Section 5 concludes.

2

Incomplete Common Knowledge: A Simple Example

Here I illustrate the possibility of a theory of the kind sketched above by deriving a log-linear
approximation to a model of optimal price-setting under imperfect information. The loglinear approximation is convenient, as in Lucas (1973) and many other papers, in allowing
a relatively simple treatment of equilibrium with a signal-extraction problem.

2.1

Perceptions of Aggregate Demand and Pricing Behavior

Consider a model of monopolistically competitive goods supply of the kind now standard in
the sticky-price literature. The producer of good i chooses the price pit at which the good is
offered for sale in order to maximize
E

(∞
X

)

β

t

Π(pit ; Pt , Yt )

(2.3)

t=0

where period t profits are given by
Π(p; P, Y ) = m(Y )[Y (p/P )1−θ − C(Y (p/P )−θ ; Y )].

(2.4)

Here Yt is the Dixit-Stiglitz index of real aggregate demand, and Pt the corresponding price
index, the evolution of each of which is taken to be independent of firm i’s pricing policy.
10

Firm i expects to sell quantity yti = Yt (pit /Pt )−θ if it charges price pit , for some θ > 1. Real
production costs are given by C(yti ; Yt ), where the second argument allows for dependence
of factor prices upon aggregate activity. Finally, (2.4) weights profits in each state by the
stochastic discount factor m(Yt ) in that state, so that (2.3) represents the financial-market
valuation of the firm’s random profit stream. (See, e.g., Woodford, 2001.) The model here
abstracts from all real disturbances.
I assume that the firm can choose its price independently each period, given private
information at that time about the aggregate state variables. In this case, the pricing
problem is a purely static one each period, of choosing pit to maximize Eti Π(pit ; Pt , Yt ), where
Eti denotes expectation conditional upon i’s private information set at date t. The first-order
condition for optimal pricing is then
Eti [Πp (pit ; Pt , Yt )] = 0.

(2.5)

In the absence of information limitations, each supplier would choose the same price (which
then must equal Pt ), so that equilibrium output would have to equal the natural rate of
output Ȳ , defined as the level such that Πp (P ; P, Ȳ ) = 0. (This is independent of P.)
To simplify the signal-extraction issues, I shall approximate (2.5) by a log-linear relation,
obtained by Taylor-series expansion around the full-information equilibrium values pit /Pt = 1
and Yt = Ȳ .5 This takes the form
pt (i) = pt|t (i) + ξyt|t (i),

(2.6)

introducing the notation pt (i) ≡ log pit , pt ≡ log Pt , yt ≡ log(Yt /Ȳ ), and letting xt+j|t (i) ≡
Eti xt+j for any variable x and any horizon j ≥ 0. Assuming that C is such that Cy > 0,
Cyy ≥ 0, and CyY > 0, one can show that ξ > 0. I shall assume, however, that it satisfies
5

We abstract here from any sources of real growth, as a result of which the full-information equilibrium
level of output, or “natural rate” of output, is constant. Nothing material in the subsequent analysis would
be different were we to assume steady trend growth of the natural rate of output. We abstract here from
stochastic variation in the natural rate so that producers need only form inferences about the monetary
disturbances. One advantage of this of this simplification is that it makes clear the fact that the present
model, unlike that of Lucas (1972), does not depend upon the existence of both real and nominal disturbances
in order for there to be real effects of nominal disturbances.

11

ξ < 1, so that the pricing decisions of separate producers are strategic complements (again
see Woodford, 2001).
Finally, I specify the demand side of the economy by assuming a given stochastic process
for aggregate nominal expenditure. A traditional justification for such an assumption is that
the central bank determines an exogenous process for the money supply, and that there is
a constant, or at any rate exogenous, velocity of money. Yet we need not assume anything
as specific as this about the monetary transmission mechanism, or about the nature of
monetary policy. All that matters for the analysis below is (i) that the disturbance driving
the nominal GDP process is a monetary policy shock, and (ii) that the dynamic response of
nominal GDP to such shocks is of a particular form. The assumption of a particular response
of nominal GDP under historical policy is something that can be checked against time
series evidence, regardless of how one believes that this response should best be explained.
Direct specification of a stochastic process for nominal GDP eliminates the need for further
discussion of the details of aggregate demand determination, and for purposes of asking
whether our model is consistent with the observed responses of real activity and inflation to
monetary disturbances, this degree of detail suffices.6
Letting qt denote the exogenous process log(Pt Yt /Ȳ ), and averaging (2.6) over i, we
obtain
pt = ξqt|t + (1 − ξ)pt|t ,
introducing the notation xt+j|t ≡

R

(2.7)

xt+j|t (i)di. The (log) price level is then a weighted average

of the average estimate of current (log) nominal GDP (the exogenous forcing process) and
the average estimate of the (log) price level itself.
Iterating (2.7) allows us to express pt as a weighted average of the average estimate of qt ,
6

My point here is essentially the same as that of Christiano et al. (1998), who argue that it is possible to
test the predictions of their model by computing the predicted responses to a given money-growth process,
even if they do not believe (and do not assume, in their VAR strategy for identifying the effects of monetary
policy shocks) that monetary policy is correctly described by an exogenous process for money growth. Of
course, if one wanted to ask a question such as what the effect would be of an improvement in suppliers’
information, it would be necessary to take a stand on whether or not the nominal GDP process should
change. This would depend on how aggregate nominal expenditure is determined.

12

the average estimate of that average estimate, and so on. Introducing the notation
(k)

≡ xt|t

(0)

≡ xt

xt

xt

(k−1)

for each

k≥1

for higher-order average expectations, we obtain
∞
X

pt =

(k)

ξ(1 − ξ)k−1 qt .

(2.8)

k=1

Thus the (log) price level can be expressed as a weighted average of expectations and higherorder expectations of the current level of (log) nominal GDP, as in Phelps (1983). Since
yt = qt − pt , it follows that
yt =

∞
X

(k)

ξ(1 − ξ)k−1 [qt − qt ].

(2.9)

k=1

Thus output deviates from the natural rate only insofar as the level of current nominal GDP
is not common knowledge. But this equation differs from (1.1), the implication of the Lucas
model, in that higher-order expectations matter, and not simply the average estimate of
current nominal GDP.

2.2

Equilibrium Inflation Dynamics

To consider a specific example, suppose that the growth rate of nominal GDP follows a
first-order autoregressive process,
∆qt = (1 − ρ)g + ρ∆qt−1 + ut ,

(2.10)

where ∆ is the first-difference operator, 0 ≤ ρ < 1, and ut is a zero-mean Gaussian white
noise process. Here g represents the long-run average rate of growth of nominal GDP, while
the parameter ρ indexes the degree of serial correlation in nominal GDP growth; in the
special case that ρ = 0, nominal GDP follows a random walk with drift g. The disturbance
ut is assumed to represent a monetary policy shock, which therefore has no effect upon the
real determinants of supply costs discussed above.
13

In the case of full information, the state of the economy at date t would be fully described
by the vector

"

Xt ≡

qt
qt−1

#

.

That is to say, knowledge of the current value of Xt would suffice to compute not only the
equilibrium values of pt and yt , but the conditional expectations of their values in all future
periods as well. In terms of this vector, the law of motion (2.10) can equivalently be written
Xt = c + AXt−1 + aut ,
where

"

c≡

(1 − ρ)g
0

#

"

,

A≡

1 + ρ −ρ
1
0

(2.11)
#

"

,

a≡

1
0

#

.

With incomplete information, however, average expectations and higher-order average ex(k)

pectations Xt

will also matter for the determination of prices and output and of their

future evolution.
Suppose that the only information received by supplier i in period t is the noisy signal
zt (i) = qt + vt (i),

(2.12)

where vt (i) is a mean-zero Gaussian white noise error term, distributed independently both
of the history of fundamental disturbances {ut−j } and of the observation errors of all other
suppliers. I shall suppose that the complete information set of supplier i when setting pit
consists of the history of the subjective observations {zt (i)}; this means, in particular, that
the person making the pricing decision does not actually observe (or does not pay attention
to!) the quantity sold at that price.
Suppose, however, that the supplier forms optimal estimates of the aggregate state variables given this imperfect information. Specifically, I shall assume that the supplier forms
minimum-mean-squared-error estimates that are updated in real time using a Kalman filter.7 Let us suppose that the supplier (correctly) believes that the economy’s aggregate state
7

This is optimal if the supplier seeks to maximize a log-quadratic approximation to his or her exact
objective function; however, the exact objective function implied by the model above would not be logquadratic.

14

evolves according to a law of motion
X̄t = c̄ + M X̄t−1 + mut ,

(2.13)

for a certain matrix M and vectors c̄ and m that we have yet to specify, where
"

X̄t ≡
and
Ft ≡

∞
X

Xt
Ft

#

(k)

ξ(1 − ξ)k−1 Xt .

(2.14)

k=1

Thus our conjecture is that only a particular linear combination of the higher-order expec(k)

tations Xt

is needed in order to forecast the future evolution of that vector itself. Our

interest in forecasting the evolution of this particular linear combination stems from the fact
that (2.8) implies that pt is equal to the first element of Ft . In terms of our extended state
vector, we can write
pt = e03 X̄t ,

(2.15)

introducing the notation ej to refer to the jth unit vector (i.e., a vector the jth element of
which is one, while all other elements are zeros).
In terms of this extended state vector, the observation equation (2.12) is of the form
zt (i) = e01 X̄t + vt (i).

(2.16)

It then follows (see, e.g., Chow, 1975; Harvey, 1989) that i’s optimal estimate of the state
vector evolves according to a Kalman filter equation
X̄t|t (i) = X̄t|t−1 (i) + k[zt (i) − e01 X̄t|t−1 ],

(2.17)

where k is the vector of Kalman gains (to be specified), and the forecast prior to the period
t observation is given by
X̄t|t−1 (i) = c̄ + M X̄t−1|t−1 (i).

(2.18)

Substituting (2.18) into (2.17), we obtain a law of motion for i’s estimate of the current
state vector. Integrating this over i (and using (2.16) to observe that the average signal is
15

just qt = e01 X̄t ), we obtain a law of motion for the average estimate of the current state
vector,
X̄t|t = X̄t|t−1 + ke01 [X̄t − X̄t|t−1 ]
= c̄ + ke01 M X̄t−1 + (I − ke01 )M X̄t−1|t−1 + ke01 mut .
Next we observe that (2.14) implies that
Ft = ξ¯X̄t|t ,
where

"

ξ¯ ≡

(2.19)

ξ 0 1−ξ
0
0 ξ
0
1−ξ

#

.

Substituting the above expression for X̄t|t , we obtain
¯ + k̂e0 M X̄t−1 + (ξ¯ − k̂e0 )M X̄t−1|t−1 + k̂e0 mut ,
Ft = ξc̄
1
1
1

(2.20)

¯
where k̂ ≡ ξk.
We wish now to determine whether the laws of motion (2.11) and (2.20) for the elements
of X̄t can in fact be expressed in the form (2.13), as conjectured. We note first that (2.11)
implies that the matrices and vectors in (2.13) must be of the form
"

c̄ =

c
d

#

"

,

M=

A 0
G H

#

"

,

m=

a
h

#

,

where c, A and a are defined as in (2.11), and the vectors d and h and the matrices G and
H are yet to be determined.
Making these substitutions in (2.20), we then obtain
Ft = ĉ + k̂A1 Xt−1 + [ξA + (1 − ξ)G − k̂A1 ]Xt−1|t−1 + (1 − ξ)HFt−1|t−1 + k̂ut ,

(2.21)

where
ĉ ≡ ξc + (1 − ξ)d,

(2.22)

and A1 is the first row of A, i.e., the row vector [1 + ρ

− ρ]. Finally, we note that (2.19)

for date t − 1 implies that
(1 − ξ)Ft−1|t−1 = Ft−1 − ξXt−1|t−1 .
16

Using this substitution to eliminate Ft−1|t−1 from (2.21), we finally obtain
Ft = ĉ + k̂A1 Xt−1 + HFt−1 + [ξA + (1 − ξ)G − ξH − k̂A1 ]Xt−1|t−1 + k̂ut .

(2.23)

This has the same form as the lower two rows of (2.13) if it happens that the expression in
square brackets is a zero matrix.
In this case, we are able to make the identifications
d = ĉ,

(2.24)

G = k̂A1 ,

(2.25)

h = k̂.

(2.26)

Given (2.22), (2.24) requires that d = c, and (2.25) and (2.26) uniquely identify G and h
once we know the value of the gain vector k̂. Using solution (2.25) for G, we observe that
the expression in square brackets in (2.23) is a zero matrix if and only if
H = A − k̂A1 .

(2.27)

Thus we have a unique solution for H as well. It follows that once we determine the vector
of Kalman gains k, and hence the reduced vector k̂, we can uniquely identify the coefficients
of the law of motion (2.13) for the state vector X̄t . This then allows us to determine the
equilibrium dynamics of pt and yt , using (2.15) and the identity yt = qt − pt .

2.3

Optimal Filtering

It remains to determine the vector of Kalman gains k in the Kalman filter equation (2.17) for
the optimal updating of individual suppliers’ estimates of the aggregate state vector. Let us
define the variance-covariance matrices of forecast errors on the part of individual suppliers:
Σ ≡ var{X̄t − X̄t|t−1 (i)},
V

≡ var{X̄t − X̄t|t (i)},

17

Note that these matrices will be the same for all suppliers i, since the observation errors are
assumed to have the same stochastic properties for each of them.
The Kalman gains are then as usual given by8
k = (σz2 )−1 Σe1 ,

(2.28)

σz2 ≡ var{zt (i) − zt|t−1 (i)} = e01 Σe1 + σv2 .

(2.29)

where

Here σv2 > 0 is the variance of the individual observation error vt (i) each period. Relations
(2.28) – (2.29) then imply that
¯ 1.
k̂ = (e01 Σe1 + σv2 )−1 ξΣe

(2.30)

Thus once we have determined the matrix Σ, k̂ is given by (2.30), which allows us to solve
for the coefficients of the law of motion (2.13) as above.
The computation of the variance-covariance matrix of forecast errors also follows standard
lines. The transition equation (2.13) and the observation equation (2.16) imply that the
matrices Σ and V satisfy
Σ = M V M 0 + σu2 mm0 ,
V

= Σ − (σz2 )−1 Σe1 e01 Σ,

where σu2 is the variance of the innovation term ut in the exogenous process (2.10). Combining
these equations, we obtain the usual stationary Riccati equation for Σ:
Σ = M ΣM 0 − (e01 Σe1 + σv2 )−1 M Σe1 e01 ΣM 0 + σu2 mm0 .

(2.31)

The matrix Σ is thus obtained by solving for a fixed point of the nonlinear matrix equation
(2.31). Of course, this equation itself depends upon the elements of M and m, and hence
upon the elements of G, H, and h, in addition to parameters of the model. These latter
coefficients can in turn be determined as functions of Σ using (2.25) – (2.27) and (2.30).
8

Add refs!!!

18

Thus we obtain a larger fixed-point equation to solve for Σ, specified solely in turns of model
parameters.
Except in the special case discussed below, this system is too complicated to allow us to
obtain further analytical results. Numerical solution for Σ in the case of given parameter
values remains possible, however, and in practice proves not to be difficult.

3

The Size and Persistence of the Real Effects of Nominal Disturbances

We now turn to the insights that can be obtained regarding the effects of nominal disturbances from the solution of the example described in the previous section. In particular, we
shall consider the impulse responses of output and inflation in response to an innovation ut
implied by the law of motion (2.13), and how these vary with the model parameters ρ, ξ,
and σv2 /σu2 .9
One question of considerable interest concerns the extent to which an unexpected increase
in nominal GDP growth affects real activity, as opposed to simply raising the money prices
paid for goods. But of no less interest is the question of the length of time for which any
real effect persists following the shock. This is an especially important question given that
the inability to explain persistent output effects of monetary policy shocks was one of the
more notable of the perceived weaknesses of the first generation of asymmetric-information
models.

3.1

The Case of a Random Walk in Nominal Spending

In considering the question of persistence, a useful benchmark is to consider the predicted
response to an unexpected permanent increase in the level of nominal GDP. In this case,
the subsequent dynamics of prices and output are due solely to the adjustment over time of
9

It should be evident that it is only the relative size of the innovation variances that matters for the
determination of the Kalman gains k, and hence of the coefficients M and m in the law of motion. It is also
only the relative variance that is determined by a particular assumed rate of information flow in the “noisy
channel” through which a supplier monitors current aggregate demand. See Sims (2001) for details of the
computation of the rate of information flow.

19

a discrepancy that has arisen between the level of nominal spending and the existing level
of prices, and not to any predictable further changes in the level of nominal spending itself.
This corresponds to the computation of impulse response functions in a special case of the
model of the previous section, the case in which ρ = 0, so that the log of nominal GDP
follows a random walk with drift.
In this special case, the equations of the previous section can be further simplified. First,
we note that in this case, the state vector Xt may be reduced to the single element qt . The
law of motion (2.11) continues to apply that now c = g, A = 1, and a = 1 are all scalars.
The law of motion for the aggregate state can again be written in the form (2.13), where Ft
is defined as in (2.14); but now Ft is a scalar, and the blocks G, H and h of M and m are
each scalars as well. Equation (2.19) continues to apply, but now with the definition
ξ¯ ≡ [ξ 1 − ξ].
Equation (2.26) holds as before, but now k̂ is a scalar; equations (2.25) and (2.27) reduce to
G = k̂,
H = 1 − k̂.
Substituting these solutions for the elements of M (k̂) and m(k̂), we can solve (2.31) for
the matrix Σ(k̂) in the case of any given reduced Kalman gain k̂. The upper left equation
in this system is given by
Σ11 = Σ11 − (Σ11 + σv2 )−1 Σ211 + σu2 .
This equation involves only Σ11 , and is independent of k̂. It reduces to a quadratic equation
in Σ11 , which has two real roots, one positive and one negative. Since the variance Σ11 must
be non-negative, the positive root is the only relevant solution. This is given by
Σ11 =

o
σu2 n
1 + [1 + 4(σv2 /σu2 )]1/2 .
2

20

(3.1)

The lower left equation in the system (2.31), in turn, involves only Σ21 and Σ11 , and
given that we have already solved for Σ11 , this equation can be solved for Σ21 . We obtain
Σ21 (k̂) = σu2

1 + 2(σv2 /σu2 ) + [1 + 4(σv2 /σu2 )]1/2
(2/k̂) − 1 + [1 + 4(σv2 /σu2 )]1/2

.

(3.2)

Finally, (2.30) expresses k̂ as a function of Σ, which in fact depends only upon the elements
Σ11 and Σ21 . Substituting expressions (3.1) – (3.2) into this relation, we obtain a quadratic
equation for k̂, namely
(σv2 /σu2 )k̂ 2 + ξ k̂ − ξ = 0.

(3.3)

It is easily seen that for any parameters ξ, σu2 , σv2 > 0, equation (3.3) has two real roots,
one satisfying
0 < k̂ < 1,

(3.4)

and another that is negative. Substituting our previous solutions for M (k̂) and m(k̂) into
(2.13), we note that this law of motion implies that
qt − Ft = (1 − k̂)(qt−1 − Ft−1 ) + (1 − k̂)ut .

(3.5)

Law of motion (3.5) implies that qt − Ft , which measures the discrepancy between the actual
level of nominal spending and a certain average of higher-order expectations regarding current nominal spending, is a stationary random variable if and only if |1− k̂| < 1. This requires
that k̂ > 0, and so excludes the negative root of (3.3). Thus if we are to obtain a solution in
which the variances of forecast errors are finite and constant over time, as assumed above,
it can correspond only to the root satisfying (3.4). This root is given by
1
k̂ = {−γ + [γ 2 + 4γ]1/2 },
2

(3.6)

γ ≡ ξσu2 /σv2 > 0.

(3.7)

where

21

3.2

Dynamics of Real Activity

Since in this special case, pt = Ft , (3.5) immediately implies that (log) real GDP yt evolves
according to
yt = ν(yt−1 + ut ),

(3.8)

where ν = 1 − k̂ and k̂ is given by (3.6). Since 0 < ν < 1, this describes a stationary
process with positive serial correlation. The implied effect of a monetary shock at date t
upon current and expected subsequent real activity is given by
Et (yt+j ) − Et−1 (yt+j ) = ν j+1 ut ,
which holds for all j ≥ 0. Thus the same coefficient ν determines both the size of the initial
impact upon real activity of a monetary shock (yt is increased by νut ), and the degree of
persistence of such an effect (the effect on output j periods later decays as ν j ).
While the model implies that the real effects of a monetary shock die out with time,
output is not predicted to again equal the natural rate on average in any finite time, as in
the Lucas model. Indeed, the degree of persistence of such real effects may be arbitrarily
great. For (3.6) implies that k̂ may be an arbitrarily small positive quantity (so that ν is
arbitrarily close to 1), if γ is small enough; and the half-life of output disturbances tends to
infinity as ν approaches one.
More generally, the degree of persistence is observed to be a monotonically decreasing
function of γ, which depends both upon ξ and upon σv2 /σu2 . Not surprisingly, this implies
that persistence is greater the larger is σv2 relative to σu2 ; that is, the less the information
contained in the individual suppliers’ subjective perceptions of the state of nominal GDP.
And if this information is small enough, persistence may arbitrarily great. This may seem
little different from the conclusion in the case of the Lucas model that the output effects of a
monetary disturbance may persist for a substantial time if it takes a long time for changes in
the money supply to become public information. But because the bottleneck in our case is
assumed to be the inaccuracy of individual subjective perceptions, rather than limitations of
the statistics that are publicly available should people bother to pay attention, the mere fact
22

that monetary data quickly enter the public domain does not in itself imply that perceptions
of the state of aggregate demand must be accurate.
Even more interestingly, persistence is predicted to be greater the smaller is ξ, which is
to say, the greater the extent of “real rigidity” in the sense of Ball and Romer (1990), and
hence the greater the degree of strategic complementarity in individual suppliers’ pricing
decisions.10 In fact, the model implies that regardless of the degree of accuracy of the
suppliers’ observations of the aggregate state — as long as they are not perfect — the degree
of persistence of the real effects of a monetary policy shock can be arbitrarily great, if the
degree of “real rigidity” is sufficiently great (i.e., ξ is sufficiently small)!
This means that substantial real effects of monetary policy, and significant persistence of
such effects, do not depend upon private parties being wholly ignorant of the occurrence of the
disturbance to monetary policy. If σv2 /σu2 is not too large, each individual supplier will have
a fairly accurate estimate of current aggregate demand at the time of setting its price, and
individual estimates qt|t (i) will quickly adjust by nearly as much as the permanent change
in nominal spending that has occurred. Nonetheless, prices may be quite slow to adjust,
owing to continuing uncertainty about others’ estimates of current aggregate demand, and
even greater uncertainty about others’ estimates of others’ estimates. Thus the sluggishness
of higher-order expectations stressed by Phelps (1983) can play a critical role in explaining
both the size and persistence of the real effects of monetary policy.

3.3

Dynamics of Higher-Order Expectations

This can be shown explicitly through an analysis of the impulse responses of higher-order
average expectations following a monetary shock. While we have seen above that it is
not necessary to solve for the complete hierarchy of expectations in order to solve for the
equilibrium dynamics of output (only the particular average of higher-order expectations
represented by Ft ), consideration of the dynamics of expectations at different levels can
10

See Woodford (2001) for further discussion of the interpretation of this parameter and various factors
that can make it small in an actual economy.

23

provide further insight into the reason for the sluggishness of price adjustment in this model.
Similar Kalman-filtering techniques as in the previous section can be used to determine
(k)

the dynamics of average expectations at each level of the hierarchy. Let qt

denote the

average k-th order expectation at date t regarding the current level of (log) nominal GDP,
(0)

where qt

is defined as qt , and let us conjecture a law of motion of the form
(k)

qt

=

k
X

(j)

(3.9)

αkj qt−1 + ak ut

j=0

for each k ≥ 0, where for k = 0 we have α00 = 1 and a0 = 1. We wish to determine the
coefficients αkj and ak for higher values of k.
(k)

Supplier i’s estimate of the value of qt

should evolve according to a Kalman filter

equation of the form
(k)

(k)

qt|t (i) = qt|t−1 (i) + κk+1 (zt (i) − zt|t−1 (i)),
where the k + 1st order Kalman gain κk+1 remains to be determined. Substituting the
observation equation (2.12) for zt (i) and its forecast as before, and averaging over i, we
obtain
(k+1)

qt

(k)

(0)

(0)

= qt|t−1 + κk+1 (qt − qt|t−1 ).

Then substituting the average forecasts at date t − 1 implied by the assumed law of motion
(0)

(3.9), and the law of motion itself for qt , we obtain
(k+1)

qt

=

k
X

(j+1)

(0)

(1)

αkj qt−1 + κk+1 (qt−1 − qt−1 + ut ).

j=0

This yields a law of motion for the next higher order of expectations of the desired form
(3.9).
Identifying the coefficients αk+1,j and ak+1 with the ones appearing in this last relation,
we obtain equations that can be used to solve recursively for these coefficients at each order
of expectations. For each k ≥ 1, we find that
αk0 = κk ,
αkj = κk−j − κk+1−j

for each ; 0 < j < k,
24

αkk = 1 − κ1 ,
ak = κk .
Thus once we determine the sequence of Kalman gains κk , we know the complete law of
motion (3.9) for all orders of expectations.
The Kalman gains can also be determined using methods like those employed above.
Letting
(k)

(k)

σk0 ≡ cov{qt − qt|t−1 (i), qt − qt|t−1 (i)},
then the usual reasoning implies that the Kalman gains are given by
κk+1 = (σz2 )−1 σk0

(3.10)

for each k ≥ 0.11 These covariances in turn satisfy a Riccati equation,
σk0 = (1 − (σz2 )−1 σ00 )

k
X

αkj σj0 + ak σu2 .

(3.11)

j=0

for each k ≥ 0. Note that once we know the value of σ00 , this is a linear equation in the
other covariances; and we have already solved for σ00 = Σ11 in (3.1).
Substituting the above solution for the αkj and ak coefficients as functions of the Kalman
gains, and using (3.10) to replace each covariance σk0 by a multiple of κk+1 , it is possible to
rewrite (3.11) in terms of the Kalman gains alone. We obtain the relation


κk+1



k
k
X
X
σu2 
1 − κ1
κ
κ
−
κ
κ
+
κ
=
j k+1−j
j k+2−j
k
1 − (1 − κ1 )2 j=1
σv2 
j=2

(3.12)

for each k ≥ 1. This relation allows us to solve recursively for each of the κk , starting from
the initial value
κ1 =

−1 + [1 + 4(σv2 /σu2 )]1/2
2σv2 /σu2

implied by (3.10) using (3.1) for σ00 .
Figure 3 gives a numerical illustration of the implied dynamics of higher-order expectations in response to an immediate, permanent unit increase in nominal spending. The figure
11

Note that in the case k = 0, this equation is equivalent to the first row of (2.28.)

25

1

0.8

0.6
k=0
k=1
0.4

k=2
k=3
k=4

0.2

k=5
k=6
k=7

0

k=8

−1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

(k)

Figure 3: Impulse response functions for higher-order expectations qt , for various values of
k. The case k = 0 indicates the exogenous disturbance to log nominal GDP itself.
(0)

(1)

shows the impulse responses of qt (nominal GDP itself), qt (the average estimate of current
(2)

nominal GDP), qt

(the average estimate of the average estimate), and so on, up through

the eighth-order expectation q (8) , in the case of a relative innovation variance σv2 /σu2 = 4.
One observes that even with this degree of noise in subjective estimates of current nominal
spending, the average estimate of current nominal GDP adjusts fairly rapidly following the
disturbance: forty percent of the eventual adjustment occurs in the period of the increase in
nominal GDP itself, and eighty percent has occurred within two periods later. Higher-order
expectations instead adjust much more sluggishly. Eighth-order expectations adjust only a
fifth as much as do first-order expectations during the period of the disturbance; even three
periods later, they have not yet adjusted by as much as first-order expectations do in the
period of the disturbance, and it is only nine periods after the disturbance that they have
adjusted by eighty percent of the size of the disturbance.
26

The extent to which these different orders of average expectations matter for pricing
depends, of course, on the degree of strategic complementarity between the pricing decisions
of different suppliers. If ξ is near one, then the average price level will adjust at the rate
(1)

that the average estimate qt

does, and the real effects of the disturbance will be modest

after the period of the shock, and the next period or so.12 On the other hand, if ξ is small,
so that strategic complementarity is great, the sluggishness of higher-order expectations can
matter a great deal. Woodford (2001) suggests that ξ = .15 is an empirically plausible value
for the U.S. In this case, the impulse response of the average price level would be a weighted
average of those shown in Figure 1 (and the responses of still higher-order expectations, not
shown), with a weight of only .15 on the response of first-order expectations. More than
half the weight is put on expectations of order k > 4, and more than a quarter of the weight
is put on expectations of order k > 8, i.e., expectations that adjust more slowly than any
that are shown in the figure. Thus the insight of Phelps (1983), that the dependence of
aggregate outcomes upon higher-order expectations can be an important source of inertia in
the response of prices to nominal disturbances, is born out.

4

Comparison with a Model of Sticky Prices

It may be worth briefly considering the extent to which the predictions of such a model
resemble, and differ from, those of a model in which prices do not immediately adjust to
nominal disturbances, not because price-setters are unaware of the adjustment that would
best serve their interests at any of the times at which they actually consider changing their
prices, but simply because they do not continuously reconsider their prices. This familiar
hypothesis of “sticky prices” is clearly not entirely unrelated to the hypothesis of incomplete
information. In particular, insofar as suppliers behave in the way assumed in models with
sticky prices, they surely do so not primarily in order to economize on the cost of price changes
themselves — literal “menu costs” are in most cases quite small — but rather in order to
12

If ξ exceeds 1, as is theoretically possible (Woodford, 2001), then prices will adjust even more rapidly
than does the average expectation of current nominal GDP.

27

economize on the cost of having to make more frequent decisions about whether their current
prices are significantly out of line or not.13 And there is obviously a close relation between
the hypothesis that there are substantial costs associated with constant close monitoring of
current conditions (the hypothesis explored in this paper) and the hypothesis that there are
substantial costs associated with constant reconsideration of how close one’s current prices
are to those that are optimal under current conditions.
For this reason, it is interesting to ask how similar or different the implications of the
hypothesis of incomplete common knowledge for aggregate dynamics are to those of a model
with sticky prices. Here I show that the dynamics of aggregate output and the aggregate price
index derived above in the case of a random walk in nominal GDP are indistinguishable from
those predicted by a standard sticky price model, namely, a discrete-time version of the model
proposed by Calvo (1983). Thus it need not be possible to distinguish among these models
empirically, using aggregate data alone. Nonetheless, this does not mean that the models
make identical predictions regardless of the nature of monetary policy, as consideration of a
more general policy specification will show.

4.1

Dynamics of Real Activity under the Calvo Pricing Model

In the well-known Calvo (1983) model of staggered pricing, the price charged by each supplier
is reconsidered only at random intervals of time, with the probability that any given price will
be reconsidered within a particular time interval being independent of which price it is, how
long ago it was last reconsidered, and the level of the current price (relative either to other
prices or to other aspects of current market conditions). In this case (and proceeding directly
to a log-linear approximation to the optimal pricing condition), (2.6) becomes instead
pt (i) = (1 − αβ)

∞
X

(αβ)j Et [pt+j + ξyt+j ]

(4.1)

j=0
13

Zbaracki et al. (1999) document this in the case of a single industrial firm whose operations they study
in detail. They find that the firm’s “managerial costs” of price adjustment are many times larger than the
physical costs of price changes.

28

for any supplier i that reconsiders its price in period t, where 0 < α < 1 is the probability
that any given price is not reconsidered during any given period, and 0 < β < 1 is again the
discount factor in (2.3). This says that the price chosen is a weighted average of the prices
that would be optimal at the various dates and in the various states of the world in which
the price chosen at date t has not yet been revised. Because we now assume full information,
subjective expectations at date t are now replaced by an expectation conditional upon the
history of disturbances through that date. If instead i does not reconsider its price in period
t, then we have simply pt (i) = pt−1 (i).
This model of pricing results (see, e.g., Woodford, 2001) in an aggregate supply relation
of the form
∆pt = κyt + βEt ∆pt+1 ,

(4.2)

where
κ=

(1 − α)(1 − αβ)
ξ > 0.
α

(4.3)

This relation is sometimes called the “New Keynesian Phillips Curve.” Note that it holds
regardless of the assumed evolution of nominal spending. Let us first consider the case of a
random walk with drift in nominal GDP, as in section 3.
The rational expectations equilibrium associated with such a policy is then a pair of
stochastic processes for the price level and real GDP that are consistent with both (4.2) and
∆pt + ∆yt = g + ut .

(4.4)

The unique solution in which inflation and output fluctuations are stationary is given by
yt = ν(yt−1 + ut ),
∆pt = g + (1 − ν)(ut + yt−1 ),
where 0 < ν < 1 is given by
ν=

1 + β + κ − [(1 + β + κ)2 − 4β]1/2
.
2β
29

(4.5)

We observe that output fluctuations again follow a law of motion of the form (3.8), except
that now the autoregressive coefficient ν depends upon the frequency of price adjustment
among other parameters. Thus the impulse responses of both prices and real activity in
response to a monetary disturbance are of the same form as in the noisy-information model.
In fact, for given values of ξ and β, to any value of the variance ratio σv2 /σu2 (or rate of
information flow in the model with noisy information) there corresponds a particular value
of α (or degree of price stickiness) that results in identical dynamics of prices and output.
Thus in the case that nominal GDP evolves according to (4.4), and we treat both α and the
variance ratio as free parameters (to be estimated from the dynamics of aggregate output and
the aggregate price index), the predictions of the two models are observationally equivalent.
In the case that β is near one (a plausible assumption), we can go further, and obtain an
equivalence between a particular value of the variance ratio and a particular value of α that
holds regardless of the value of ξ. When we set β equal to one, (4.5) reduces to exactly the
same expression for ν as in the noisy-information model (one minus the right-hand side of
(2.30)), except that γ is equal to κ. Comparing expression (4.3) for κ (and setting β = 1)
with expression (3.7) for γ, we see that the value of α required for the sticky-price model to
imply the same dynamics as the noisy-information model is the one such that
α
σv2
=
.
(1 − α)2
σu2

(4.6)

In this limiting case, the required value of α is independent of the value of ξ. This means
that even if the structure of the economy were to shift in a way that changed the value of ξ,
the predictions of the two models would continue to be identical.

4.2

Consequences of Persistence in the Growth of Nominal Spending

However, it would be a mistake to conclude more generally that the noisy-information model
is observationally equivalent to the Calvo model of staggered pricing. The models cease to
predict the same dynamics of output and inflation if nominal GDP does not follow a random
walk with drift. This can be seen by considering the more general stochastic process for
30

sticky prices,

ρ=0
1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0

2

4

6

sticky prices,

8

10

0

12

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1
2

4

6

0

8

2

4

6

noisy information,
0.6

0

output
inflation/2

ρ=0.3

0.6

0

ρ=0

noisy information,

1

10

0

12

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

ρ=0.3

8

10

12

Figure 4: Comparison of impulse response functions predicted by the two models, for the
cases ρ = 0 and .3.
nominal GDP (2.10) considered earlier, in the case that ρ > 0, so that the growth rate of
nominal GDP exhibits serial correlation.14 In this case, we are unable to obtain an analytical
solution to the nonlinear equation system (2.31), and so must resort to numerical solution
for particular assumed parameter values.
Figures 4 and 5 plot the impulse responses of output and inflation15 to an innovation
in nominal GDP growth at date zero, that eventually raises (log) nominal GDP by a unit
amount. (The innovation at date zero is thus of size u0 = 1 − ρ.) The two rows of Figure 4
consider nominal spending processes characterized by ρ = 0 and ρ = .3 respectively, while
14

It is important to note that this is the case of practical interest, given that variations in nominal GDP
growth do exhibit considerable persistence. More to the point, VAR estimates of the effects of monetary
policy shocks indicate an effect on nominal GDP that takes many quarters to reach its eventual magnitude,
rather than an immediate permanent increase of the kind implied by the random-walk specification.
15
In these figures, “inflation” is defined as 4∆pt , corresponding to an annualized inflation rate if the model
“periods” are interpreted as quarters.

31

sticky prices,

ρ=0.6

noisy information,

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0

2

4

6

sticky prices,

8

10

0

12

output
inflation/4

0

ρ=0.9

2

4

6

noisy information,

0.14

0.14

0.12

0.12

0.1

0.1

0.08

0.08

0.06

0.06

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

0

ρ=0.6

8

10

12

ρ=0.9

0
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

Figure 5: The comparison extended to the cases ρ = .6 and .9.
the two rows of Figure 5 consider the further cases ρ = .6 and ρ = .9. The two columns
of both figures compare the predictions of two models for each case, the model with Calvo
pricing (the left column) and the model with noisy information (the right column).
In each case, the value of ξ is fixed at .15, a value that is argued to be realistic for the
U.S. economy in Woodford (2001). The sticky-price model is further calibrated by assuming
β = .99, a plausible discount factor if the periods are interpreted as quarters, and α = 2/3, so
that one-third of all prices are revised each quarter. This implies an average interval between
price changes of 9 months, consistent with the survey evidence of Blinder et al. (1998, Table
4.1). The noisy-information model is then calibrated by assuming that σv2 /σu2 = 6.23, the
value required in order for the predicted inflation and output dynamics of the two models to
be identical in the case that ρ = 0.16
16

This value differs slightly from the variance ratio of 6 that would be indicated by (4.6), because β is not
exactly equal to one.

32

Comparing the two columns, we observe that the predicted impulse responses are the
same for both models when ρ = 0 (as we have shown above analytically), but that they
become progressively more different the larger the value assigned to ρ. Thus the two models
are not observationally equivalent in the case of an arbitrary monetary policy, and will not
give the same answers to a question about the consequences of changing the way in which
monetary policy is conducted.
Furthermore, the failure of the predictions to agree in the case of substantial persistence
in nominal GDP growth is not one that can be remedied by adjusting the value of α in the
sticky-price model. The impulse responses predicted by the noisy-information model when
ρ > 0 are ones that are not consistent with the Calvo model for any parameter values. This
is because relation (4.2) can be “solved forward” to yield
∆pt = κ

∞
X

β j Et yt+j ,

(4.7)

j=0

which implies that the predicted path of inflation is a function solely of expected subsequent
output gaps. It follows that a monetary disturbance with a delayed positive effect on output
must increase inflation earlier. It is thus not an artifact of the particular parameter values
assumed in Figures 2 and 3 that the inflation response is observed to peak sooner than the
output response when ρ > 0. The noisy-information model can instead generate responses
in which inflation peaks later, as is especially evident in the case ρ = .9. Such a response is
plainly inconsistent with (4.7).
Further insight into the difference in the predictions of the two models may be obtained
from Figure 6, which plots the impulse response functions for the price level implied by the
two models alongside the impulse response for nominal GDP. (The case shown corresponds
to the case ρ = .9 in Figure 5.) A monetary disturbance results in a gradual increase in
the log of nominal GDP, to an eventual level that is higher by one than its level before the
shock. The sticky-price model predicts that the average log price of goods will not rise as
much as the increase in nominal GDP, and so real output is temporarily increased. But still,
by comparison with the noisy-information model, the sticky-price model predicts relatively
33

nom. GDP
price (SP)
price (NI)

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Figure 6: Impulse response function for the price level in the sticky-price model (SP) and
the noisy-information model (NI), for the case ρ = .9.
strong price increases in the time immediately following the shock. The reason is that,
under the assumption of full information, suppliers who revise their prices soon after the
shock can already anticipate that further increases in nominal GDP are coming in the next
few quarters. Then, because there is a substantial probability that the supplier’s price will
not be revised again while those increases in aggregate demand, it is desirable to increase the
price immediately in order to prevent it from falling too far behind its desired level before
the next opportunity for revision arises.
In the noisy-information model, instead, there is no such need to “front-load” price
increases in the case of a disturbance that is expected to result in persistent above-average
growth in nominal spending. Suppliers who suspect that such a shock has occurred will
increase prices some, but can plan to increase prices more later if their estimate of demand
conditions has not changed in the meantime. In the absence of a need to “front-load,” initial
34

1.5
real GDP /4
inflation
conf.interval

1

0.5

0

−0.5

−1

−1.5

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Figure 7: Estimated impulse responses of real GDP and inflation to an unexpected interestrate reduction. Source: Christiano et al. (2001).
price increases are quite small, owing to uncertainty about whether others are expecting
others ... to expect others to perceive the increase in demand. A few quarters later, instead,
price increases are more rapid than in the sticky-price model. Once suppliers can become
fairly confident that others expect ... others to have noticed the surge in spending, the
fact that prices were not already increased earlier does not prevent them from being rapidly
brought into line with the current volume of nominal spending. The result is a surge in
inflation that occurs after the peak effect on output.
The Calvo pricing model has in fact come under extensive criticism for implying that
the rate of inflation should be a purely “forward-looking” variable, and the relative timing
of the output and inflation responses predicted by the noisy-information model are, at least
qualitatively, more similar to those indicated by VAR estimates of the effects of monetary
policy shocks. For the estimated responses generally indicate a stronger effect on inflation
35

in the quarters after the peak effect on output; see, for example, the responses in Figure
7, which are again taken from Christiano et al. (2001).17 The question of how well the
precise quantitative predictions of the noisy-information model match empirical evidence of
this kind is left for future work.18 But the model offers some promise of providing a more
satisfactory explanation than a standard sticky-price model can.

4.3

Responses to Other Disturbances

The noisy-information model offers qualitatively different predictions from a sticky-price
model in another respect as well. We have thus far only considered the predictions of the
two models about the effects of a single kind of disturbance, a monetary policy disturbance
that affects the path of nominal spending with no effect upon potential output (the constant
Ȳ above). However, even when the two models predict identical effects of a disturbance of
this kind, they need not predict identical effects for other types of disturbances as well.
In general, they will not, for a simple reason. In the sticky price model, the rate at which
prices adjust following a disturbance depends on the rate at which various suppliers choose
to reconsider their prices; but this rate, if taken as exogenous as in “time-dependent pricing”
models like the Calvo model, will be the same regardless of the type of disturbance to which
the economy must adjust. On the other hand, there is no reason why the rate of flow of
information about different disturbances must be the same, in a noisy-information model.
Some variables may be observed with more precision, and others with less; and as a result,
prices may succeed better at bringing about an efficient response to some disturbances than
to others.
A simple example can easily illustrate the way that this can result in predictions different
17

This observation is related to what Mankiw and Reis (2001) call “the acceleration phenomenon,” though
the evidence that they discuss relates to unconditional correlations between cyclical output and subsequent
inflation acceleration, rather than to the co-movements of these variables that are associated with identified
monetary policy shocks.
18
We cannot address the question here, both because the estimated impulse response of nominal GDP
shown in Figure 1 is plainly not consistent with the simple law of motion (2.10) for any value of ρ, and because
our theoretical calculations have assumed that nominal GDP is affected only by monetary disturbances, while
the identified VAR implies otherwise.

36

from those of a sticky-price model. Let us again assume a random walk in nominal GDP,
the case in which the two models will (for appropriate parameter values) predict the same
responses to a monetary disturbance ut . But let us now generalize the above model, so that
the log of the natural rate of output (ȳt ) follows a random walk with drift — for example,
as a result of a random walk with drift in a multiplicative technology factor19 — that is
independent of the random walk in nominal GDP resulting from the actions of the central
bank. We can write this process as
ȳt = ḡ + ȳt−1 + ūt ,
where ḡ is the average rate of growth in the natural rate, and ūt is a mean-zero i.i.d. disturbance, distributed independently of ut .
The optimal price for any price-setter is still given by (2.6), if now yt is interpreted as
output relative to the time-varying natural rate. Similarly, optimal pricing policy in the
sticky-price model continues to be described by (4.1), under the same reinterpretation. It
follows that in the sticky-price model, the relation between inflation and the output gap
continues to be described by (4.2). Equation (4.4) continues to hold as well, except that the
right-hand side becomes
(g − ḡ) + ut − ūt .
Since the composite disturbance ut − ūt is still completely unforecastable at any date prior to
t, the stationary rational expectations equilibrium of the sticky-price model takes the same
form as before, except with g replaced by g − ḡ and ut replaced by ut − ūt . In particular, the
equilibrium output gap will evolve according to
yt = ν(yt−1 + ut − ūt ).

(4.8)

The predictions of the noisy-information model will instead depend upon what we assume
about the observability of the additional disturbance process ȳt . Suppose, for simplicity, that
19

See Woodford (2001) for explicit analysis of how the natural rate of output is affected by technology
shocks, and other real disturbances, in a model of monopolistic competition of the kind used here.

37

each supplier observes ȳt precisely, while still observing the state of aggregate demand only
with noise. In this case, there is again only a single “hidden” state variable to estimate on
the basis of the noisy observations. In fact, our previous calculations continue to apply, if
we replace pt throughout by p̃t , the log of “natural nominal GDP” (i.e., Pt times the natural
rate of output). For p̃t satisfies the identity p̃t + yt = qt , given our reinterpretation of yt ; and
the perfect observability of the natural rate means that (2.6) may equivalently be written
p̃t (i) = p̃t|t (i) + ξyt|t (i).
With this reinterpretation of the price variable, our derivations go through as before. In
particular, the equilibrium output gap will evolve according to
yt = ν(yt−1 + ut ).
For appropriately chosen parameter values, the coefficient ν here may take the same value
as in (4.8). But even in that case, there remains an important difference in the predicted
responses to the technology shock. In the sticky-price model, technology shocks produce
deviations of output from potential that are exactly as long-lasting as those that result from
monetary disturbances. Instead, in the noisy-information model (under our special assumption about the observability of ȳt ), technology shocks have no effects upon the output gap (or
upon p̃t ) at all. For while prices adjust only slowly to a change in demand conditions (owing to the assumed imperfect common knowledge regarding disturbances of this kind), they
adjust immediately to a change in technology (as this is assumed to be common knowledge).
This differing prediction is not just another indication that the two models are not equivalent. It is again potentially of interest as an explanation for one of the more notable embarrassments for the sticky-price model. An extensive empirical literature dating back several
decades20 has found that prices respond more, and more rapidly, to increases in the marginal
cost of supply resulting from increases in factor prices than to increases resulting from an
increased scale of production as a result of increases in demand. Such a difference is not
20

See Bils and Chang (1999) for a review of this evidence, as well for further evidence for the same
conclusion.

38

easily rationalized in terms of a standard sticky-price model. Some have argued that such
evidence indicates that prices are set on the basis of considerations other than a constant
desired markup over marginal supply cost. The noisy-information model suggests a different,
and possibly simpler explanation. Prices are set in proportion to marginal cost, but it must
be the supplier’s subjective estimate of marginal cost; and if suppliers are better informed
about certain disturbances that affect supply cost than about others, those disturbances will
have a larger and more immediate effect on prices.
Of course, I have given no reason why one should assume that suppliers are better informed about variation in the natural rate of output than about variation in aggregate
nominal spending. My point is simply that there is no reason why the logic of the noisyinformation model should imply that the rate of information flow with regard to different
shocks must be the same. Even if one supposes that, on grounds of theoretical parsimony,
one should prefer to derive the degree of noise associated with the observation of various
disturbances from a single underlying limitation on human information-processing capacity,
one should not in general expect that the amount of scarce processing capacity allocated to
monitoring different types of disturbances should be the same.
This possibility of explaining the differential responsiveness of prices to different types of
disturbances is also an important advantage of the noisy-information model over the model
recently proposed by Mankiw and Reis (2001), that is in some ways similar. Mankiw and
Reis also argue for a pricing model in which each supplier’s price at any given time is optimal
conditional upon that supplier’s information set, and in which price adjustment in response
to a disturbance to aggregate demand is delayed owing to suppliers’ not all having complete
information about the disturbances that have already occurred. But rather than assuming
continuous observation of demand conditions using a noisy channel, as is proposed here,
Mankiw and Reis assume that suppliers obtain no new information at all except at random
intervals. Yet on the occasions upon which a supplier updates its information, it acquires
complete information about all disturbances that have occurred up until that time.21 This
21

The Mankiw-Reis model is thus an example of what Sims (2001, sec. 8) calls “information-delay RE”

39

is a model in which the relevant cost of information flow is a fixed cost of logging on to the
internet; on the occasions upon which one bears this cost, there is zero additional cost of
downloading all of the available news with infinite precision.
A full comparison of these alternative types of incomplete-information models is beyond
the scope of the present paper.22 But one disadvantage of the Mankiw-Reis approach is
that it suggests that the rate at which suppliers (in aggregate) learn about particular events
should be the same for all events, being determined by the single parameter that indicates
the frequency of information updates. The noisy-information model instead makes it natural
that learning should be more rapid about some events than about others.

5

Conclusions

We have seen that the Phelps-Lucas hypothesis, according to which temporary real effects
of purely nominal disturbances result from imperfect information about the nature of these
disturbances, deserves more continued interest than is often supposed. When one departs
from the assumptions of the Lucas (1972) model in two crucial respects — introducing a
monopolistically-competitive pricing framework in which the optimal pricing decisions of
individual suppliers of goods depend crucially upon the prices that they expect others to
set, and allowing individual suppliers’ subjective perceptions of current conditions to be
contaminated by the noise that inevitably results from finite information-processing capacity
— it is possible to explain not only real effects of purely nominal disturbances, but real effects
that may persist for a substantial period of time.
We have shown that a model of this kind offers not only a potential explanation for the
kinds of real effects that are usually mentioned as grounds for the assumption of substantial
price stickiness, but also some prospect of an explanation of aspects of price dynamics that are
modelling, as opposed to “signal-extraction RE” modelling, the category to which the present paper would
belong. See Sims for further discussion of the importance of this distinction.
22
Their implications are certainly not equivalent. For example, in the case of a random walk in nominal GDP, the Mankiw-Reis model does not imply inflation and output dynamics that are observationally
equivalent to those predicted by the Calvo model, except in the special case that ξ = 1.

40

not easily reconciled with sticky-price models that assume optimization with full information,
subject only to a constraint upon the frequency of price changes. Of course, there is no reason
why the best model might not involve both sticky prices and noisy information — it may be
most realistic to suppose that prices remain fixed for a time, but also that when revised they
are adjusted on the basis of imperfect subjective perceptions of current conditions. But our
preliminary investigation here suggests at least that there is an important cost to abstracting
from the information limitations of price-setters.
While the model proposed here seeks to rehabilitate certain aspects of the explanation
of the real effects of monetary policy advocated by Phelps and Lucas thirty years ago,
acceptance of it would not necessarily lead to all of the conclusions emphasized in the earlier
literature. The Lucas (1972) model was widely argued to imply that there should be little
scope for the use of monetary stabilization policy to offset the fluctuations in output relative
to potential that would otherwise be caused by other disturbances to the economy. For
that model implied that monetary policy could have no effect on real activity that was
systematically correlated with real disturbances unless the central bank were able to observe
and respond to those disturbances, while the private sector could not also observe them and
use them to predict the central bank’s response. Successful monetary stabilization policy
would then be impossible if the central bank’s only information about real disturbances were
also available to the general public.
But the interpretation proposed here of the nature of the relevant information limitations
undermines this conclusion. If suppliers have an inaccurate estimate of current aggregate
conditions not because of the unavailability of good data in the public domain, but because
of paying insufficient attention to the available public-domain data, it is quite possible for the
central bank to affect real activity in ways that are correlated with that public information.
This should greatly increase the plausible scope of monetary stabilization policy. Analysis
of the optimal conduct of policy in the presence of the kind of imperfect common knowledge
described here should accordingly be an important topic for further study.

41

References
Ball, Laurence, and David Romer, “Real Rigidities and the Non-Neutrality of Money,”
Review of Economic Studies 57: 183-203 (1990).
Bils, Mark, and Yongsung Chang, “Understanding How Price Responds to Costs and
Production,” NBER working paper no. 7311, August 1999.
Blinder, Alan S., Elie R.D. Canetti, David E. Lebow, and Jeremy B. Rudd, Asking
About Prices: A New Approach to Understanding Price Stickiness, New York:
Russell Sage Foundation, 1998.
Calvo, Guillermo A., “Staggered Prices in a Utility Maximizing Framework,” Journal of
Monetary Economics 12: 383-398 (1983).
Chow, Gregory C., Analysis and Control of Dynamic Economic Systems, New York:
Wiley, 1975.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans, “Modeling Money,”
NBER Working Paper no. 6371, January 1998.
—- —-, —- —-, and —- —-, “Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to
Monetary Policy,” NBER Working Paper no. 8403, July 2001.
Green, D.M., and J.A. Swets, Signal Detection Theory and Psychophysics, New York:
Wiley, 1966.
Harvey, Andrew C., Forecasting, Structural Time Series Models, and the Kalman Filter,
Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1989.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr., “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,” Journal of Economic
Theory 4: 103-124 (1972).
—- —-, “Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs,” American Economic Review 63: 326-334 (1973).
—- —-, “Understanding Business Cycles,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 5: 7-29 (1977).
Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Ricardo Reis, “Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A

42

Proposal to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” NBER working paper no.
8290, May 2001.
Morris, Stephen, and Hyun S. Shin, “Global Games: Theory and Applications,” Cowles
Foundation discussion paper no. 1275R, August 2001.
Phelps, Edmund S., “Introduction: The New Microeconomics in Employment and Inflation Theory,” in E.S. Phelps et al., Microeconomic Foundations of Employment
and Inflation Theory, New York: Norton, 1970.
—- —-, “The Trouble with ‘Rational Expectations’ and the Problem of Inflation Stabilization,” in R. Frydman and E.S. Phelps, eds., Individual Forecasting and Aggregate
Outcomes, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983.
Sargent, Thomas J., “Equilibrium with Signal Extraction from Endogenous Variables,”
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 15: 245-273 (1991).
—- —-, Bounded Rationality in Macroeconomics, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993.
Sims, Christopher A., “Comparison of Interwar and Postwar Business Cycles: Monetarism Reconsidered,” American Economic Review 70(2): 250-257 (1980).
—- —-, “Stickiness,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 49: 317-356
(1998).
—- —-, “Implications of Rational Inattention,” unpublished, Princeton University, revised June 2001.
Townsend, Robert M., “Forecasting the Forecasts of Others,” Journal of Political Economy 91: 546-588 (1983a).
—- —-, “Equilibrium Theory with Learning and Disparate Expectations: Some Issues
and Methods,” in R. Frydman and E.S. Phelps, eds., Individual Forecasting and
Aggregate Outcomes, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983b.
Woodford, Michael, “Optimizing Models with Nominal Rigidities,” unpublished, Princeton University, revised July 2001.
Zbaracki, Mark, Mark Ritson, Daniel Levy, Shantanu Dutta, and Mark Bergen, “The

43

Managerial and Customer Dimensions of the Cost of Price Adjustment: Direct
Evidence from Industrial Markets,” unpublished, Univ. of Pennsylvania, November
1999.
Ziemer, R.E., and W.H. Tranter, Principles of Communications, fourth ed., New York:
Wiley, 1995.

44

