                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AND THE HOME BIAS


                                            Lee Pinkowitz
                                            René M. Stulz
                                           Rohan Williamson


                                          Working Paper 8680
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8680


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2001




We thank Craig Doidge, Andrew Karolyi, Dong Lee, Mitch Petersen, Francis Warnock, and Ingrid Werner
for helpful comments and conversations, and are grateful to participants at the Fall 2001 Washington Area
Finance Association Conference. We thank Francis Warnock for providing us with his data. Pinkowitz and
Williamson thank the Capital Markets Research Center at Georgetown University for support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.


© 2001 by Lee Pinkowitz, René M. Stulz and Rohan Williamson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Corporate Governance and the Home Bias
Lee Pinkowitz, René M. Stulz and Rohan Williamson
NBER Working Paper No. 8680
December 2001
JEL No. G110, G120, G150, G320



                                              ABSTRACT

        In most countries, many of the largest corporations are controlled by large shareholders. We show
that, under reasonable assumptions, this stylized fact implies that portfolio holdings of U.S. investors
should exhibit a home bias in equilibrium. We construct an estimate of the world portfolio of shares
available to investors who are not controlling shareholders. This available world portfolio differs sharply
from the world market portfolio. In regressions explaining the portfolio weights of U.S. investors, the
world portfolio of available shares has a positive significant coefficient but the world market portfolio
has no additional explanatory power. This result holds when we control for country characteristics.




Lee Pinkowitz                          René M. Stulz                    Rohan Williamson
Georgetown University                  The Ohio State University        Georgetown University
Finance Group                          Department of Finance            Finance Group
Georgetown School of Business          2100 Neil Avenue                 Georgetown School of Business
Old North                              806 A Fisher Hall                Old North
Washington, DC 20057                   Columbus, OH 43210               Washington, DC 20057
                                       and NBER
                                       stulz_1@cob.osu.edu
        The home bias is perhaps the least controversial stylized fact in international finance. There is now

much evidence that investors overweight domestic stocks in their common stock portfolio. Excellent data

on stock ownership is available for the U.S. for 1997. U.S. investors have roughly 91% of their stock

investments in U.S. stocks, but U.S. stocks represent only 49% of the world market portfolio. If investors

minimize the variance of the real return of their portfolio subject to a constraint on the expected real return

of their portfolio, they should hold the world market portfolio of common stocks if the joint distribution of

real returns on securities is the same across investors. U.S. investors are not close to holding the world

market portfolio of common stocks.

        Many authors have attempted to explain the home bias.1 Explanations proposed in the literature

include barriers to international investment, departures from purchasing power parity, information

asymmetries between domestic and foreign investors, hedging of human capital or other non-traded assets,

and over-optimism of domestic investors toward home assets. This vast literature has not succeeded in

providing a generally accepted explanation for the home bias.

        In this paper, we show that another stylized fact in international finance has important implications

for estimates of the magnitude of the home bias. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1999) establish

that firms outside the U.S. are typically controlled by a large shareholder. The large shareholder is most often

a family. In countries where controlling shareholders are economically important, we would expect to see

a large home bias in equity holdings since a large fraction of the outstanding shares will be held by local

controlling shareholders. However, less intuitively, we show that the economic importance of controlling

shareholders outside the U.S. helps explain the home bias of U.S. investors.

        The world market portfolio used as a benchmark for estimates of the extent of the home bias is

constructed assuming that all shares issued by a corporation could potentially be held by foreign investors.

This is not correct. If a firm has a controlling shareholder who holds 51% of the firm’s shares, only 49% of


        1
            See Lewis (1999) and Karolyi and Stulz (2001) for reviews of this literature.

                                                       1
the firm’s shares will be available for purchase by small shareholders. An increase in the demand for a firm’s

shares by small shareholders will not lead the controlling shareholder to lower his holdings to less than 50%

because in doing so he would lose the benefits from controlling the company. The controlling shareholder

is therefore only willing to sell his shares as a controlling block for a price significantly above the price at

which shares trade on the stock market – he demands a control premium to sell. Nenova (2000) and Dyck

and Zingales (2001) show that the benefits from control are substantial in most countries. We call portfolio

investors those investors whose return from shares consists only of dividends and price appreciation, so that

the shares these investors hold yield no private benefits from control for them. Shares held by investors who

are controlling shareholders or who belong to a coalition of shareholders who control the firm cannot be

bought by portfolio investors and therefore should not be included in the world market portfolio when

estimating the home bias of these investors.

        We construct estimates of the fraction of the shares that are closely held for 51 countries in 1997.

Our estimate can also be thought of as measuring the float of shares in each market as a fraction of the

market’s capitalization, which would be one minus the fraction of closely-held shares. We define closely-held

shares to be those held by a stockholder with a block of shares that he would not sell without being paid a

premium to reflect the benefits he derives from control. We call such a shareholder a controlling shareholder.

We classify as controlling shareholders all shareholders who are known to hold more than 5% of a firm’s

shares. Our estimates can overstate the holdings of shares unavailable for stock market trading, since it may

well be that some of the large shareholders do not belong to a coalition of controlling shareholders and might

be willing to alter their holdings without receiving a control premium. Yet, it is also possible that our

estimates understate the holdings of shares unavailable for trading because many shareholders that may

belong to a control coalition hold too few shares to be included in the database we use. For instance, a firm

controlled by a coalition of shareholders where each shareholder in the coalition owns less than 5% of the

shares would be viewed as a firm with no controlling shareholder in our study. Across the 51 countries, the


                                                       2
average estimate is that 32% of the shares are not available for trading. However, there is substantial

variation across countries in the fraction of shares that can be held by portfolio investors. Not surprisingly,

the U.S. is the country where controlling shareholders are least important. In nine countries, tradeable shares

(i.e., float) represent less than half of the market’s total capitalization.

        We show that, under some assumptions, portfolio investors hold the world market portfolio of

available shares. We construct an estimate of this portfolio, which we refer to as the world float portfolio.

The U.S. market weight in the world float portfolio is 58.32%, which is substantially higher than the 49.60%

weight in the world market portfolio. Consequently, portfolio investors should overweight the U.S. in their

holdings relative to the share of the U.S. in the world market portfolio. Controlling shareholders are typically

residents – the management team belongs to the coalition of controlling shareholders and has to be resident.

Since the stock market wealth of U.S. investors is estimated to be 101.53% of the capitalization of U.S.

equities and closely-held shares are estimated to represent 7.94% of U.S. equities, we expect U.S. investors

to hold at least 61.28% of their equities in U.S. shares.2 Taking into account the role of controlling

shareholders has the effect of increasing the share of the U.S. in the world portfolio of available shares,

thereby reducing (but not eliminating) the home bias of U.S. investors as traditionally measured.

        We show that controlling shareholders directly affect the investment of U.S. shareholders in a

country. The share of a country’s equities in the stock portfolio of U.S. investors is negatively related to the

share of the stock market capitalization of the country held by large shareholders. The literature has


        2
           The Treasury reports that U.S. investors hold $1,207,787 million in foreign equities at the end
of 1997. The IFC reports the U.S. market capitalization to be $11,308,779 million. According to flow of
funds data, U.S. investors hold 90.85% of their stock market wealth in U.S. equities. Consequently, U.S.
investors’ holdings represent 101.53% of U.S. stock market capitalization. U.S. portfolio investors hold
all the stocks held by U.S. investors minus 7.94% of U.S. market capitalization representing closely-held
shares. This means that U.S. portfolio investors hold stocks worth $10,666,149 million, of which they put
58.32% in the world float portfolio assuming they hold that portfolio. Total U.S. equities held by U.S.
investors are therefore $10,666,149 x 0.5832 + $815,766 million, which corresponds to 62.22% of U.S.
stock market wealth if controlling shareholders hold only equities in the firms they control.




                                                        3
established that financial markets are more developed in countries where investors’ rights are better protected

and controlling shareholders are more important in countries where investors’ rights are less protected (see

La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (2000)). Hence, it could be that U.S. investors are more

reluctant to invest in countries with poorer investor rights and that our estimate of shares held by controlling

shareholders serves as a proxy for investor rights. We investigate this issue in multiple regressions and find

that differences in investor rights and financial development across countries cannot explain why U.S.

investors invest less in countries where large shareholders own a larger fraction of the market’s

capitalization.

        The paper proceeds as follows. We first present in Section I a simple model to show the conditions

under which portfolio investors hold the world float portfolio. We then estimate in Section II the fraction of

shares held by large shareholders for 51 countries. In Section III, we compare the world market portfolio to

the world float portfolio. In Section IV, we show that the fraction of shares held by U.S. investors in 50

foreign countries is negatively related to the proportion of shares held by controlling shareholders. We

further show that the world float portfolio explains the stock holdings of U.S. investors better than the world

market portfolio. Section V concludes and discusses some additional implications of our results.



Section I. A simple model of portfolio holdings with controlling shareholders.

        Consider a world with perfect financial markets. Risky assets include both domestic and foreign

stocks. For simplicity, there is no inflation and no exchange rate uncertainty.3 The investment opportunity

set is constant and asset prices follow lognormal diffusions. Define V to be the variance-covariance matrix




        3
          See Karolyi and Stulz (2001) for a review of how inflation and exchange rate uncertainty affect
portfolio choice in open economies. Models that focus on barriers to international investment usually
ignore inflation and exchange rate uncertainty like we do. The model we present is unchanged in the
presence of inflation and exchange rate uncertainty provided that returns are real returns, that purchasing
power parity holds, and that there is an asset that has a risk-free real return.

                                                       4
of domestic currency returns on risky assets,  the vector of expected domestic currency returns of risky

assets over the risk-free rate, and wki the vector of weights of risky assets in the portfolio of investor i of

country k. Investors can borrow or lend at the risk-free rate to satisfy their wealth constraint. If 1 is a vector

of ones, then 1'wki is the investor’s allocation to risky assets. Investors maximize the expected utility of their

terminal wealth. With these assumptions, each investor chooses the portfolio that minimizes volatility of

return subject to a constraint on expected return. Any investor holds the following portfolio of risky assets

regardless of the country he is from:


                                                  w ki =λ ki V -1μ                                       (1)



where ki is the Lagrangian multiplier associated with the constraint on expected return. Since all investors

hold the same portfolio of risky assets up to a scalar multiple, the fraction of holdings of risky assets a U.S.

investor invests in the U.S. must be the same as the fraction of holdings of risky assets any investor in the

world invests in the U.S. Since all investors hold any two risky assets in identical proportions regardless of

the country they are from, these proportions must be the proportions of the world market portfolio. Investors

therefore put their wealth in the riskless asset and in the world market portfolio of risky assets. With this

model, investors in a country have a home bias if the weight of home country risky assets exceeds the weight

of these assets in the world market portfolio. The world market portfolio includes all assets in positive net

supply. For simplicity, we assume that only common stocks are in positive net supply.

        Let’s now add controlling shareholders to this simple world. Each one of these shareholders owns

a large stake in a firm and, as a result, controls that firm. To simplify the analysis, we assume that a

controlling shareholder has a control block in the firm that will not be sold, so that we do not analyze the

controlling shareholder’s decision to keep the block intact. There are no restrictions on borrowing and

lending, so that the controlling shareholder can always make the required investment to have a controlling

stake. We therefore model the controlling shareholder as a shareholder who chooses a portfolio by


                                                        5
minimizing return volatility subject to a constraint on the expected return of the portfolio and subject to the

constraint that he must hold enough shares of the firm to retain control.

          We assume that to keep control the controlling shareholder has to own a fraction 7kj of the shares

of the firm he controls, firm kj. It will simplify the notation to adopt the convention that the controlling

investor of firm j in country k is investor j in country k. Throughout, when we refer to firm (or controlling

shareholder) xy, we mean firm y in country x. Controlling shareholders belong to the set c and portfolio

investors belong to the set nc. For all investors kj in c, let Wkj be the controlling investor’s wealth and Mkj

be the market capitalization of the firm that the investor controls. The controlling shareholder must invest

at least 7kjMkj/Wkj of his wealth in the equity of the firm to have control assuming that an investor’s

proportionate ownership of cash flow rights is his proportionate ownership of voting rights. The controlling

shareholder then solves his portfolio optimization problem subject to this constraint on his holdings of

shares:


   1 kj                          ω kjM kj
L = w 'Vw + λ [Q - w ' µ ] + δ [
  kj     kj  kj kj  kj        kj
                                     kj
                                          - w kj'h kj ] ∀ kj ∈ c                                                 (2)
   2                              W



where Qkj is the investor’s required expected return for the portfolio and hkj is a vector that has zeroes

everywhere except in its kj-th element. Solving for the optimal portfolio, we obtain:




                 w kj = λ kjV -1 µ + δ kj V -1h kj ∀ kj ∈ c                                                      (3)



Investor kj puts kj of his wealth in portfolio   V -1 µ   , and   kj
                                                                        in portfolio   V -1h kj . Portfolio V -1 µ   is the


portfolio of risky assets of a non-controlling investor with logarithmic utility, so we call it the log portfolio.
 kj
  , the Lagrangian multiplier associated with the constraint that the controlling investor must hold enough


                                                           6
shares in the firm to have control, is equal to zero if the firm does not have a controlling shareholder. Absent

controlling shareholders, the log portfolio is proportional to the market portfolio. With controlling

shareholders, it no longer is. This is because the controlling shareholders do not divide their holdings

between the market portfolio and the risk-free asset.

        The controlling shareholders divide their wealth among three portfolios: the risk-free asset, the log

                               -1   kj
portfolio, and the portfolio V h . The portfolio     V -1h kj is investor-specific. For controlling investor kj,

it is the minimum-variance portfolio that is constrained to have a portfolio weight of one in the common

stock of firm kj. To construct this portfolio, controlling shareholder kj must take long and short positions in

risky assets that reduce the risk he bears from his controlling stake. Suppose that all securities have zero

covariance with security kj except one security, security kv, which has positive covariance. In this case, the

hedge portfolio would have a short position in security kv given by the slope in a regression of the return of

security kj on the return of security kv.

        In equilibrium, the demand for risky securities must equal their supply. Let M be the vector of the

capitalizations of common stocks so that Mkj, the capitalization of the common stock of firm kj, is the element

kj of the vector. Ww is the sum of the wealth of the investors in the world, then M/Ww corresponds to the

vector of portfolio shares of the world market portfolio, which we write wM. Capital market equilibrium

requires that:



                                                1
                                            µ=   w 
                                                     Vw M - z 
                                               λ
                                                           ki
                                                                                                       (4)
                                                      ki W
                                            λ = ∑λ
                                             w

                                                 ki      Ww


The first term in the brackets is the covariance of a security with the world market portfolio – the numerator



                                                        7
of the security’s CAPM beta. Absent controlling shareholders, the term z in the square brackets is equal to

zero and the Sharpe-Lintner model holds. In the presence of controlling shareholders, z is not equal to zero,

so that the term in the brackets is not equal to the covariance of a security with the world market portfolio.

To understand how the presence of controlling shareholders affects the expected return of stock kj, we need

to consider the determinants of zkj.

        The vector z is an adjustment factor due to the differential portfolio demands of the controlling

shareholders. The element kj of that adjustment factor is:



                                          ω kjM kj               
                                          µL      kj
                                                      − w LkjQ kj  kj
                                                                    W
                                  z kj =  -1 W                                                     (5)
                                          Vkj µ L − w kj µ Hedge  W
                                                       L kj           w

                                                                 
                                                                 


where L is the expected excess return of the log portfolio and   µ Hedge
                                                                    kj
                                                                          is the expected excess return on the


hedge portfolio for controlling investor kj. Note that L must be positive.

        From equation (4), the expected return on stock kj falls as zkj increases. Consider a stock that is

uncorrelated with all other stocks. The return on this stock cannot be hedged, so that the expected excess

return of the hedge portfolio for that stock is zero. Keeping the expected excess return on the log portfolio

constant, an increase in the fraction of the stock held by the controlling shareholder and an increase in the

capitalization of the stock both increase zkj and hence decrease the expected excess return on the stock.4

These results follow from the fact that as a stock’s ownership becomes more concentrated, portfolio investors


        4
          Note that the denominator is unchanged as the fraction of the stock held by the controlling
shareholder increases. The first term in the numerator increases. As the first term increases, the weight of
the stock in the log portfolio falls because the expected excess return of the stock falls, which decreases
the second term. However, the second term has a minus sign, so that the decrease in that term increases
the numerator.

                                                      8
hold less of the stock in their portfolio, so that they require a smaller risk premium to hold the supply of the

stock available to them.

        In general, the portfolio share of a stock in the log portfolio will be trivial relative to the portfolio

share of that stock for the controlling shareholder. Consequently, the numerator of the term in brackets of

equation (5) will be positive. In the special case where stock returns are uncorrelated, there is no hedge

portfolio and the denominator is   μ L /σ kj2 , which is positive. We expect the denominator to be generally


positive because the hedge portfolio has primarily short positions if stock returns are positively correlated.

This means that the existence of a controlling shareholder for firm kj reduces the required return of that

firm’s stock relative to the CAPM for a given expected return on the market portfolio.

        It is important to note that this result does not imply that going from an economy with no controlling

shareholders to one with controlling shareholders lowers expected returns on common stocks. This is because

introducing controlling shareholders affects 1/w. In the Sharpe-Lintner model, 1/w is the price of risk.

With controlling shareholders, it is not. An analysis of how 1/w changes as the degree of ownership

concentration in the economy changes is beyond the scope of this paper since portfolio shares are unaffected

by 1/w. Further, the value of a firm’s equity equals the expected cash flows to equity discounted at the

required return for equity. Because controlling shareholders extract private benefits of control, the expected

cash flows to minority shareholders are lower when the firm has a controlling shareholder, so that it would

not be correct to infer that firms with concentrated ownership are worth more than other firms for minority

shareholders because the discount rate for these firms is lower.

        We can now solve for the holdings that portfolio investors must have in this model by substituting

equilibrium expected returns given by equation (4) into equation (1):




                                                       9
                                       λ ki
                                    w = w  w M - V -1z 
                                        ki
                                                                                                           (6)
                                       λ


It immediately follows from equation (6) that portfolio investors do not hold the world market portfolio.

Consider two stocks, pq and kj. There is no controlling shareholder for firm pq, but there is one for firm kj.

If we ignore the impact of controlling shareholders, we would predict that each investor in the world should

hold the two shares in the ratio   wM      M
                                    pq / w kj . Now, using equation (6), suppose that firm kj is uncorrelated



with all other securities. In this case, our model predicts that portfolio investors hold the two shares in the


           pq /(w kj − z kj / σ kj ) . We know already that in this case zkj is positive, so that portfolio investors
ratio of w M      M             2




allocate more of their wealth to stock q relative to stock j than they would in a world without controlling

shareholders. With our assumptions, equation (6) therefore predicts that the portfolios of portfolio investors

in countries with few controlling shareholders will appear to have a home bias since portfolio investors

underweight stocks of firms with controlling shareholders.

        The key implication of the asset demand equation for a controlling shareholder is that he uses risky

assets to reduce the risk resulting from his controlling stake. In a world where the investor could hedge his

controlling stake exactly, he would do so and then choose the same portfolio as any other investor.

Obviously, the investor is not able to hedge his controlling stake exactly – he cannot go short a security with

a return perfectly correlated with the return of the stock of firm kj. This leaves the investor in a situation

where he will choose to go short in the portfolio whose return is most highly correlated with the stock of firm

kj without including the stock of firm kj. In general, stocks from the investor’s home country, country k, are

likely to be positively correlated with the stock of firm kj. In perfect financial markets, we would therefore

expect controlling shareholders to go short stocks from their home country to hedge their controlling stake.


                                                        10
This would reduce the home bias predicted by our model since foreign investors and local portfolio investors

would have to buy the shares sold short by the controlling shareholders.

        Selling stocks short is difficult and expensive in most countries. In addition, selling stocks short to

hedge a controlling stake requires the short-sale positions be kept in place as long as the investor holds the

controlling stake. If there is a chance that the investor would have to close the short sale, the investor might

have to sell shares from his controlling stake if the shares sold short have appreciated. Because of the risk

involved in shares, the controlling stake cannot be fully used as collateral for margin requirements for the

short sale. As a result, if the shares sold short appreciate, it is highly likely that eventually the controlling

shareholder would become liquidity constrained and would have to sell shares from his stake to meet margin

requirements. Consequently, hedging the controlling stake through short sales creates a substantial risk for

the controlling investor, making it unlikely that he will establish a hedge portfolio even if short-sales are

feasible.

        If the controlling shareholder cannot sell shares short, an interesting case to consider is the one where

the controlling shareholder’s stock holdings consist only of his control block. This case assumes that the long

positions in stocks of controlling shareholders besides the control positions are economically unimportant.

Consequently, the market-clearing condition for the common stock of firm kj is:


                                    ∑
                                   ki ∈ nc
                                             λ ki V -1 µ W ki h kj = (1 - ω kj )M kj                    (7)




where nc is the set of portfolio investors.

        Solving for the asset demands of portfolio investors in equilibrium, we have:




                                                           11
                                        W w λ ki 
                                   w =  wnc wnc  (1 − ω ) ⊗ w M
                                      ki
                                                                                                         (8)
                                       W λ 




where (1 − ω ) ⊗ w
                        M
                            denotes a vector where element kj is   (1 − ω kj )w kjM , Wwnc is the aggregate wealth



of investors who are not controlling shareholders, and wnc is the wealth-weighted average of the Lagrangian

multiplier across investors who are not controlling shareholders. In this model, portfolio investors do not hold

the world market portfolio. More precisely, portfolio investors hold firms in the ratio:




                                              w kipq    (1 − ω pq )w pq
                                                                       M

                                              ki       =                                             (9)
                                                          (1 − ω )w kj
                                                                 kj   M
                                               w kj



The portfolio weight of stock pq falls relative to the portfolio weight of stock kj as the fraction of the shares

of firm pq held by the controlling shareholder increases. Stocks with the same proportional holdings by

controlling shareholders are held in the same proportion as their proportion in the world market portfolio,

but not other stocks.

        We can also express holdings of firm pq as a fraction of the portfolio of risky assets of an investor

relative to what the holdings would be without closely held shares:




                                              w kipq         (1 − ω pq )
                                              M        =                                               (10)
                                              w pq      1'[(1 − ω ) ⊗ w M ]
                                                       



                                                           12
           ki
where w pq denotes the portfolio weight of asset pq in investor ki’s portfolio of risky assets. The portfolio


                ki
weights   w pq       sum to one, while the   w kipq   weights do not. The numerator on the right-hand side is the



fraction of the stock pq not held by controlling shareholders. The denominator of the right-hand side of this

expression corresponds to the fraction of a dollar of the world market portfolio that can be held by portfolio

investors. In the traditional CAPM, this fraction is one, and since there are no controlling shareholders, the

numerator is one also. Therefore, with the CAPM assumptions, each investor’s portfolio of risky assets is

the world market portfolio. The right-hand side of equation (10) exceeds one when a firm’s controlling

shareholders own a smaller fraction of the firm’s stock than the fraction of the world stock market wealth

held by controlling shareholders, and will be smaller than one otherwise.

          In the presence of controlling shareholders, portfolio investors overweight the shares of countries

where the fraction of total capitalization held by controlling shareholders is smaller than the fraction of the

world market portfolio held by controlling shareholders and underweight the shares of other countries

relative to the world market portfolio weights. The U.S. is a country where the fraction of total capitalization

held by controlling shareholders is low. Suppose that the controlling shareholders in the U.S. hold 10% of

the U.S. market portfolio and the U.S. market portfolio is 49% of the world market portfolio. Suppose further

that, outside the U.S., controlling shareholders hold 50% of the capitalization of firms. The numerator of

equation (10) is 0.9. The denominator is 0.9 x 0.49 + 0.5 x 0.51, or 0.70. Consequently, for portfolio

investors, the U.S. has a weight equal to 1.29 times its weight in the world market portfolio, or 0.63. Assume

further that U.S. stock market wealth equals the capitalization of the U.S. stock market. With 10% of the U.S.

market held by controlling shareholders, our model predicts that U.S. shareholders hold 67% of the U.S.

market portfolio. With this example, roughly half of the home bias of U.S. investors is explained. As we will

see, the assumptions made in this example are not unreasonable. We can also predict the extent of the home


                                                            13
bias in a typical foreign country. We assume that controlling shareholders are domestic shareholders, which

is generally the case.5 Consider then a country that is 5% of the world market portfolio where controlling

shareholders hold 50% of the market capitalization. In this country, local shareholders hold more than 50%

of the market capitalization, even when portfolio investors do not have a home bias in that country.

        There are good arguments for why asset demands of portfolio investors include hedging terms and

why foreign investors might be less well informed than domestic investors. The existing literature on the

home bias has analyzed how departures from mean-variance optimization can help explain the home bias.

Departures from mean-variance optimization would affect the holdings of portfolio investors in our model,

but they would not change the two key points we make, namely that the existence of controlling shareholders

implies that there is an inherent home bias in how investors in a country invest their wealth and that the

existence of controlling shareholders increases the portfolio shares of countries with dispersed firm

ownership for portfolio investors.



Section II. Controlling shareholders and the world market portfolio.

        Our sample of U.S. investor holdings of foreign securities is taken from the 2000 version of the

Report on U.S. Holdings of Foreign Long-term Investments published by United States Department of

Treasury. The report examines foreign equity holdings in 164 countries by U.S. investors as of the end of

1997. The equity holdings are obtained from a survey by the Treasury Department and the Federal Reserve

Board of major custodians and large institutional investors. Participation in the survey is mandatory and lack

of compliance is subject to penalties. The primary source for the world market portfolio is the 1998

Emerging Markets Fact Book of the International Finance Corporation (IFC). We also use the data reported

by the Fédération Internationale des Bourses de Valeurs (FIBV), the World Bank, and the Salomon Guide


        5
          Unfortunately, except for Doidge (2001), the residence of controlling investors has not been
investigated in the literature. Doidge (2001) provides evidence that in a sample of firms that have ADRs,
almost all firms have resident controlling shareholders.

                                                     14
to World Equities of 1999. All sources report market capitalizations as of the end of 1997. For most

countries, the numbers provided by these various sources are very similar. However, there are some countries

with large differences – Ireland has a capitalization of $24 billion according to IFC but $49 billion according

to FIBV.6 We therefore make sure that our conclusions are not sensitive to these differences. We define

country k’s weight in the world market portfolio,   wM
                                                     k , as the ratio of the market capitalization of country



k divided by the market capitalization of all equity markets in the world as reported by the IFC.

        To obtain the fraction of a firm’s shares that are closely held,   ω kj , we use the data on closely held

shares from the Worldscope Database. Closely-held shares correspond to shares held by insiders. Insiders

are considered to be officers, directors, and their immediate families, shares held in trusts, shares held by

another corporation (except shares held in a fiduciary capacity by financial institutions), shares held by

pension benefit plans, and shares held by individuals who hold 5% or more of the outstanding shares. For

Japanese firms, closely held shares represent the holdings of the ten largest shareholders.

        The first column of Table 1 shows the number of firms in each country for which Worldscope has

any information for 1997. Worldscope typically has information on large firms in a country. Not surprisingly,

the number of firms in the dataset varies dramatically across countries, going from Slovakia, which has 2

firms in the dataset, to Japan, which has 2,409. Among the firms for which Worldscope has information, it

has ownership information for only a subset of firms. The second column in the table reports the number of

firms in each country for which ownership data is available. In some countries, the number of firms for which

ownership data is available is close to the number of firms in the Worldscope dataset. In other countries, only

a small fraction of firms have ownership information. For instance, Worldscope has ownership data on 2,392


        6
         As Ahearne, Griver, and Warnock (2001) point out “Differences between the two sources were
for the most part small or nonexistent, except for in the data for Ireland, Australia, and New Zealand,
where the IFC number was based on an incorrect currency conversion.” We use the FIBV number for
Ireland.

                                                      15
of 2,409 Japanese firms, but only 15 of 166 firms in Taiwan.

        Our estimate of the fraction of   ω kj has an upward bias and several downward biases. The upward

bias is that the measure includes large holdings from shareholders who may not be part of the controlling

coalition. For instance, when T. Boone Pickens attempted to acquire a board seat at Koito Manufacturing

in the 1980s, he owned 26% of that company. With our approach, this stake would be part of the closely held

shares of the company, so that we would overstate the ownership of the controlling coalition for that

company.7 The downward biases appear more significant. The first downward bias is that if part of the stake

of a controlling shareholder is held through third parties, such as other corporations, that own small stakes

in the firm, we might miss these stakes altogether. For instance, a company with a controlling shareholder

who exerts control through fifteen stakes of 4% would appear to have no controlling shareholder with our

data. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1999) show both that indirect ownership is important and

that finding the ultimate owner of a corporation is difficult. However, their analysis would also miss a

controlling shareholder who exerts control through fifteen stakes of 4%. The second downward bias is that

poor reporting and difficulties in identifying large blocks mean that some large blocks will not be noticed.

Importantly, disclosure requirements vary across countries and the disclosure requirements are not

consistently enforced. Worldscope cannot report undisclosed holdings. This may lead us to especially

understate the fraction of closely held shares in countries with poor disclosure requirements. The third

downward bias is that Worldscope has only the largest companies in a country. Controlling shareholders are

even more prevalent in the smaller companies, so that our estimate for a market is downward biased. This

third bias may not be important because the market portfolio for a country is value-weighted. Our dataset has

an extremely large number of firms, so that it would not be feasible for us to attempt to improve on the

Worldscope dataset.


        7
         This particular example does not affect our results because our data come from 1997. The
example is merely illustrative of possible biases.

                                                     16
        The model of Section I assumes that there are no barriers to international investment. Such barriers

exist and they contribute to the home bias. In particular, in many countries, some shares cannot be held by

foreign investors. We use a market portfolio for each country that ignores the ownership restrictions against

foreign investors. The reason for proceeding this way is that we cannot distinguish within the controlling

block which shares have ownership restrictions and which do not. Consequently, what we call the portfolio

of available shares may include some shares that are not available to foreign investors. This would lead us

to underestimate the extent to which the existence of controlling shareholders reduces the home bias.

        In order to aggregate the firm level data to the country level, we estimate the percentage of shares

closely held in a country by forming a value-weighted average of controlling stakes for the firms for which

Worldscope reports the data. The value-weighted estimate divides the sum of the market value of all closely

held shares in a country by the sum of the market value of all shares. We then use this value as our estimate

of the fraction of shares held by controlling shareholders for the country. This is shown in equation (11)

below where 7kj x Mkj is the market value of closely held shares in firm kj and Mkj is the market value of all

shares in firm kj. We construct this index for each country using only the firms with available data on

closely held shares in that country. Data on closely held shares are available for 51 countries:



                                                                        N

                                                                       ∑ω
                                                                       j=1
                                                                                  kj
                                                                                       M kj
          Fraction of closely held shares for country k =                 N
                                                                                                      (11)
                                                                         ∑M j=1
                                                                                       kj




The third column of Table 1 reports our estimate of the fraction of closely held shares for country k.

Worldscope reports firm data for the end of a firm’s fiscal year. Different firms in a country can have

different fiscal years, so that the market values using Worldscope can be measured at different points in time.

We therefore compute the fraction of closely held shares using end of December stock prices. The difficulty


                                                      17
with this approach is that while all the stock prices are from December 1997, we are using the number of

shares outstanding measured at different month ends. We also compute the fraction of closely held shares

using end of fiscal year data. The two approaches lead to estimates of the fraction of closely held shares that

are virtually identical. Except for three countries, the two approaches lead to estimates that are within one

percent of the country’s market capitalization. The difference is largest for China, where it is 4.45% of the

country’s market capitalization.

        Table 1 shows that the U.S. is unique among the countries for which we have data. For the U.S., the

fraction of shares that are closely held is 7.94%, which makes the U.S. the country with the lowest value-

weighted controlling ownership. The U.K. is next with 9.93%. Except for Ireland, Sri Lanka, the U.S., and

the U.K., no country has a value-weighted controlling ownership of less than 20%. Only seven countries have

value-weighted controlling ownership between 20% and 30%. Twenty-three countries have value-weighted

controlling ownership in excess of 50%.

        La Porta, et. al (2000) provide evidence that common law countries protect investor rights better than

civil law countries. We would therefore expect that ownership is less concentrated in common law countries.

Nenova (2000) shows that the value of control is lower in common law and Scandinavian law countries.

Eight out of the eleven countries where value-weighted controlling ownership is below 30% are either

common law countries or Scandinavian countries. The exceptions are Mexico, Switzerland, and Taiwan.

Though a country with low ownership concentration is almost surely a common law country or a

Scandinavian country, a country with common law does not necessarily have low ownership concentration.

Common law countries are almost equally split between value-weighted ownership below 50% (eight

countries) and value-weighted ownership above 50% (seven countries). There is stronger evidence that the

value-weighted controlling ownership is negatively related to measures of capital market development. The

U.K. and the U.S. have the lowest value-weighted controlling ownership and the most developed capital

markets.


                                                      18
        The last three columns show the market value of the firms for which we have information about

closely held shares, the market value of the country’s firms, and the percentage of the market capitalization

of the country represented by the firms for which we have information about closely held shares. For 19

countries, we have information on closely held shares for more than 80% of the market’s capitalization. For

some countries, the value of the firms for which we have information on closely held shares exceeds the

reported value of the market capitalization. This could arise for a number of different reasons. First, in some

cases, the market capitalization of IFC is low compared to the estimate of FIBV. Second, shares could have

been issued since the end of the fiscal year. Third, firms have different classes of shares, so that estimates

of firm market values could differ because of differences in ways of treating different classes of shares.

Fourth, some firms could be traded only on regional exchanges that may not be included in the IFC or FIBV

estimates. In any case, for the purpose of this study, the conclusion one has to draw from the last column of

Table 1 is that for many countries the market capitalization of the firms for which we have closely held

shares information is close to the market capitalization of all firms. Note that we do not use the percentage

in the last column in our analyses. The number we use is the percentage of shares which are closely held and

that number varies little if we compute it at either fiscal year end or calendar year end. Consequently, we are

reassured that the percentage of closely held shares is not sensitive to timing issues.

        We compute, but do not report, an equally-weighted measure of controlling ownership. With that

measure, we average controlling ownership across the firms for which data is available. That measure is

higher in almost every country than the value-weighted ownership. This is not surprising since it puts more

weight on smaller firms and smaller firms tend to be more closely held. There are exceptions, though, but

none dramatic.



Section III. The home bias after taking into account closely held shares.

        In the first column of Table 2, we report the weight of each country in the U.S. investors’ portfolio.


                                                      19
The second column shows the world market portfolio weight for each country in our dataset. The portfolio

weights range from 0.01% for Zimbabwe to 49.60% for the U.S. Out of the 51 countries, 43 countries have

a world portfolio share below 2%. Of the countries that have higher portfolio shares than 2%, only the U.S.

has a portfolio share greater than 10%.

        The third column of Table 2 shows the fraction of the world float portfolio, which is constructed

using only the shares that are not closely-held. For each country, the available shares of firm kj represent a

fraction (1 − ω
                  kj
                       )w kjM of the world market portfolio. However, the portfolio weights of the world float


portfolio do not sum to one. After making this adjustment and summing the available shares across a country,

                                                                                    F
we get the portfolio weight of the country in the world float portfolio,          wp     :



                                                       (1 − ω kj )(w M      M
                                                                     kj / w j )
                             w = ∑w = ∑
                                F          ki
                                p          kj                                     w Mj                  (12)
                                      kj          kj    1'[(1 − ω ) ⊗ w ] M




The denominator on the right-hand side of the equation is the fraction of available shares in the world market

portfolio. The numerator is the fraction of available shares in country p’s market portfolio. Consequently,

a country will have a larger weight in the world float portfolio only if the fraction of shares available in that

country is greater than the fraction of shares available in the world market portfolio. The only countries with

greater weights in the world float portfolio than in the world market portfolio are Ireland, Sri Lanka, Sweden,

the U.K., and the U.S. The weight of the U.S. in the world float portfolio is 58.32%, in contrast to 49.60%

in the world market portfolio. For a number of countries, the drop in the portfolio weight is proportionately

large. An example is Brazil which falls from 1.12% to 0.47%. The weight of Brazil in the portfolio of

equities held by U.S. investors is 0.24%. Though the share of Brazil in the portfolio of U.S. investors is 21%

of Brazil’s weight in the world market portfolio, it is 51% of Brazil’s weight in the world float portfolio. This

                                                          20
effect takes place across countries, but obviously its importance depends on the extent to which shares are

closely held in a country.

        Ahearne, Griver, and Warnock (AGW, 2001) introduce a measure of the home bias defined as one

minus the ratio of a country’s weight in the portfolio of U.S. investors divided by the country’s weight in the

world market portfolio. In the presence of closely-held shares, our analysis predicts a bias:




                                                       w kUS            (1 − ω k )
                              Predicted Bias = 1 −           = 1 −                                    (13)
                                                       wM k
                                                                    ′ −ω) ⊗ wM ]
                                                                   1[(1



The fourth column of Table 2 shows the AGW bias measure. The bias measure exceeds 0.5 for all countries.

Our predicted bias is positive in all countries but five and exceeds 0.5 in 14 countries. A negative bias means

that we expect a country to be overweighted in the portfolio of U.S. investors. U.S. investors are only

expected to overweight Ireland, Sri Lanka, Sweden, the U.K., and the U.S.

        The average AGW bias is 0.81 while our average predicted bias is 0.33. The home bias does not get

eliminated when we take into account closely held shares. The means of the predicted bias and the AGW bias

are significantly different. Taking into account closely held shares using our measure brings the unexplained

bias to 0.48. Using the world market portfolio as a benchmark for evaluating the extent to which U.S.

investors have a home bias therefore builds in a substantial bias in the comparison. When one starts from the

world float portfolio, the home bias is 41% smaller.



Section IV. The determinants of the weight of foreign countries in the portfolio of stocks of U.S.

investors.

        The first column of Panel A of Table 3 shows that the portfolio share of a country for U.S. investors

is positively related to the weight of that country in the world market portfolio. Absent a home bias and


                                                      21
absent closely-held shares, the coefficient on the world market portfolio weight of a country should be one.

Instead, the coefficient is 0.1496 with a t-statistic of 5.59. When we use the weight of a country in the world

float portfolio, the coefficient is 0.1610 and the t-statistic is 14.68. The adjusted R-square of the regression

increases from 0.8416 to 0.8816 when we substitute the weight of the float portfolio for the weight of the

market portfolio. In the third column, we report a regression with both weights. The weight of a country in

the world market portfolio is not significant in that regression. Finally, in the last column, we include in the

regression the weight of a country in the world market portfolio and the fraction of shares closely held in that

country. The fraction of shares closely held has a significant negative coefficient, so that U.S. investors have

a lower portfolio share of countries with a larger fraction of shares that are closely held. All these results are

consistent with the model of Section I. However, it is also clear that taking into account the fraction of shares

that are closely held does not make the home bias disappear.

        In the second panel of Table 3, we examine whether there is information in the country weights of

the world float portfolio that is not in the country weights of the world market portfolio. For that purpose,

we use as explanatory variables the country weight in the world market portfolio and the residual from a

regression of the country weight in the world float portfolio on the weight in the world market portfolio. It

is clear from the regression that the weight in the world float portfolio has information that is not in the

weight of the world market portfolio. We then reverse the procedure to show that the weights of the market

portfolio have no information for understanding the country portfolio shares of U.S. investors that the

weights of the float portfolio do not have. It follows from this that any attempt at understanding the home

bias of U.S. investors should start from the world float portfolio.

        We find that the fraction of closely held shares helps explain the country weights of the portfolio of

stocks of U.S. investors. It could be, however, that the float portfolio better explains the country weights in

the portfolio of U.S. investors than the market portfolio simply because the fraction of closely held shares

proxies for country characteristics that explain the country weights in the portfolio. In that case, controlling


                                                       22
for country characteristics would remove the explanatory power of the world float portfolio in a regression

that also includes the world market portfolio.

        In Table 4, we take the regression of Panel A of Table 3 that regresses the portfolio share of a

country in the portfolio of stocks of U.S. investors on the world market portfolio weight and the world float

portfolio weight of a country and show that our results are robust to controlling for country characteristics.

If investors were to hold the world market portfolio, the only country characteristic that would matter for

their portfolio would be the share of the country in the world market portfolio. However, since we show that

the fraction of shares held by controlling shareholders is significantly related to the weight of a country in

the portfolio of U.S. investors, we have to be concerned that the fraction of shares held by controlling

shareholders proxies for country characteristics correlated with the fraction of shares held by controlling

shareholders. The literature predicts that ownership is more concentrated when investor protection is weaker.

Greater investor protection leads to greater financial development. Consequently, we examine whether

controlling for measures of investor protection and financial development affect our conclusions.

        In all regressions of Table 4, we control for GNP per capita in 1997 to take into account the

correlation between the other variables and economic development. GNP per capita is significant at the 10%

level in only one regression. In the first regression, we control for the La Porta et al. (1998) anti-director

index. A higher value of the index means greater minority shareholder protection. La Porta et al. (1998)

compute this index by adding up dummy variables that take value one if a country does not block shares

before the shareholder meeting, if a country allows voting by mail, if it allows for cumulative voting or

proportional representation, if it has a mechanism for shareholders to pursue redress against decisions of the

company that they believe to be harmful, if it has preemptive rights, and finally if less than 10% of the

shareholder vote can call a shareholder assembly. We then control for measures of judicial efficiency,

corruption, and expropriation risk. These indices are those used by La Porta et al. (1998). The indices are

constructed so that a value of one means low investor protection and a value of 10 means high investor


                                                     23
protection. Countries with greater expropriation risk have a lower share in the portfolios of U.S. investors.

We control for the stock market capitalization per capita and for equity issues to GDP. These two measures

are computed for 1997 and are obtained from Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine (1999). These measures are

unrelated to the share of a country in U.S. stock portfolios. Finally, we control for trade openness, defined

as the average trade share in GDP from 1985 to 1995, obtained from Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine

(1999). It is not significant. When we use all these variables in a regression, they increase the adjusted R2

by 3%. The corruption index is the only significant variable besides the weight in the world float portfolio.

The weight in the world float portfolio is highly significant in all the regressions of Table 4, while the weight

in the world market portfolio is never significant. Adding the country control variables to the regressions of

Table 3 affects none of our conclusions.

        Though we do not reproduce the results, we estimate the regressions of Table 4 imposing the

requirement that a country has to have at least 5, 10, or 20 firms to be included in the regression. Our

conclusions are not affected by this requirement. We also estimate the regressions of Tables 3 and 4 using

only countries for which we have ownership data for at least 75% of the country’s market capitalization. This

requirement reduces the number of countries, but none of the conclusions we reach are affected when we

impose this requirement.



Section V. Conclusion and additional implications.

        In this paper, we show that the home bias is intricately linked to corporate governance. When

companies are controlled by large investors, portfolio investors are limited in the fraction of a firm they can

hold. Portfolio investors cannot hold the world market portfolio in a world with controlling shareholders. We

show that the home bias is significantly smaller when one takes into account the extent to which shares are

held by controlling shareholders across the world. With our results, the removal of barriers to international

investment cannot make the home bias disappear, however. For the home bias to disappear, it is necessary


                                                       24
that investor rights improve across countries where firms are mostly controlled by large shareholders so that

it becomes optimal for firms to have atomistic shareholders in these countries.

        Though we have focused on holdings of foreign shares by U.S. investors across countries, our results

have implications for two additional issues that have received attention over time:

        1) Turnover and home bias. Tesar and Werner (1995) showed that foreign investors have greater

turnover than domestic investors. Warnock (2001) using different data finds that U.S. investors turn over

their foreign shares faster than their holdings of NYSE stocks but more slowly than their holdings of

NASDAQ stocks. Since controlling shareholders do not trade their holdings, our evidence suggests that for

foreign investors to trade more than the domestic investors who trade, one should observe a turnover ratio

for foreign investors that exceeds the turnover ratio of domestic investors by more than 33%. Unless the

turnover ratio of foreign investors is much larger than the turnover ratio of domestic investors, one has to

conclude that foreign investors trade less than domestic investors.

        2) Bias of foreign investors toward large firms. Kang and Stulz (1997) show that foreign investors

in Japan have a bias towards holding larger firms. This size bias has been confirmed for other countries.

There are a number of possible explanations for this bias. However, there is evidence in the U.S. that smaller

firms are more likely to have high inside ownership (see Demsetz and Lehn (1985)). If this stylized fact for

the U.S. holds across countries, then the fraction of shares that are available to foreign investors is likely to

be proportional to size.




                                                       25
                                               References

Ahearne, A. G., W. L. Griever, and F. E. Warnock, 2001, Information costs and home bias: An analysis of

    U.S. holdings of foreign equities, Reserve Board, International Finance Division, Working Paper 691

    (Updated), Washington, D.C.

Beck, T., A. Demirgüç-Kunt, and R. Levine, 1999, A new database on financial development and structure,

    working paper, University of Minnesota.

Demsetz, H., and K. Lehn, 1985, The structure of corporate ownership: causes and consequences, Journal

    of Political Economy 93, 1155-1177.

Doidge, C., 2001, Do changes in laws matter for ownership and control? Evidence from emerging market

    firms that list in the U.S., working paper, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.

Dyck, A., and L. Zingales, 2001, Why are private benefits of control so large incertain countries and what

    effect does this have on their financial development?, unpublished working paper, University of Chicago,

    Chicago, Ill.

Kang, J. and R. M. Stulz, 1997, Why is there a home bias? An analysis of foreign portfolio equity ownership

    in Japan, Journal of Financial Economics 46, 3-28.

Karolyi, A., and R. M. Stulz, 2001, Are financial assets priced locally or globally?, forthcoming in the

    Handbook of the Economics of Finance, G. Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz, eds., North-Holland.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1998, Law and Finance, Journal of

    Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer, 1999, Corporate ownership around the world, Journal

    of Finance 54, 471-517.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 2000, Investor protection and corporate

    governance, Journal of Financial Economics 58, 3-27.

Lewis, K. K, 1999, Trying to explain home bias in equities and consumption, Journal of Economic Literature


                                                    26
    37, 571-608.

Nenova, T., 2000, The value of corporate votes and control benefits: Cross-country analysis, working paper,

    World Bank.

Tesar, L. and I. M. Werner, 1995, Home bias and high turnover, Journal of International Money and

    Finance 14, 467-493.

Warnock, F., 2001, Home bias and high turnover reconsidered, working paper, Federal Reserve Board,

    Washington, DC.




                                                    27
Table 1
Summary Statistics for Countries for Year 1997
We use December 1997 prices, and splice fiscal year end prices when December 1997 prices are unavailable.
In all the firms, only 57 prices are other than December year end. The percentage of market capitalization
closely held in column (3) is computed using only firms for which ownership data is available on
Worldscope.

                       Number Number of Percentage Market Cap. of                 Total     Sample Firm
                          of   Firms with   of Market      Firms                 Market      Percent of
                        Firms Closely Held Cap. Closely With Closely              Cap.      Total Market
     COUNTRY                  Shares Data     Held      Held Shares              ($ Mil)        Cap.
                                                           Data                                (4)/(5)

                          (1)         (2)           (3)             (4)             (5)           (6)
ARGENTINA                  43          14         52.68%          37,764          59,252       63.73%
AUSTRALIA                 279         268         24.85%         257,422         295,785       36.95%
AUSTRIA                    90         42          54.85%          31,627          35,724       88.53%
BELGIUM                   115         98          47.14%         133,346         136,965       97.36%
BRAZIL                    149         23          67.13%         121,861         255,478       47.70%
CANADA                    483         125         48.82%         156,119         567,635       27.50%
CHILE                      81         75          64.94%          53,888          72,046       74.80%
CHINA                      79         64          68.74%          14,941         206,366        7.24%
CZECH REPUBLIC              8           8         78.10%           4,818          12,786       37.68%
DENMARK                   182         119         25.10%          85,557          93,766       91.24%
EGYPT                       5          3          40.55%           1,388          20,830        6.66%
FINLAND                   105          92         23.49%          72,200          73,322       98.47%
FRANCE                    546         475         37.98%         558,215         674,368       82.78%
GERMANY                   605         492         44.74%         811,349         825,233       98.32%
GREECE                    107          23         75.18%           3,383          34,164        9.90%
HONG KONG                 392         387         42.73%         373,916         413,323       90.47%
HUNGARY                    26          16         49.48%          11,432          14,975       76.34%
INDIA                     282         33          40.32%          26,838         128,466       20.89%
INDONESIA                 130         122         68.97%          25,079          29,105       86.17%
IRELAND                    57         54          13.06%          47,068          49,371      95.34%
ISRAEL                     54         20          58.01%          10,092          45,268       22.29%
ITALY                     194         87          37.54%         257,611         344,665       74.74%
JAPAN                    2409        2392         38.38%        2,330,318       2,216,699     105.13%
JORDAN                      4          2          65.55%           1,079           5,446       19.82%
KOREA (SOUTH)             301         296         39.23%          35,924          41,881      85.78%
LUXEMBOURG                 17           6         66.74%          11,867          33,892       35.02%
MALAYSIA                  432         420         52.15%          85,255          93,608       91.08%
MEXICO                    78          11          26.15%          40,240         156,595      25.70%
MOROCCO                     8           6         48.93%           4,531          12,177       37.21%
NETHERLANDS               196         158         33.74%         465,149         468,736       99.23%


                                                   28
NEW ZEALAND       52     51    77.48%     26,933       30,511     88.27%
NORWAY           123    112    41.07%     63,497       66,503     95.48%
PAKISTAN          95     16    77.37%     5,893        10,966    53.74%
PERU              33      6    68.60%     1,720        17,586     9.78%
PHILIPPINES      108     42    51.13%      6,315       31,361     20.13%
POLAND            41     24    64.26%      3,939       12,135    32.46%
PORTUGAL          63     48    35.04%     44,827       38,954    115.08%
SINGAPORE        219    215    57.10%    107,452      106,317    101.07%
SLOVAKIA           2      1    50.79%       222         1,826    12.18%
SOUTH AFRICA     196    182    52.86%    144,091      232,069    62.09%
SPAIN            154    113    42.12%    154,716      290,383    53.28%
SRI LANKA         12     12    19.15%       670         2,096    31.94%
SWEDEN           193    172    20.99%    259,614      272,730    95.19%
SWITZERLAND      187    140    25.73%    234,537      575,338    40.77%
TAIWAN           166     15    22.26%    31,384       287,813    10.90%
THAILAND         243    123    57.83%     7,306        23,538    31.04%
TURKEY            78     58    70.86%    22,424        61,090    36.71%
UNITED KINGDOM   1510   1474    9.93%   1,933,420    1,996,225   96.85%
UNITED STATES    484    464     7.94%   6,907,039   11,308,779   61.08%
VENEZUELA         18      2    61.53%     6,169        14,581     42.31%
ZIMBABWE           6      6    36.63%       455         1,969    23.08%




                                29
Table 2
World market index and home bias measures
The world float portfolio is the world market portfolio adjusted to reflect that not all shares are available for
purchase by portfolio investors. We calculate the Ahearne, Griever, and Warnock (2001, AGW) measure of
home bias using our dataset.

       COUNTRY               Weight in    World Market   World Float                  AGW          Predicted
                            U.S. Investor  Portfolio   Portfolio Weight             Measure of     Home Bias
                              Portfolio     Weight                                  Home Bias

                                  (1)              (2)                (3)            1-[(1)/(2)]    1-[(1)/(3)]
 ARGENTINA                       0.10             0.26               0.16               0.62            0.40
 AUSTRALIA                       0.24             1.30               1.25               0.82            0.04
 AUSTRIA                         0.03             0.16               0.09               0.82            0.42
 BELGIUM                         0.05             0.60               0.41               0.92            0.33
 BRAZIL                          0.24             1.12               0.47               0.79            0.58
 CANADA                          0.54             2.49               1.63               0.78            0.35
 CHILE                           0.03             0.32               0.14               0.89            0.55
 CHINA                           0.02             0.91               0.36               0.98            0.60
 CZECH REPUBLIC                  0.01             0.06               0.02               0.90            0.72
 DENMARK                         0.07             0.41               0.39               0.84            0.04
 EGYPT                           0.01             0.09               0.07               0.94            0.24
 FINLAND                         0.11             0.32               0.31               0.65            0.02
 FRANCE                          0.65             2.96               2.34               0.78            0.21
 GERMANY                         0.49             3.62               2.55               0.86            0.29
 GREECE                          0.01             0.15               0.05               0.92            0.68
 HONG KONG                       0.21             1.81               1.32               0.88            0.27
 HUNGARY                         0.03             0.07               0.04               0.60            0.35
 INDIA                           0.05             0.56               0.43               0.92            0.24
 INDONESIA                       0.02             0.13               0.06               0.85            0.60
 IRELAND                         0.11             0.22               0.24               0.51           -0.11
 ISRAEL                          0.05             0.20               0.11               0.73            0.46
 ITALY                           0.32             1.51               1.21               0.79            0.20
 JAPAN                           1.04             9.72               7.65               0.89            0.21
 JORDAN                          0.00             0.24               0.01               0.99            0.56
 KOREA (SOUTH)                   0.03             0.18               0.14               0.82            0.22
 LUXEMBOURG                      0.04             0.15               0.06               0.73            0.58
 MALAYSIA                        0.04             0.41               0.25               0.91            0.39
 MEXICO                          0.27             0.69               0.65               0.61            0.06
 MOROCCO                         0.00             0.05               0.04               0.97            0.35
 NETHERLANDS                     0.81             2.05               1.74               0.60            0.15
 NEW ZEALAND                     0.04             0.13               0.04               0.70            0.71
 NORWAY                          0.07             0.29               0.22               0.75            0.25
 PAKISTAN                        0.01             0.05               0.01               0.81            0.71

                                                       30
PERU             0.02    0.08      0.03   0.77    0.60
PHILIPPINES      0.02     0.14     0.09   0.84    0.38
POLAND           0.01     0.05     0.02   0.77    0.54
PORTUGAL          0.05    0.17     0.14   0.69    0.17
SINGAPORE         0.08    0.47     0.26   0.83    0.45
SLOVAKIA         0.00    0.01      0.01   0.92    0.37
SOUTH AFRICA      0.08    1.02     0.61   0.93    0.40
SPAIN            0.19    1.27      0.94   0.85    0.26
SRI LANKA        0.00     0.01     0.01   0.89   -0.03
SWEDEN           0.30    1.20      1.21   0.75   -0.01
SWITZERLAND      0.47     2.53     2.39   0.81    0.05
TAIWAN           0.04    1.26     1.25    0.97    0.01
THAILAND          0.02    0.10     0.06   0.84    0.46
TURKEY           0.05    0.27     0.10    0.83    0.63
UNITED KINGDOM    1.66    8.76    10.07   0.81   -0.15
UNITED STATES    91.29   49.60    58.32     -    -0.18
VENEZUELA        0.02    0.06      0.03   0.77    0.51
ZIMBABWE         0.00    0.01      0.01   0.88    0.19




                             31
Table 3: Simple regression results
The world float portfolio is the world market portfolio adjusted to reflect that not all shares are available for
purchase by portfolio investors. Closely held shares is the percentage of shares in a country which are
unavailable for purchase by the portfolio investors. Each country represents one observation. All regressions
use White standard errors.

Panel A: Simple regressions of the world market portfolio and the world float portfolio.
 Dependent Variable is Weight in US portfolio
 Constant                                     0.0002           0.0004          0.0004                0.0013
                                               (1.24)           (3.22)         (2.51)                (2.10)
 Weight in World Market Portfolio             0.1496                           0.0049                0.1423
                                               (5.59)                          (0.09)                (5.47)
 Weight in World Float Portfolio                               0.1610          0.1560
                                                               (14.68)         (3.22)
 Closely Held Shares                                                                                -0.0021
                                                                                                     (-2.17)
 N                                                   50              50               50               50
 Adjusted R2                                       0.8416          0.8816           0.8792           0.8517


Panel B: Orthogonalization of world market portfolio and world float portfolio.
 Dependent Variable is Weight in US portfolio
 Constant                                                           0.0017                       0.0017
                                                                    (11.47)                      (11.47)
 Weight in World Market Portfolio                                   0.0028
                                                                    (11.36)
 Weight in World Float Portfolio - Additional explanatory           0.0006
 power                                                               (3.22)
 Weight in World Float Portfolio                                                                 0.0029
                                                                                                 (14.11)
 Weight in World Market Portfolio - Additional                                                   0.0000
 explanatory Power                                                                                (0.09)
 N                                                                          50                      50
 Adjusted R2                                                              0.8792                 0.8792




                                                       32
Table 4: Regression results using flow of funds US ownership of foreign stocks.
The world float portfolio is the world market portfolio adjusted to reflect that not all shares are available for purchase by portfolio investors. US$ GNP
per capita is the 1997 GNP per capita for each country measured in U.S. dollars. Anti-director rights is an index of the six variables that measure
shareholder rights in each country. The judicial efficiency index is an index that measures the efficiency of a country's judicial system. The corruption
index is a measure of a country's government corruption, and the expropriation risk index measures the risk of expropriation. These indices are from
La Porta, Lopes de Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998). Average Openness is the average openness from 1985 to 1995 for each country. The financial
development and openness variables are from Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine (1999). All regressions use White standard errors.
Dependent variable is weight in US stock portfolio
                            0.0007        0.0003             -0.0007         -0.0030          0.0002          0.0005         -0.0000         -0.0007
Constant                    (1.51)        (0.69)              (-1.05)         (-2.09)         (1.02)          (1.76)          (-0.01)         (-0.19)
                              -0.0169        -0.0164         -0.0063         -0.0041         -0.0183         -0.0799         -0.0062         -0.0693
Weight in World Market         (-0.28)        (-0.27)         (-0.12)         (-0.09)         (-0.33)         (-1.23)         (-0.10)         (-1.19)
                               0.1720         0.1695          0.1602          0.1559          0.1711          0.2140          0.1603          0.1858
Weight in World Float          (3.35)         (3.34)          (3.78)          (4.03)          (3.70)          (4.21)          (3.09)          (4.17)
                               0.0000         0.0000         -0.0000         -0.0000          0.0000          0.0000          0.0000          0.0000
US$ GNP per capita             (1.36)         (1.18)          (-0.46)         (-1.37)         (1.70)          (1.41)          (1.27)          (0.09)
                              -0.0001                                                                                                        -0.0003
Anti-director Rights           (-0.83)                                                                                                        (-0.90)
                                             -0.0000                                                                                         -0.0002
Judicial efficiency Index                     (-0.05)                                                                                         (-0.56)
                                                              0.0002                                                                          0.0006
Corruption Index                                              (1.41)                                                                          (1.85)
                                                                              0.0005                                                          0.0001
Expropriation Risk                                                            (2.26)                                                          (0.15)
                                                                                              0.0001                                          0.0017
Stock Market                                                                                  (0.20)                                          (1.16)
                                                                                                             -0.0122                         -0.0455
Equity Issues to GDP                                                                                          (-0.96)                         (-1.08)
                                                                                                                              0.0006         -0.0012
Average Openness                                                                                                              (0.55)          (-0.94)
N                                37             37              37              37              42              24              33              20
Adjusted R2                    0.8846         0.8823          0.8902          0.8963          0.8872          0.8966          0.8827          0.9113



                                                                           33
