                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE ADVANTAGE OF TRANSPARENT INSTRUMENTS OF MONETARY POLICY


                                            Andrew Atkeson
                                             Patrick Kehoe


                                          Working Paper 8681
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8681


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2001




Atkeson and Kehoe thank the National Science Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis or the Federal Reserve System.


© 2001 by Andrew Atkeson and Patrick Kehoe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
The Advantage of Transparent Instruments of Monetary Policy
Andrew Atkeson and Patrick Kehoe
NBER Working Paper No. 8681
December 2001
JEL No. E5, E52, E61, F33, F41



                                            ABSTRACT

       Is the exchange rate or the money growth rate the better instrument of monetary policy? A
common argument is that the exchange rate has a natural advantage because it is more transparent: it is
easier for the public to monitor than the money growth rate. We formalize this argument in a simple
model in which the government chooses which instrument it will use to target inflation. We find that
when the government cannot commit to its policies, the greater transparency of the exchange rate makes
it easier to provide the government with incentives to pursue good policies. Hence, transparency gives
the exchange rate a natural advantage over the money growth rate as the monetary policy instrument.




Andrew Atkeson                                                 Patrick Kehoe
Department of Economics                                        Research Department
UCLA                                                           Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Bunche Hall 9381                                               90 Hennepin Avenue
Box 951477                                                     Minneapolis, MN 55480-0291
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477                                     and NBER
and NBER                                                       pkehoe@res.mpls.frb.fed.us
andy@atkeson.net
     By the simple virtue of being a price rather than a quantity, the exchange rate

     provides a much clearer signal to the public of the government’s intentions and

     actual actions than a money supply target. Thus, if the public’s inflationary

     expectations are influenced to a large extent by the ability to easily track and

     continuously monitor the nominal anchor, the exchange rate has a natural advan-

     tage (Calvo and Végh 1999, p. 1589).

     True, the exchange rate has some special properties. In particular, it is easily

     observable, so the private sector can directly monitor any broken promises by the

     central bank. But we know of no convincing argument that turns these proper-

     ties into an explanation for why it would be a more eﬃcient method to achieve

     credibility to target the exchange rate rather than, say, the money growth rate

     (Persson and Tabellini 1994, p. 17).


A classic question in international economics is whether the exchange rate or the money

growth rate is the better instrument of monetary policy. A common answer, illustrated by

the quotation from Calvo and Végh (1999) above, is that the exchange rate has a natural

advantage over the money growth rate as an instrument of monetary policy because the

exchange rate is easier for the public to observe; hence, it is more transparent. Skeptics of

this view agree that the exchange rate is easier for the public to monitor. However, as Persson

and Tabellini (1994) point out in the other quotation above, no clear theoretical argument

has been made that explains why the transparency of the exchange rate gives it a natural

advantage as a monetary policy instrument. We provide such a theoretical argument here.

       We formalize this argument by building on the analyses of Canzoneri (1985) and
Zarazaga (1993) and using a simple model of sustainable monetary policy similar to that

of Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Barro and Gordon (1983). In our model, each period,

the government chooses one of two regimes for monetary policy: one in which the exchange

rate is the instrument or one in which the money growth rate is the instrument. Under the

exchange rate regime, the government picks the rate of depreciation of the exchange rate with

some foreign country. By choosing this exchange rate, the government sets the mean inflation

rate, and realized domestic inflation varies with shocks to the inflation rate in the foreign

country. Under the money regime, the government picks a money growth rate, thus setting

the mean inflation rate, and realized inflation varies with domestic inflation shocks. Hence,

under both regimes, the government sets the mean inflation rate, and realized inflation varies

with exogenous shocks.

       The key diﬀerence between the two regimes is the degree to which the public can

observe the monetary policy instrument. The exchange rate regime is transparent in that

agents can directly observe the exchange rate. The money regime is opaque in that agents

cannot directly observe money growth rates; rather, agents observe inflation, which serves

as a noisy signal of money growth. In all other respects, the two regimes are symmetric.

Note that in both regimes, the government is targeting inflation; it is just using diﬀerent

instruments to implement its target.

       Exchange rate regimes gain an advantage from their transparency only because this

characteristic helps mitigate credibility problems that arise when the government cannot

commit to its monetary policies. To emphasize this point, we consider the government’s

choice of monetary policy instrument when the government can and cannot commit to its

policies. First we consider an environment in which the government can commit and, hence,

                                              2
has no credibility problems. We demonstrate that here, even though exchange rates are easier

to monitor, exchange rate regimes have no natural advantage: an exchange rate regime is

preferred to a money regime if and only if the volatility of foreign inflation shocks is smaller

than that of domestic inflation shocks.

       We then consider an environment in which the government has credibility problems

because it cannot commit to its policies. Here, regardless of the regime for monetary pol-

icy, the government has an incentive in the short run to surprise the public with higher

than expected inflation in order to decrease unemployment. In equilibrium, this short-run

incentive is balanced against the costs that arise when agents adjust their expectations of fu-

ture policies–and, hence, their future actions–when they perceive that the government has

deviated from its policies. We evaluate the two regimes by comparing their best equilibria.

       In the environment without commitment, the exchange rate regime has a natural

advantage because of its transparency; when the volatilities of foreign and domestic shocks

are equal, the exchange rate regime is strictly preferred. Under the exchange rate regime,

agents can directly observe any deviation by the government from its expected policy action,

and so they can respond precisely whenever a deviation occurs. In contrast, under the money

regime, agents cannot directly observe deviations by the government. Instead, agents respond

to inflation, which is a noisy signal of the government’s choice of money growth rate; thus,

their response to a deviation by the government must necessarily be less precise. This inability

of agents to precisely tailor their behavior in response to deviations by the government makes

deterring the government from surprise inflation harder in the money regime. Hence, the

exchange rate regime has a natural advantage.

       The result that the exchange rate regime has a natural advantage when the government

                                               3
cannot commit is easiest to show under the assumptions that inflation is the only signal of

money growth and that money growth is never observable. We show that we can relax both

of these assumptions and still obtain our result.

       We also characterize the outcomes that occur in the best exchange rate regime and

the best money regime in the two environments, with and without commitment. When

the government can commit to its policies, the two regimes’ outcomes are symmetric. In

both regimes, the government sets its instrument to the same constant level every period.

This constant level determines the mean inflation rate, and realized inflation varies randomly

around this constant mean.

       In contrast, when the government cannot commit to its policies, the optimal outcomes

under the two regimes are not symmetric. In the best equilibrium under an exchange rate

regime, the government chooses a low rate of depreciation of the exchange rate and achieves a

low average inflation rate. It maintains this low depreciation rate, and thus this low average

inflation rate, in every period, regardless of the realization of inflation. Observed inflation

fluctuates randomly around this constant mean.

       The equilibrium outcome under the best money regime looks quite diﬀerent. Under

a money regime, agents cannot tell whether high realized inflation is the result of the gov-

ernment’s choice of a high money growth rate or is simply the result of a large domestic

inflation shock. Because of this lack of transparency, the optimal outcome necessarily os-

cillates at random between two extreme phases, with low and high average inflation. This

random oscillation along the equilibrium path in the best money regime is analogous to the

outcomes obtained by Green and Porter (1984) and Abreu, Pearce, and Stacchetti (1986) in

their analyses of equilibrium price wars among oligopolists.

                                              4
       Among the literature on monetary policy, our analysis is most closely related to the

seminal contribution of Canzoneri (1985), who was the first to use the logic of Green and

Porter (1984) to explain periodic bouts of high inflation. (See also Zarazaga 1995.) There is

also some work in this literature on the issue of transparency in monetary policy. Cukierman

and Meltzer (1986) and Faust and Svensson (2001, forthcoming) explore linear signaling

outcomes in models with unobserved types.

       Among the international economics literature, the most closely related work is by

Canavan and Tommasi (1997) and Herrendorf (1999), who use two-period signaling games to

argue that governments can signal their preferences for low inflation by choosing an exchange

rate rather than a money growth rate. For related work in a domestic context, see the analysis

of Backus and Driﬃll (1985).

       Here we have used a simple reduced-form model of money. Chang (1998), Albanesi,

Chari, and Christiano (2001), and Phelan and Stacchetti (forthcoming) have used the recur-

sive methods of Abreu, Pearce, and Stacchetti (1990) to analyze some general equilibrium

macroeconomic models with perfect monitoring.


1. Two Monetary Policy Instruments

       Here we present a model of monetary policy in which, each period, the government

selects either an exchange rate regime, in which it uses the exchange rate as its policy instru-

ment, or a money regime, in which it uses the money growth rate as its policy instrument.

       In the model, time is discrete, and time periods are denoted t = 0, 1, 2, . . . . The

economy consists of a government, which dislikes both unemployment and inflation, and a

continuum of agents who each choose the rate of change of their individual nominal wages.


                                               5
       The timing of actions within each period is as follows. At the beginning of a period, the

government chooses a regime for monetary policy, namely, whether it will use the exchange

rate or the money growth rate as its policy instrument in the current period. If it chooses

the exchange rate regime, the government opens a trading desk at which it trades domestic

and foreign currency. If it chooses the money regime, the government does not open this

desk. The presence or absence of the trading desk is thus an observable indicator of the

current regime. After the government’s choice of regime, agents choose their nominal wages.

Finally, depending on the regime, the government chooses either the rate of depreciation of

the exchange rate or the money growth rate. The government is free to switch regimes at the

beginning of each period.

       For convenience, we will describe the economy for a given period t starting at the

end of the period and working backward to the beginning. At the end of the period, the

government chooses the rate of depreciation of the exchange rate or the money growth rate.

The government takes as given the average rate of wage inflation x set by agents earlier in the

period. Unemployment is equal to a constant U plus the gap between average wage inflation

x and realized inflation π. The government’s per period payoﬀ for a given value of x and a

realization of π is

                      1h                  i
(1)    r(x, π) = −      (U + x − π)2 + π 2 .
                      2

       Under the two regimes, realized inflation is a function of monetary policy as follows.

Under the exchange rate regime, the government chooses a rate of change in the exchange

rate denoted et = st − st−1 , where st is the level of the exchange rate. For simplicity, however,




                                                6
we refer to et as the exchange rate. Inflation in the home country is given by


(2)    π = e + π∗


where π ∗ is inflation in the foreign country, which has a normal distribution with mean 0 and

variance σ 2π∗ . Thus, by choosing an exchange rate, the government sets the mean inflation

rate to be e, while the variance of domestic inflation is determined by shocks in the foreign

country which are outside the domestic government’s control. Foreign inflation π ∗ is observed

only after the exchange rate is chosen. We let g(π|e) denote the density of realized domestic

inflation given the choice of exchange rate e.

       Under the money regime, the government chooses a money growth rate µ. Given µ,

realized inflation π is given by


(3)    π =µ+ε


where ε represents domestic inflation shocks which are normally distributed with mean 0

and variance σ 2π . Thus, by choosing the money growth rate, the government sets the mean

inflation rate to be µ, and the variance of domestic inflation is determined by domestic shocks

outside of the government’s control. We interpret the imperfect connection between money

growth and inflation as arising from some combination of the government’s imperfect control

over actual (as opposed to desired) money growth and a noisy relation between money growth

and inflation. We let f (π|µ) denote the density of realized inflation given the choice of money

growth rate µ and let σ 2π denote the variance of domestic inflation shocks.

       To model the idea that exchange rates are more easily monitored than money growth

rates, we assume that under both regimes, agents can see the exchange rate e and the inflation

rate π but not the money growth rate µ. Thus, under an exchange rate regime, agents directly

                                                 7
see the actions of the government, while under a money regime they do not. In the money

regime, inflation serves as a noisy signal of the government’s actions.

       Under both regimes, equations (2) and (3) both hold. In the exchange rate regime, e

is the choice variable and the money growth rate µ is endogenously determined, while in the

money regime, µ is the choice variable and the exchange rate e is endogenously determined.

In these regimes, the government’s choice of either e or µ determines the mean inflation rate.

The only diﬀerence in the regimes, besides observability of the instruments, is the variance of

the resulting inflation. In this sense, in both regimes, the government is targeting inflation.

       The government’s expected per period payoﬀ under an exchange rate e is

                   Z
       S(x, e) =       r(x, π)g(π|e) dπ


and under a money growth rate µ is

                   Z
       R(x, µ) =       r(x, π)f (π|µ) dπ.


With our functional forms, these become

                       1h                 i
(4)    S(x, e) = −       (U + x − e)2 + e2 − σ 2π∗
                       2

                       1h                  i
(5)    R(x, µ) = −        (U + x − µ)2 + µ2 − σ 2π .
                       2

Notice that the government’s payoﬀs in the two regimes are symmetric with respect to the

policy variables e and µ. In particular, the functions S and R diﬀer only with respect to the

uncontrollable variances σ 2π∗ and σ 2π , which are constants. We ensure that the government’s

payoﬀs are bounded by assuming that the policies e and µ are bounded above and below by

some arbitrarily large constants.


                                                  8
       In the middle of each period, each agent chooses the change in the agent’s own wage

rate zt = wt − wt−1 . For simplicity, we refer to zt as individual wages. We let xt denote the

average change in the wage rate in period t, which, again for simplicity, we refer to as average

wages. An agent’s payoﬀ for a given value of z and a realization of π is

                          1h              i
(6)    rA (z, π) = −        (z − π)2 + π 2 .
                          2

Each agent can choose z diﬀerently depending on whether the regime is an exchange rate

regime or a money regime. We denote these choices ze and zµ . An agent’s expected per period

payoﬀ under an exchange rate regime with exchange rate e is

                      Z
        A                                             1h              i
(7)    S (ze , e) =        rA (ze , π)g(π|e) dπ = −     (ze − e)2 + e2 − σ 2π∗
                                                      2

while this agent’s expected per period payoﬀ under a money regime with money growth rate

µ is

                      Z
        A                                              1h              i
(8)    R (zµ , µ) =        rA (zµ , π)f (π|µ) dπ = −     (zµ − µ)2 + µ2 − σ 2π .
                                                       2

Notice that under either regime, agents aim to choose wages equal to mean inflation, either

e or µ, depending on the regime.

       Notice also that the objective function of these agents diﬀers from that of the govern-

ment. In our simple reduced-form model, this diﬀerence generates the conflict of interests

between the government and the agents that leads to a time consistency problem. We think

of this setup as a reduced-form way of capturing the tension that occurs in a general equilib-

rium model in which the government and the agents have the same objectives but there are

distortions in the economy that lead to a time consistency problem. (See Chari, Kehoe, and

Prescott 1989 for a more complete discussion.)

                                                       9
          The payoﬀ for the government is the discounted value of its expected per period payoﬀs

                    ∞
                    X
(9)       (1 − β)         β t [(1 − it )S(xet , et ) + it R(xµt , µt )]
                    t=0


where 1 ≥ β > 0 is the discount factor and it is a variable that indicates the regime chosen

in period t, where it = 0 for the exchange rate regime and it = 1 for the money regime. Here

xet denotes the average wages chosen in period t if an exchange rate regime is chosen and xµt

denotes the average wages chosen in period t if a money regime is chosen. The discounted

payoﬀs for the agents are written similarly.


2. With Commitment

          We first suppose that the government can commit to a monetary policy once and for

all in period 0. We show that when the government can commit to its policies, a classic result

holds: an exchange rate regime is preferred to a money regime if and only if the volatility

of foreign inflation shocks is lower than that of domestic inflation shocks. Thus, for this

environment, the exchange rate has no natural advantage over the money growth rate as an

instrument of monetary policy even though the exchange rate is more easily monitored.

          In this environment with commitment, at the beginning of period 0, the government

chooses the sequence {it , et , µt }∞
                                    t=0 indicating the regime it will follow and the exchange rate


or money growth rate it will implement under that regime in each period. After this, in each

period t, agents choose wages zet or zµt , depending on the regime. Given (7) and (8), it is

clearly optimal for agents to choose zet = et and zµt = µt ; hence, in equilibrium average wages

satisfy


(10)      xet = et and xµt = µt .


                                                              10
        Here the optimal policies and allocations solve the Ramsey problem of choosing se-

quences {it , et , µt , xet , xµt }∞
                                   t=0 to maximize the government’s discounted payoﬀ (9) subject to


the equilibrium condition on agents’ average wages (10). This problem reduces to a sequence

of static problems of choosing e and µ to solve maxe S(e, e) and maxµ R(µ, µ) and then choos-

ing the regime that leads to the higher payoﬀ. Since the government’s payoﬀs are symmetric

with respect to the policy variables, the optimal exchange rate and money growth rate are

identical (both 0), and the government simply picks the regime with the lower variance of

inflation. We denote this maximum payoﬀ as v R and refer to it as the Ramsey payoﬀ. We

summarize this result as

Proposition 1. No Natural Advantage With Commitment. When the government

can commit to its monetary policies, an exchange rate regime is preferred to a money regime

if and only if σ 2π∗ ≤ σ 2π .


3. Without Commitment

        Now we suppose that the government cannot commit to its policies. Instead, in each

period, it chooses a regime and then, after agents set their wages, the government chooses the

level of its monetary policy instrument. We show that when the government cannot commit

to its policies, the exchange rate regime has a natural advantage over the money regime

because of the exchange rate’s transparency.

        In this environment without commitment, both the government and agents choose their

actions as functions of the observed history of aggregate variables: the choice of regime, the ex-

change rate, and inflation. In period t, this history is given by ht = (i0 , e0 , π 0 ; . . . ; it−1 , et−1 , π t−1 ).

A strategy for the government is a sequence of functions σ G = {it (ht ), et (ht ), µt (ht )} that map


                                                        11
histories into the choice of regime it and corresponding exchange rates et or money growth

rates µt . A strategy for agents is a sequence of functions σ A = {zet (ht ) , zµt (ht )}∞
                                                                                         t=0 that map


histories into actions zt , where zet (ht ) is only relevant if it (ht ) = 0 and zµt (ht ) is only relevant

if it (ht ) = 1. We also define a sequence of functions σ X = {xet (ht ) , xµt (ht )}∞
                                                                                     t=0 that record the


average wages chosen by agents after each history. Let σ = (σ G , σ A , σ X ) denote the strategies

of the government, the strategies of the agents, and the average wages. Notice that in the

histories we need not record the history of average wages since a deviation by any one agent

cannot aﬀect this average. (See, for example, Chari and Kehoe 1990 for details.)

       A perfect equilibrium in this environment is a collection of strategies σ such that (i)

after every history ht , the agents’ strategy σ A is optimal given the government’s strategy

σ G and the average of other agents’ wages σ X ; (ii) after every history ht , the government’s

strategy σ G is optimal given the average of agents’ wages σ X ; and (iii) after every history ht ,

σ A and σ X agree.

       Let V denote the set of perfect equilibrium payoﬀs. In what follows, it will prove

convenient to allow public randomization to guarantee that this set V is convex and thus

equal to an interval [vw , vb ], where v w is the lowest, or the worst, equilibrium payoﬀ and v b

is the highest, or the best, equilibrium payoﬀ. This public randomization is accomplished by

adding to the model a random variable θt that the government and the agents observe at

the beginning of each period. We modify the histories ht to include the realizations of this

variable from period 0 through period t.

       Clearly, given agents’ payoﬀs (7) and (8), after any history ht , the agents’ best re-

sponse to the government strategy σ G is to choose wages zet (ht ) = et (ht ) or zµt (ht ) = µt (ht ),



                                                    12
depending on the regime. Thus, in any perfect equilibrium, average wages must satisfy


       xet (ht ) = et (ht ) and xµt (ht ) = µt (ht ).


That is, in equilibrium, wage inflation must equal expected inflation.

       We formulate the incentive constraint of the government recursively, by drawing on

the work of Abreu, Pearce, and Stacchetti (1986, 1990). Their basic idea as follows. In a

repeated game, a strategy is a prescription for current actions and all future actions follow-

ing every possible history. When evaluating the government’s current payoﬀs and current

incentive constraints, however, we need not specify the whole sequence of future actions for

the government and agents that follow every possible current action that the government

might take. Rather, we need specify only how the government’s payoﬀ from the next period

on, namely, its continuation value, will vary as the government’s current action varies. In a

perfect equilibrium, these continuation values are also equilibrium payoﬀs for the repeated

game starting from next period on. This simple observation forms the basis for a recursive

approach to describing the incentive compatibility constraints for the government and to

finding the set of equilibrium payoﬀs.

       Consider a period in which the government has chosen an exchange rate regime and

agents have chosen wages xe . We formulate the current incentive constraint on the govern-

ment’s choice of exchange rate e recursively as follows. What matters to the government in

choosing the exchange rate is how its current period payoﬀ and its continuation value vary

with its action e. Its current period payoﬀ is (1 − β)S(xe , e), where the agents’ choice of xe

is taken as given. Agents observe the government’s choice of exchange rate e; therefore, their

future choices of wages, and thus the future payoﬀs of the government, can vary directly


                                                        13
with e. Rather than describe the entire sequence of future actions taken by agents and the

government, contingent on the government’s current choice of e, we simply describe the gov-

ernment’s continuation value from those actions as some function w(e). Since, in a perfect

equilibrium, the strategies that the government and agents follow from next period on must

also be perfect equilibrium strategies of the repeated game starting from that period, the

government’s continuation values w(e) must lie in the set V of perfect equilibrium payoﬀs for

the government.

       Given any such continuation value function w(e) ∈ V, we say that an exchange rate e

is incentive compatible in the current period if


(11)   (1 − β)S(xe , e) + βw(e) ≥ (1 − β)S(xe , e0 ) + βw(e0 )


for all e0 . This incentive constraint simply requires that the government get a higher discounted

sum of current and future payoﬀs from choosing e than from choosing any other e0 . It is a

standard result that such a recursive incentive constraint is necessary and suﬃcient for full

incentive compatibility.

       Consider next a period in which the government has chosen a money regime and agents

have chosen wages xµ . We can formulate the current incentive constraint on the government’s

choice of money growth rate µ recursively as well. This constraint is diﬀerent from the

constraint (11) above because here agents do not observe the government’s action, the money

growth rate µ. Instead, they observe only inflation π = µ + ε, which is a noisy signal of µ.

Hence, the government’s continuation value cannot vary with µ directly; it can vary only

with π. (It should be clear that it is feasible but redundant to also condition this value on the

endogenously determined exchange rate e = π − π∗ .) Thus, we write the continuation value


                                               14
function for the government when it has chosen a money regime as w(π). These continuation

values w(π) must also lie in the set V of the government’s perfect equilibrium payoﬀs.

       Given any such continuation value function w(π) ∈ V, we say that a money growth

rate µ is incentive compatible in the current period if

                              Z                                            Z
                                                                  0
(12)   (1 − β)R(xµ , µ) + β       w(π)f (π|µ) dπ ≥ (1 − β)R(xµ , µ ) + β       w(π)f (π|µ0 ) dπ


for any possible µ0 . This incentive constraint simply requires that the government get a

higher discounted payoﬀ from choosing µ than from choosing any other µ0 . Notice that here

the government’s continuation values vary with µ only to the extent that changes in the

money growth rate µ shift the distribution of inflation f (π|µ).

       Notice also that the set of equilibrium payoﬀs V is independent of which regime is

used in the current period. This is because we have assumed that the government can

switch regimes at the beginning of any period; hence, the game from the next period on

is independent of the regime used in the current period. Note as well that the set V in

which the government’s continuation values must lie is unknown. One can solve for this set

recursively. To show that an exchange rate regime has a natural advantage, however, we do

not need to solve for V. Instead, we treat this set V = [v w , v b ] as a parameter and show that

an exchange rate regime has a natural advantage from transparency for any nondegenerate

set V of equilibrium payoﬀs.

       We now compare the exchange rate regime to the money regime. We first compute

the highest payoﬀ that can be achieved if the exchange rate regime is used in the current

period. This payoﬀ is the highest perfect equilibrium payoﬀ for the government given that

it uses an exchange rate regime in the current period and is free to switch regimes in each


                                                 15
future period. We then compute the corresponding highest payoﬀ for the government given

that it uses a money regime in the current period and is free to switch regimes in each future

period. We compare these payoﬀs to characterize when the exchange rate regime is preferred

to the money regime.

         Given a set V = [v w , v b ] of perfect equilibrium payoﬀs, the best payoﬀ for the govern-

ment under an exchange rate regime is the solution to the following problem: choose current

actions xe and e and a continuation value function w(e) ∈ V to maximize


         (1 − β)S(xe , e) + βw(e)


subject to the incentive constraints xe = e and (11). Notice that the left side of the incentive

constraint (11) is the payoﬀ to be maximized, so setting w(e) = vb is clearly optimal. To relax

the incentive constraint (11) as much as possible, it is optimal to minimize the right side of

this constraint by setting w(e0 ) = vw . Using this argument and substituting out xe = e, we

can write the problem as


(13)     max (1 − β)S(e, e) + βv b
          e


subject to


(14)     (1 − β) [S(e, e0 ) − S(e, e)] ≤ β(v b − v w )


for all e0 .

         Given a set V = [v w , v b ] of perfect equilibrium payoﬀs, the best payoﬀ for the govern-

ment under a money regime is the solution to the following problem: choose current actions

xµ and µ and a continuation value function w(π) ∈ V to maximize

                                Z
(15)     (1 − β)R(xµ , µ) + β       w(π)f (π|µ) dπ

                                                     16
subject to the incentive constraints xµ = µ and (12). Substituting xµ = µ and rearranging

the incentive constraint, we can write this problem as

                                    Z
(16)   max
        µ
          (1 − β)R(µ, µ) + β            w(π)f (π|µ) dπ


subject to

                                             Z
(17)   (1 − β) [R(µ, µ0 ) − R(µ, µ)] ≤ β         w(π) [f (π|µ) − f(π|µ0 )] dπ.


       We use the following result to compare the two regimes in Proposition 2.

Lemma 1. V nondegenerate. If the variance of foreign inflation shocks is less than or

equal to that of domestic inflation shocks, then the set V = [v w , v b ] has v b > v w and v b is

greater than the payoﬀ from the static Nash outcome repeated in every period.

       The proof is in Appendix A. We then have

Proposition 2. A Natural Advantage Without Commitment. When the govern-

ment cannot commit to its monetary policies, an exchange rate regime is preferred to a money

regime even if the variances of foreign and domestic inflation shocks are the same.

Proof. When σ 2π∗ = σ 2π , the current period payoﬀs are the same, in that S(µ, µ0 ) = R(µ, µ0 ).

Clearly, then, the exchange rate regime is weakly preferred to the money regime. Now we

show that the exchange rate regime is strictly preferred. The continuation value for the

government is lower under the money regime than under the exchange rate regime, since

w(π) ≤ v b implies that

       Z
(18)       w(π)f (π|µ) dπ ≤ v b .


       Suppose first that w(π) is such that (18) is an equality. Then w(π) = v b (almost

everywhere), the continuation payoﬀ of the government is independent of the government’s

                                                     17
current action, and the only incentive compatible actions under a money regime are the static

Nash actions. From Lemma 1, we know that the government can achieve a payoﬀ that is

strictly higher than that of static Nash with an exchange rate regime. Hence, if (18) is an

equality, then an exchange rate regime is strictly preferred to a money regime.

       Next, suppose that w(π) is such that (18) is a strict inequality. Note that the incentive

constraint is tighter under a money regime than under an exchange rate regime, since
       Z
           w(π) [f (π|µ) − f (π|µ0 )] dπ < v b − v w .


As a result, here also the best payoﬀ the government can achieve under an exchange rate

regime is strictly higher than the best payoﬀ it can achieve under a money regime. Q.E.D.

       We illustrate the results of Propositions 1 and 2 in Figure 1. There we show how the

optimal regime varies with the relative volatility of the domestic and foreign inflation shocks.

When the government can commit to its policies, the exchange rate regime is preferred if and

only if the variance of foreign inflation shocks, σ 2π∗ , is lower than the variance of domestic

shocks, σ 2π . This is the region labeled A in the figure. When the government cannot commit

to its policies, the exchange rate regime is preferred even if the variances of the shocks are

equal. Thus, the region for which the exchange rate regime is preferred expands to include

the region labeled B as well as A.


4. Relaxing Some Assumptions

       In modeling the idea that exchange rates are easier to monitor than money growth

rates, we have made the simple but extreme assumptions that inflation is the only signal of

the money growth rate and that money growth rates are never observed. Here we show that

we can relax these assumptions and still derive our main result that when the government

                                                    18
cannot commit to its policies, exchange rate regimes have a natural advantage because of the

transparency of their monetary policy instrument.

        Suppose first that, in addition to inflation, agents observe another noisy signal of

money growth denoted by η. In an environment in which the government has imperfect

control over money growth, we might interpret this signal η as the realized money growth

rate. Let f (π, η|µ) be the density of inflation π and the noisy signal η given the money

growth rate µ. Here the government’s continuation value can vary only with π and η and can

be written as w(π, η). The government’s incentive constraint now becomes

                                       Z Z
        (1 − β)R(xµ , µ) + β                  w(π, η)f (π, η|µ) dπdη ≥

                                       Z Z
                              0
        (1 − β)R(xµ , µ ) + β                  w(π)f (π, η|µ0 ) dπdη


for any possible µ0 . Proving the analogue of Proposition 2 in this environment is straightfor-

ward.

        Suppose next that while inflation is the only signal of the money growth rate that

agents can observe in the current period, the money growth rate is perfectly observable with

a lag, which for simplicity we take to be one period. Specifically, assume that the money

growth rate µt−1 is observed after agents set their wages in period t. Here, the history on

which agents condition their actions is


        ht = (i0 , e0 , π 0 ; i1 , e1 , π 1 , µ0 ; . . . ; it−1 , et−1 , π t−1 , µt−2 )


and the history for the government is


        Ht = (i0 , e0 , π 0 , µ0 ; i1 , e1 , π 1 , µ0 ; . . . ; it−1 , et−1 , π t−1 , µt−1 ).



                                                                  19
The strategies for the agents and the government are defined as functions of these histories

in the standard way.

         The intuition for why exchange rates have a natural advantage in this environment is

clear. Under the money regime, any deviation in period t is not directly observed in that

period. Thus, in period t+1, agents can react only to a noisy signal of that action. Of course,

by period t + 2, agents have observed the government’s action in period t, and agents at that

time can precisely react to any deviation in period t. This lag in the ability to precisely react

leads to a tighter incentive constraint under the money regime and thus gives the exchange

rate regime its advantage.

         The technical diﬃculty in proving this result is that this economy does not lend itself

to recursive analysis as easily as our original economy does. In our original economy, the

governments and the agents have the same information at the beginning of each period; hence,

the economy starting from any period t looks identical to the economy starting in period 0.

In this new economy with information lags, however, the government and the agents do not

have the same information at the beginning of each period. In particular, in the continuation

of this economy starting from period t, the government has private information, namely, its

actions in period t − 1, that the agents do not have. In the economy starting in period

0, however, the government has no private information. Hence, when there are lags, the

economy starting in period t does not look identical to the economy starting in period 0, and

the recursive analysis of equilibrium payoﬀs that we used in proving Proposition 2 does not

apply.

         In Appendix B, we prove the following proposition without using recursive methods.
           h     i
Let V = v w , v b be the set of equilibrium payoﬀs for the government of the economy starting

                                               20
in period 0. Assume that


(19)   vb < v R


so that the best equilibrium payoﬀ to the economy with no commitment is strictly less than

the Ramsey payoﬀ.

Proposition 3. Under (19), if the variance of the domestic and foreign inflation shocks are

equal, then an exchange rate regime is strictly preferred to a money regime.

       The idea of the proof of this proposition is to show that the tighter incentive constraint

under the money regime makes the best equilibrium under a money regime have a lower value.

The role of our assumption in (19) is to ensure that the incentive constraint in both regimes

strictly binds. This assumption will hold whenever the government discounts the future

by a suﬃcient amount. If the government discounts the future suﬃciently little, then the

incentive constraint in both regimes is slack, both regimes attain the Ramsey payoﬀ, and the

best money regime is tied with the best exchange rate regime.


5. The Best Equilibria Without Commitment

       So far, we have compared the best payoﬀs the government can achieve under exchange

rate and money regimes. Here we characterize the equilibrium outcomes that produce these

best payoﬀs. We begin by describing these optimal outcomes under the two regimes. Then

we present a formal characterization of the outcomes.


A. Optimal Outcomes

       When the exchange rate regime is the preferred regime, the equilibrium outcome is

simple. In each period, the government chooses an exchange rate regime and sets the exchange


                                               21
rate equal to the best exchange rate policy eb . If the government deviates from this policy,

then the government and agents revert to the actions that implement the worst equilibrium

payoﬀ vw . These actions may correspond to either an exchange rate regime or a money regime,

depending on the variances of the shocks. In equilibrium, of course, there are no deviations;

hence, the exchange rate is set to eb in every period, and inflation randomly fluctuates around

this mean level eb . This result follows immediately from the solution to (13).

       The equilibrium outcome under the best money regime looks quite diﬀerent. Under

this regime, the government starts by setting the money growth rate equal to some low

growth rate µb and continues to do that as long as low inflation is realized. Specifically, the

government sets the money growth rate to µb as long as the domestic inflation shock ε is

small enough so that µb + ε ≤ π b , where π b is the relatively low cutoﬀ level of inflation used

in the best money regime. In equilibrium, eventually a large enough domestic inflation shock

must occur so that the realized inflation exceeds π b . After such a shock, the government and

agents revert to the actions that implement the worst equilibrium payoﬀ v w . Thus, under

the money regime, the actions that implement the worst equilibrium payoﬀs are eventually

observed. We prove this result later in Proposition 4.

       The worst equilibrium payoﬀ v w can occur under either an exchange rate regime or

a money regime, depending on the variances of domestic and foreign inflation shocks. This

worst equilibrium payoﬀ is the larger of two payoﬀs: the worst payoﬀ under an exchange rate

regime vew and the worst payoﬀ under a money regime vµw . That is, v w = max{vew , vµw }. The

worst equilibrium payoﬀ is the larger of these two payoﬀs because, at the beginning of each

period, the government can choose which regime it prefers.

       It turns out that when the variances are such that a money regime implements the best

                                               22
payoﬀ, that regime also implements the worst payoﬀ. In this worst regime, the government

starts by setting the money growth rate equal to some high growth rate µw and continues

to do that as long as the domestic inflation shock ε is small enough so that µw + ε ≤ π w ,

where π w is the relatively high cutoﬀ level of inflation used in the worst money regime. When

a suﬃciently large domestic inflation shock occurs so that realized inflation exceeds π w , the

government and agents revert to the actions that implement the best equilibrium payoﬀ.

In this sense, in the worst money regime, extremely high inflation must be realized before

average inflation can fall. We prove this result later in Proposition 5.

       In Figure 2 we illustrate a typical path of money growth and inflation outcomes ob-

served in the best equilibrium over time when the money regime is used in both the best

and worst equilibria. In period 0, agents choose low wages xµ = µb , the government chooses

a low money growth rate µb , and realized inflation is this low money growth rate plus the

domestic inflation shock π 0 = µb + ε0 . In the figure, we assume that realized inflation π 0 is

less than the critical value π b . Hence, in period 1, agents again choose wages xµ = µb , the

government again chooses a low money growth rate µb , and realized inflation is π 1 = µb + ε1 .

The outcome continues in this fashion, with agents choosing low wages and the government

choosing a low money growth rate, until the domestic inflation shock is large enough so that

realized inflation exceeds the critical value π b . In the figure, this occurs in period 4. In period

5, agents choose high wages xµ = µw , the government chooses high money growth rate µw ,

and realized inflation is π 5 = µw +ε5. This pattern continues until the domestic inflation shock

is high enough so that realized inflation exceeds the high critical value π w . In the figure, this

occurs in period 7. In period 8, the outcome reverts back to the pattern of agents choosing

low wages and the government choosing a low money growth rate. After that, the outcome

                                                 23
cycles stochastically between these two phases, depending on the realizations of the domestic

inflation shocks.

       We use an argument similar to that in Proposition 2 to characterize the regions of the

parameter space in which the exchange rate regime and the money regime are used in the

best and worst equilibrium outcomes. When the variances of domestic and foreign inflation

shocks are the same, the worst payoﬀ under an exchange rate regime is lower than that under

a money regime; that is, vew < vµw . This is because here the current period payoﬀ functions R

and S are the same and the incentive constraint is looser under an exchange rate regime than

under a money regime. Hence, when these variances are the same, the worst equilibrium

payoﬀ v w = max{vew , vµw } is equal to that under a money regime. Clearly, increasing the

variance of foreign inflation shocks above that of the domestic shocks reduces vew and leaves

vµw unchanged. Hence, v w = vµw when the variance of foreign inflation shocks exceeds that of

domestic inflation shocks.

       In Figure 3, we combine this result with that in Proposition 2 to characterize which

regimes are used in the best and worst outcomes in each part of the parameter space. If the

variance of foreign shocks is suﬃciently high relative to that of domestic shocks, as in region

C of the figure, then the government follows a money regime in both the best and the worst

equilibria. If the variance of foreign shocks is suﬃciently low relative to that of domestic

shocks, as in region E, then the government follows an exchange rate regime in both the best

and the worst equilibria. When the variances of the two inflation shocks are similar, as in

region D, then the government uses an exchange rate regime in the best equilibrium and a

money regime in the worst equilibrium. In regions D and E, the observed best outcome is

an exchange rate regime with a constant e in every period. The observed best outcome in

                                              24
region C stochastically cycles between the best money regime and the worst money regime

as discussed above.


B. Formal Description

       We begin our formal characterization of these outcomes with the best money regime.

The recursive representation of this regime is the solution to problem (15). To solve this

problem, we first replace the incentive constraint (12) with the first-order condition associated

with maximizing the left side of this incentive constraint with respect to µ. The resulting

constraint is
                                Z
(20)   (1 − β)Rµ (xµ , µ) + β       w(π)fµ (π|µ) dπ = 0


where Rµ (x, µ) = ∂R(x, µ)/∂µ and fµ (π|µ) = ∂f (π|µ)/∂µ. This first-order condition is

necessary and suﬃcient to ensure that (12) holds when the function defined by the left side

of (12) is concave in µ. In Proposition 4 below, we simply assume that this approach is valid

and characterize the resulting w(π). In Lemma 2, we show that, given the resulting form of

w(π), the left side of (12) is concave in µ when the variance of domestic inflation shocks is

suﬃciently large.

       Under the assumption that our first-order condition approach is valid, in problem

(15) we can replace the government’s incentive constraint (12) with constraint (20). In any

solution to this problem, the continuation values necessarily have a bang-bang form:
                                    
                
                                    
                                     
                
                 v b if π ≤ π b     
                                     
(21)   wb (π) =                 
                                         .
                
                                
                 v w if π > π b 
                                 


That is, there is a cutoﬀ inflation level π b such that the optimal continuation value function

wb (π) is set to the best payoﬀ v b if the realized inflation rate is less than πb and to the worst

                                                 25
payoﬀ v w if the realized inflation rate is greater than π b .

       Part of the rationale for the optimal continuation value taking the form (21) is intuitive.

Since higher money growth rates make higher inflation more likely, in order to discourage the

government from choosing a high money growth rate, the continuation value function must

specify a low continuation payoﬀ for the government when realized inflation is high. Slightly

less intuitive is that the best continuation value function must assign only the best and worst

possible equilibrium payoﬀs. Mechanically, this occurs because both the payoﬀs and the

incentive constraint are linear in the continuation values. We demonstrate this formally in

Proposition 4.

Proposition 4. Under the assumption that the first-order condition approach is valid, the

optimal continuation value function has the form of (21).

Proof. With λ as the multiplier on the government’s incentive constraint (20), the term in

the Lagrangian that involves w(π) is

           Z        "             #
                          fµ (π|µ)
       β       w(π) 1 + λ          f (π|µ) dπ.
                          f (π|µ)

Notice that this term is linear in each value of w(π), so that it is optimal to set
                                                
                           h            i       
                   
                                f (π|µ)         
                                                 
                    v b if 1 + λ fµ(π|µ) > 0    
       wb (π) =            h              i   
                                                     .
                   
                                              
                    v w if 1 + λ fµ (π|µ) < 0 
                                               
                                   f (π|µ)

These first-order conditions imply that the optimal continuation values are always extreme,

that is, either v b or vw . The only issue is, for what values of π are the payoﬀs vb and vw

assigned? To determine these values, we start by observing that with our assumption of

normality, fµ (π|µ) = f(π|µ)(π − µ)/σ π , so that our densities satisfy the monotone likelihood




                                                 26
ratio property; that is, the ratio

         fµ (π|µ)
                  = (π − µ)/σ π
         f(π|µ)

is increasing in π. Thus, w b (π) is increasing in π if λ > 0 and decreasing in π if λ < 0.

         We will show that λ < 0 and wb (π) is decreasing in π as follows. First, note that at

the optimum, Rµ (xb , µb ) ≥ 0. This follows since the optimum must weakly improve on the

static Nash payoﬀ and thus must have a money growth rate less than or equal to the static

Nash level. That is, xb = µb ≤ U. Since Rµ (x, µ) = U + x − 2µ, Rµ (xb , µb ) ≥ 0. Next, since

Rµ (xb , µb ) ≥ 0, the incentive constraint (20) implies that
         Z
(22)         wb (π)fµ (π|µ) dπ ≤ 0.


Since inflation is normally distributed with mean µ, increasing µ increases the distribution

of inflation in the sense of first-order stochastic dominance. Thus, increasing µ increases
R
    wb (π)f (π|µ) dπ when w b (π) is increasing and decreases this integral when w b (π) is decreas-

ing. Thus, to satisfy (22), wb (π) must be decreasing. Q.E.D.

         In Lemma 2, proved in Appendix A, we justify our use of the first-order approach. We

let φ and Φ denote the density and cumulative distribution functions of a standard normal,

respectively.

Lemma 2. First-order approach valid. Given that wb (π) has the bang-bang form (21)
                                β
and is decreasing, if σ 2π >   1−β
                                   (v b   − v w )φ(1)/2, then the incentive constraint (12) is satisfied

if and only if the first-order condition (20) holds.

         To complete our characterization of the outcome under the best money regime, we must

also characterize the outcome under the worst money regime. In the worst money regime,

continuation values ww (π) are assigned to give the government the incentive to choose a higher

                                                      27
money growth rate than it would choose in the static Nash outcome. This entails giving the

government high continuation values when high inflation is realized and low continuation

values when low inflation is realized. Thus, when the equilibrium reverts to the worst money

regime, the government chooses a high money growth rate and keeps choosing this high

rate until a suﬃciently high level of inflation is realized. This result is proved in the next

proposition.

       As before, under the assumption that the first-order condition approach is valid, we

can write the problem of finding the worst payoﬀ under a money regime as
                                     Z
(23)       min (1 − β)R(x, µ) + β        w(π)f (π, µ) dπ
       µ,x,w(π)


subject to the constraints x = µ and (20).

Proposition 5. Under the assumption that the first-order approach is valid, the optimal

continuation value function for the worst equilibrium in the money regime has the form
                                    
                  
                                    
                                     
                  
                   v w if π ≤ π w   
                                     
(24)   ww (π) =                   
                  
                                  
                   v b if π > π w 
                                   

for some cutoﬀ inflation rate π w .

Proof. The proof is similar to that of Proposition 4. Specifically, the first-order condition of

the problem (23) with respect to w(π) implies that ww (π) has a bang-bang form around some

cutoﬀ π w . To see that ww (π) must be increasing, note that at the optimum, Rµ (xw , µw ) ≤ 0, so

that the current period payoﬀ for the government is decreased when the government deviates

to a higher money growth rate. Accordingly, the incentive constraint (20) implies that
       Z
           ww (π)fµ (π|µ) dπ ≥ 0

which gives the result that ww (π) is increasing. Q.E.D.

                                                  28
6. Conclusion

          Here we have considered the advantage of transparency in a model in which the ex-

change rate is observable and the money growth rate is only observable with noise, at least

contemporaneously. In the best equilibrium of an exchange rate regime, the rate of depreci-

ation of the exchange rate is constant. This occurs because our simple model abstracts from

all shocks that would lead the optimal mean inflation rate to vary over time. As such, our

model does not provide a rationale for fixing exchange rates; rather, it provides a rationale

for using the exchange rate rather than the money growth rate as the instrument of monetary

policy.

          We have shown here that a certain price, the exchange rate, has an advantage over a

certain quantity, the money growth rate, as a monetary policy instrument. This basic idea,

that prices have an advantage over quantities as policy instruments, might also be applied

to a comparison of interest rates and any other quantity instrument that is more diﬃcult to

monitor.




                                               29
                         Appendix A: Proofs of Lemmas 1 and 2


Proof of Lemma 1.

       Here we show that the set of equilibrium payoﬀs contains a point with strictly higher

value than that of the static Nash outcome. In any period, in an exchange rate regime, the

government’s static best response to average wages xe is to choose e to maximize S(xe , e).

This best response is given by B(xe ) = (U + xe )/2. Likewise, under a money regime, the

government’s static best response to wages xµ is B(xµ ) = (U + xµ )/2, and the static Nash

outcomes are e = xe = U and µ = xµ = U. Repeating the static Nash outcomes in ev-

ery period, regardless of the history, is a perfect equilibrium that leads to a payoﬀ for the

government of

       vN = max[S(U, U), R(U, U)].

Thus, v N ∈ V.

       We now construct a higher equilibrium payoﬀ using trigger strategies. Let ê be some

exchange rate that is strictly lower than the static Nash exchange rate U, and let v̂ = S(ê, ê)

be the government’s payoﬀ when xe = ê and this ê is played in every period. The trigger

strategies specify the following. Begin with the government choosing an exchange rate regime,

agents setting xe = ê, and the government choosing ê. Continue with these actions in every

period until the government deviates in the choice of regime or in choosing e 6= ê. After

any such deviation, both the government and the agents revert to the static Nash outcome

forever. These strategies constitute an equilibrium if the government has no incentive to

deviate in that

(25)   (1 − β) [S(ê, B(ê)) − S(ê, ê)] ≤ β(v̂ − vN )

                                                   30
holds. It is easy to show with our functional forms that (25) is satisfied for ê = U −ε for some

suﬃciently small ε. Thus, v̂ and v N are equilibrium payoﬀs that satisfy vb ≥ v̂ > v N ≥ vw .

Q.E.D.


Proof of Lemma 2.

       Here we show that the solution to the problem with incentive constraint (12) is satisfied

if and only if the first-order condition (20) holds when σ 2π >                 β
                                                                               1−β
                                                                                   (w̄   − w) φ(1)
                                                                                               2
                                                                                                   .

       Using (21), we can write the constraint (12) as
                                                 (       Ã            !    "        Ã            !#)
                                         πh − µ           πh − µ
(26)   µ ∈ arg max(1 − β)R(x, µ) + β w̄Φ        + w 1 − Φ                                              .
                µ                          σπ               σπ

Since F (π h , µ) = Φ((π h − µ)/σ π ), we can write the first- and second-order conditions of the

maximization problem (26) as

                                  µ          ¶       Ã            !
                    h        w̄ − w   πh − µ
(27)   (1 − β)Rµ (x , µ) − β        φ                                 =0
                               σπ       σπ

and for all µ
                                              Ã              !    Ã        !
                        h             πh − µ   πh − µ
(28)   (1 − β)Rµµ (x , µ) − β(w̄ − w)        φ                                 ≤0
                                        σ 2π     σπ

which can be written as

                            (w̄ − w)
(29)   −2(1 − β) − β                 φ(z)z ≤ 0
                               σ 2π

for all z ∈ [−∞, ∞]. The expression φ(z)z in (29) is minimized at z = −1. Since φ(−1) =

φ(1), the inequality σ 2π >       β
                                 1−β
                                     (w̄   − w) φ(1)
                                                 2
                                                     guarantees that the second-order condition holds

globally, and thus, (20) is both necessary and suﬃcient for (12). Q.E.D.




                                                             31
                           Appendix B: Proof of Proposition 3


       We prove Proposition 3 in three steps.

       The first step is to show that in any period, the government’s continuation payoﬀ

can never be lower than the worst equilibrium payoﬀ v w starting from period 0. This follows

because each period, the government always has the option of not conditioning its action on

what it has done in the past. Therefore, the government cannot be held to a payoﬀ lower

than the worst it can attain in period 0 when there is no past on which to condition its

actions. Thus, the continuation value for the government following a money regime, when

the government has private information, can never be worse than that following an exchange

rate regime, when it does not.

       The second step in the proof of Proposition 3 is

Lemma 3. If the variances of foreign and domestic inflation shocks are the same, then for any

equilibrium strategy profile σ that starts in the first period with a money regime, there exists

an alternative equilibrium strategy profile σ̃ that starts in the first period with an exchange

rate regime and implements the same payoﬀ for the government.

Proof. The current period payoﬀ functions R(xµ , µ) and S(xe, e) are identical, and the

distributions of realized inflation π are also identical, whenever e = µ and xe = xµ . The

alternative equilibrium strategy profile σ̃ is constructed by in the first period having the

government choose an exchange rate regime, agents set wages xe = xµ , and the government

choose e0 = µ0 and, in subsequent periods having the government’s and the agents’ actions

vary with realized inflation π 0 in the same way as these actions varied with π 0 under the

original strategy profile σ.


                                              32
       After a deviation in which the government chooses a money regime in the first period

or in which it chooses an exchange rate regime but sets e0 6= µ0 , let the continuation of σ̃ im-

plement the worst possible equilibrium payoﬀ; namely, let it be a strategy profile that delivers

the payoﬀ v w for the government. From the first step above, we know that this punishment

for deviations is (weakly) more severe than any punishment for deviations specified in σ, and

hence, σ̃ must also be incentive compatible. The establishes the second step. Q.E.D.

       The third step completes the proof of Proposition 3 as follows. Let σ be an equilibrium

strategy profile in which the government chooses a money regime in period 0. By Lemma 3,

we know that we can construct an alternative equilibrium in which the government chooses an

exchange rate regime and attains the same value. We now show that by choosing an exchange

rate regime, we can relax the period 0 incentive constraint and thus attain a strictly higher

payoﬀ for the government. This will complete the proof since, under the assumption that

attaining the Ramsey payoﬀ is infeasible, the incentive constraint strictly binds in any money

regime.

       Given any value of realized inflation in period 0 and any money growth rate in period

0, the government’s continuation value from period 1 on lies between v w and vb . Since agents’

actions in period 1 cannot be contingent on µ0 , but rather must depend on realized inflation,

the cost to the government of a deviation from period 0 in terms of the change in the expected

continuation value must be strictly less than v b − v w . In contrast, under an exchange rate

regime, there is an equilibrium in which the cost to the government after a deviation is equal

to v b − v w . Hence, the incentive constraint is strictly looser when an exchange rate regime is

chosen in period 0 than when a money regime is chosen. Thus, the best equilibrium payoﬀ is

strictly higher under an exchange rate regime than under a money regime. Q.E.D.

                                               33
References


Abreu, Dilip. 1986. Extremal Equilibria of Oligopolistic Supergames. Journal of Economic

      Theory 39(1, June): 191—225.

Abreu, Dilip; Pearce, David; and Stacchetti, Ennio. 1986. Optimal Cartel Equilibria with

      Imperfect Monitoring. Journal of Economic Theory 39(1): 251—69.

           . 1990. Toward a Theory of Discounted Repeated Games with Imperfect Moni-

      toring. Econometrica 58(5, September): 1041—63.

Albanesi, Stefania; Chari, V.V.; and Christiano, Lawrence J. 2001. How Severe is the Time

      Consistency Problem in Monetary Policy? Working Paper 8139. National Bureau of

      Economic Research.

Backus, David, and Driﬃll, John. 1985. Inflation and Reputation. American Economic

      Review 75(3, June): 530—38.

Barro, Robert J., and Gordon, David B. 1983. Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a Model

      of Monetary Policy. Journal of Monetary Economics 12(1, July): 101—21.

Calvo, Guillermo A., and Végh, Carlos. 1999. Inflation Stabilization and BOP Crises in

      Developing Countries. In Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 1C, ed. John B. Taylor

      and Michael Woodford, pp. 1531—1614. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Canavan, Chris, and Tommasi, Mariano. 1997. On the Credibility of Alternative Exchange

      Rate Regimes. Journal of Development Economics 54(1, October): 101—22.

Canzoneri, Matthew B. 1985. Monetary Policy Games and the Role of Private Information.

      American Economic Review 75(5, December): 1056—70.

Chang, Roberto. 1998. Credible Monetary Policy in an Infinite Horizon Model: Recursive


                                           34
      Approaches. Journal of Economic Theory 81(2, August): 431—61.

Chari, V. V., and Kehoe, Patrick J. 1990. Sustainable Plans. Journal of Political Economy

      98(4, August): 783—802.

Chari, V. V.; Kehoe, Patrick J.; and Prescott, Edward C. 1989. Time Consistency and Policy.

      In Modern Business Cycle Theory, ed. Robert J. Barro, pp. 265—305. Cambridge,

      Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Cukierman, Alex, and Meltzer, Allan H. 1986. A Theory of Ambiguity, Credibility, and Infla-

      tion under Discretion and Asymmetric Information. Econometrica 54(5, September):

      1099—128.

Faust, Jon, and Svensson, Lars E. O. 2001. Transparency and Credibility: Monetary Policy

      with Unobservable Goals. International Economic Review 42(2, May): 369—97.

           . 1999. Forthcoming. The Equilibrium Degree of Transparency and Control in

      Monetary Policy. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking.

Green, Edward J., and Porter, Robert H. 1984. Noncooperative Collusion under Imperfect

      Price Information. Econometrica 52(1, January): 87—100.

Herrendorf, Berthold. 1999. Transparency, Reputation, and Credibility under Floating and

      Pegged Exchange Rates. Journal of International Economics 49(1, October): 31—50.

Kydland, Finn, and Prescott, Edward C. 1977. Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsis-

      tency of Optimal Plans. Journal of Political Economy 85(3, June): 473—91.

Persson, Torsten, and Tabellini, Guido. 1994. Introduction. In Monetary and Fiscal Policy,

      Vol. 1, Credibility, ed. Torsten Persson and Guido Tabellini, pp. 1—31. Cambridge,

      Mass.: MIT Press.

Phelan, Christopher, and Stacchetti, Ennio. Forthcoming. Sequential Equilibria in a Ramsey

                                            35
      Tax Model. Econometrica.

Zarazaga, Carlos E.J.M. 1995. Hyperinflations and Moral Hazard in the Appropriation of

      Seigniorage: An Empirical Implementation with a Calibration Approach. Research

      Department Working Paper 95-17. Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.




                                         36
   Figure 1
   Parameter regions for which an exchange rate regime is preferred
   to a money regime with and without commitment*




Variance of
foreign shocks
                    e preferred
                    without
                    commitment
                                            B

                                                            A
                                            e preferred with and
                                            without commitment


                     45°

                                                                  Variance of
                                                                  domestic shocks




  *With commitment, exchange rate regimes are preferred in region A, where the variance of
   domestic inflation shocks is greater than the variance of foreign inflation shocks. With no
   commitment, exchange rate regimes have an additional advantage; they are preferred in
   both region A and region B.
    Figure 2
    Outcomes with money regime
    in the best and worst equilibria

Inflation
and Money
Growth Rates
                                                                                                   7
          w
                                Inflation cutoff in worst




          w                                                                             6
                                Money growth in worst
                                                                                                       Realized
                                                                           5
                                                                                                       Inflation




          b                                                     4
                                                                    Inflation cutoff in best
                                        2
                   0

                                                                                                             8
          b                                          3              Money growth in best
                            1
                                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                                       9



               0        1           2           3           4          5            6          7         8         9            10
                                                                                                                           Periods
     Figure 3
     Regimes in the best and worst equilibrium outcomes




Variance of
foreign shocks
                       µ in best
                       and worst
                                                            D
                           C
                                                  e in best,
                                                  µ in worst




                                                           e in best
                                                 E         and worst
                     45°

                                                                Variance of
                                                                domestic shocks



     *In region C, the money regime is followed in the best and the worst equilibria. In region
      D, the exchange rate regime is followed in the best equilibria and the money regime is
      followed in the worst equilibria. In region E, the exchange rate regime is followed both
      in the best and in the worst equilibria.
