NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AN EVALUATION OF MULTI-FACTOR CIR MODELS USING LIBOR, SWAP RATES,
AND CAP AND SWAPTION PRICES
Ravi Jagannathan
Andrew Kaplin
Steve Guoqiang Sun
Working Paper 8682
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8682
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2001

Earlier versions of the paper had Jagannathan and Sun as the authors. We thank Pat Hess and Jack Kareken
for helpful discussions, Fannie Mae and University Capital Strategies Group for providing the data. We thank
Jefferson Duarte, Michael Johannes, Nour Meddahi, Krishna Ramaswamy and Robert Stambaugh,
anonymous referee, and seminar and conference participants at the Universities of California/Berkeley,
Chicago and Pennsylvania, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, McGill University, and Duke University for
helpful comments. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2001 by Ravi Jagannathan, Andrew Kaplin and Steve Guoqiang Sun. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

An Evaluation of Multi-Factor CIR Models Using LIBOR,
Swap Rates, and Cap and Swaption Prices
Ravi Jagannathan, Andrew Kaplin and Steve Guoqiang Sun
NBER Working Paper No. 8682
December 2001
JEL No. C13, C32, C51, E43, G12

ABSTRACT
We evaluate the classical Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1985) (CIR) model using data on LIBOR,
swap rates and caps and swaptions. With three factors the CIR model is able to fit the term structure of
LIBOR and swap rates rather well. The model is able to match the hump shaped unconditional term
structure of volatility in the LIBOR-swap market. However, statistical tests indicate that the model is
misspecified. In particular the pricing errors are related to the slope of the swap yield curve. The economic
importance of these shortcomings is highlighted when the model is confronted with data on cap and
swaption prices. Pricing errors are large relative to the bid-ask spread in these markets. The model tends
to overvalue shorter maturity caps and undervalue longer maturity caps. With only one or two factors,
the model also tends to undervalue swaptions. Our findings point out the need for evaluating term
structure models using data on derivative prices.

Ravi Jagannathan
J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Leverone/Anderson Complex
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
rjaganna@nwu.edu
Andrew Kaplin
Northwestern University
a-kaplin@nwu.edu
Steve Guoqiang Sun
University Capital Strategies Group

1. Introduction
The last two decades have seen an explosive growth in the use of interest rate
derivatives by institutions. A number of theoretical term structure models have been
proposed in the literature for understanding the risk in such derivative products and for
valuing them. However, there have been only a few published empirical studies of these
valuation models using data on derivative prices. This lack of empirical work has
impeded the full development of practical tools based on these models. We fill this void
in the empirical term structure literature.
In particular, we empirically examine the classical three-factor Cox, Ingersoll
Ross (1985) (CIR) model using data on LIBOR and swap rates. Unlike Grinblatt who
separately identifies the credit spread, we use the framework developed by Duffie and
Singleton (1999) and directly model the default-adjusted yield without separating the
credit spread component. The advantage of this approach is that under mild technical
regularity conditions, (see Duffie and Singleton (1997), 696-697) existing term structure
models for Treasury bonds can be used to model the LIBOR yield curve, with the riskfree rate replaced by the default-adjusted rate.
Although the CIR model has received wide attention in the theoretical literature,
its empirical performance has not yet been evaluated using price data on interest rate
derivative claims. We find that with three factors, the CIR model fits the term structure
of LIBOR and swap rates well. The model pricing errors are reasonable given the bid-ask
spread in these markets. However when evaluated using price data on caps and
swaptions, the model is not satisfactory. These findings are similar to those reported in
Longstaff, Santa-Clara and Schwartz (2000) for stochastic string models and stress the
need to use derivative price data (along with data on interest rates) to evaluate the
economic importance of the statistical rejections of theoretical models.
Related Literature
Pearson and Sun (1994) evaluate the empirical performance of the two-factor
version of the CIR model and an extension that nests the two-factor specification using
interest rate data. They examine the accuracy of the models' forecasts of future interest
rates against that obtained using a "naive" rule. They find that the "naive" rule performs
better than the two-factor model as well as its extension. Chen and Scott (1993) use the
model-pricing-errors for bonds of different maturities to compare the relative
performance of two-factor and three-factor CIR models. They find that the two-factor
model performs almost as well as the three-factor model. Jegadeesh and Pennacchi
(1996) empirically examine a two-factor Gaussian term structure model. They find that
while the two-factor model shows a significant improvement over the one factor models
examined in the literature the model has difficulty capturing the term structure of
volatility in the Eurodollar futures market. Duffie and Singleton (1997) find a two-factor
model to be inadequate in fitting the term structure of swap yields. Das and Foresi
(1996), Johannes (1999) and Piazzezi (1999) suggest augmenting the models with jump
components. Chacko and Das (2000) provide pricing formulae for a variety of derivative
claims for models in the affine class that may also include jump components. Dai and
Singleton (1999) provide a comprehensive evaluation of different term structure models

within the affine class and find that some sub families within the affine class have better
potential than others. However, they do not use derivative prices in their otherwise
extensive study.
There is substantial empirical evidence documenting the shortcomings of affine
term structure models of which multifactor CIR models form a part. Backus, Foresi,
Mozumdar and Wu (1998) demonstrate that term premiums generated by affine models
may be too low when compared with what we observe in the data. Using semi
nonparametric statistical methods, Ghysels and Ng (1998) find evidence against affine
models. Duffee (2000) points out that affine term structure models are not flexible
enough to produce the observed temporal patterns in interest rate volatilities and produce
poor forecasts of future changes in interest rates. In view of this Duffee (2000) and
Duarte (2000) propose extending the classical affine class of models to allow for more
flexible parameterization of the market price of risk. Bansal and Zhou (2000) propose a
model that allows for regime shifts.
Although these studies document the shortcomings of affine term structure models
along interesting dimensions, none of them examine whether these shortcomings are
sufficiently severe to affect their use in valuing interest rate derivative claims. We show
that this is indeed the case for multifactor CIR models. We estimate the model
parameters using time series data on LIBOR and swap rates, following the maximum
likelihood method described in Pearson and Sun (1994). We assume that one LIBOR or
swap rate is observed without error while estimating the one-factor model and that other
LIBOR and swap rates are measured with error. For the two-factor model, we assume two
LIBOR and swap rates are observed without error, and similarly for the three-factor
model. In each case, the log-likelihood is the sum of that from the exactly matched rates
and that from the measurement error. Using the estimated model parameters, we predict
the future LIBOR and swap rates and compare them with the realized values. We also
compute the pricing errors for CAPS and swaptions. Larger pricing errors would show a
greater model misspecification.
We organize the rest of the paper as follows. Section 2 applies multifactor CIR
models to the LIBOR and swap markets. Section 3 contains the estimation results using
LIBOR and swap rates. Section 4 applies CIR models to price CAPS and swaptions.
Section 5 concludes.
2. Multifactor CIR Models for the LIBOR Yield Curve
A. Valuation of bonds that are subject to default risk
Under the assumption that no arbitrage opportunities exist, the value process of a
contingent claim discounted at the risk-free interest rate is a martingale under some
equivalent martingale measure Q. Specifically, let Pt and rt be respectively the value of
the contingent claim and the instantaneous risk-free interest rate at date t. Then
(2.1)

T
Pt = E tQ exp − ∫ rs ds PT  .


t

This formula can be used to price any claim where we know the timing of the
final payoff. When the security is subject to default risk, (2.1) cannot be used directly.
Here the final payoff PT and the time of the final payoff T are uncertain, since default can
occur anytime.
Duffie and Singleton (1999) show, however, that if we replace the risk-free rate in
(2.1) with a default-adjusted rate, it can still be used to price the risky claim, with PT
being the promised payoff at the specified expiration date T, i.e.,
(2.2)

[

T

Pt = EtQ exp(− ∫t Rs ds ) PT

]

We identify the equivalent martingale measure, Q, and relate it to the parameters of the
stochastic process determining the temporal evolution of the interest rates in the
following way.
Following Duffie and Singleton (1997), we assume that there are n independent
state variables, each evolving over time according to a square root process
(2.3)

dy it = κ i (θ i − yit )dt + σ i yit dWi (t ), i = 1,2,..., n.

where Wi ’s are independent Brownian motions. The market price of risk, λi for each
state variable, yi, is assumed to be linear. Using arguments similar to those in Cox,
Ingersoll and Ross (1985), it can be shown that under the equivalent martingale measure,
(2.4)

dyit = ki (θi − yit )dt + σ i yit dWit*

where ki and θi is given by,
(2.5)

k i = k i + λi , θ i =

kiθ i
.
k i + λi

The instantaneous default-adjusted rate is assumed to be the sum of all state
variables
n

(2.6)

Rt = ∑ yit .
i =1

Prices of pure discount bonds can be derived following Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (1985).
By using Girsanov’s theorem (see Sun (1998)) the fundamental pricing equation (2.2) can
be transformed to an expectation under another measure, under which the state still
follows a square root process. However the integral instead of being over a path, involves
only the terminal value RT . Namely, there exists an equivalent measure H such that (2.2)
can be rewritten as
(2.7)

  n γ −k
 
Vt = π t E tH exp ∑ i 2 i yiT  X 
 
  i =1 σ i

where
n

(2.8)

i =1

(2.9)

 γ i − ki

π t = exp[ − ∑ 

 σi

γ i = ki 2 + 2σ i 2

2

yit −

k iθi (γ i − k i )

σi

2


( T − t ) ]


Under measure H, the process yi follows
(2.10)

dyit = ( k iθi − γ i yit )dt + σ i yit dW$t
The defaultable discount bond price is then given by1

(2.11)

n

P(t , T ) = Π pi (t , T ) ,
i =1

where p i (t , T ) = Ai (t , T )e − Bi (t ,T ) yit , for
(2.12)
(2.13)

 2γ i exp[(γ i + k i )(T − t ) / 2] 
Ai (t , T ) = 

 (γ i + ki )[exp(γ i (T − t )) − 1] + 2γ i 
2[exp(γ i (T − t )) − 1]
Bi (t , T ) =
.
(γ i + ki )[exp(γ i (T − t )) − 1] + 2γ i

2 kiθ i / σ i 2

,

The yield to maturity is a sum of that from each state
n

(2.14)

YTM (τ ) = ∑ YTM i (τ ) ,
i =1

where YTM i (τ ) is linear in yit but nonlinear in τ. The limiting cases are
(2.15)

YTM i (0) = yit

(2.16)

YTM i (∞ ) =

2kiθi
.
γ i + ki

If k i > 0, it can be shown that when yit < YTM i ( ∞) , YTM i (τ ) is an increasing function of
τ; when yit > θi , it is a decreasing function; and for intermediate values, the function is
humped. If k i < 0 , YTM i (τ ) is an increasing function of τ initially, no matter what value
the current state takes. Then it will continue to increase or start to decrease, depending on
the relationship between the spot state and the long-term yield. Finally, the long-term
yield is a decreasing and convex function of the market price of risk. A negative market
price of risk implies a positive term premium.
The yield curve in the multifactor model can be rising, falling or humped.
Depending on the current realizations of the state variables, it can even have an inversehump, which the one-factor model does not admit.
One of the properties of CIR specification is that the volatility of the short rate
diminishes as the level of it approaches zero. To enable the model to have sufficiently
high volatility at low levels we add a negative constant to (2.6). Here the default-adjusted
rate, Rt, and the discount bond price, P(t,T), are modified as follows:
n

(2.17)

Rt = ∑ yit + y
i =1

(2.18)

n

P(t , T ) = Π pi (t , T )e − y ( T − t )
i =1

See Sun (1998) for a derivation of the bond pricing formulae, following Cox, Ingersoll,
and Ross (1985).

1

respectively, where pi(t,T) is the same as in equation (2.11). The case (2.6) can be
considered a special case of (2.17) where y = 0 .

B. LIBOR and Swap Rates
The London Interbank Offer Rate (LIBOR) rates are generally higher than the
corresponding Treasury bill interest rates since they are subject to the default risk of the
participating banks. Given the price of a zero-coupon defaultable bond, we can compute
LIBOR rates. Let P(t,T) be the price at date t of a defaultable discount bond with
maturity date T, and Rτ be the LIBOR rate with a term to maturity τ. Then by definition,
(2.19)

Rτ =


1
1
− 1 .

τ  P( t , t + τ ) 

In a common "plain vanilla" interest rate swap, party B agrees to pay to party A
cash flows equal to interest at a predetermined fixed rate on notional principal for some
number of years. At the same time, party A agrees to pay party B cash flows equal to
interest at a floating rate on the same notional principal for the same period. The floating
rate in the swap is set at the beginning of each period and paid at the end of the period.
The floating rate in many interest rate swap agreements is the LIBOR rate. The life of the
swap can range from two years to more than 15 years. By convention, a swap contract has
a value of zero at the inception date. Since the floating side has a par value, the fixed side
is a par coupon bond, and the coupon rate is the prevailing swap rate.
To find a fair swap rate, it is necessary to discount the cash flows in a swap at
LIBOR rates. The implicit assumption is that the risk associated with swap cash flows is
the same as the risk associated with the cash flows on a loan in the interbank market.
Assuming a 6-month settlement period, we have
1 − P(t , T )
c=2× n
(2.20)
∑ P ( t , t + i / 2)
i =1

where c is the prevailing swap rate and P the price of the same discount bonds that were
used in (2.19) to determine LIBOR rates.
In a CIR model, both LIBOR and swap rates are determined by state variables
through the prices of discount bonds. These are all non-linear functions of the state
variables.
C. Interest Rate Caps
The interest rate caps that we examine are written on LIBOR with payments made
at the end of each period. In general, a cap is characterized by the cap rate R X , the
settlement period τ, and maturity T. Suppose interest payments are made at times τ, 2τ, ...,
nτ=T from the beginning of the life of the cap and the notional amount of the contract is
$1. Then the holder’s payoff at time (i + 1)τ is

(2.21)

τ max( Ri − R X ,0)

where Ri is the value at time iτ of the rate being capped. This call option on the rate
being capped is commonly referred to as a caplet. A cap is a portfolio of caplets. The
common practice in the financial markets is to price a caplet using Black’s (1976) model
(see Hull (1997)). To price a cap written on LIBOR, this model assumes a log-normal
process for the LIBOR rate.
The value at time iτ of the payoff from the caplet that occurs at time (i + 1)τ
given in (2.21) is
1
1
τ
(2.22)
−
max( Ri − R X ,0) = (1 + R X ) max(
,0) ,
1 + Ri
1 + R X 1 + Ri
which is (1+ R X ) times the payoff on a put option on a $1 par zero-coupon bond with
strike price 1/(1+τ R X ). Therefore, a cap can also be considered a portfolio of put options
on zero-coupon bonds.
In a CIR model, an analytical expression for options on zero-coupon bonds is
available. We therefore use the second interpretation, a portfolio of put options on zerocoupon bonds, to compute the cap price.
We first compute the price of a put option on a discount bond. The integration
region in (2.7) is now given by P (T , s) ≤ K where P(T,s) is the discount bond price. This
generates a linear boundary
n

(2.23)

∑y
i =1

iT

/ yi* ≥ 1

where
(2.24)

n
yi* =  − y ( s − T ) + ln( Π Ai / K ) / Bi
i =1

and Ai and Bi are defined by (2.12) and (2.13). The price of a put option on a discount
bond is given by (see Chen and Scott (1992) and Sun (1998)):
(2.25)

P put (t , T , s, K ) = KP (t , T )(1 − χ 2 [ L1 ,..., Ln ; ν1 ,..., ν n , δ1 ,..., δn ])

− P (t , s)(1 − χ 2 [ L1* ,..., Ln * ; ν1 ,..., ν n , δ1* ,..., δn * ])

where
(2.26)

Li = 2ψ i yi* , Li * = 2ψ i * yi*

(2.27)

δi = yit φi2 exp[γ i (T − t )] / ψ i , δi * = yit φi2 exp[γ i (T − t )] / ψ i *

(2.28)

ψ i = 2(φi +

(2.29)

φi =

γ i + ki
γ +k
), ψ i * = 2(φi + i 2 i + Bi (T , s))
2
σi
σi

2γ i
, ν i = 4k iθi / σ i2
σ (exp[γ i (T − t )] − 1)
2
i

The χ 2 is the multidimensional cumulative noncentral chi-square distribution function.
The two and three-dimensional cases are given by

(2.30)

L


x
χ 2 [ L1 , L2 ; ν1 , ν 2 , δ1 , δ2 ] = ∫ F  L1 (1 − 2 ); ν1 , δ1  f ( x 2 ; ν 2 , δ2 )dx 2
0
L2



(2.31)

χ 2 [ L1 , L2 , L3 ; ν1 , ν 2 , ν 3 , δ1 , δ2 , δ3 ]

2

=∫

L3

0

f ( x 3 ; ν 3 , δ3 )dx 3 ∫

L2 (1− x3 / L3 )

0



x
x
F  L1 (1 − 2 − 3 ); ν1 , δ1  f ( x 2 ; ν 2 , δ2 )dx 2
L2 L3



where F and f are the probability and density functions respectively of a univariate
noncentral chi-square distribution.
The cap is then the summation of the individual caplets, where each is a put
option on a discount bond whose price is given by (2.22). An N-period cap will have N-1
caplets, since there is no need to cap the first payment.
D. Interest Rate Swaptions

An interest rate swaption is an option on interest rate swaps. It gives the holder
the right to enter into a specific interest rate swap at a specific time in the future. A payertype swaption gives the holder the right to pay the fixed interest rate payments and
receive the floating. A receiver-type swaption gives the holder the right to receive the
fixed rate payment and pay the floating. The receiver swaption is a portfolio of put
options on future swap rates, each with an identical strike rate (which is the swap rate
specified in the swaption contract), and an identical reference rate (which is the future
swap rate). In the other case, a payer swaption is a call option. We now focus on the
receiver-type option.
The common practice in the financial markets is to price a swaption using Black’s
(1976) model (see Hull (1997)). To price a swaption, this model assumes a log-normal
process for the swap rate.
An interest rate swaption can be regarded as an agreement to exchange a fixedrate bond for a floating-rate bond. Since the floating-rate bond is worth par at the start of
the swap, a receiver swaption can be regarded as a call option on a coupon bond, with the
strike price equal to par and the coupon rate being the future swap rate. In the CIR
framework, we use this interpretation to price swaptions.
The price computation for a call option on a coupon bond is more complicated
than that for a call option on a discount bond, since we now have a nonlinear, nonclosed
form boundary. Consider a coupon bond ($1 par) with first coupon date T, maturity s,
coupon rate c and settlement period τ. The price of this bond at date t is given by
n −1

(2.32)

P(t , T , s, τ , c) = ∑ c j P(t , T + jτ ) , n = ( s − T ) / τ + 1
j=0

where
(2.33)

c j = τc for j ≠ n − 1,

c n −1 = 1 + τc .

Now consider a European call option on this coupon bond, with an exercise price K. The
integration region in (2.7) is given by

(2.34)

P (T , T + τ , s,τ , c) ≤ K .

We must solve (2.34) numerically to obtain the critical values of the state variables. Since
the discount bond price is a decreasing function of the state variables, the coupon bond
price is also a decreasing function of the state variables. The critical values thus formed a
curve for the integration. Let yi * ( yi1 , ..., yik ) be the value of yi such that
P (T , T + τ , s,τ , c) = K for given values of yi1 ,..., yik and zero values of all other y’s that

do not appear in the argument list. Therefore yi* () is the value of yi such that
P (T , T + τ , s,τ , c) = K when all other state variables are zero.
The price of a call option on a coupon bond is given (see Chen and Scott (1995)
and Sun (1998)) by
n

(2.35) P call (t , T , s, τ , c, K ) = P (t , T , s, τ , c) ∑ w j χ 2 [ X 1*j ,..., X nj* ; ν1 ,..., ν n , δ1*j ,..., δnj* ]
i =1

− KP (t , T ) χ 2 [ X 1 ,..., X n ; ν1 ,..., νn , δ1 ,..., δn ]
where

c j P(t , T + jτ )

(2.36)

wj =

(2.37)

X 1 = ψ 1 y1* (

(2.38)

X 1*j = ψ 1*j y1* (

(2.39)

ψ ij * = φi +

P(t , T , s,τ , c)
x2

ψ2

,...,

x2

ψ

*
1j

,

xn

ψn

,...,

), X 2 = ψ 2 y 2* (
xn

ψ

*
nj

x3

ψ3

,...,

), X 2* j = ψ 2* j y 2* (

xn

ψn

x3

ψ

*
3j

) , …, X n = ψ n y n* () .

,...,

xn

ψ nj*

) , …, X nj* = ψ nj* y n* () .

γ i + ki
+ Bi (T , T + jτ ) , δij * = 2 yit φi2 exp[γ i (T − t )] / ψ ij * .
2
σi

All other variables are the same as in (2.27)-(2.29).
The two and three-dimensional cumulative noncentral chi-square distributions are
respectively
(2.40)

χ 2 [ X 1 , X 2 ; ν1 ,ν2 , δ1 , δ2 ] = ∫ F ( X 1 ; ν1 , δ1 ) f ( x 2 ; ν2 , δ2 )dx 2

(2.41)

χ [ X 1 , X 2 , X 3 ; ν1 ,ν2 ,ν3 , δ1 , δ2 , δ3 ]

X2

0

2

=∫

X3

0

f ( x 3 ; ν 3 , δ3 )dx 3 ∫

X2

0

F ( X 1 ; ν1 , δ1 ) f ( x 2 ; ν 2 , δ2 )dx 2

E. Computation of the Multidimensional Distribution using Fourier Inversion

The multidimensional integral of the noncentral chi-square distribution in cap and
swaption price is computationally demanding. Chen and Scott (1995) proposed an
alternative approach to compute the multidimensional distribution. It is based on Fourier
inversion and is much faster when the integral boundary is linear.

The central idea is the relationship between distribution function F ( x) and the
characteristic function Φ(t ) (see Shephard (1991))
1 1 ∞
Φ (t )e − itx
(2.42)
F ( x ) = − ∫ imag (
)dt .
2 π 0
t
Therefore, the cumulative distribution can be regarded as Fourier inversion of the
characteristic function. The characteristic function has a nice property that, if a random
variable is a linear combination of some independent random variables, its characteristic
function is simply the product of their characteristic functions. Namely,
(2.43)

n

n

Φ (t ) = Π Φ i (ai t ) for X = ∑ ai yi .
i =1

i =1

Applying these results to the multidimensional noncentral chi-square distribution in the
expression for the cap price, gives:
(2.44)

χ 2 [ L1 ,..., Ln ; ν1 ,..., νn , δ1 ,..., δn ] =

 e − it n
t 
1 1 ∞
− ∫ imag 
Π Φi (
)
2 π 0
ψ i yi* 
 t i =1

(2.45) χ 2 [ L1* ,..., Ln * ; ν1 ,..., ν n , δ1* ,..., δn * ] =

 e − it n *
1 1 ∞
t 
− ∫ imag 
Π Φ i ( * * )
2 π 0
ψ i yi 
 t i =1

where
(2.46)

Φ i (t ) = (1 − 2it ) −νi / 2 exp[itδi / (1 − 2it )]

(2.47)

Φ i * (t ) = (1 − 2it ) −νi / 2 exp[itδi * / (1 − 2it )]

are the characteristic functions of χ 2 [ x; ν i , δi ] and χ 2 [ x; νi , δi * ] respectively. Since only
one-dimensional integrals are involved in (2.44) and (2.45), the computation becomes
much easier.
For the swaption price, the boundary is nonlinear and this approach cannot be
applied directly. Chen and Scott (1995) suggest that we compute the probability under the
linear boundary using Fourier inversion and those between the linear and nonlinear
boundary using the multidimensional integral. The difference between these two
probabilities is the probability in the swaption price. The resulting computations,
however, are still time consuming for the three-factor model.

3. Evaluating Multifactor CIR Models Using LIBOR and Swap Rates
A. Econometric Method

Following Pearson and Sun (1994), Chen and Scott (1993), and Duffie and
Singleton (1996), the joint distribution of observed LIBOR and swap rates can be
obtained from the noncentral chi-square distributions of the state variables through a
change of variable. We first invert the pricing equations (2.16) and (2.17) to express the

unobservable state variables as functions of observed rates. We then apply quasimaximum likelihood estimation to obtain parameter estimates.
For this purpose, write (2.16) and (2.17) as
rit = gi ( y1t ,..., ynt ), i = 1,..., n; n = 1,2,3
(3.1)
where rit is either the LIBOR rate or the swap rate. Given the appropriate parameter
values, the above system of nonlinear equations can be solved numerically for the state
variables as functions of observed rates, i.e., yit (r1t ,..., rnt ), i = 1,..., n; n = 1,2,3 . For a nfactor model, we assume that n of the rates are observed without any error and invert the
rates to get the n state variables. For the one factor model, the inversion is unique since
both LIBOR and swap rates are increasing functions of the state variable. For two- and
three-factor models, we cannot guarantee the uniqueness.
Through a change of variable, the joint conditional density of the exactly observed
rates can be written as
(3.2)

n

f r ( r1T ,..., rnT | r1t ,..., rnt ) = J −1 Π f ( yiT (r1T ,..., rnT | yit (r1t ,..., rnt ))
i =1

where f is the conditional noncentral chi-square density given by
f ( yiT | yit ) = 2ci f (2ci yiT ; ν i , λi )
(3.3)
where

2ki
,
σ i (1 − exp(−ki (T − t )))

(3.4)

ci =

(3.5)

λi = 2ci yit exp[− ki (T − t )]

(3.6)

f ( x; ν , λ ) =

2

1 − ( x + λ )/ 2  x 
 
e
 λ
2

q /2

Iq

(

λx ) , q =

ν
2

−1

is the probability density of a non-central chi-square distribution χ 2 ( x; ν , λ ) , with ν
degrees of freedom and parameter of noncentrality λ, and Iq(.) is the modified Bessel
function of order q, and J is the Jacobian of the transformation

(3.7)

J=

∂g1
∂y1

L

∂gn
∂y1

∂gn
L
∂yn

M

O

∂g1
∂yn
M

If g is the LIBOR rate in (2.15), the derivative term is given as
∂g Bi (t , T )
.
=
(3.8)
∂y i
τP
If g is the swap rate in (2.17), the derivative is

n

(3.9)

n
j
j
j
Bi (t , T ) P (t , T )∑ P (t , t + ) + (1 − P (t , T ))∑ Bi (t , t + ) P (t , t + )
2
2
2
∂g
j =1
j =1
.
= 2×
n
j 2
∂y i
(∑ P (t , t + ))
2
j =1

The log-likelihood of the exactly observed rates is
(3.10)

T −1

log L1 = ∑ ln f r ( r1t +1 ,..., rnt +1 | r1t ,..., rnt ) .
t =1

For a n-factor model, only n observed rates are needed to identify the state variables
(factors). Since we have more rates than needed to identify the factors, we follow the
common practice, and assume that the other rates are observed with error. The
measurement error δ it is defined as the difference between the observed and the fitted
rate. We assume the errors are i.i.d. Normal with mean zero and possibly nonzero
correlation. The log-likelihood for measurement errors is
(3.11)

log L2 = −

mT
T
1 T
ln(2π ) − ln Ω − ∑ δ t ' Ω −1δ t
2
2
2 t =2

where Ω is the covariance matrix for δ t . The total log-likelihood is the sum of the loglikelihoods of the exactly observed rates and the measurement errors.
B. Description of the Data
The average bid-ask spreads for the LIBOR and swap rates were obtained from
Bloomberg for the period from February 3, 1995 till July 16, 1999. The LIBOR rate is for
the 3-month maturity, and swap rates are for maturities of 2-, 3-, 5-, 7- and 10-years. For
each rate2, the observations are weekly, and there is a total of 233 data points. To show
the behavior of interest rates during this sample period, the 3-month LIBOR, 2-year swap,
and 10-year swap rates are graphed in Figure 1. The rates generally decrease during the
first quarter of the sample period. Then the short rate remains relatively stable till
September 1998, while the long rate goes up and down during that period, reaching as
high as 7.365%, June of 1996. During the last quarter the long rate goes up while the
short rate takes a dive to 4.195% before going up. The 10-year swap rate is generally
higher than the 3-month LIBOR rate, but the only exception is two weeks in October of
1998. The spread varies a great deal without any observable pattern.
We report the sample means and standard deviations in Table 2, panel A. Our
sample means and standard deviations of weekly changes in LIBOR and swap rates are
reported in panel B. The average 3-month LIBOR rate in this period is 5.627% with
standard deviation 0.322% (the 3-month LIBOR rate data set has had an anomaly
substituted with an average of previous and following rates). The average 10-year swap
rate is 6.513% with standard deviation 0.565%, and the rates are on average upward
sloping. The LIBOR rate is less volatile than the swap rate, and the short-term swap rate
is less volatile than the long-term swap rate. For weekly changes, all the means are
2

All rates are quoted on annual basis and in computations one week is assumed to represent 1/52 of a year.

approximately .5 - .6 basis points negative. This shows that over the past half decade
interest rates have on average declined. The standard deviations range from 5.036 basis
points for the 3-month LIBOR up to 10.651 basis points for the 3-year swap rate, and the
volatility curve is hump shaped (see Figure 3).
Table 4, Panel A contains the results from principal component analysis of weekly
changes of LIBOR and swap rates. Each column represents one independent factor and
each row represents the weight of a particular rate in this factor. For example, the first
factor (Level) consists of 0.1228 of the 3-month LIBOR rate changes, 0.4280 of the 2year swap rate changes, etc., all the way down to 0.4198 of the 10-year swap rate changes.
Since this factor has positive, almost equal weights on all rates, we generally refer to it as
the level factor. The last row is the percentage of the sum of the variances of all the rate
changes explained by each factor. The level factor explains 93.697% of the total variation
and is the dominant factor. The second factor is mainly the difference between the LIBOR
rate (weight -0.8662) and swap rates (with larger weight put on longer rates). It is
therefore generally called the slope factor. It explains 3.554% of the total variation. The
third factor has positive weights on short-end LIBOR (0.4817) and long-end 7- and 10year swap rates (total weights 0.7986), but negative weights on intermediate 2-, 3-, and 5year swap rates (total weights -0.9424). It is generally named the curvature factor. It
explains 1.961% of the total variation. These three independent factors explain more than
99% of the total variation in rates. We therefore conclude that three independent factors
drive the term structure of LIBOR and swap rates: level, slope and curvature.
Table 3, Panel B reports the R-square values from the regression of weekly
changes in the 3-month LIBOR, and 2- and 10-year swap rates on the level, slope and
curvature factors. For the 3-month LIBOR rate, the slope factor is the dominant factor. It
explains 59.34% of the variance. The level factor also explains 31.78%. Therefore, the
LIBOR rate is driven by the slope and level factors. For the 2-year swap rate, the level
explains 94.11% and the curvature explains 4.29%. For the 10-year swap rate, the level
explains 94.81% and the curvature explains 2.57%. So the swap rates are mainly driven
by the level factor, with other factors having little explanatory power.
C. Empirical Results
C.1 One-Factor CIR Model
The one-factor CIR model is estimated first. Only one observed LIBOR or swap
rate is needed to recover the unobservable state variable. The 3-month LIBOR rate and 2and 10-year swap rates were tested, and the 2-year swap rate gave the smallest fitting
errors for all other LIBOR and swap rates. Table 1 reports the estimated parameter values.
For the one factor model, the state variable is the instantaneous default-adjusted
rate, or the short rate itself. The long-run mean, y0, of the short rate is estimated at
6.747%. The speed of adjustment k is estimated at 0.05532. The conditional mean and
variance of the short rate for the one-factor model are given by:
(3.12)

E ( Rτ | Rt ) = θ + ( Rt − θ )e − k (τ −t )

(3.13)

var( Rτ | Rt ) =

σ2

[θ + 2( R
2k

t

− θ )e − k (τ −t ) − (2 Rt − θ )e − 2 k (τ −t )

]

The marginal density of process is
1
ν
2θ
,
(3.14)
π ( x) = a
x a −1 e − x / b , a = , b =
2
ν
b Γ (a )
where ν is defined in (2.29). This is a gamma distribution Γ( x; a , b) . The steady state has
a mean and standard deviation of θ and σ

θ
2k

respectively, which are the limits of

(3.12) and (3.13) as τ goes to infinity.
The “half-life” of the process (the time when the short rate is expected to reach a
value halfway between the current level and the long-run mean), is ln 2 / k , or roughly
12.5 years. This implies weak mean reversion.
For the estimated parameter values the implied long-term yield, as defined in
(2.16), is 8.929% (see Table 1, Panel B). The absolute value of the pricing (fitting) errors
(Table 2, Panel A) for the 3-month LIBOR and the 10-year swap rates have means of
33.853 and 18.610 basis points respectively. Those for other swap rates have smaller
means but still large standard errors. With typical bid-ask spreads in the swap market
during this period of about four basis points, this pricing error is very large. We also
report the mean and standard deviation of the weekly changes in LIBOR and swap rates.
In Table 2, Panel B, we find that the one-factor CIR model is unable to match the
volatility of the changes in LIBOR and long-term swap rates. The sizable pricing errors
can be taken as evidence against the one factor CIR model.
To test whether the recovered values of the state variable have the conditional and
marginal densities implied by the estimated parameters, we calculate test statistics for the
conditional moments. If a n-dimensional vector g has an asymptotic normal distribution,
N (0, Ω) , then the test statistic is given by:
(3.15)

g' Ω −1 g → χ 2 (n) .

To construct this test for the conditional distribution of the CIR state variable, we
use the following three moment conditions as the g function
(3.16)
E [Rt +1 − µ1t ] = 0 ,
(3.17)

E [( Rt +1 − µ1t ) Rt ] = 0 ,

(3.18)

E ( Rt +1 − µ1t ) 2 − µ 2t = 0 , E (( Rt +1 − µ1t ) 2 − µ 2t ) Rt = 0 ,

[

]

[

]

where µ1t and µ2t are the first and second conditional moments defined by (3.12) and
(3.13) for τ = t + 1 . The asymptotic covariance matrix Ω is estimated using the NeweyWest procedure. We use the square root of the 233 observations, or 15, as the window
width in Newey-West procedure. The test statistic is 8.9117 (Table 1, panel A, Test 1
column) for the one factor model. Since the 5% critical value for chi-square distribution
with four degrees of freedom is 9.49, we cannot reject the hypothesis at the conventional
level that the sample conditional first and second moments are indeed the ones implied by
the estimated parameter values.

Table 4, Panel C reports the R-square values from the regression of the previously
defined three main factors on changes in the recovered state variable. The value 0.9402
shows that the state variable captures the level factor.
C.2 Two-Factor Model
We now continue with the estimation of the two-factor CIR model. Two rates
need to be matched to recover the state variables. Table 1 reports the results when 2- and
10-year swap rates are used to recover the state variables.
The risk premia for both state variables are negative. The estimated parameters
imply a long rate of 5.330%. The two-factor model generates a long run mean of the short
rate of 3.546%.
From Table 2 we can see that the pricing errors of the two-factor model are much
smaller than that for the one-factor model. The mean absolute pricing errors for the 3- and
5-year swap rates are both less than the bid-ask spread (about four basis points), while the
mean absolute pricing error for the fitted LIBOR rate is not. This is encouraging since it
seems that the swap market can be priced by a two-factor equilibrium model. The LIBOR
rate is still not well fitted. This suggests that the short-term rate has distinctive features
that the dynamics of the intermediate and long-term rates do not capture (see Figure 1),
the 3-month LIBOR behaves considerably different from the swap rates. Figure 2
illustrates differences in behavior between observed and fitted (using 2-factor
specification) 3-month LIBOR rates. When comparing Figures 1 and 2 we can see that the
largest discrepancies occur when the yield curve has negative slope (for example October,
1995 – March, 1996 and September, 1998 – December, 1998). One possible explanation
could be that even a 2-factor model does not correctly capture the slope component.
The correlation of the changes of the two state variables is, 0.0013 (see Table 1,
Panel B). Remember that in the model we assume the two factors were independent.
Therefore, this evidence does not contradict the model specifications.
The test statistic3 for the null hypothesis that the sample conditional first and
second moments are consistent with those implied by the estimated parameter values is
4.6567 for the first variable and 6.4909 for the second variable. So again we cannot reject
the hypothesis that the sample conditional first and second moments are indeed the ones
implied by the estimated parameter values.
Table 4, Panel C reports R-square values from regressing the level, slope and
curvature factors on the changes in the two recovered state variables. The level factor is
mainly explained by the second state variable and the curvature by the first. The first
factor also explains a significant portion of the slope factor. If we include both state
variables, the level factor is almost entirely explained as well as most of the curvature
factor. The slope factor, however, is not captured by the two state variables. Furthermore,

3

We can extend one-factor specification test to multifactor models because we assume that factors are not
correlated. For multifactor models we do the test separately for each factor and Rt refers to the respective
state variable.

the R-square values are in line with the independency result: the first factor explains
changes of slope and curvature factors but not the level factor.
Note that we would expect either a positive or zero constant as the lower bound
for the nominal rate. The estimated value of the constant is negative and statistically
significantly different from zero, -0.25495 (0.00003). This suggests that the short rate is
too volatile even at low interest rate levels to be consistent with the standard CIR
specification where the constant is equal to zero.
C.3 Three-Factor Model
We now continue to observe if adding another factor into the CIR framework
significantly improves the performance. In Figure 3, with the 3-factor specification, we
can closely fit the volatility curve. Table 1 gives the estimation results when the 3-month
LIBOR, and 2- and 10-year swap rates are matched to recover three state variables. The
long-run mean of the short rate is estimated at 6.244% and the long-term yield is 6.257%.
The risk premia are all negative, but not estimated with sufficient precision. Correlations
among the three state variables are –0.35, -0.50, and –0.58 respectively. Thus the
independence assumption is violated as we increase the number of variables. Table 2,
Panel C reports additional inconsistencies between theoretical models and estimation
results. We assume that the autocorrelations of rates’ pricing errors to be zeros but as one
can see from the table they are significantly positive. We have tried to estimate a model
with autocorrelated pricing errors, but it did not converge.
The tests cannot reject the hypothesis that the conditional means and variances of
the factors are as given by their assumed theoretical distribution.
As can be seen from Table 4, by increasing the number of factors to three, we
capture all three factors (level, slope and curvature) estimated by the principal component
analysis. While the mean absolute pricing errors are all either smaller than the bid-ask
spread or pretty close to it, we are unable to justify our assumption that the factors are
independent. The negative value for the estimated constant term suggests that the square
root process is unable to provide a good description of the volatility: the volatility is
rather large even when the rate is close to zero. Hence the dependence of volatility on the
level of the state variables could also be higher than that suggested by a square root
process.
D. Out of Sample Performance
To test these specifications we apply estimated models to another data set
containing 3-month LIBOR and 2-, 3-, 5-, 7- and 10-year swap rates. This data set covers
the period from April 7, 1989 till September 12, 1997. We obtained the LIBOR and swap
rates from Bloomberg.

As in the earlier sections, we assumed no pricing errors for some of the swap rates
and inverted the pricing functions to obtain the state variables for each point in time. For
example, for a 3-factor specification, 3-month LIBOR, and 2- and 10-year swap rates
were used. As we can see from Table 3, the results, in particular for a 3-factor model, are
surprisingly good. The mean absolute pricing errors are comparable with the ones for the
original data set. For a 3-factor model two out of three figures (3- and 7-year swap rates)
are less than bid-ask spread of about four basis points and the remaining one is 4.629
basis points. These pricing errors are comparable to those reported by Dai and Singleton
(1999) for models that belong to the more general affine term-structure class that nests
the CIR specification. Their data set contains 6-month LIBOR and 2-, 3-, 5-, 7-, and 10year swap rates and covers the period from April 3, 1987 till August 23, 1996. The lowest
means of pricing errors they report for 3-, 5-, and 7-year swaps are -11.3, 16.9, and -12.7
basis points, respectively.
E. Prediction of Future Spot Rates
We use equation (3.13) to find the expected value of the state variable to evaluate
the predictive power, regress the actual monthly changes in rates on a constant and the
predicted 3-month change in rates. We use the change in rates instead of the level of rates
because the LIBOR and swap rates are persistent. A good model would have an intercept
a close to zero and a regression coefficient b close to one. Table 5 reports the results.
For the prediction of the 3-month LIBOR, all three models generate an intercept
insignificantly different from zero and a coefficient b insignificantly different from one.
However, for all specifications R-square is small, the one-factor model has the largest Rsquare of 13.30%.
For the 2-year swap rate, only one of the intercepts (the two-factor model) is
insignificantly different from zero but the corresponding slope coefficient is significantly
different from one. For other models both estimated parameters are off.
For the 10Y swap rate, the intercept is insignificantly different from zero for the
one-factor model, but the slope coefficients for all three models are significantly different
from one. To summarize the preceding discussion, we can say that to go to three factors
does not appear to improve the performance when it comes to forecasting future swap
rates.
Notice that the one-factor model performs best in forecasting 3-month changes for
the 3-month LIBOR, this happens though the three-factor model was forced to match the
3-month LIBOR rate. The three-factor model does worst, again showing that something is
missing in the model specifications. The pattern continues forecasting three-month
changes in 2- and 10-year swap rates.

4. Valuation of Caps and Swaptions
So far we have been focusing on the LIBOR and swap rates. We have used
correlation, conditional distributions, and predictive power as evidence against the
multifactor CIR models. To evaluate the economic importance of the statistical evidence
against the models reported in the earlier sections, we examine the models’ pricing errors
for caps and swaptions.
A. Pricing Errors of Caps Using CIR Models
The weekly cap data, obtained from Fannie Mae, consists of bid prices from
February 17, 1995 to July 16, 1999. Cap maturities are 1-, 2-, 5-, and 10-years. All
contracts are at the money –, i.e., the strike rate is the spot rate for the corresponding
maturity. The original data is quoted as the Black’s volatility, we transform it into price
data using Black’s formula. For this purpose, we obtain the data for LIBOR zero coupon
bonds from University Capital Strategies Group, Minneapolis, Minnesota. The forward
rate is computed from these LIBOR zeros. We compute the strike from the forward rates.
The derived price is in basis points, or cents per $100 face value of the cap contract. The
typical bid-ask spread is one to two percent in Black’s volatility. We also transform this
bid-ask spread in volatility into that in basis points using Black’s formula.
Table 6, Panel A reports the means and standard deviations of the cap prices
during this period, along with the average bid-ask spreads. The average price is only
19.60 basis points for the one-year contract, but 638.20 basis points for the ten-year
contract. Although the 10-year cap has only ten times the individual caplets that the 1year cap has. The longer maturity caplets are more valuable, so that the average price of
the 10-year cap is about 30 times that of the 1-year contract. If you compare the price of a
5-year and 10-year cap, you will find that the relative price difference is close to the
difference in the number of caplets in each contract. This is because the 5-year cap also
has many long-maturity caplets. Beyond five years, although the longer maturity caplet is
still more valuable, the difference is small. An average bid-ask spread in the cap market
is 8% to 10% of the price, which implies a very illiquid market. The shorter maturity
price is more volatile than the longer maturity price. For 5- and 10-year contracts, the
volatility is just about 50% larger than the bid-ask spread, but for the 1-year contract, the
volatility is more than three times the bid-ask spread.
Table 6, Panel A also reports the mean absolute pricing errors from using the
estimated CIR models in the previous section. The 1-year cap computed using two-factor
model has pricing error larger than those of one-factor. This is surprising, given that the
two-factor model fit the LIBOR and swap rates more precisely than the one-factor model.
However, the negative value for the constant term suggests that the two-factor model is
misspecified. The pricing errors for longer maturities are better with two-factor model,
for 2-, 5-, and 10-year caps they are about twice as low as the ones for one-factor model.
So the one-factor model outperforms the two-factor model on the short end but loses a lot
for all other maturities.

The three-factor model, in Table 6, does not do as well as the two-factor model
for 1- and 2-year caps. However, pricing errors for 5- and 10-year caps are 30-35% lower
than those for the two-factor model.
Overall, no CIR model can price the cap consistently into the bid-ask spread, and
all CIR models are misspecified. Thus, it also could be viewed that by increasing the
number of factors we lose the descriptive power on the short end and gain with longer
maturity caps. Comparing Figures 1 and 4, we can see that estimated caps prices behave
very differently for both 1- and 3-factor models when the yield curve has negative slope.
This observation suggests, the CIR specification does not capture the interaction between
the intertemporal dynamics of level and slope.
B. Joint Estimation
In order to test how information contained in caps prices data relates to the term
structure we also did joint estimation. Sum of caps’ absolute pricing errors was added to
the likelihood function. The results of these computations for two- and three-factor
models are reported in the Table 1’. As we can see from Table 1 and Table 1’ comparison
the coefficients for state variables processes are basically the same. Assigning larger
weights to the sum of caps’ absolute pricing errors did not result in any significant
change. One possible reason for this outcome could be the LIBOR and swap rates alone
do not span the fixed income related instruments, as it was mentioned before in the
literature, see for example Collin-Dufresne and Goldstein (2001). Another possible
reason could be the shortcomings of CIR models. Although the models we use are
multifactor ones the structure imposed by CIR specification is quite nonflexible. We will
illustrate this point using Dai and Singleton (1999) framework a bit later when we will
talk about stochastic volatility in CIR models.
C. Pricing Errors of Swaptions Using CIR Models
The weekly swaption data, obtained from Fannie Mae, consists of bid prices from
February 17, 1995 to July 16, 1999. The swaption maturities are 3-months and 2-years
and the underlying swap lengths are 2-, 5- and 10-years. All contracts are at the money
and of receiver type. The original data is quoted as the Black’s volatility. We transform it
into price using Black’s formula. Prices of LIBOR zero coupon bonds are used to
compute the forward swap rate. We compute the forward swap rate such that the forward
swap contract has a value of zero at the future entering date, by assuming the forward
LIBOR is realized. The transferred price is in basis points, or cents per $100 face value of
the swaption contract. The typical bid-ask spread is one to two percent in Black’s
volatility. We also transform this bid-ask spread in volatility to one in price.
Table 6, Panel B reports the means and standard deviations of swaption prices
during this period, along with the average bid-ask spread. The average price of a 2-year
contract is about 2.5 times the price of a 3-month contract with the same underlying swap
length. The average bid-ask spread in the swaption market is approximately 8% to 10% of

the price, similar to those in the cap market. Three-month contracts are more volatile than
the 2-year contracts. For those contracts that have the same maturity but different
underlying swap lengths, the ones that have shorter underlying swap lengths are more
volatile. For all the contracts, the volatility and bid-ask spread are of the same order. We
can say that the swaption price is relatively stable over time.
Table 6, Panel B also reports pricing errors using the estimated CIR models. The
one-factor model did reasonably well, pricing 3-month swaptions with an underlying
swap length of two years, specifically contract 3M2Y. Nevertheless it produces large
pricing errors for all other contracts and every time the one-factor model gives us more
volatile swaption prices. As in the cap market, the one-factor model can be used to price
short-term swaptions, both as to swaption maturity and underlying swap length. The twofactor model considerably improves the pricing errors for long-term swaptions. The
pricing errors are still large when compared with the typical bid-ask spread in this market.
Standard deviations of fitted prices produced by the three-factor model are too low
compared to the observed swaption prices standard deviations. The conclusion is that
none of the models capture the processes driving the pricing of swaptions well enough.
Although the one-factor model cannot capture the long rate well, it can be used to price
the shorter maturity swaptions. The two-factor model prices the longer maturity
swaptions better, but still the pricing errors are too large. Similar to the caps, comparing
Figures 1 and 5, we can see that the biggest differences in behavior are during the
negative sloped yield curve.

D. Slope of Term Structure and Models’ Specification
As we already mentioned in subsection 4.A estimated caps prices seem to be
behave very different from market prices. To test that observation we run regressions of
the following form
(4.1)

FittedCap Pr icet − ObservedCap Pr icet = α + βSlopet + ε t ,

where for Slopet we have two options: the short end slope, the difference between 2-year
swap and 3-month LIBOR rates, and the yield curve slope, the difference between 10-year
swap and 3-month LIBOR rates. The results for these regressions are reported in the
Table 7. As we can see there is certain dependence between pricing errors and slope of
the term structure. It is especially evident for the latter choice of slope variable, in this
case all p-values are very close to zero. With the three factor CIR model we force fit 3month LIBOR, 2-year swap, and 10-year swap rates so this particular model produces
exactly the same slopes as we observe in data but even model demonstrates strong
dependence of pricing errors on slope. Again it suggests that CIR models fail in capturing
intertemporal dynamics of slope. Regression coefficients for 1-year cap are positive. Also
on average this cap is overpriced by all three models. Therefore as term structure slope
starts decreasing the pricing error starts shrinking and if term structure becomes more
negatively sloped the 1-year cap may become underpriced. On the other hand 10-year cap

is underpriced by all models and all regression coefficients are positive. Hence the pricing
error for 10-year cap also starts decreasing in absolute value as slope becomes smaller
and at some point this cap may become overpriced. So although the coefficients differ in
sign the cap prices behave the same way as the structure flattens the caps become more
precisely priced.
We also extend our chi-square test of subsection 3.C.1 and add one moment
condition that includes slope
(4.2)

[

]

E (( Rt +1 − µ1t ) 2 − µ 2t ) Slopet = 0 .

These new test statistics are reported in the Table 1 in the Test 2 column. As we can see
now all three specifications (one-, two-, and three-factor CIR models) are rejected at .5%
significance level.
E. Stochastic volatility in CIR models
With the three-factor CIR model we can force-fit term structure of interest rates
with good precision but as we already pointed out the model has difficulty replicating
standard deviations of caps and swaptions prices. Caps and swaptions are volatility
instruments and they are even quoted in terms of Black volatility. So problem with
correct pricing could be inability of CIR specifications to deal with stochastic volatility.
To demonstrate CIR models flaws let us apply Dai and Singleton (1999)
framework. The general identified AY(3,3) model is
 α + β ' ⋅ Y (t )dW 
 k1 (θ 1 − Y1 ) 
1
1
1 



'

dY (t ) =  k 2 (θ 2 − Y2 ) dt + Σ 3×3 α 2 + β 2 ⋅ Y (t )dW2  .


 k (θ − Y ) 
'

α + β 3 ⋅ Y (t ) dW3 
3 
 3 3
 3

For multifactor CIR model ( β 1 , β 2 , β 3 ) is diagonal. We assume that the factors are not
correlated so Σ 3×3 is diagonal as well. Therefore the model we study is

 σ 1 Y1 dW1 
 k1 (θ 1 − Y1 ) 




dY (t ) =  k 2 (θ 2 − Y2 ) dt +  σ 2 Y2 dW2  .


 k (θ − Y ) 
3 
 3 3
 σ 3 Y3 dW3 
The Ar(3,3) equivalent of the model above is

1
1
 drt   k1 (θ t − rt ) 


 

k
 dθ t  =  k 2 (θ + ν t − θ t ) dt +  1 − 2 k
1

 dν   k (ν − ν ) 
3
t
 t 



where
rt = Y1 (t ) + Y2 (t ) + Y3 (t ) + y ,


 σ r + a θ + b ν + c dW (t ) 
1
1 t
1 t
1
1
 1 t

k3
 σ 2 a 2θ t + b2ν t + c 2 dW2 (t ) ,
1−
k1


σ 3 b3ν t dW3 (t )
k3
k3



(1 −
)(1 −
)
k1
k 2 

θ t = (1 − k 2 k )Y2 (t ) + (1 − k 3 k )Y3 (t ) + θ 1 + (k 2θ 2 + k 3θ 3 ) k + y ,
1

1

1

ν t = (1 − k 3 k )(1 − k 3 k )Y3 (t ) ,
1

θ = θ1 + θ 2 +

2

k 3θ 3

ν = (1 − k 3 k )(1 −
1

k1
k3

+y,
k2

)θ 3 .

The variables rt , θ t , and ν t are traditionally called short rate, stochastic central tendency,
and stochastic volatility, respectively. This transformation allows us to see why we may
have problems with modeling: the stochastic volatility ν t appears in the drift of θ t .
In contrast the following AY(3,2) model has nice interpretation of level, stochastic
central tendency and stochastic volatility

Y3 dW1
 k1 (0 − Y1 ) 
 1 σ 12 σ 13 





dY (t ) =  k 2 (θ 2 − Y2 ) dt + 
1
 α 2 + β 22Y2 dW2  ,


 k (θ − Y ) 

1 
β 33Y3 dW3 
3 
 3 3

which becomes more evident from its Ar form
ν t dW1 (t ) 
 drt   k1 (θ t − rt ) 
 1 σ rθ σ rν 

 



2
1
 dθ t  =  k 2 (θ − θ t ) dt + 
 a + ς θ t dW 2 (t )  ,


 dν   k (ν − ν ) 

1  ξ ν t dW3 (t ) 
t 
 t  3





where
rt = Y1 (t ) + Y2 (t ) ,

θ t = (1 − k 2 k )Y2 (t ) + k 2θ 2 k ,
1

1

ν t = Y3 (t ) ,
θ = θ2 , ν = θ3 .
The models of this type could a way to pursue, though there may be other roadblocks, for
example Chen (1996) model is from that class ( a = 0, σ rθ = σ rν = 0 ) but it was rejected
by Dai and Singleton (1999) based solely on interest rates data.

5. Conclusion
In this paper we investigate the ability of one-, two- and three-factor CIR models
to describe the dynamics of the LIBOR and swap markets. We estimate the model
parameters using the maximum likelihood method and time series data on LIBOR and
swap rates. Using the estimated model parameters, we predict the future LIBOR and swap
rates and compare them with realized rates. We then use the estimated model to price
interest rate derivatives, specifically caps and swaptions, and to compute the resulting
pricing error.
Although the use of more factors fits the LIBOR and swap rates more precisely,
the statistical properties of the estimated factors are not consistent with the properties
implied by the model. In particular, we found that in the three-factor model the factors are
correlated, contradicting the assumption that they are independent. The constant term in
all three models (a short rate is the sum of the factor(s) plus a constant) is estimated to be
negative. We added a constant term so that nominal interest rates would be bounded away
from zero. Why is the constant negative? The short interest rate volatility falls to zero at
very low levels in the CIR specification without a constant. However, in the data (see, for
example, Figure 1) the short (3-month LIBOR) rate volatility is still high at the lowest
levels suggesting that the volatility fall with level may be too high in the CIR model
without a constant. By adding a negative constant the volatility of the short rate at low
levels can still be kept sufficiently high to match what we observe in the data. This clearly
suggests that the CIR specification may have to be modified. Also notice that the constant
becomes more negative with a number of factors. This fact provides an additional
indicator that just increasing the number of factors in the CIR model is not going to help.
When used to predict future LIBOR and swap rates, we found there are more
indications of model misspecification. When used to value interest rate derivatives,
specifically caps and swaptions, no CIR model can correctly price all contracts
simultaneously. Although the one factor model is clearly deficient, it is the best among all
the CIR models considered for the pricing of short maturity caps and swaptions.
However, the pricing error is still too large relative to the typical bid-ask spread. More
factors may help improve the pricing of longer term caps and swaptions, although again
the pricing error is large compared with the bid-ask spread. Adding these factors makes
the pricing of short-term contracts worse. In other words, the stochastic process for the
factors may be misspecified. While it is possible to satisfactorily fit the term structure of
swap rates by increasing the number of factors to three, the fitting errors for short
maturity caps and swaptions in fact become larger with more factors.
Clearly the models cannot capture the cap and swaption prices around the LTCM
failure date (see Figures 4 and 5). During the periods when the short rate was relatively
stable the models’ movements in the cap and swaption prices closely resemble the
movements in the market prices of caps and swaptions. The largest differences in
behavior between actual and modeled prices are where the yield curve has a negative
slope. These observations suggest that the models have a problem with simultaneously
matching the dynamics of the level of the short rate and the slope of the yield curve as
pointed out by Duffee (2000). In order to satisfactorily value derivative claims, we need

richer term structure models that satisfactorily capture the time series properties of the
spot rates and risk premia. Several alternatives to the CIR specification have been
proposed in the literature, for example, Anderson and Lund (1997), Dai and Singleton
(1999), Duarte (2000), and Duffee (2000). Attari (1999) suggests a three factor -- four
state variable model, where the short rate is assumed to be a sum of two instantaneously
perfectly negatively correlated state variables. Using these models for valuing derivative
claims involve complex and time consuming computational methods. Therefore an
examination of the extent to which these models are suitable for valuing derivative claims
is left for future research.

Table 1. Estimates of Multi-Factor CIR Model Using LIBOR and Swap Rates
These tables show the estimated parameters and implied rates for one-, two-, and three-factor CIR models.
All models are estimated using 3-month LIBOR and 2-, 3-, 5-, 7-, and 10-year swap rates over the period
from 2/3/1995 to 7/16/1999. The quasi-maximum log-likelihood method was used for estimation. The
results are presented in the following form: estimated parameter (standard error).

A. Factor Parameters
The percentiles for chi-square distribution with 4 degrees of freedom (test 1) are 7.78 (10% confidence
interval) and 9.49 (5% confidence interval) and the percentiles for chi-square distribution with 5 degrees of
freedom (test 2) are 9.24 (10% confidence interval), 11.07 (5% confidence interval) and 16.75 (.5%
confidence interval). Test 1 includes four moment conditions as described on page 14 and Test 2 includes
five moment conditions as described on page 20.

One-Factor
Y
Two-Factor
Y1
Y2
Three-Factor
Y1
Y2
Y3

κ

θ

σ

λ

Test 1

Test 2

0.05532
(0.04522)

0.09615
(0.11615)

0.02702
(0.01806)

-0.01854
(0.04068)

8.9117

20.8347

0.39269
(0.03172)
0.05205
(0.03486)

0.27315
(0.00003)
0.01626
(0.01059)

0.01553
(0.00091)
0.03906
(0.00633)

-0.00038
(0.01765)
-0.05789
(0.03492)

4.6567

5.8826

6.4909

79.4120

3.96377
(0.38200)
0.03424
(0.09165)
0.37520
(0.04571)

0.52095
(0.23463)
0.15236
(0.46651)
0.37601
(0.10268)

0.01930
(0.00435)
0.02607
(0.02523)
0.01826
(0.00294)

-0.00767
(0.03411)
-0.00301
(0.09002)
-0.01972
(0.04287)

4.2478

8.6076

5.5523

133.4975

4.6755

8.9600

B. Derived Model Parameters
The table reports estimates of constant, y , values of log-likelihood function, factors correlations, and
implied short and long rates.

y

One-Factor
Two-Factor
Three-Factor

-0.02868
(0.01892)
-0.25395
(0.00003)
-0.98689
(0.00005)

y0
0.06747

y∞
0.08977

LogL
7280.70

Corr12

0.03546

0.05330

8314.27

0.0013

0.06244

0.06257

8513.61

-0.35

Corr23

Corr13

-0.50

-0.58

Table 1’. Estimates of Multi-Factor CIR Model Using LIBOR and Swap Rates , and Cap
Prices
These tables show the estimated parameters and implied rates for two- and three-factor CIR models. All
models are estimated using 3-month LIBOR and 2-, 3-, 5-, 7-, and 10-year swap rates over the period from
2/3/1995 to 7/16/1999, and 1-, 2-, 5-, and 10-year cap prices. The quasi-maximum log-likelihood method
was used for estimation. The results are presented in the following form: estimated parameter (standard
error).

A. Factor Parameter

Two-Factor
Y1
Y2
Three-Factor
Y1
Y2
Y3

κ

θ

σ

λ

0.39220
(0.01724)
0.05319
(0.02015)

0.27274
(0.15365)
0.01619
(0.00140)

0.01534
(0.00247)
0.04302
(0.00369)

-0.00038
(0.00435)
-0.05917
(0.01814)

3.97490
(1.04442)
0.03439
(0.07936)
0.37531
(0.15012)

0.52205
(0.28391)
0.15567
(0.44937)
0.37307
(0.16397)

0.04140
(0.01492)
0.02470
(0.02403)
0.03320
(0.01108)

-0.02990
(0.15550)
-0.00304
(0.07840)
-0.01657
(0.14512)

B. Derived Model Parameters
The table reports estimates of constant, y , values of log-likelihood function, factors correlations, and
implied short and long rates.

y

Two-Factor
Three-Factor

-0.22893
(0.11022)
-0.98960
(0.00015)

y0
0.06000

y∞
0.07510

LogL
7566.63

Corr12
-0.67

Corr23

Corr13

0.06118

0.06178

7481.69

-0.09

-0.89

-0.29

Table 2. Observed and Fitted LIBOR and Swap Rates
The tables present the actual and implied LIBOR and swap rates. The estimated parameters used for
computations are shown in Table 1. The numbers in bold represent the results for exactly fitted rates, so
they should be exactly the same as the corresponding market figures. We also report implied autocorrelation
in the LIBOR and swap rates’ pricing errors.

A. Level of LIBOR and Swap Rates
3M

2Y

MEAN (%)
5.966
Market 5.627
5.966
One-Factor 5.742
Two-Factor 5.677
5.966
Three-Factor 5.627
5.966
STD (%)
0.514
Market 0.322
0.514
One-Factor 0.524
0.512
Two-Factor
0.514
Three-Factor 0.322
0.514
M.A.E (bps)
One-Factor 33.853 0.000
Two-Factor 31.179 0.000
Three-Factor 0.000
0.000
*M.A.E: mean absolute pricing error.

3Y

5Y

7Y

10Y

6.093
6.062
6.075
6.083

6.254
6.235
6.246
6.259

6.444
6.387
6.372
6.384

6.513
6.578
6.513
6.513

0.534
0.506
0.522
0.538

0.551
0.488
0.540
0.559

0.538
0.471
0.554
0.567

0.565
0.448
0.565
0.565

6.058
2.651
1.692

11.518
2.280
1.608

15.327
7.248
6.403

18.610
0.000
0.000

7Y

10Y

-0.545
-0.619
-0.619
-0.632

-0.603
-0.590
-0.603
-0.603

10.556
9.278
9.849
10.118

9.906
8.818
9.906
9.906

0.923
0.987
0.987

0.901
1.000
1.000

B. Weekly Changes of LIBOR and Swap Rates
3M
2Y
3Y
5Y
MEAN (bps)
Market -0.437 -0.676 -0.673 -0.651
One-Factor -0.686 -0.676 -0.664 -0.641
Two-Factor -0.706 -0.676 -0.659 -0.635
Three-Factor -0.437 -0.676 -0.675 -0.655
STD (bps)
Market 5.036 10.145 10.691 10.350
9.611
One-Factor 10.322 10.145 9.963
9.818
Two-Factor 11.021 10.145 9.928
10.314
10.243
Three-Factor 5.036 10.145
CORR.
0.976
0.960
One-Factor 0.571
1.000
0.986
0.990
Two-Factor 0.574
1.000
0.986
0.990
Three-Factor 1.000
1.000
*CORR: correlation between fitted and observed changes.

C. Implied Autocorrelations of Rates’ Pricing Errors
Entries for exactly fitted rates are left blank.

3M
1 week
One-Factor
Two-Factor
Three-Factor

0.933
0.923

2Y

3Y
0.800
0.673
0.620

5Y
0.910
0.689
0.632

7Y
0.916
0.941
0.946

10Y
0.954

Table 3. Out of Sample Performance Check. Observed and Fitted LIBOR and Swap Rates
The tables present the actual and implied LIBOR and swap rates. The period is from 4/7/1989 till
9/12/1997. The estimated parameters used for computations are shown in the Table 1 (the parameters are
estimated using the rates’ data from 2/3/1995 till 7/16/1999). The numbers in bold represent the results for
exactly fitted rates (these rates are used to extract state variables, so they should be exactly the same as the
corresponding market figures). We also report implied autocorrelation in the LIBOR and swap rates’
pricing errors.

A. Level of LIBOR and Swap Rates
3M
MEAN (%)
Market
One-Factor
Two-Factor
Three-Factor
STD (%)
Market
One-Factor
Two-Factor
Three-Factor
M.A.E. (bps)
One-Factor
Two-Factor
Three-Factor

2Y

3Y

5Y

7Y

10Y

5.734
6.212
5.736
5.734

6.432
6.432
6.432
6.432

6.734
6.519
6.699
6.715

7.138
6.677
7.085
7.116

7.379
6.815
7.343
7.369

7.591
6.987
7.591
7.591

1.807
1.563
1.873
1.807

1.539
1.539
1.539
1.539

1.432
1.512
1.411
1.426

1.272
1.459
1.257
1.277

1.197
1.410
1.175
1.190

1.112
1.342
1.112
1.112

62.567
39.524
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000

22.037
4.287
3.008

47.409
6.368
4.629

58.281
4.871
3.064

63.652
0.000
0.000

7Y

10Y

-0.787
-0.885
-0.780
-0.789

-0.735
-0.846
-0.735
-0.735

13.866
14.906
13.457
13.828

13.157
14.194
13.157
13.157

0.932
0.999
0.999

0.899
1.000
1.000

*M.A.E: mean absolute pricing error.
B. Weekly Changes of LIBOR and Swap Rates
3M
2Y
3Y
5Y
MEAN (bps)
Market -1.046 -0.962 -0.899 -0.823
One-Factor -0.973 -0.962 -0.946 -0.914
Two-Factor -1.083 -0.962 -0.907 -0.829
Three-Factor -1.046 -0.962 -0.914 -0.841
STD (bps)
Market 11.176 16.272 15.684 14.772
One-Factor 16.524 16.272 15.983 15.428
Two-Factor 19.634 16.272 15.132 13.946
Three-Factor 11.176 16.272 15.734 14.569
CORR.
0.994
0.964
One-Factor 0.955
1.000
0.999
0.998
Two-Factor 0.965
1.000
0.999
0.999
Three-Factor 1.000
1.000
*CORR: correlation between fitted and observed changes.

C. Implied Autocorrelations of Rates’ Pricing Errors
Entries for exactly fitted rates are left blank.

3M
1 week
One-Factor
Two-Factor
Three-Factor

0.939
0.858

2Y

3Y
0.985
0.804
0.729

5Y
0.992
0.862
0.799

7Y
0.992
0.762
0.657

10Y
0.992

Table 4. Principal Component Analysis
The tables show the results of standard principal component analysis of data. The 3-month LIBOR and 2-,
3-, 5-, 7-, and 10-year swap rates are from 2/3/1995 to 7/16/1999.

A. Principal Component Analysis on Changes in Rates
∆3M
∆2Y
∆3Y
∆5Y
Level
0.1228 0.4298 0.4624 0.4500
Slope
-0.8662 -0.2727 -0.1120 0.0812
Curvature
0.4817 -0.6007 -0.2884 -0.0351
Factor 4
-0.0096 -0.6056 0.6616 0.2352
* Total Variation Explained

∆7Y
0.4542
0.2231
0.3553
0.0158

∆10Y
0.4214
0.3262
0.4433
-0.3738

T.V.E (%)*
93.697
3.554
1.961
0.327

B. R-square: Regression of Changes in Rates on Factors
Each entry is a R-square for a regression of a rate’s weekly changes of one of the factors from Table 3,
Panel A. The principal component analysis factors are independent by construction.

On Level
On Slope
On Curvature

∆3M
0.3178
0.5934
0.1078

∆2Y
0.9411
0.0188
0.0429

∆10Y
0.9481
0.0252
0.0257

C. R-square: Regression of Factors on Changes in Implied State Vectors
Each entry is a R-square for a regression of one of the principal component analysis factors on an implied
state vector. Implied state vectors correspond to the estimates shown in Table 1.

Level

Slope

Curvature

0.9402

0.0180

0.0385

0.0047
0.7615
0.9934

0.3622
0.0981
0.3634

0.5983
0.1295
0.5983

0.5517
0.6866
0.0082
0.9940

0.0153
0.1061
0.2210
0.9922

0.4215
0.1932
0.7339
0.9602

One-Factor
on ∆y

Two-Factor
on ∆y1
on ∆y2
on ∆y1 +∆y2
Three-Factor
on ∆y1
on ∆y2
on ∆y3
on ∆y1 +∆y2+∆y3

Table 5. Prediction of 3-Month Changes of LIBOR and Swap Rates
A. Sample: 3-Month Changes of Rates (bps)
Because we work with weekly data, a 3-month period is assumed to be equal to 13 weeks. That assumption
gives us 17 three-month changes for 233 weeks.

Mean
STD

3M
-6.8250
24.3526

2Y
-15.7250
59.2229

10Y
-15.8813
44.9111

B. Prediction of 3-Month Changes

3M LIBOR
One-Factor
Two-Factor
Three-Factor
2Y Swap
One-Factor
Two-Factor
Three-Factor
10Y Swap
One-Factor
Two-Factor
Three-Factor

const (bps)

B

R-square

20.1804*
10.8231*
-7.5643*

0.6844**
0.5693**
0.4928**

0.1330
0.0905
0.0973

1.4707
1.4086*
-7.4916

0.0092
0.0397
-0.0319

0.3773
0.4270
0.0732

0.5563*
-1.4580
-2.1863

-0.1251
0.0224
-0.0003

0.0612
0.4396
0.0001

* - insignificantly different from 0, **- insignificantly different from 1.

Table 6. Cap and Swaption Price
The tables report means, standard deviations, and mean absolute errors (M.A.E.s) of actual and fitted caps
and swaptions data series.

A. Cap Price (bps)
The 1-, 2-, 5-, and 10-year caps are from 2/17/1995 to 7/16/1999.

1Y

2Y

5Y

10Y

19.60
21.97
26.66
33.95

72.92
50.68
67.55
88.04

284.84
185.88
235.59
292.94

638.20
462.69
533.18
618.39

5.57
6.20
5.32
5.73
1.70

15.80
0.56
3.97
5.01
5.51

48.88
25.25
13.32
8.52
33.01

81.51
82.39
18.82
9.84
54.74

7.24
9.47
15.03

23.00
11.64
17.36

104.61
53.00
36.62

204.93
110.77
70.59

MEAN
Market
One-Factor
Two-Factor
Three-Factor
STD
Market
One-Factor
Two-Factor
Three-Factor
Bid/Ask
M.A.E
One-Factor
Two-Factor
Three-Factor

B. Swaption Price (bps)
The 3-month-2-year, 3-month-5-year, 3-month-10-year, 2-year-2-year, 2-year-5-year, and 2-year-10-year
swaptions are from 2/17/1995 to 7/16/1999.

MEAN
Market
One-Factor
Two-Factor
Three-Factor
STD
Market
One-Factor
Two-Factor
Three-Factor
Bid/Ask
M.A.E
One-Factor
Two-Factor
Three-Factor

3M2Y

3M5Y

3M10Y

2Y2Y

2Y5Y

2Y10Y

37.75
32.64
39.02
44.03

86.97
73.48
78.55
85.01

144.85
92.86
118.63
95.56

104.57
75.78
87.57
104.30

228.45
174.73
208.57
187.97

358.50
187.16
277.01
322.79

8.06
7.48
6.73
1.01
3.37

15.40
35.07
18.86
5.43
8.12

20.61
70.29
24.43
7.86
14.49

15.99
18.88
7.64
4.37
9.17

26.95
52.55
17.65
15.43
21.40

36.19
91.36
32.66
32.05
37.40

7.92
8.42
8.26

25.29
17.88
11.68

68.08
28.95
49.52

28.81
18.76
12.50

59.00
31.39
42.15

171.34
81.49
59.10

Table 7. Real and Estimated Cap Prices and Slope of Yield Curve
The tables report regression coefficients for regressions of the following form

FittedCap Pr icet − ObservedCap Pr icet = α + βSlopet + ε t ,
P-values for each coefficient are reported in parentheses.

A. 3Month-2Year Slope
For this table Slope = 2-Year Swap Rate – 3-Month LIBOR Rate.

One-Factor
Two-Factor
Three-Factor

1Y
15.9752
(0.0000)
14.0395
(0.0000)
14.9764
(0.0000)

2Y
-9.1432
(0.0008)
-5.1930
(0.0197)
3.4068
(0.1872)

5Y
-54.7213
(0.0000)
-17.7983
(0.0075)
-12.1523
(0.1071)

10Y
-124.2013
(0.0000)
-9.2060
(0.4386)
-43.7534
(0.0020)

B. 3Month-10Year Slope
For this table Slope = 10-Year Swap Rate – 3-Month LIBOR Rate.

One-Factor
Two-Factor
Three-Factor

1Y
9.4554
(0.0000)
6.7235
(0.0000)
6.7174
(0.0000)

2Y
-18.0537
(0.0000)
-11.8317
(0.0000)
-7.9676
(0.0001)

5Y
-98.5700
(0.0000)
-38.2459
(0.0000)
-40.6191
(0.0000)

10Y
-223.8566
(0.0000)
-56.1248
(0.0000)
-92.9875
(0.0000)

Figure 1: LIBOR and Swap Rates
9

8

rate (%)

7

6

5

4

3
2/3/1995

2/3/1996

2/3/1997

2/3/1998

year

3M

2Y

10Y

2/3/1999

Figure 2: 3M LIBOR

11
10
9

rate (%)

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
2/3/1995

2/3/1996

2/3/1997

2/3/1998

year
Observed

2-Factor CIR

2/3/1999

Figure 3: Weekly Changes Volatility
12

10

volatility (bps)

8

6

4

2

0
0

2

4

6

8

time
Market

1-Factor

2-Factor

3-Factor

10

Figure 4: 1Y ATM Cap
50
45
40
price (bps)

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
Feb95

Jun95

Oct95

Feb96

Jun96

Oct96

Feb97

Jun97

Oct97

Feb98

Jun98

year
market

1-Factor CIR

3-Factor CIR

Oct98

Feb99

Jun99

Figure 5: 3M2Y ATM Swaption
80

70

price (bps)

60

50

40

30

20
Feb-95

Jun-95

Oct-95

Feb-96

Jun-96

Oct-96

Feb-97

Jun-97

Oct-97

Feb-98

year
market

1-Factor CIR

2-Factor CIR

Jun-98

Oct-98

Feb-99

Jun-99

References
Aït-Sahalia, Y., 1996, “Testing Continuous-Time Models of the Spot Interest Rate,”
Review of Financial Studies, 9(2), 385-426.
Andersen, T. and J. Lund, 1997, “Short Rate Diffusion: Sources of Steepness, Level and
Curvature in the Yield Curve,” working paper, Northwestern University.
Attari, M., 1999, “Testing Interest Rate Models: What Does Futures and Options Data
Tell Us?” working paper, University of Wisconsin at Madison.
Backus, D., S. Foresi, A. Mozumbar and L. Wu, 1998, “Predictable Changes in Yields
and Forward Rates,” NBER working paper no. 6379.
Bansal, R. and H. Zhou, 2000, “Term Structure of Interest Rates with Regime Shifts,”
working paper, Duke University.
Beaglehole, D. and M. Tenny, 1991, “General Solutions of Some Interest Rate
Contingent Claim Pricing Equations,” Journal of Fixed Income, September 1991,
69-83.
Berndt, E., B. Hall, R. Hall, and J. Hausman, 1974, “Estimation and Inference in
Nonlinear Structural Models,” Annals of Economic and Social Measurement, 3/4,
653-665.
Bjork, T., 1996, “Interest Rate Theory,” Department of Finance, Stockholm School of
Economics, Sweden. To appear in Springer Lecture Notes in Mathematics.
Black, F., 1976, “The Pricing of Commodity Contracts,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 3, 167-179.
Black, F., E. Derman and W. Toy, 1990, “A One-Factor Model of Interest Rates and Its
Application to Treasury Bond Options,” Financial Analyst Journal, JanuaryFebruary 1990, 33-39.
Black, F. and P. Karasinski, 1991, “Bond and Option Pricing when Short Rates are
Lognormal,” Financial Analyst Journal, July-August 1991, 52-59.
Brennan, M. J. and E. S. Schwartz, 1979, “A Continuous-time Approach to the Pricing of
Bonds,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 3, 133-155.
Chacko, G. and S. Das, 2000, “Pricing Interest Rate Derivatives: A General Approach,”
working paper, Harvard University.

Chan, K. C., A. Karolyi, F. Longstaff and A. Sanders, 1992, “An Empirical Comparison
of Alternative Models of the Short-term Interest Rate,” Journal of Finance,
48,1209-1227.
Chen, L. 1996, “Interest Rate Dynamics, Derivatives Pricing, and Risk Management,”
Lecture Notes in Economics and Mathematical Systems, 435, Springer.
Chen, R.-R., and L. Scott, 1992, “Pricing Interest Rate Options in a Two-Factor CoxIngersoll-Ross Model of the Term Structure,” Review of Financial Studies. 5 (4),
613-636.
Chen, R.-R. and L. Scott, 1993, “Maximum Likelihood Estimation for a Multifactor
Equilibrium Model of the Term Structure of Interest Rates,” Journal of Fixed
Income, December 1993, 14-31.
Chen, R.-R. and L. Scott, 1995, “Interest Rate Options in Multifactor Cox-Ingersoll-Ross
Models of the Term Structure” Journal of Fixed Income, Winter 1995, 53-72.
Collin-Dufresne, P. and R. S. Goldstein, “Do Bonds Span Fixed Income Markets? Theory
and Evidence for ‘Unspanned’ Stochastic Volatility,” working paper, Carnegie
Mellon University
Constantinides, G., 1992, “A Theory of the Nominal Term Structure of Interest Rates,”
Review of Financial Studies, 5(4), 531-552.
Cox, J., J. Ingersoll and S. Ross, 1985, “A Theory of the Term Structure of Interest
Rates,” Econometrica, 53(2), 385-407.
Das, S. and S. Foresi, 1996, “Exact Solutions for Bond and Option Prices with Systematic
Jump Risk,” Review of Derivatives Research, 1, 7-24.
Dai, Q. and K. Singleton, 1999, “Specification Analysis of Affine Term Structure
Models,” working paper, Stanford Graduate School of Business.
Dothan, M., 1978, “On the Term Structure of Interest Rates,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 6, 59-69.
Duarte, J., 2000, “The Relevance of the Price of Risk in Affine Term Structure Models,”
working paper.
Duffee, G., 2000, “Term Premia and Interest Rate Forecasts in Affine Models,” working
paper, Haas School of Business, UC Berkeley.
Duffie, D. and K. Singleton, 1997, “An Econometric Model of the Term Structure of
Interest Rate Swap Yields,” Journal of Finance, 52, 1287-1321.

Duffie, D. and K. Singleton, 1999, “Modeling Term Structures of Defaultable Bonds,”
Review of Financial Studies, 12, 687-720.
Feller, W., 1951, “Two Singular Diffusion Problems,” Annals of Mathematics, 54, 173182.
Friedman, A., 1975, “Stochastic Differential Equations and Application (I),” Academic
Press, New York.
Ghysels, E. and S. Ng, 1998, “A Semi-Parametric Factor Model of Interest Rates and
Tests of the Affine Term Structure,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 80, 535548.
Grinblatt, M., 1995, “An Analytic Solution for Interest Rate Swap Spreads,” working
paper no. 9-94, Anderson Graduate School of Management, UCLA.
Harrison, M. and D. Kreps, 1979, “Martingales and Arbitrage in Multiperiod Security
Markets,” Journal of Economic Theory, 20, 381-408.
Ho, T. 1995, “Evolution of Interest Rate Models: A Comparison,” Journal of Derivatives,
Summer 1995, 9-20.
Hull, J., 1997, "Options, Futures and Other Derivatives," Third Edition, Prentice Hall,
New Jersey.
Johannes, M., 1999, “Jumps in Interest Rates: A Nonparametric Approach,” Job Market
Paper, Department of Economics, University of Chicago.
Johnson, N. and S. Kotz, 1983, “Continuous Univariate Distributions,” John Wiley &
Sons.
Karlin, S. and H. Taylor, 1981, “A Second Course in Stochastic Process,” Academic
Press, New York.
Litterman, R. and A. Scheinkman, 1991, “Yield Curve Factors,” Journal of Fixed Income,
June 1991, 54-61.
Longstaff, F. and E. Schwartz, 1992, “Interest Rate Volatility and the Term Structure: A
Two-Factor General Equilibrium Model,” Journal of Finance, 47, 1259-1282.
Longstaff, F., P. Santa-Clara and E. Schwartz, 2000, “The Relative Valuation of Caps and
Swaptions: Theory and Empirical Evidence,” working paper, Anderson Graduate
School of Management, UCLA.
Marsh, T. and E. Rosenfeld, 1983, “Stochastic Processes for Interest Rates and
Equilibrium Bond Prices,” Journal of Finance, 38, 635-646.

Øksendal, B., 1998, “Stochastic Differential Equations: An Introduction with
Applications,” 5th Edition, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg.
Pearson, N. and T. Sun., 1994, “Exploiting the Conditional Density in Estimating the
Term Structure: An Application to the Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross Model,” Journal
of Finance, 49(4), 1279-1304.
Piazzesi, M., 1999, “An Econometric Model of the Yield Curve with Macroeconomic
Jump Effects,” Job Market Paper, Department of Economics, Stanford University.
Stanton, R., 1997, “A Nonparametric Model of Term Structure Dynamics and the Market
Price of Interest Rate Risk,” working paper; forthcoming in Journal of Finance.
Sun, G., 1997, “The Test Function Method for Estimating Continuous-Time Models of
Short Term Interest Rate,” working paper, Department of Finance, University of
Minnesota.
Sun, G., 1998, “Essays on Term Structure Models,” unpublished dissertation, University
of Minnesota.
Vasicek, O., 1977, “An Equilibrium Characterization of the Term Structure,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 5, 177-188.
Wei, D. and D. Guo, 1997, “Pricing Risky Debt: An Empirical Comparison of the
Longstaff and Schwartz and Merton Models,” Journal of Fixed Income,
September 1997, 8-28.

