                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            MODEL UNCERTAINTY AND LIQUIDITY


                                          Bryan R. Routledge
                                            Stanley E. Zin


                                          Working Paper 8683
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8683


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2001




We thank Burton Hollifield, Erzo Luttmer, David Marshall, and seminar participants at Boston College, Cal-
Tech, Carnegie Mellon, the International Monetary Fund, Tulane, CEF-2000 (Barcelona), the Econometric
Society World Congress (Seattle), and the NBER Summer Institute for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.


© 2001 by Bryan R. Routledge and Stanley E. Zin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Model Uncertainty and Liquidity
Bryan R. Routledge and Stanley E. Zin
NBER Working Paper No. 8683
December 2001
JEL No. G10, G13, G20



                                               ABSTRACT

        Extreme market outcomes are often followed by a lack of liquidity and a lack of trade. This
market collapse seems particularly acute for markets where traders rely heavily on a specific empirical
model such as in derivative markets. Asset pricing and trading, in these cases, are intrinsically model
dependent. Moreover, the observed behavior of traders and institutions that places a large emphasis on
"worst-case scenarios'' through the use of "stress testing'' and "value-at-risk'' seems different than Savage
rationality (expected utility) would suggest. In this paper we capture model-uncertainty explicitly using
an Epstein-Wang (1994) uncertainty-averse utility function with an ambiguous underlying asset-returns
distribution. To explore the connection of uncertainty with liquidity, we specify a simple market where
a monopolist financial intermediary makes a market for a propriety derivative security.                 The
market-maker chooses bid and ask prices for the derivative, then, conditional on trade in this market,
chooses an optimal portfolio and consumption. We explore how uncertainty can increase the bid-ask
spread and, hence, reduces liquidity. In addition, "hedge portfolios'' for the market-maker, an important
component to understanding spreads, can look very different from those implied by a model without
Knightian uncertainty. Our infinite-horizon example produces short, dramatic decreases in liquidity even
though the underlying environment is stationary.




Bryan R. Routledge                                                 Stanley E. Zin
GSIA, Carnegie Mellon University                                   GSIA, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890                                          Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890
rout@sulawesi.gsia.cmu.edu                                         and NBER
                                                                   zin@cmu.edu
1 Introduction
In August 1998 an odd thing happened: the Russian government repudiated
debt. While this event had a large e ect on the value of Russian bonds, the
event, by itself, is not odd. Long prior to August, yields on Russian govern-
ment bonds exhibited a signi cant premium over comparable U.S. Treasury
securities, suggesting that default (or at least rescheduling) was not only possi-
ble but carried non-trivial probability. These bonds were undoubtedly ex ante
risky. The ex post default and the change in the bond's price can be viewed
simply as a realization from the distribution of possible payo s (i.e., \risk
happens"). What is truly odd about the Russian-debt default, and the subse-
quent collapse of the prominent hedge-fund Long Term Capital Management,
was that during the crisis, markets for most emerging-markets debt exhibited
a severe lack of liquidity. Bid-ask spreads on emerging market debt increased
from 10-20 basis points to 60-80 basis points following the crisis.1 More dra-
matically, a number of market-makers withdrew from trading and did not
post quotations while others reported that the market became \one-sided."2
The lack of liquidity was not limited to the Russian debt market and emerging
market bonds. The \ ight-to-quality" made trading in corporate debt diÆcult
as bid-ask spreads increased dramatically.3 In addition, several initial public
o erings, including that of Goldman Sachs, as well as several corporate bond
o erings and were canceled, reportedly, due to a lack of liquidity.4
   The extremely large change in nancial prices, in particular the credit
spreads, observed over this period had little, if any, historical precedent. My-
   1  See International Monetary Fund (1998).
   2  See Bank of International Settlements (1999) report which surveyed market participants
following the crisis. The Wall Street Journal reported on November 16th, 1998, (page A1)
that \LTCM's partners: : : reported that their markets had dried up. There were no buyers,
no sellers. It was all but impossible to maneuver out of large trading bets."
    3 Bank of International Settlements (1999) reports that bid-ask spreads for U.K. AA
corporate bonds doubled and U.K. BAA bonds tripled.
    4 On October 7th, The Wall Street Journal reported (page A1) on liquidity in the corpo-
rate bond market: \According to [Scott's Fertilizer Company's] lead investment bankers at
Salomon Smith Barney, there is no bond market at any price."

                                             1
ron Scholes, a partner in Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) at the
time of the Russian debt crisis noted the improbability of the events of Au-
gust 1998. One week after the Russian government default, the swap credit
spread increased 20 basis points (treasury bond yields versus AA rated debt
yields). The increase is ten standard deviations above historic norms.5 The
large and dramatic change in nancial prices was not the only source of uncer-
tainty. There was uncertainty about the solvency of some U.S.-based nancial
institutions. The Federal Reserve Bank's role in facilitating a recapitalization
of LTCM, a hedge fund, was unprecidented. More generally, there was uncer-
tainty about the Federal Reserve Bank's interest rate policy. The subsequent
rate cut on October 15, 1998, represented a change from in ation targeting.6
    Many economic models can incorporate unusual events like the Russian
crisis as rare events, structural breaks, or changes in the risk premiums. From
any of these perspectives, standard models would typically predict a capital
loss by some, a capital gain by others, and perhaps a change in the market-
price process. However, most models are unable to explain the drop in liquidity
that accompanies the crisis.7 The puzzle is not the large change in nancial
prices, it is that people seem to stop trading. In this paper we investigate the
connection between uncertainty and liquidity.
   The Russian debt crisis and market collapse is not unique. For example,
Summers (2000) recounts the ve other major international nancial crises
that took place during the 1990's involving economies in Mexico, Thailand,
Indonesia, South Korea, and Brazil. Domestically, there have been many mar-
ket collapses or crashes including the 1975 municipal bond crisis sparked by
   5 See Scholes (2000). Note that for a normal distribution, the probability of a 10 standard
deviation tail event is on the order of 10 24 which is roughly the likelihood of winning the
Powerball lottery three times in a row. It was also rumored at the time, that relative
to some of LTCM's empirical models, price changes of this magnitude represented a 23
standard deviation event. The likelihood for a normal distribution of such an observation is
on the order of 10 117 (for comparison, the number of atoms in the universe is on the order
of 1078).
   6 See Marshall (2001).
   7 Marshall (2001) models a liquidity crisis as a \bad" equilibrium in coordination a game
of asymmetrically informed lenders and borrowers.

                                              2
New York City's near default, various stock market crashes (1929, 1987, 1989),
and the collapse of the high-yield debt market in the early 1990's. While all of
these events have their unique aspects, they share two common features. First,
times of crises are associated with a greater degree of uncertainty. Almost by
de nition, a crisis involves a substantial change in nancial prices so the ex
ante likelihood of the event is low and the event is unusual. However, as in
the case of the Russian crisis, there is an increased degree of uncertainty. For
example, Prati and Sbracia (2001) documents that the dispersion in forecasts
of economic growth increased during the Asian nancial crisis. Second, crises
are accompanied by a severe lack of liquidity. Following the various recent
international and domestic crises, liquidity disappeared. Bid-ask spreads in-
crease,8 people have diÆculty executing trades for existing nancial securities,
and new bond and equity o erings are postponed or canceled. In this paper we
investigate the connection between these two features. We investigate whether
severe reduction in liquidity, or a \market break" can result from \model un-
certainty." In particular, we focus on markets such as nancial derivatives in
which traders must rely on an empirical model for the stochastic cash- ow
process of an underlying security. This is a setting where asset pricing and
trading is intrinsically model-dependent. By specifying preferences that ex-
plicitly incorporate \model uncertainty" in a simple market-making setting,
we show how uncertainty and liquidity are related.
    To study the uncertainty-liquidity connection, we focus on a nancial inter-
mediary. The role of an intermediary is to facilitate trade. In well-developed
liquid markets, the role of an intermediary is the straightforward matching
of buyers and sellers (e.g., the specialist at the NYSE). In contrast, in more
specialized nancial markets like \proprietary products," the intermediary par-
ticipates directly in the transaction. For example, according to Scholes (2000),
LTCM was in the \business of supplying liquidity." This type of intermedia-
tion requires an ability to value and hedge the nancial contract that is being
provided. Typically, rms attack this problem in two disjoint approaches.
  8 Becker, Chadha, and Sy (2000) document the increase in bid-ask spreads in foreign
exchange and interbank rates following the 1997-1998 Asian crisis.

                                         3
They use a model like Black and Scholes (1973) to calculate arbitrage bounds
and hedge trades for a nancial contract. However since the nancial model
is only an abstraction that is based on limited data, rms typically \stress
test" their model to account for \model risk." For example, \Value at Risk"
calculates the loss potential over a speci ed horizon for an arbitrarily speci-
  ed probability. A portfolio resulting from the sale of a nancial contract and
an o setting (perhaps dynamic) hedge position might have a 1% likelihood of
losing $50 million over the next two weeks. Exactly how large a tail to mea-
sure and what distributional assumption to make are left to judgment. What
is striking about the amount of attention paid to worst-case scenarios, stress
testing and value-at-risk calculations is that trader attitudes towards uncer-
tainty of the correctness of their model is distinct from the risk of stochastic
prices. That is, the preferences expressed by this behavior do not adhere to
the Savage (1954) axioms for expected utility rationality.
    Savage rationality, in particular the independence or sure-thing axiom, im-
plies that preferences should not depend on the source of the risk. Uncertainty
about the appropriateness of a pricing model, \model uncertainty," is indis-
tinguishable from the risk inherent in the assumed stochastic process. The
Savage independence axiom implies that one can simply collapse the proba-
bility weighting across possible models (\uncertainty") with the probabilities
for payo s (\risk") to represent behavior with a single probability measure for
states. However, in experimental settings, decision makers consistently violate
the independence axiom. For example, Ellsberg (1961), demonstrated that
individuals' decisions over lotteries could not be represented by an expected
utility decision rule. People expressed (revealed) a preference to \know the
odds" or an aversion to uncertainty. In the context of nancial intermedia-
tion, not knowing the realization of an asset payo (consumption risk) and not
knowing the probability measure for payo s (model uncertainty) have di erent
behavioral implications. This distinction between risk and uncertainty, rst
described by Knight (1921), is axiomatized in Gilboa and Schmeidler (1989).
The resulting decision rule that captures uncertainty aversion is represented
by Choquet (1955) utility. Given a random variable ! 2 , an agent chooses
                                       4
the optimal action,  2 , according to
                                                         
                                 max min E [u(; !)] :
                                 2 2
                                                                                           (1)
Uncertainty is captured by the set of probability measures . The aversion to
uncertainty manifests itself in the \min" operator that appears after the action
is chosen. If the set  is a singleton, then the decision rule is the standard
Savage rationality of expected utility.9 In this paper, we use the recursive
intertemporal formulation of uncertainty aversion of Epstein and Wang (1994)
and (1995). This speci cation facilitates dynamic programming and preserves
dynamic consistency.10 The robust control framework of Hansen, Sargent,
and Tallarini (1999) is similar to the Epstein and Wang approach. In a linear-
quadratic model the mean return, for example, is chosen by a malevolent
nature. The result is the same \min" operator as in Choquet utility.
    Our goal in the paper is to understand the relationship between model un-
certainty and liquidity. The Choquet representation of uncertainty aversion is
well de ned. However, at any level of generality, \liquidity" is diÆcult to de-
 ne. Analogous to the vacuous distinction between unemployment and leisure
in a perfect labor market, parties choosing not to trade in a frictionless nan-
cial market is not a lack of liquidity. Liquidity can only be de ned relative to a
market friction. Models of liquidity must include a market friction like an im-
perfectly competitive market or asymmetric information. Within the context
of some market imperfection, liquidity is commonly measured as a \discount
for immediacy" (e.g. Grossman and Miller (1988)) or the \price impact of a
trade" (e.g. Kyle (1985)). In this paper we wish to study the relationship
between liquidity and uncertainty rather than market microstructure per se.
We, therefore, specify a rather simple market mechanism. We focus on the bid
   9 A closely related approach of Gilboa (1987) and Schmeidler (1989) models subjective
prior beliefs to be non-additive. In a coin toss, uncertainty aversion is captured by P (head)+
P (tail) < 1.
  10 Time inconsistent examples with uncertainty aversion is a concern since there is no
restriction that conditional events have less uncertainty than unconditional. Seidenfeld and
Wasserman (1993) de ne and provide examples of this dilation of beliefs.

                                              5
and ask prices for a proprietary derivative security. The market-maker for this
derivative is assumed to be a monopolist in that market while the market for
the underlying security is frictionless. We therefore treat the bid-ask spread
and the associated probability that the market maker will make a trade, as a
measure of liquidity in the market for this derivative security.11
    Speci cally, we consider a nancial intermediary who makes a market for
a propriety derivative security. This market maker chooses bid and ask prices
for the derivative to optimally tradeo the probability of attracting a seller
or buyer with the current income and future utility implications implied from
a trade in the derivative. When there is ambiguity about the appropriate
probability distribution for the underlying security's cash ows, the market-
maker is uncertain about these dynamic consequences, which we model with
an Epstein-Wang uncertainty-averse utility function. We nd that uncertainty
increases the bid-ask spread and, hence, reduces liquidity. In addition, \hedge
portfolios" for the market maker can look very di erent from those implied by
a model without Knightian uncertainty.
   In Section 2, we lay out the basic economic environment and describe the
market-makers problem. In Section 3, we explore some simple two-period
examples of the general model and in Section 4 extend these examples to an
in nite time horizon. Section 5 concludes the paper.


2 The Model
The model we consider is that of a monopolist making a market in a derivative
asset as well as choosing optimal portfolio and consumption. The market-
maker sets a bid and ask price for a derivative whose payo is X (Pt )  0.12
  11 The setting we adopt here is similar to Ho and Stoll (1981) and related inventory-based
microstructure models.
  12 In order to maintain the intuitive bid-ask relation, 0 < b < a, we will only consider
derivatives with non-negative payo s.

                                             6
Trades by the market maker are discrete short, no-trade, or long events, de-
noted dt 2 f 1; 0; 1g. The \size" of a trade can be incorporated into the
de nition of the derivative's payo . For concreteness, our numerical examples
focus on the case of a one-period call option X (Pt) = s max(Pt x; 0). The
parameter s determines the size or importance of each trade.
     The demand for the derivative is summarized by the arrival of a random
willingness-to-trade v~t . If v~t is greater than or equal to the posted ask price,
at , then a \buy order" is received and the market maker must go short one
call (denoted as dt = 1), at a price of at . If the willingness-to-trade v~t is
less than or equal to the posted bid price, bt , then the market maker must
go long one call (dt = 1), at a price of bt . If v~t lies between the bid and ask
prices, no trade takes place (dt = 0). We assume the willingness to trade is
an i.i.d. process with (v) = Prob(~v < v). The bid and ask prices determine
the likelihood of trade in the derivative with Prob(dt = 1) = [1 (at )],
Prob(dt = 0) = [(at ) (bt )], and, Prob(dt = 1) = (bt ). For simplicity, we
assume (v) is atomless and de ne (v) = @ (v)=@v.
    The exogenous random arrival of a trade request is consistent with a num-
ber of deeper microstructure models. This simple speci cation of the market
structure for the derivative lets us focus on the e ect of return-uncertainty on
liquidity. Note that there is no uncertainty about the distribution governing
trade arrival. To explore uncertainty about the market microstructure itself,
a more detailed speci cation of the market would be needed.
   After the arrival of the request to trade, the market maker chooses an
optimal consumption and investment in a risky asset. This allows the mar-
ket maker the opportunity to dynamically hedge the realized position in the
derivative market.




                                        7
2.1      Investment Opportunities:


We denote as t 1 the asset holdings brought into period t, t the assets pur-
chased in period t to be carried into t + 1, Pt as the ex -dividend price of the
underlying risky asset, and Æt as the period-t dividend paid by the risky as-
set.13 The market for the underlying asset is assumed to be frictionless. ct is
period-t consumption and !t is the income of the market-maker in period t.
The period-t budget constraint is:
                  t 1 (Pt + Æt ) + ! (yt ; vt ; dt 1 ; at ; bt ) = ct + t Pt :          (2)

    Total income, !(yt; vt ; dt 1; at; bt ), includes both exogenous income and
derivatives trading income. Exogenous period t income is denoted yt. The
market-making activity a ects income both through the derivative position,
dt 1 , carried into period t and through new trades in the derivative. The trad-
ing income in the current period depends on the choice of ask, at , and bid, bt ,
and the realization of the willingness-to-trade, v~t.
                                                         8
                                                         >
                                                         >
                                                         >
                                                         <
                                                               a;       if vt  at
       ! (yt ; vt ; dt 1 ; at ; bt ) = yt + dt 1 X (Pt ) + >   0;       if bt < vt < at   (3)
                                                           >
                                                         >
                                                         :     b;       if vt  bt
The trading outcome also determines the position in the derivative dt the
market maker will carry forward into the next period. That is dt = 1 if
vt  at , dt = 0 if bt < vt < at , or dt = 1 if vt  bt .

   The timing of events implied by this notation is shown in Figure 1. The
market maker enters period t with holdings in the underlying security of t 1
which pay a dividend of Æt and are liquidated at the price Pt . Holdings in
the derivative of dt 1 have cash- ows realized of X (Pt ). Finally, he collects
  13The dividend on the risky asset is helpful in constructing the simple numerical example
in Section 4. It is not needed for any of the analytical discussion or the two period example
in Section 3.

                                                8
                                                 Figure 1: Model Time-Line
                                                                                                                    choose
           incoming           choose       exogenous request            trade             update                  consumption                outgoing
            wealth            bid/ask         for trade               execution           wealth                   portfolio                  wealth




                               fa ; b g
                                  t   t               vt                                                              fc ;  g
                                                                                                                        t   t

                                                                                      8>
                                                                                       <W     t   + at   if dt = 1
                                                                              Wt0   =
                                                                                       >: W
                                                                                          W
                                                                                              t

                                                                                                    bt
                                                                                                         if dt = 0
                                                                                                         if dt = +1
                                                                                              t


                                                                  8                                                    8
        W t = t   1 (Pt + Æt ) + yt + dt 1 X (Pt )               >< 1     if vt > at                                  ><  (P +1 + Æ +1 ) X (P +1)
                                                                                                                            t    t     t             t       if dt = 1
                                                           dt   =
                                                                   >: +1
                                                                      0    if bt   a
                                                                                   vt     t                   Wt+1 =
                                                                                                                        >:  ((PP +1 +
                                                                                                                            t    t     tÆ +1 )               if dt = 0
                                                                           if vt < bt                                       t    t +1 + Æ +1 ) + X (P +1 )
                                                                                                                                       t             t       if dt = +1




exogenous income of yt. Given this information, he chooses a bid price, bt ,
and an ask price, at . After the bid and ask are set, the exogenous request for
a trade arrives, i.e., v~t is realized. Knowing the outcome of the trade in the
derivative market, the market maker then chooses date t consumption, ct, and
investment in underlying risky security, t .

2.2     Preferences:


The stochastic process governing the transition of the underlying security price
and exogenous income is assumed to be Markov, with transition density given
by

                                          ProbfP 0; Æ0; y0 j P; Æ; yg = (P; Æ; y) :                                                                                      (4)

If the market maker has uncertainty or ambiguity about these probabilities,
we will denote as  the set of all such distributions. As in Epstein and Wang
(1995), we assume that this set is time invariant. It should be thought of
as part of the investor's preferences, rather than the physical environment
since the uncertainty is only relevant if the agent's preferences are averse to
ambiguity. Also following Epstein and Wang, we assume that preferences are

                                                                                  9
given by the utility function, U , that is the stationary, recursive speci cation
of uncertainty aversion:
                     U (c0 ; c~1 ; c~2 ; : : :) = u(c0 ) +       min E U (~c1 ; c~2 ; : : :) ;
                                                                 2 
                                                                                                 (5)
where 0 < < 1 is a utility discount factor and u(c) is the single period utility
derived from consumption c. Standard Savage preferences are included in this
speci cation. If the set  as a singleton, the agent adheres to Savage axioms.

2.3       Bellman Equation:


Combining the investment opportunity, the consumption implied by the bud-
get constraint (2), and the speci cation of preferences, we can characterize
this problem as a dynamic program. The Bellman equation associated with
this program is given by:
                                (                           h
 V (; d; P; Æ; y ) = max
                       a;b
                                  [1 (a)] max
                                                  u((P + Æ ) + y + dX (P ) + a 0 P )
                                                        0

                                                                                                i
                                                          + min   E [V ( ; 1; P ; Æ ; y )]
                                                              2 
                                                                          0         0   0    0
                                                     h
                                 + [(a) (b)] max
                                                        u((P + Æ ) + y + dX (P ) 0 P )
                                                                                                i
                                                                 0



                                                           + min    E [V ( ; 0; P ; Æ ; y )]
                                                                2 
                                                                              0     0   0    0
                                                h
                                      + (b) max
                                              
                                                   u((P + Æ ) + y + dX (P ) b 0 P )
                                                        0
                                                                                                  )
                                                                                               i
                                                           + min
                                                               2 
                                                                    E [V ( ; 1; P ; Æ ; y )] :
                                                                            0     0   0    0
                                                                                          (6)
V (; d; P; Æ; y )
                is the value function. It depends on the ve state variables:
the position in the asset, the position in the derivative, the realized price for
the asset, the realized dividend, and the realization for the exogenous income.
The portfolio (and hence consumption), are chosen after the realization of v~,
which along with a and b, determines the outgoing position in the derivative.
The outgoing position in the derivative, d0, characterizes the future e ect from
                                                      10
the derivative trading (i.e., a, b, v~ need not be included in the list of state
variables).
    Although closed-form solutions for the optimal policies of this dynamic
program are unavailable, there are many computational algorithms that can
be used to solve numerical versions of this model. When the set  is not
a singleton, the computational burden associated with solving this problem
can be signi cantly greater than in the standard expected utility model. The
additional non-linear program necessitated by the uncertainty averse prefer-
ences (minimizing over distributions) increases computation time. Routledge,
Trick, and Zin (2000) o er some new approaches to this problem that may
yield signi cant computational gains.


3 Two-Period Model
To better understand the connection between uncertainty and liquidity, we
 rst examine a simpler, two-period (t = 0; 1) version of the economy. Here,
the market maker makes a market in a derivative of the single risky asset at
period zero and the derivative payo s at period one. The single risky asset,
whose prices are P0 and P1 , trades in a perfect market. In this section, the
dividend is zero, Æ0 = Æ1 = 0, and exogenous income, y0 and y1 are non-
stochastic.

3.1     Portfolio Choice with Uncertainty Aversion


Since the portfolio is chosen after the realization of trade in the derivative, we
can consider the portfolio choice and the market-making activity separately.
To do this, write the Bellman equation in two parts. The full market-maker
problem is discussed in Section 3.2. However, before characterizing the optimal
period zero bid and ask prices, we rst consider the choice of the optimal
                                       11
consumption and portfolio. How Knightian uncertainty a ects the optimal
portfolio turns out to be very important to understanding the market-making
problem.
   The portfolio problem is the inner maximization over 0 in equation (6).
Note that a portfolio choice determines consumption via the budget constraint.
That is, c0 = !0 P0 and c1 = !1 + P1. De ne the indirect total utility
function U (d; a; b) as follows:
                                                                     
          U (d; a; b) = max
                         
                            u (!0     P0 ) +   min E [u (!1 + P1 )]
                                                2 
                                                                               (7)
The two-period version of income, equation (3), is
                    8
                    >
                    >
                    >
                    <
                         b       if d = 1
         !0 = y0 + >     0       if d = 0 ; and !1 = y1 + dX (P1)              (8)
                    >
                    >
                    :    a       if d = 1
Since U (d; a; b) is conditional on the realization for the trade in the derivative
market, the ask and bid prices have implications only for period-zero income.
Therefore, U (d; a; b) does not depend on a or b if d = 0. Similarly, it does not
depend on ask price, a, if a \buy" order occurred and d = 1. Finally, U does
not depend on the bid price b if a \sell" order d = 1 was received. Therefore,
we can summarize equation (7) with three functions. Denote U0 when there
is no trade in the derivative (d = 0), Ub when the market maker has paid b
and is long the derivative (d = 1), and Ua for when the market maker sold the
derivative for a and holds a short position (d = 1).
    For concreteness, consider the portfolio choice for three di erent agents
i 2 f1; 2; K g. Two Savage individuals are captured with 1 = f 1 g and 2 =
f2g. An individual with an aversion to Knightian uncertainty is represented
by K = f1; 2g. Obviously, to make this example interesting, 1 6= 2 .
   For Savage individuals i = 1; 2, the optimal portfolio is characterized by

                                        12
the standard rst order condition.
                                                h                  i
                    u0 (w0       i P0 )P0 + Ei u0 (w1 + i P1 )P1 = 0        (9)
Figures 2 and 3 plot total utility (right-hand-side of (7)) against portfolio hold-
ings, , given income and prices. The utility is plotted for each distribution 1
and 2 and the Savage-optimal portfolios, 1 and 2 , are indicated. For expo-
sition, the utility function is quadratic and the distribution, i , is summarized
by its mean and variance.
    The Knight agent's utility in Figures 2 and 3 is the lower envelope of the
two Savage agents. There are two possibilities for how the optimal portfolio
of the Knight individual is characterized. First, the aversion to uncertainty
can make the Knight agent act according to the worst-case probability distri-
bution. Here, the Knight agent simply looks like a pessimistic or \worst-case"
Savage agent. Distribution 1 is the worst-case near 1 in Figure 2 since
E [u (!1 + 1 P1 )] < E [u (!1 + 1 P1 )] :14 In this case, K = 1 and the opti-
  1                          2

mal portfolio satis es the rst-order condition in equation (9). The de nition
of worst-case depends on the correlation between period-one income and the
asset payo . Since, as we will explore below, market-making activity in u-
ences this correlation, the distribution that is considered as worst-case may
depend on the market-maker's position in the derivative.
     The de nition of the worst-case distribution will also depend on the port-
folio. In Figure 2 very large long or short positions in the asset switch the
characterization of worst-case to 2 (note that 2 has a larger variance than
 1 ). However, for portfolios in the neighborhood of K (which is equal to 1 ),
distribution 1 is always the worst-case. In contrast, Figure 3 is an example
where, at the optimal Knight portfolio, there is no portfolio-free characteriza-
tion of the worst-case. This is the second possibility for the characterization
                                                                  
 14   This condition implies that E2 u !1 + 2 P1 > E1 u !1 + 2 P1 .



                                             13
              Figure 2: Optimal Portfolio: Quadratic Example 1
                                     10
                                          Model 1: µ=1.1 σ=0.6
                                      9   Model 2: µ=1.8 σ=1.5
                                          Optimal θ
                                          Knightian
                                      8


                                      7


                                      6
                  Expected Utility




                                      5


                                      4


                                      3


                                      2


                                      1


                                      0

                                     −3        −2                −1             0            1   2    3
                                                                      Portfolio Holdings θ

   Note: The gure depicts the utility from each of two distributions (low mean/low
   variance versus high mean/high variance) as a function of the investment in the risky
   asset . In this example, the Knightian-uncertainty portfolio choice is equivalent to
   assuming the low mean/low variance distribution and Savage expected utility.



of the Knight-optimal portfolio and occurs when
                E1 [u (!1 + 1 P1 )] > E2 [u (!1 + 1 P1 )]                                        and      (10)
                E2 [u (!1 + 2 P1 )] > E1 [u (!1 + 2 P1 )]                                             :
In this situation, there is not a clear worst case distribution and the Knight
agent acts like neither of the Savage agents K 6= 1 and K 6= 2 . At K , a
marginal change in the portfolio alters which distribution is considered worst-
case and uncertainty is of rst-order importance.
    When equation (10) holds, the optimal Knight portfolio is not character-
ized by a rst-order condition. Instead, the optimal portfolio for the Knight
individual occurs at the intersection of the utility calculated under the two

                                                                          14
                  Figure 3: Optimal Portfolio: Quadratic Example 2
                     12
                           Model 1: µ=0.9 σ=0.6
                           Model 2: µ=2 σ=1.5
                           Optimal θ
                     10    Knightian




                      8




                      6




                      4




                      2




                      0

                      −3        −2                −1         0        1    2        3

       Note: The gure depicts the utility from each of two distributions (low mean/low
       variance versus high mean/high variance) as a function of the investment in the
       risky asset . In this example, the Knightian-uncertainty portfolio choice di ers
       signi cantly from the Savage expected-utility choice under either distribution.



distributions. That is, K , solves
                           h                          i            h         i
                      E1 u w1 + K P1                      = E u w1 + K P1
                                                                 2                        (11)
and K lies between 1 and 2.15
    The behavior of the Knight trader in these two cases is distinct. Consider,
for example, how the Knight's optimal portfolio responds to a change in initial
income, w0 . In the situation where the Knight's portfolio is identical to a
pessimistic Savage portfolio it is de ned by the rst order condition (see Figure
2). Di erentiating equation (9) implies that 0 < @@!K < P1 . However, in the
                                                                           0    0

  15Equation (11) may have multiple solutions. However, the optimal portfolio is the only
solution that lies in the interval between 1 and 2 . This is because, for Savage individuals,
the rst-order condition is necessary and suÆcient.

                                                            15
case where there is no portfolio-free characterization of the worst-case as in
Figure 3, equation (11) determines the optimal portfolio and @@!K = 0. Due to
                                                                   0
the rst-order nature of the uncertainty, the optimal portfolio of the Knight
agent is insensitive to changes in initial wealth. This is true even for discrete
changes in initial income. As long as equation (10) holds at the new level
of income, !0, even large changes in initial income will not alter the optimal
Knight holdings of the risky asset.

3.1.1   Convex Uncertainty




Thus far, Knightian uncertainty has been characterized by the discrete set,
K = f1; 2g. This represents uncertainty between two alternative models.
A natural alternative characterization of uncertainty is be to allow mixing be-
tween the two discrete models. Consider a case where Knightian uncertainty
is de ned by the convex set C = f 1 + (1 )2j 2 [0; 1]g. Since expec-
tations are linear in probabilities, adding the convex hull to the set of possible
distributions does not alter behavior. In particular, the optimal portfolio, C ,
for a Knight trader with this convex uncertainty, C , will be identical to a
Knight trader with the discrete set of models, K ; that is C = K . However,
since C is convex, by the min-max theorem,
        n                           o              n                     o
  max
   
      u(c0 ) + minC E [u(c1 )] = minC max
                2               2   
                                           u(c0 ) + E [u(c1 )]              (12)
Therefore, there exists a Savage individual with beliefs  = 1 + (1 )2
whose optimal portfolio is identical to the Knight's; that is C =  . Figure
4 is identical to Figure 3 except utility is plotted for additional distributions.
In this case the optimal Knight portfolio, C , is the same as that of a Savage
individual whose beliefs are given by = 0:1. One can not distinguish between
a Savage individual with beliefs  =0:1 and Knight trader with uncertainty of
C simply by observing the portfolio choice. However, the two traders are
distinguished by other behavior. For example, the Savage individual reacts in
the usual way to a change in initial income, 0 < @@! < P1 . This is not true
                                                       0     0


                                        16
               Figure 4: Optimal Portfolio: Convex Uncertainty
                                                  1
                    α= 0.0: µ=0.9 σ=0.5 Model π
                    α= 0.1:
                        12 µ=1.0 σ=0.6
                    α= 0.2: µ=1.1 σ=0.7
                    α= 0.3: µ=1.2 σ=0.8
                    α= 0.4: µ=1.3 σ=0.9
                    α= 0.5:
                        10 µ=1.4 σ=1.0
                    α= 0.6: µ=1.5 σ=1.1
                    α= 0.7: µ=1.6 σ=1.2
                    α= 0.8: µ=1.7 σ=1.3
                    α= 0.9: µ=1.8 σ=1.4
                         8
                    α= 1.0: µ=1.9 σ=1.5 Model π2
                    Optimal θ
                    Knightian

                                        6
                     Expected Utility




                                        4




                                        2




                                        0

                                        −3   −2       −1             0            1   2   3
                                                           Portfolio Holdings θ

   Note: The gure depicts the utility under several of the possible distributions C =
   f 1 + (1 2 j 2 [0; 1]g) as a function of the investment in the risky asset . In
   this case, the optimal Knight portfolio, C = K is the same as a Savage portfolio
   with = 0:1,  =0:1



of the Knight portfolio. As before, @@!C = 0. When initial income changes,
                                                                0
the optimal Knight portfolio can still be represented by a particular Savage
agent's choice. However, it will be a di erent-looking Savage. That is, when
0 < < 1, a change in endowment requires a changes in the beliefs if one
is to mimic the Knight portfolio with a Savage individual. As in Figure 3,
the uncertainty is of rst-order importance. Since the relevant aspects of
Knightian uncertainty are present in the simple discrete-set characterization,
P iK , we focus on this speci cation in the remainder of the paper.




                                                           17
3.2     The Market Maker Problem


Given a characterization of the portfolio problem and the resulting indirect
utility, the market-maker problem at period zero in the two-period model is
given by                                                       
              max
               a;b
                     [1 (a)] Ua + [(a) (b)] U0 + (b)Ub :                 (13)
Recall that the demand for the derivative asset is captured by the arrival of a
trader with a valuation v~ with distribution (v) = Prob(~v < v). In choosing
the bid and ask prices, the tradeo for the market maker is straightforward.
Choosing a high value for the ask will generate more revenue should a high-
value trader arrive. However, it lowers the probability of such a trade actually
arriving. Likewise, choosing a low value for the bid will allow the market
maker to obtain the future cash ows of the derivative for a low price should
a low-value trader arrive, but it lowers the probability of such a trade actually
arriving. In both cases, the period-zero income e ect that results from a trade
is o set by the period-one income e ect of the derivative's payo .

3.2.1   Example




To explore the e ects of uncertainty on the bid-ask spread, we examine a
numerical example of the two period economy. Preferences, u, in this example
are quadratic and exogenous income, y0 and y1, is constant. The example
considers a market-maker for a call option X (Pt ) = s max(0; P1 1:5) with
s = 1. The demand for the derivative is summarized by the arrival of a
random willingness-to-trade v~ with (v) as uniform on the interval [0:5; 1:5].
The current price, P0 = 0:9. The distribution(s) of the underlying asset's
period one payo , P1; is assumed to be binomial with equally likely values of
                                    8
                                    <    m + m
                               P~1 = :                                      (14)
                                         m m


                                         18
                 Figure 5: Bid and Ask as Uncertainty Increases
                                                    Bid Ask as Uncertainty Increases
                          1.6




                          1.4



                                                                                                   vH
                          1.2                                                                      vL
                                                                                                   ask Savage
                                                                                                   bid Savage
                                                                                                   ask Knight
                                                                                                   bid Knight
                  Price




                           1




                          0.8




                          0.6




                          0.4
                            0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9       1       1.1        1.2         1.3   1.4      1.5       1.6


   Note: The expected-utility market maker is willing to raise his bid price as volatility
                                                    Standard Deviation in Model #2



   increases, whereas the market maker with an aversion to Knightian uncertainty does
   not.



which implies a mean of m and a variance of m2 . There are two possible
distributions or models, m for m 2 f1; 2g, for the underlying asset. Two
Savage market-makers are captured by 1 = f1g and 2 = f2g. The Knight
market-maker with uncertainty aversion, is represented by K = f1; 2g.
Model m = 1 has a mean and standard deviation variance of 0:9. Model 2
has a mean and standard deviation that we range from 0:7 to 1:8. For the
di erent economies we consider, as the distribution in Model 2 moves further
away from the distribution in Model 1, uncertainty increases.
    Figure 5 depicts the e ect on the bid and ask prices as uncertainty in-
creases. The market maker with an aversion to Knightian uncertainty main-
tains a constant bid price, whereas a Savage market maker will allow the bid
price to rise to re ect the higher value of the derivative. The a ect that this
has on the bid-ask spread is depicted in Figure 6, and the a ect on the prob-

                                                              19
             Figure 6: Bid-Ask Spread as Uncertainty Increases
                                                   Bid Ask Spread as Uncertainty Increases
                               1


                              0.9


                              0.8

                                                                                                    Savage
                              0.7                                                                   Knight


                              0.6
               Price Spread




                              0.5


                              0.4


                              0.3


                              0.2


                              0.1


                               0
                               0.6   0.7    0.8   0.9       1       1.1        1.2      1.3   1.4   1.5      1.6
                                                         Standard Deviation in Model




ability of a trade is depicted in Figure 5. As depicted in these gures, it is
possible for model uncertainty to completely eliminate the willingness of a
uncertainty-averse market-maker to provide liquidity, while a market maker
who is not averse to this uncertainty, but is merely a pessimistic expected
utility maximizer, will continue to provide liquidity.

3.2.2   Determinants of Spreads




In the preceding example, the liquidity provided by a Knight market-maker
was always less than or equal to the liquidity provided by a market maker
with Savage preferences. To explore why this occurs, consider the rst-order
conditions for the market-maker problem in equation (13).
                                                                       !
                                           1 (a) @Ua = U U                                                        (15a)
                                            (a)   @a    a  0



                                                                  20
          Figure 7: Probability of a Trade as Uncertainty Increases
                                                                Liquidity as Uncertainty Increases
                                        1


                                       0.9


                                       0.8                                                                 Savage Prob Sell
                                                                                                           Savage Prob Trade
                                                                                                           Knight Prob Sell
                                       0.7                                                                 Knight Prob Trade
                Probability of Trade




                                       0.6


                                       0.5


                                       0.4


                                       0.3


                                       0.2


                                       0.1


                                        0
                                        0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9        1       1.1        1.2          1.3    1.4      1.5       1.6
                                                                  Standard Deviation in Model




                                                                                 !
                                                      (b)             @Ub
                                                                                      = Ub U0 :                                      (15b)
                                                      (b)              @b
Denote the optimal portfolio from the solution equation (7) as ai when the
market maker has received a and is short the derivative (d = 1) and de ne
bi and 0i analogously (for i 2 f1; 2; K g). For both Savage and Knight traders
@Ua and @Ub are given by
 @a         @b

                                                    @Ua                   
                                                        = u0 y0 + a ai P0                                                           (16a)
                                                     @a
                                                    @Ub                 
                                                        = u0 y0 b bi P0 :                                                           (16b)
                                                     @b
For Savage preferences, equation (16) is the envelope condition. For the Knight
market-maker, the envelope condition holds when the optimal portfolio is iden-
tical to a worst-case Savage and is de ned by the rst-order condition (9).
When there is no portfolio-free characterization for the worst-case distribu-
tion as in equation (10) and Figure 3, equation (16) holds since @@aaK = 0 and

                                                                            21
@bK
 @b = 0. This simpli es the characterization of the optimal bid and ask prices
since Knightian uncertainty only e ects the right-hand-side of equation (15)
indirectly through the optimal portfolio. Equation (16) is a useful property
since it facilitates decomposing the ask-bid rst-order condition to isolate the
e ects of Knightian uncertainty.
    Market-making activity has implications for income at both date zero and
date one (see equation (8)). Denote Ub=0 as the total indirect utility from a
long position in the derivative acquired at zero cost. Similarly, we can denote
Ua=0 as the total indirect utility from a short position in the derivative when
no compensating period-zero ask is received. Using this notation and equation
(16), we can re-write the equation (15) to decompose the rst-order condition
to highlight period-zero and period-one income e ects of derivative trade.
           1 (a) u0 y + a i P  + U U = U U                             (17a)
             (a)        0        a 0         a    a=0         0    a=0

               (b) u0 y b i P  + U
                         0         b 0        b=0 Ub = Ub=0 U0 (17b)
                (b)
         |             {z            }        |   {z   }     |     {z   }
                     trade                    period 0           period 1
                    arrival                   income             income


Consider the optimal ask price given by equation (17a). The left-hand side of
(17a) captures the basic trade-o in terms of period zero income. The rst
term shows that a larger ask price decreases the likelihood of a trade arrival
(and decreases marginal utility of period-zero consumption if a trade arrives).
The second term, Ua Ua=0 , captures the bene t of a larger ask price has on
utility if a trade does occur. The left-hand side of (17a) is increasing in a.
The right-hand side of (17a), U0 Ua=0 , captures only the disutility from the
e ect that a short position in the derivative has on period-one income. Since
X (P )  0 a short position, given no adjustment in period zero income (a = 0),
makes the market-maker worse o (U0 Ua=0 > 0). Since the right-hand side
                                         22
                            Figure 8: Utility-Based Spreads
                U                         Ub=0

                       Ub

                                                                        Ua
                                                       U0


                U0




                                                                         Ua=0




                              θ b θ b=0           θ0        θ a=0 θ a           θ
   Note: The gure depicts the utility as a function of the investment in the risky asset
   . The solid lines depict the utility under the case where the market-maker is long
   the derivative at cost b = 0 (left), has no position in the asset (center), is short the
   derivative at ask price of zero, a = 0 (right). The peak of each of these three lines
   determines the right-hand-side of equation (17). The dashed lines show the utility
   in the long (left) and short (right) cases given the optimal bid and ask price.



includes only the period-one income e ect of the derivative cash- ow, it is
independent of a. The decomposition for equation (17b) has an analogous
interpretation. The left-hand side of (17b) increasing in the bid price, b, and
the right-hand side independent of the bid, b.
    Based on equation (17), all else equal, ask prices are higher when U0 Ua=0
is large and bid prices are lower when Ub=0 U0 is small. In this case, spreads
are large and the market is less liquid. Figure 8 plots utility as a function of
the investment in the risky asset  and is analogous to Figures 2 and 3. The
solid lines depict the utility under the case where the market-maker is long the

                                                 23
derivative at cost b = 0 (solid line at left), has no position in the asset (solid
line in center), is short the derivative at ask price of zero, a = 0 (solid line
at right). The distance between the peaks determines the right-hand-side of
equation (17). If the distance U0 Ua=0 is large, the market-maker's optimal
ask will be large to o set the large utility cost of the short-position at period
one. At the optimal ask, Ua (peak of dashed line on right) must lie above U0 .
At the optimal ask, Ua U0 > 0 since the market maker can choose to set
the ask price arbitrarily large and drive the probability of the short position
to zero.16 Similarly, if the distance between Ub=0 and U0 is small, the bene t
from being long the derivative is small and the market-maker has little room
to bid aggressively for the derivative. Again, note that at the optimal bid Ub
(peak of dashed line on left) must lie above U0 .
   The decomposition in (17) is also helpful since it highlights the e ect of
Knightian uncertainty on bid-ask spreads. Since the left-hand-sides of (17)
are concerned with the impact of ask and bid prices on period zero income,
uncertainty about the distribution of period one income plays no direct role.
The only way the left-hand-sides of (17) can behave di erently for a Savage
market-maker relative to a Knight market-maker is through di erences in the
optimal portfolio. In contrast, since the right-hand-sides of (17) concerns
period one income, uncertainty has a direct e ect.
    Knightian uncertainty will lower all three levels of utility in Figure 8. That
is relative to the Savage market makers, UaK < Uai , U0K < U0i , and UbK < Ubi ,
for i = 1; 2. Consider, for example, the case where the optimal portfolio for
the Knight and the Savage market-makers, with no position in the derivative,
yields consumption that is close to riskless, and, hence, without ambiguity.
In this case, U0K  U0i and a Knightian market-maker bid-ask spread will be
larger than a Savage. That is: aK  ai and bK  bi (for i = 1; 2 Savage
market makers). However, if U0i is a ected by uncertainty, then it is possible
that the Knight market-maker posts a bid or ask that is more aggressive. This
occurs when the the derivative position \hedges ambiguity." In particular,
 16   Substitute equation (16) into (15) and not the left-hand side is positive.

                                               24
the di erence U0K UaK=0 may be smaller for a Knight market-maker than
a Savage if the worst-case distribution in the U0K case di ers from the case
in UaK=0 . In this case, the optimal Knight market-maker may post a more
aggressive (lower) ask.

3.2.3       Market Structure




Non-zero bid-ask spreads are, of course, directly related to our assumption
of a monopolist market-maker. Interestingly, the di erence between bid-ask
spread of a Knight market maker relative to a Savage market-maker is also
closely linked to the market structure. For example, consider the e ect of
making a small trade in a call option. De ne X (P1) = s max(P1 x; 0) and
let s ! 0.17 Since period-one income is continuous in s, indirect utility in
equation (7) is continuous in s even under Knightian uncertainty. Therefore
the right-hand-sides of equation (17) are both zero as s ! 0. Therefore,
Knightian uncertainty can have no direct impact on bid-ask spreads. It will
only a ect spreads indirectly through the e ect on the optimal portfolio..
    More generally, uncertainty aversion itself cannot be the source of a bid-ask
spread. Consider the case where, in addition to arbitrarily small trades in the
derivative, the market-maker faces Bertrand competition. In Bertrand compe-
tition, the ask prices will simply be the compensating period zero income that
o sets the disutility from a short position in the derivative security. That is
the ask price, a, solves Ua U0 = 0 and the bid price, b, solves Ub U0 = 0.
Figure 9 plots the indirect utility (at the optimal portfolio) as a function of
the position in the derivative, d, and the size of derivative payo , s, with
X (P1 ) = s max(P1 1:5; 0) (the same call option as in the previous exam-
ple). This plot lets us consider arbitrarily small long and short positions in
the derivative. The plot shows Savage expected utility preferences under the
two possible distributions. For the Savage market-maker, the indirect utility
  17   Ask and bid prices need to rede ned to be \per unit" so that the market maker pays
s  b to go long and gets s  a to go short.

                                               25
Figure 9: Total Indirect Utility as size of derivative payo , s, Varies Continu-
ously
                           11


                           10


                            9


                            8


                            7
               U (θ , d)
               *
               *




                            6


                            5

                                                                               Model 1: µ=1 σ=0.6
                            4                                                  Model 2: µ=1.8 σ=1.5
                                                                               Knightian

                            3


                           2
                           −2   −1.5   −1   −0.5           0            0.5    1         1.5          2

   For xed parameters, the size of the position in the derivative, d  s, is varied.
                                             position in the call option (d)



   The payo in the derivative is X (P1 ) = s max(P1 1:5; 0) and trades are discrete
   d 2 f 1; 0; 1g. The total utility shown is at the optimal portfolio.




is di erentiable in s. In particular, small positive and small negative positions
in the derivative have an equal (but opposite) e ect on utility. Therefore,
bid-ask spreads are zero (i.e., a = b). For the Knightian-uncertain market-
maker in the same setting, this is true almost everywhere. The lower line in
Figure 9 represents the indirect utility of the Knightian market-maker. For
small and large values of s, the Knightian indirect utility is the same as the
worst case Savage (as in Figure 2). For intermediate values of s, the Knightian
indirect utility is strictly lower as in the case when the uncertainty aversion is
of rst-order importance (see Figure 3). However, only at two points in Figure
9 is the Knightian market maker's indirect utility kinked (non-di erentiable)
and, hence, only at these two points does the ask price exceed the bid. These
kink points occur where both (9) and (10) simultaneously occur. Since these

                                                       26
two points are unlikely to occur (of zero measure), when markets are friction-
less, Knightian uncertain preferences are not suÆcient to generate a bid-ask
spread.18
    To apply our model to the market collapse related to the 1998 Russian
bond default, for example, it is not suÆcient that a market-maker like LTCM
is uncertainty averse. It is also important the the trades in the derivative be
large and that the market-maker has some degree of market power in order
for Knightian uncertainty to e ect market liquidity. Interestingly, the Bank of
International Settlements (1999) lists the increased concentration of market-
making activity as one of the factors that ampli ed the crisis. Given the
important interaction between market frictions and Knightian uncertainty, we
leave the question of an optimal market design given uncertainty to future
research.

3.2.4    Hedging Derivatives Positions




Figures 2 and 3 helped characterize the optimal Knight portfolio independent
of the market-making activity. However, it is interesting to consider how the
optimal portfolio responds to a change in the position in the derivative. Look-
ing back at equation (17), the optimal portfolio appears in most of the terms.
Therefore, Knightian uncertainty has an e ect on bid-ask spreads indirectly
through the optimal portfolio. Moreover, hedging derivative positions in the
underlying markets is an important facet of market making. The popularity of
models like Black and Scholes (1973) is in their ability to provide an o setting
trade that hedges a position in the derivative. The ability to hedge positions is
essential for a nancial intermediary like LTCM to leverage their capital into
  18This is in contrast to comments in both Dow and Werlang (1992) and Epstein and
Wang (1995). More generally, in representative agent, endowment economies, Knightian
uncertainty is rarely locally relevant. For example, Knightian uncertainty can create an
indeterminacy in equilibrium (Epstein and Wang (1994) and (1995)). However, in economies
with aggregate risk and uncertainty only about aggregate endowment, the representative
agent's Knightian utility is di erentiable and prices are unique. See Epstein (2001).

                                          27
             Figure 10: Hedging a Short Call Position: \Natural"
                                       Choquet Expected Utility versus Stock Holdings


                           0.1




                            0




                          −0.1
                E[u(c)]
                   α∈A




                          −0.2
                min




                          −0.3




                          −0.4




                          −0.5
                             −2   −1    0            1              2             3     4   5

   Note: The gure depicts the utility from each of two distributions as a function of
                                                    shares of stock (θ)



   the investment in the risky asset . The lower line for each distribution represents is
   from a short position in the call option. The \o" is optimal portfolio of the Knight
   market-maker given no position, 0K (upper left), and given a short position in the
   call option, aK=0 (lower right)



large positions. In our two-period example, we can also look at the e ect of
model uncertainty on the trades used to hedge a position in the derivative. In
our setting, the market is not complete, so market-makers cannot o set the
full position in the derivative. However, the change in the optimal portfolio
due to a trade in the derivative captures the hedging behaviour of the market-
maker. For example, consider the optimal portfolio in the case where there is
no derivative position relative to a short position in the derivative. De ne the
\hedge portfolio" induced by this short position in the call as ai 0i .
   Figure 10 depicts this hedge portfolio for a short call position in a log-utility
version of the two-period model. (The switch to logarithmic utility adds some
asymmetry to the utility function relative to the quadratic case.) In this
                                                        28
           Figure 11: Hedging a Short Call Position: \Unnatural"
                                       Choquet Expected Utility versus Stock Holdings


                           0.1




                            0




                          −0.1
                E[u(c)]
                   α∈A




                          −0.2
                min




                          −0.3




                          −0.4




                          −0.5
                             −2   −1    0            1              2             3     4   5

   Note: The gure depicts the utility from each of two distributions as a function of
                                                    shares of stock (θ)



   the investment in the risky asset . The lower line for each distribution represents is
   from a short position in the call option. The \o" is optimal portfolio of the Knight
   market-maker given no position, 0K (upper right), and given a short position in the
   call option, aK=0 (lower left)



example, the short call position is hedged by buying more of the underlying
asset. This is a natural hedging strategy and is consistent with the behavior
of any Savage market maker. However, with a slightly di erent con guration
of uncertainty, Figure 11 depicts a very strange situation. The short position
in the call option is hedged by reducing investment in the underlying asset.
The optimal portfolio, in response to a short position in the call option, has
shifted left. The reason for this odd behavior is that, in this case, when d = 0,
the optimal portfolio was not given by the solution to the rst condition as
in equation (9) and uncertainty is of rst-order importance. In this case, the
optimal portfolio of the Knight trader does not resemble either of the Savage
traders. Since the optimal portfolio is given by (11), it does not respond in

                                                        29
a natural way to the derivative position. When the optimal portfolio is given
by (11), the optimal hedge portfolio is not constrained to be either positive or
less than one as it would be for Savage market makers.


4 In nite-Horizon Model
Building on our understanding of the two-period example, we now return to the
in nite-horizon model summarized in equation (6). We focus on a relatively
simple portfolio problem so that we can highlight the role of market making in
the derivative. Assume that the underlying security price follows a two-state
Markov process with Pt 2 f0:75; 1:25g with transition probabilities speci ed
below. To ensure that the portfolio problem is well speci ed, it is necessary to
assume the asset also carries a stochastic dividend. Without some additional
cash- ow, the optimal portfolio is an arbitrarily large short-sale position in
the case Pt = 1:25. Therefore, we assume the underlying asset pays a dividend
that also follows a two state Markov process, Æt 2 f0; 0:4g. As in the previous
section, we will consider two Savage market makers with beliefs, 1 = f1g and
2 = f2g, and a Knight market maker with uncertainty represented by K =
f1; 2g. For both possible models, 1 and 2, the states are i.i.d.. The two
price and two dividend states produces a four state Markov process of (Pt ; Æt)
2 f(0:75; 0); (0:75; 0:4); (1:25; 0); (1:25; 0:4)g with transition probabilities,
                         2                                       3
                       6
                         0:1875       0:5625   0:0625   0:1875 7
                       6 0:1875       0:5625   0:0625   0:1875 777
                       6
                 1 = 66
                       6 0:1875       0:5625   0:0625   0:1875 775
                       4
                         0:1875       0:5625   0:0625   0:1875
                         2                                      3
                                                                            (18)
                         6
                             0:1250   0:1250   0:3750   0:3750 7
                2   =
                         6
                         6
                         6
                             0:1250   0:1250   0:3750   0:3750 777 :
                         6
                         6
                         4
                             0:1250   0:1250   0:3750   0:3750 775
                             0:1250   0:1250   0:3750   0:3750
                                        30
This distribution produces asset returns that are state-dependent. For dis-
tribution 1, a more pessimistic view, the mean (standard deviation) asset
return is 0:63 (0:36) when Pt = 0:75 and 0:02 (0:22) when Pt = 1:25. The
 2 distribution is more optimistic with mean (standard deviation) asset return
of 0:73 (0:40) in the Pt = 0:75 states and 0:04 (0:24) in the Pt = 1:25 states.
Other parameters used in the example are: utility is log, exogenous income is
constant at yt = 12:750, and = 0:8.

4.1    Portfolio Choice


The optimal portfolio in the case where there is no market-making activity,
is shown in Figure 12. In each state, the Knight portfolio policy lies between
the two Savage portfolio policies. This feature is similar to the discussion of
the two period example of Figures 2 and 3. Unlike the Savage portfolio, the
Knight portfolio policy has a region that is at. In this region, the uncertainty
is of rst-order importance since there is no portfolio-free characterization of
the worst-case distribution and the optimal portfolio, tK , is independent of
the asset holdings at the start of the period, tK 1 .
    In the absence of market-making, Knightian uncertainty does not dramat-
ically alter the portfolio behavior of a trader. While the optimal policy di ers
in the case of a Knight trader, it does not, by itself, have a dramatic e ect
on the time-series behavior of the portfolio holdings. To see this consider the
simulation presented in Figure 13. Since there are two possible probability
measures describing the evolution of price and dividend, the results show the
simulation conducted under both distributions 1 and 2 . The time-series
behavior of the optimal Knight portfolio is constrained by the fact that it is
bounded by the Savage-optimal portfolios state-by-state. Knight portfolio is
never dramatically di erent than the Knight.



                                      31
Figure 12: Portfolio Policy for Two Savage Traders and a Knight Trader
                                                        Pt=0.750 δt=0.000                                                        Pt=0.750 δt=0.400
                                               4                                                                     4
                     θ asset holdings policy




                                                                                          θ asset holdings policy
                                                                                                                     3
                                               3

                                                                                                                     2
                                               2
                                                                                                                     1

                                               1
                                                                                                                     0
                                     t




                                                                                                          t

                                               0                                                                    −1
                                               −2        0             2         4                                   −2           0             2         4
                                                    θ   assets entering period                                            θ      assets entering period
                                                    t−1                                                                    t−1

                                                        Pt=1.250 δt=0.000                                                        Pt=1.250 δt=0.400
                                1.5                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                          Savage 1
                                               1                                                                          Savage 2
 θt asset holdings policy




                                                                                          θ asset holdings policy




                                                                                                                     2    Knight
                                0.5

                                               0                                                                     1

                      −0.5                                                                                           0
                                    −1
                                                                                                                    −1
                                                                                                          t




                      −1.5

                                    −2                                                                              −2
                                     −2                  0             2         4                                   −2           0             2         4
                                                    θ   assets entering period                                            θ      assets entering period
                                                    t−1                                                                    t−1
 The optimal portfolio, i , as a function of the previous asset holdings, is shown.
 Each sub-plot is a di erent value of the price-dividend state. The portfolio policy is
 shown for a Savage trader with beliefs 1 = f1 g, a Savage trader with 2 = fpi2g,
 and an uncertainty averse Knight trader with beliefs K = f1 ; 2 g. 1 and 2 are
 de ned in equation (18).




                                                                                     32
                          Figure 13: Optimal Portfolio Time Series
                                     Sample Path of θ − under model 1
            4

            3

            2
 ,P ,δ )
     t t




            1
     t−1
θm(θ
     t




            0

           −1

           −2
                0              5          10                 15         20            25
                                                 Time (t)

                                     Sample Path of θ − under model 2
            4
                    Savage 1
            3       Savage 2
                    Knight
            2
 ,P ,δ )
     t t




            1
     t−1
θm(θ
     t




            0

           −1

           −2
                0              5          10                 15         20            25
                                                 Time (t)
For a simulation of the economy, the optimal realized portfolio, ti , is shown for three
traders: a Savage market maker with beliefs 1 , a Savage with beliefs 2 , and a
Knight market maker with uncertainty averse beliefs represented by K = f1 ; 2 g.
One period of the simulation consists of drawing a price Pt and a dividend Æt The
top panel is simulated under 1 and the bottom panel is simulated under 2 (see
equation (18) for parameters).




                                                33
4.2    Market-Maker Policies


We use the same example to consider the in nite-horizon version of the market-
maker problem. The derivative asset is a call option based on the ex -dividend
price; that is X (Pt) = s max(Pt x). We set the strike price at x = 1:0 and
the derivative size at s = 1:0. The demand for the derivative is summarized by
the arrival of a random willingness-to-trade v~, where v~ is distributed uniformly
on the interval [0:1; 0:2]. Again, we consider the behavior of the two Savage
market makers and an uncertainty averse, Knight, market maker.
    Figures 14 and 15 summarize the bid and ask policy for the Savage market
maker with beliefs 1 and 2 respectively. The gure shows the probability
of a trade occurring, 1 [(at ) (bt )], as a function of the state variables.
For the Savage market-maker with beliefs 1 , the bid and ask prices for the
derivative are close to constant. The bid and ask prices are set such that the
probability of trade is close to 0.5. For the Savage market-maker with the more
optimistic beliefs of 2 (see equation (18)), the probability for trade is slightly
higher in the case where the underlying price is low (Pt = 0:75). Note, for
both Savage market makers, the optimal bid-ask policy is not that sensitive to
the position in the underlying security, t 1 (not sensitive to current wealth).
    Figure 16 summarizes the bid and ask policy for the uncertainty averse
Knight market-maker. Notice that the bid-ask behavior, re ected in the prob-
ability of trade, is much more sensitive to the incoming asset position, t 1 .
It is also the case that the probability of trade can fall quite low (to 0.3).
The low probability of trade for the Knight market-maker coincides with the
case where the optimal portfolio is not sensitive to initial wealth since there is
no portfolio-free worst-case distribution and the portfolio is not characterized
by a rst-order-condition. Figure 17 shows the portfolio policy. Recall that
the optimal asset position is chosen after the realization of the trade in the
derivative and so depends on both previous, dt 1 , and current, dt, position in
the derivative. (The asset policy function for the two Savage traders is similar
to that shown in Figure 12, so it is not repeated.) The regions where the
                                        34
                                                Figure 14: Probability of Trade - Savage 1
                                                                            Savage 1
                                               P =0.750 δ =0.000                                                             P =0.750 δ =0.400
                                                t        t                                                                     t        t
Probabilty of trade (1−[Φ(at)−Φ(bt)])




                                                                                 Probabilty of trade (1−[Φ(at)−Φ(bt)])
                               0.7                                                                              0.7


                               0.6                                                                              0.6


                               0.5                                                                              0.5


                               0.4                                                                              0.4


                               0.3                                                                              0.3
                                 −2             0             2         4                                         −2           0             2         4
                                        θt−1   assets entering period                                                    θt−1 assets entering period

                                               Pt=1.250 δt=0.000                                                             Pt=1.250 δt=0.400
Probabilty of trade (1−[Φ(at)−Φ(bt)])




                                                                                 Probabilty of trade (1−[Φ(at)−Φ(bt)])




                                                                                                                         d =−1
                               0.7                                                                              0.7       t−1
                                                                                                                         dt−1= 0
                                                                                                                         dt−1=+1
                               0.6                                                                              0.6


                               0.5                                                                              0.5


                               0.4                                                                              0.4


                               0.3                                                                              0.3
                                 −2           0             2           4                                         −2           0             2         4
                                        θt−1 assets entering period                                                      θt−1 assets entering period
The gure shows the probability of a trade occurring given the bid and ask policy
that solves equation (6) for the Savage market-maker with beliefs 1 . The proba-
bility of a trade is calculated as 1 [(at ) (bt )]. The probability of as a function
of the state variables: previous position in the derivative, dt 1 previous position in
the portfolio, t 1 ,current asset price, Pt , and current asset dividend, Æt .




                                                                            35
                                                Figure 15: Probability of Trade - Savage 2
                                                                            Savage 2
                                               P =0.750 δ =0.000                                                              P =0.750 δ =0.400
                                                t        t                                                                      t        t
Probabilty of trade (1−[Φ(at)−Φ(bt)])




                                                                                  Probabilty of trade (1−[Φ(at)−Φ(bt)])
                               0.7                                                                               0.7


                               0.6                                                                               0.6


                               0.5                                                                               0.5


                               0.4                                                                               0.4


                               0.3                                                                               0.3
                                 −2             0             2         4                                          −2           0             2         4
                                        θt−1   assets entering period                                                     θt−1 assets entering period

                                               Pt=1.250 δt=0.000                                                              Pt=1.250 δt=0.400
Probabilty of trade (1−[Φ(at)−Φ(bt)])




                                                                                  Probabilty of trade (1−[Φ(at)−Φ(bt)])




                                                                                                                          d =−1
                               0.7                                                                               0.7       t−1
                                                                                                                          dt−1= 0
                                                                                                                          dt−1=+1
                               0.6                                                                               0.6


                               0.5                                                                               0.5


                               0.4                                                                               0.4


                               0.3                                                                               0.3
                                 −2           0             2           4                                          −2           0             2         4
                                        θt−1 assets entering period                                                       θt−1 assets entering period
The gure shows the probability of a trade occurring given the bid and ask policy
that solves equation (6) for the Savage market-maker with beliefs 2 . The proba-
bility of a trade is calculated as 1 [(at ) (bt )]. The probability of as a function
of the state variables: previous position in the derivative, dt 1 previous position in
the portfolio, t 1 ,current asset price, Pt , and current asset dividend, Æt .




                                                                             36
                                                    Figure 16: Probability of Trade - Knight
                                                                        Knight
                                               P =0.750 δ =0.000                                                             P =0.750 δ =0.400
                                                t        t                                                                     t        t
Probabilty of trade (1−[Φ(at)−Φ(bt)])




                                                                                 Probabilty of trade (1−[Φ(at)−Φ(bt)])
                               0.7                                                                              0.7


                               0.6                                                                              0.6


                               0.5                                                                              0.5


                               0.4                                                                              0.4


                               0.3                                                                              0.3
                                 −2             0             2         4                                         −2           0             2         4
                                        θt−1   assets entering period                                                    θt−1 assets entering period

                                               Pt=1.250 δt=0.000                                                             Pt=1.250 δt=0.400
Probabilty of trade (1−[Φ(at)−Φ(bt)])




                                                                                 Probabilty of trade (1−[Φ(at)−Φ(bt)])




                                                                                                                         d =−1
                               0.7                                                                              0.7       t−1
                                                                                                                         dt−1= 0
                                                                                                                         dt−1=+1
                               0.6                                                                              0.6


                               0.5                                                                              0.5


                               0.4                                                                              0.4


                               0.3                                                                              0.3
                                 −2           0             2           4                                         −2           0             2         4
                                        θt−1 assets entering period                                                      θt−1 assets entering period
The gure shows the probability of a trade occurring given the bid and ask policy
that solves equation (6) for the Knight market maker with uncertainty aversion
represented by K = f1 ; 2 g. The probability of a trade is calculated as 1
[(at ) (bt )]. The probability of as a function of the state variables: previous
position in the derivative, dt 1 previous position in the portfolio, t 1 ,current asset
price, Pt , and current asset dividend, Æt .




                                                                            37
                           Figure 17: Optimal Portfolio - Knight 2
                                       Knight
          d        =−1, d =−1                    d       =−1, d =0                  d       =−1, d =1
           t−1             t                     t−1             t                  t−1             t
     4                                      4                                  4


     2                                      2                                  2
 t




                                        t




                                                                           t
θ




                                       θ




                                                                          θ
     0                                      0                                  0


    −2                                     −2                                 −2
     −2        0        2          4        −2    0        2          4        −2    0        2         4
              t−1 θ t                             t−1 θ                              t−1 θ
           d     =0, d =−1                       d =0,  d =0                        d =0,  d =1
                     t−1                                 t t−1                              t t−1
     4                                      4                                  4


     2                                      2                                  2
 t




                                        t




                                                                           t
θ




                                       θ




     0                                      0                             θ    0


    −2                                     −2                                 −2
     −2     0        2             4        −2    0      2            4        −2    0      2           4
                θ dt=−1
           dt−1=1,                                   θ dt=0
                                                 dt−1=1,                                θ dt=1
                                                                                    dt−1=1,
                     t−1                                   t−1                                t−1
     4                                      4                                  4


     2                                      2                                  2
 t




                                        t




                                                                           t
θ




                                       θ




                                                                          θ




     0                                      0                                  0


    −2                                     −2                                −2
     −2        0               2   4        −2       0        2        4      −2        0           2   4
                    θt−1                                 θt−1
                                                           Pt=0.750 δt=0.000                θt−1
                                                           Pt=1.250 δt=0.000

The gure shows the optimal portfolio that solves equation (6) for the Knight mar-
                                                           P 0 750 δ 0 400

ket maker with uncertainty aversion represented by K = f1 ; 2 g. The optimal
portfolio is a function of the state variables: current, dt , and previous, dt 1 position
in the derivative, previous position in the portfolio, t 1 ,current asset price, Pt , and
current asset dividend, Æt .




                                                     38
probability for derivative trade is low occur, for example, when Pt = 1:25,
Æt = 0, dt 1 = 1, and t  2 (see lower-left panel of Figure 16). This situ-
ation corresponds to the lower three panels of Figure 17 where dt 1 = 1. In
particular, the lower two lines. Note that the lack of liquidity is occurring at
a point where the portfolio policy function is at which is where Knightian
uncertainty is of rst-order importance.

4.3     Time Series Behavior


To better understand the implications of these policy functions, it is helpful to
simulate realizations for the economy. A simulation consists of drawing a price
Pt , dividend Æt , and willingness to trade, v~t and applying the optimal policies
for ask and bid prices and the portfolio. The results are for a simulation of
10,000 periods of the economy under both of the possible probability measures,
 1 and  2 , that describe the evolution of prices and dividends.

   Figure 18 shows a realized path of bid and ask prices for the three market-
makers. Fifty periods are shown. The two Savage traders di er in their beliefs
about the likelihood of next period's price and dividend. The more optimistic
Savage market-maker, 1, tends to have a higher bid and ask price for the
derivative. It is not the case that the Knight market-maker simply adopts the
worst-case bid and ask. In other words, the derivative is not valued as a stand-
alone investment according to the worst-case distribution. Were this to be the
case, the Knight market-maker would adopt the optimistic Savage's ask and
the pessimistic Savage's bid.19 However, as was discussed in the two-period
portfolio choice case, uncertainty aversion manifests in behavior that is more
complicated than simply the worst case since the characterization of the worst
case can depend on the portfolio choice.
  19If one is considering a long position in a call option, the worst-case distribution has a
low mean and low variance for the underlying asset. If one is going short a call, the worst
case is a high mean and high variance.


                                             39
                                   Figure 18: Simulated Bid and Ask Prices
                                           Sample Path of Bid and Ask − under model 1
                    0.2
                                                                                               Savage 1 Bid
                                                                                               Savage 1 Ask
              0.18                                                                             Savage 2 Bid
Ask at and Bid bt




                                                                                               Savage 2 Ask
              0.16                                                                             Knight Bid
                                                                                               Knight Ask

              0.14

              0.12

                    0.1
                     1000   1005    1010   1015     1020     1025     1030      1035    1040      1045    1050
                                                               t

                                           Sample Path of Bid and Ask − under model 2
                    0.2
                                                                                               Savage 1 Bid
                                                                                               Savage 1 Ask
              0.18                                                                             Savage 2 Bid
Ask at and Bid bt




                                                                                               Savage 2 Ask
              0.16                                                                             Knight Bid
                                                                                               Knight Ask

              0.14

              0.12

                    0.1
                     1000   1005    1010   1015     1020     1025     1030      1035    1040      1045    1050
                                                               t
For a simulation of the economy, the optimal realized ask and bid prices are shown
for three market-makers: a Savage market maker with beliefs 1 , a Savage with
beliefs 2 , and a Knight market maker with uncertainty averse beliefs represented
by K = f1 ; 2 g. One period of the simulation consists of drawing a price Pt ,
dividend Æt , and willingness to trade, v~t . Of the 10,000 periods simulated, 50
periods are shown. The top panel is simulated under 1 and the bottom panel is
simulated under 2 (see equation (18) for parameters.




                                                           40
    Relative to the Savage market-makers, the uncertainty aversion of the
Knight market-maker produces a less liquid market for the derivative in that
the probability of trade is lower. Figure 19 shows the steady-state distribution
for the likelihood of trade in any given period (based on a simulation). For all
three traders, the median likelihood of trade is close to 0.5. The more opti-
mistic Savage, 2, has periods of higher liquidity. The Knight market-maker,
has slightly lower median trade likelihood. Figure 20 shows the frequency of
the position in the derivative. For all three market makers there is a higher
frequency of short positions than long. This is speci c to the parameterization
of the example. As expected, the more pessimistic Savage market-maker, 2,
is less likely to take a long position in the derivative.
    For the Knight market-maker, there is a small frequency of very low liq-
uidity realizations. Figure 21 shows a sample path for the time-series of the
probability of trade. With the Knight market-maker, the market experiences
short, infrequent dips in liquidity where the probability of trade drops dra-
matically. As discussed previously, this drop in liquidity coincides with the
case where uncertainty is of rst-order importance and there is no portfolio-
free worst-case distribution. In these cases, the portfolio choice of the Knight
and the bid-ask behavior are distinct from behavior under either of the Savage
traders. In these times of crisis, the Knightian behavior is not representable
by a worst-case Savage trader.
   In the simulation without any market-making activity shown in Figure 13,
the realized path for the optimal portfolio of the Knight trader is bounded
by the portfolio position of the two Savage traders. This is not surprising,
given this relationship holds state-by-state (see Figure 12). In this setting,
the realized path of the state variables Pt and Æt is common across trader
types. However, in the case where the trader is also a market maker, the
optimal portfolio is not just a function of the exogenous state variables Pt
and Æt . It also depends on the position in the derivative, dt . Since the bid
and ask policies of the di erent market makers di er, the realized path in the
derivative need not be common across all market-maker types. It is therefore
                                      41
                 Figure 19: Frequency for Probability of Trade in the Derivative
                                  Frequency of probability of trade − under model 1
                100

                 80
Frequency (%)




                 60

                 40

                 20

                  0
                      0   0.1       0.2            0.3             0.4          0.5       0.6              0.7
                                 Probability of Trade in derivative (Prob[d=−1 or d=1])

                                  Frequency of probability of trade − under model 2
                100
                                                                                                Savage 1
                                                                                                Savage 2
                 80                                                                             Knight
Frequency (%)




                 60

                 40

                 20

                  0
                      0   0.1       0.2            0.3             0.4          0.5       0.6              0.7
                                 Probability of Trade in derivative (Prob[d=−1 or d=1])
The gure is a histogram of the probability of trade based on 10,000 simulation
periods. The probability of a trade is calculated as 1 [(at ) (bt )] and depends
on the optimal ask and bid prices chosen by the three types of market makers. The
three market makers are a Savage market maker with beliefs 1 , a Savage with
beliefs 2 , and a Knight market maker with uncertainty averse beliefs represented
by K = f1 ; 2 g. One period of the simulation consists of drawing a price Pt
and a dividend Æt The top panel is simulated under 1 and the bottom panel is
simulated under 2 (see equation (18) for parameters.)




                                                       42
                 Figure 20: Frequency for Probability of Trade in the Derivative
                                 Frequency of position in derivative d − under model 1
                60

                50
Frequency (%)




                40

                30

                20

                10

                 0
                           −1                               0                            1
                                          position in derivative d ∈ {−1,0,+1}

                                 Frequency of position in derivative d − under model 2
                60
                                                                                             Savage 1
                50                                                                           Savage 2
                                                                                             Knight
Frequency (%)




                40

                30

                20

                10

                 0
                           −1                               0                            1
                                          position in derivative d ∈ {−1,0,+1}
The gure is a histogram of the position in the derivative, dt based on 10,000
simulation periods. The position in the derivative is the outcome of the optimal
bid and ask prices the realization of the willingness to trade v~t . The frequency is
shown for a Savage market maker with beliefs 1 , a Savage with beliefs 2 , and a
Knight market maker with uncertainty averse beliefs represented by K = f1 ; 2 g.
One period of the simulation consists of drawing a price Pt and a dividend Æt The
top panel is simulated under 1 and the bottom panel is simulated under 2 (see
equation (18) for parameters.)




                                                       43
                              Figure 21: Simulated Probability of Trade in the Derivative
                                                Sample Path of Prob. Trade − under model 1

                                                                                                    Savage 1
                      0.7
Prob of trade (Φ(at)−Φ(bt))




                                                                                                    Savage 2
                                                                                                    Knight
                      0.6


                      0.5


                      0.4


                      0.3
                       1000       1005   1010   1015     1020     1025     1030      1035    1040   1045   1050
                                                                    t

                                                Sample Path of Prob. Trade − under model 2

                                                                                                    Savage 1
                      0.7
Prob of trade (Φ(at)−Φ(bt))




                                                                                                    Savage 2
                                                                                                    Knight
                      0.6


                      0.5


                      0.4


                      0.3
                       1000       1005   1010   1015     1020     1025     1030      1035    1040   1045   1050
                                                                    t
The gure is a realized path for the probability of trade. Of 10,000 simulation peri-
ods, a representative 50 periods are shown. The probability of a trade is calculated
as 1 [(at ) (bt )] and depends on the optimal ask and bid prices chosen by the
three types of market makers. The three market makers are a Savage market maker
with beliefs 1 , a Savage with beliefs 2 , and a Knight market maker with uncer-
tainty averse beliefs represented by K = f1 ; 2 g. One period of the simulation
consists of drawing a price Pt and a dividend Æt The top panel is simulated under
1 and the bottom panel is simulated under 2 (see equation (18) for parameters.)




                                                                 44
not necessarily the case that the realized portfolio of the Knight market maker
be bounded by the Savage portfolio. However, in the simulation, it is the
case that t1  tK  t2 . This is seen in Figure 22. In this entire simulation,
as in the portion shown in the gure, the portfolio of the Knight market-
maker is bounded by the two Savage portfolios. For completeness, we also
show the frequency of portfolio holdings in Figure 23. Not surprisingly, the
pessimistic Savage market-maker, 1 , typically has lower asset holdings and is
more frequently short. The more optimistic market-maker, 2, is more often
long. The distribution for the Knight market-maker lies in between.


5 Conclusions
In a simple model of liquidity provision by a monopoly market-maker, an aver-
sion to Knightian uncertainty can signi cantly reduce liquidity. The market-
maker in our model chooses bid and ask prices for a derivative security to opti-
mally tradeo the probability of attracting a trade with the current and future
income of a particular derivatives position. When there is ambiguity about
the appropriate probability distribution for the underlying security's future
cash- ows, the market maker is uncertain about the dynamic consequences of
their derivatives trading. This uncertainty increases the market-maker's bid-
ask spreads and reduces liquidity. For example, in an in nite-horizon model
with a stationary environment, the optimal behavior of the market maker
can produce short and dramatic decreases in liquidity in situations where an
expected-utility market maker would exhibit no such decrease. Surprisingly,
the uncertainty aversion does not produce markets that are always less liq-
uid. Much of the time, the uncertainty aversion manifests itself in the form
of the \worst-case" distribution. In these situations, the bid-ask behavior is
similar to a Savage market-maker { albeit a Savage with pessimistic beliefs.
However, in some situations, the uncertainty is of rst-order importance and
there is no obvious characterization of the worst-case distribution. In these
cases, the Knightian liquidity is much smaller than an otherwise similar Savage
                                       45
                                   Figure 22: Simulated Portfolio Holdings
                                           Sample Path of portfolio − under model 1
                        4
                                                                                             Savage 1
                        3                                                                    Savage 2
                                                                                             Knight
Portfolio holdings θt




                        2

                        1

                        0

                  −1

                  −2
                   1000     1005   1010   1015    1020      1025      1030     1035   1040   1045   1050
                                                              t

                                           Sample Path of portfolio − under model 2
                        4
                                                                                             Savage 1
                        3                                                                    Savage 2
Portfolio holdings θt




                                                                                             Knight
                        2

                        1

                        0

                  −1

                  −2
                   1000     1005   1010   1015    1020      1025      1030     1035   1040   1045   1050
                                                              t
The gure is a realized path for the optimal portfolio. Of 10,000 simulation periods,
a representative 50 periods are shown. The portfolio path is shown for three market
makers are a Savage market maker with beliefs 1 , a Savage with beliefs 2 , and a
Knight market maker with uncertainty averse beliefs represented by K = f1 ; 2 g.
One period of the simulation consists of drawing a price Pt and a dividend Æt The
top panel is simulated under 1 and the bottom panel is simulated under 2 (see
equation (18) for parameters.)




                                                           46
                     Figure 23: Frequency for Portfolio Holdings
                            Frequency of portfolio θ position − under model 1
                80


                60
Frequency (%)




                40


                20


                0
                −2   −1           0                 1                2          3              4
                                      position in underlying asset θ

                            Frequency of portfolio θ position − under model 2
                50
                                                                                    Savage 1
                                                                                    Savage 2
                40                                                                  Knight
Frequency (%)




                30

                20

                10

                0
                −2   −1           0                 1                2          3              4
                                      position in underlying asset θ
The gure is a histogram of the portfolio in the underlying asset, t based on 10,000
simulation periods. The frequency is shown for a Savage market maker with beliefs
1 , a Savage with beliefs 2 , and a Knight market maker with uncertainty averse
beliefs represented by K = f1 ; 2 g. One period of the simulation consists of
drawing a price Pt and a dividend Æt The top panel is simulated under 1 and the
bottom panel is simulated under 2 (see equation (18) for parameters.)




                                                47
market-maker.
    Much of the understanding of the in nite-horizon example is generated
from a simple two-period version of the model. By characterizing the opti-
mal bid and ask prices into their e ect on trade arrival, current income, and
future income, we isolate the e ect of Knightian uncertainty. For example,
model uncertainty and uncertainty aversion alone are not suÆcient to reduce
liquidity. Signi cant liquidity e ects require an interaction between uncer-
tainty aversion and the market structure. Non-competitive market-making,
relatively large discrete trades, and an aversion to Knightian uncertainty are
all necessary to generate liquidity e ects that are signi cantly di erent from
standard Savage expected utility models. Finally, \hedge portfolios" for the
market-maker, which are an important component to understanding spreads
and liquidity, can look very di erent from those implied by a model without
Knightian uncertainty.
    The paper leaves several important questions open to future research. Fu-
ture work will extend the set of traded securities to explore the connection
between uncertainty and liquidity spill-over e ects like the \ ight to quality"
and \contagion." The unusual nature of the hedge portfolio produced by a
Knightian uncertain trader suggest that such uncertainty as a natural con-
duit for contagion. In addition, a model with a larger set of securities will
allow us to explore \ambiguity hedging" which can be thought of as a natural
counterpart to standard \risk hedging."




                                      48
References
Bank of International Settlements            (1999): \A Review of Finanical
  Market Events in Autumn 1998," Committee on the global nancial system,
  Bank of International Settlements, Basel, Switzerland.
Becker, T., B. Chadha, and A. Sy (2000): \Foreign Exchange Bid-Ask
  Spreads in the Asian Crisis," Working Paper, International Monetary Fund.
Black, F., and M. Scholes (1973): \The Pricing of Options and Corporate
  Liabilities," Journal of Political Economy, 81, 637{659.
Choquet, G. (1955): \Theory of Capacities," Annals de l'Institute Forier,
  5, 131{295.
Dow, J., and S. Werlang (1992): \Uncertainty Aversion, Risk Aversion,
  and the Optimal Choice of Portfolio," Econometrica, 60(1), 197{204.
Ellsberg, D. (1961): \Risk, Ambiguity,and the Savage axioms," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 75, 643{669.
Epstein, L. G. (2001): \Sharing Ambiguity," American Economic Review:
  Papers and Proceedings, 91(2), 45{50.
Epstein, L. G., and T. Wang (1994): \Intertemporal Asset Pricing Under
  Knightian Uncertainty," Econometrica, 62, 283{322.
           (1995): \Uncertainty, Risk-Neutral Measures and Security Price
  Booms and Crashes," Journal of Economic Theory, 67, 40{82.
Gilboa, I. (1987): \Expected Utility with Purely Subjective Non-Addative
  Probabilities," Journal of Mathematical Economics, 16, 65{88.
Gilboa, I., and D. Schmeidler (1989): \Maxmin Expected Utility with
  Non-Unique Prior," Journal of Mathematical Economics, 18, 141{153.
Grossman, S. J., and M. H. Miller (1988): \Liquidity and Market Struc-
  ture," Journal of Finance (Papers and Proceedings), 43(3), 617{633.
Hansen, L. P., T. J. Sargent, and T. D. Tallarini (1999): \Robust
  Permanent Income and Pricing," Review of Economic Studies, 66, 873{907.
Ho, T., and H. Stoll (1981): \Opitmal Dealer Pricing Under Transactions
  and Return Uncertainty," Journal of Financial Economics, 9, 47{73.
                                    49
International Monetary Fund             (1998): \World Economic Outlook and
  Intertational Capital Markets: Interim Assessment December 1998," World
  economic and nancial surveys, International Monetary Fund, Washington,
  DC.
Knight, F. H. (1921): Risk, Uncertainty and Pro t. Houghton Miin,
  Boston, MA.
Kyle, A. S. (1985): \Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading," Economet-
  rica, 53, 1315{1335.
Marshall, D. A. (2001): \The Crisis of 1998 and the Role of the Central
  Bank," Economic Perspectives, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 25(1), 2{
  23.
Prati, A., and M. Sbracia (2001): \Currency Crises and Uncertainty
  About Fundamentals," Working Paper, International Monetary Fund.
Routledge, B. R., M. Trick, and S. E. Zin (2000): \Solution Algorithms
  for Dynamic Programs with Uncertainty Aversion," Carnegie Mellon Uni-
  versity Working Paper.
Savage, L. (1954): The Foundations of Statistics. Wiley, New York, NY.


Schmeidler, D. (1989): \Subjective Probability and Expected Utility with-
  out Additivity," Econometrica, 57(3), 571{587.
Scholes, M. S. (2000): \Crisis and Risk Management," American Economic
  Review { Papers and Proceedings, 90(2), 17{21.
Seidenfeld, T., and L. Wasserman (1993): \Dilation for Sets of Proba-
  bilities," Annals of Statistics, 21(3), 1139{1154.
Summers, L. H. (2000): \International Financial Crises: Causes, Prevention,
  and Cures," American Economic Review { Papers and Proceedings, 90(2),
  1{17.




                                    50
