                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              ECONOMIC GROWTH AND THE DEMOGRAPHIC TRANSITION


                                            David E. Bloom
                                            David Canning
                                             Jaypee Sevilla


                                          Working Paper 8685
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8685


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2001

The authors are indebted to Dave Adamson, Nancy Birdsall, Barry Bloom, Dean Jamison, Allen Kelley,
Thomas Lindh, Michael Lipton, Pia Malaney, Bo Malmberg, Andrew Mason, Tom Merrick, Larry
Rosenberg, Jeffrey Sachs, Stephen Sinding, and Jeffrey Williamson for helpful discussions, and to Julie
DaVanzo for detailed written comments on this paper. Special thanks to River Path Associates and Larry
Rosenberg for editorial and computational assistance. Earlier versions of this paper have been presented at
the World Bank, Brown University, the Aga Khan University, the Yale School of Public Health, the Yale
School of Management, the Pan American Health Organization, the Rockefeller Foundation, Harvard
University, the Swedish International Development Agency, University of Uppsala, University of Dublin,
the Economic History Association, the World Health Organization, the Asian Development Bank, the Inter-
American Development Bank, USAID, CIDE (Mexico), Di Tella University, and UADE (Argentina). The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.


© 2001 by David E. Bloom, David Canning and Jaypee Sevilla. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Economic Growth and the Demographic Transition
David E. Bloom, David Canning and Jaypee Sevilla
NBER Working Paper No. 8685
December 2001




                                                    ABSTRACT

           For decades, economists and social thinkers have debated the influence of population change on economic
growth. Three alternative positions define this debate: that population growth restricts, promotes, or is
independent of economic growth. Proponents of each explanation can find evidence to support their cases. All
of these explanations, however, focus on population size and growth. In recent years, however, the debate has
under-emphasized a critical issue, the age structure of the population (that is, the way in which the population is
distributed across different age groups), which can change dramatically as the population grows. Because people’s
economic behavior varies at different stages of life, changes in a country’s age structure can have significant effects
on its economic performance. Nations with a high proportion of children are likely to devote a high proportion
of resources to their care, which tends to depress the pace of economic growth. By contrast, if most of a nation’s
population falls within the working ages, the added productivity of this group can produce a "demographic
dividend" of economic growth, assuming that policies to take advantage of this are in place. In fact, the combined
effect of this large working-age population and health, family, labor, financial, and human capital policies can
create virtuous cycles of wealth creation. And if a large proportion of a nation’s population consists of the elderly,
the effects can be similar to those of a very young population. A large share of resources is needed by a relatively
less productive segment of the population, which likewise can inhibit economic growth. After tracing the history
of theories of the effects of population growth, this report reviews evidence on the relevance of changes in age
structure for economic growth. It also examines the relationship between population change and economic
development in particular regions of the world: East Asia; Japan; OECD, North America and Western Europe;
South-central and Southeast Asia; Latin America; Middle East and North Africa; Sub-Saharan Africa; and Eastern
Europe and the former Soviet Union. Finally, it discusses the key policy variables that, combined with reduced
fertility and increases in the working-age population, have contributed to economic growth in some areas of the
developing world.



David E. Bloom
Department of Population and International Health, Harvard School of Public Health
and NBER
dbloom@hsph.harvard.edu

David Canning
Department of Economics, Queens University of Belfast
d.canning@qub.ac.uk

Jaypee Sevilla
Department of Population and International Health, Harvard School of Public Health
jsevilla@hsph.harvard.edu
Summary


DEMOGRAPHIC CHANGE AND ECONOMIC GROWTH: THE IMPORTANCE OF AGE
STRUCTURE

For decades, economists and social thinkers have debated the influence of population
change on economic growth.5 Three alternative positions define this debate: that
population growth restricts, promotes, or is independent of economic growth. Proponents
of each explanation can find evidence to support their cases.6 All of these explanations,
however, focus on population size and growth. In recent years, however, the debate has
under-emphasized a critical issue, the age structure of the population (that is, the way in
which the population is distributed across different age groups), which can change
dramatically as the population grows.7

Because people’s economic behavior varies at different stages of life, changes in a
country’s age structure can have significant effects on its economic performance. Nations
with a high proportion of children are likely to devote a high proportion of resources to
their care, which tends to depress the pace of economic growth. By contrast, if most of a
nation’s population falls within the working ages, the added productivity of this group can
produce a "demographic dividend" of economic growth, assuming that policies to take
advantage of this are in place. In fact, the combined effect of this large working-age
population and health, family, labor, financial, and human capital policies can create
virtuous cycles of wealth creation. And if a large proportion of a nation’s population


5
  A recent and very important summary of the history, along with a set of well-focused essays on the
subjects treated in this essay is Birdsall, Nancy, Allen C. Kelley, and Steven W. Sinding, eds., Population
Matters: Demographic Change, Economic Growth, and Poverty in the Developing World. Oxford University
Press, 2001.
6
  The issue is further complicated because some research has shown that the relationship is different in
developing countries than in developed countries. See Allen Kelley, 2001, "The Population Debate in
Historical Perspective: Revisionism Revised," p. 46. In Birdsall, N., Kelley, A., and Sinding, S. eds. Population
Matters: Demography, Growth, and Poverty in the Developing World. pp. 24-54. Oxford University Press.
7
  In fact, considerations of age structure were not entirely absent from these debates. Most notably, the
seminal work by Coale and Hoover (1958) suggested that population growth impeded economic growth
partly because it goes hand in hand with increased youth dependency.


                                                        2
consists of the elderly, the effects can be similar to those of a very young population. A
large share of resources is needed by a relatively less productive segment of the
population, which likewise can inhibit economic growth.

After tracing the history of theories of the effects of population growth, this report reviews
evidence on the relevance of changes in age structure for economic growth. It also
examines the relationship between population change and economic development in
particular regions of the world: East Asia; Japan; OECD, North America and Western
Europe; South-central and Southeast Asia; Latin America; Middle East and North Africa;
Sub-Saharan Africa; and Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. Finally, it discusses
the key policy variables that, combined with reduced fertility and increases in the working-
age population, have contributed to economic growth in some areas of the developing
world.8


THE DEMOGRAPHIC TRANSITION AND THE DEMOGRAPHIC “DIVIDEND”

The relationship between population change and economic growth has taken on added
salience in recent years because of demographic trends in the developing world. At
varying rates and times since the Second World War, developing countries have been
undergoing a demographic transition, from high to low rates of mortality and fertility.
This transition is producing a "boom" generation – a generation that is larger than those
immediately before and after it – that is gradually working its way through nations’ age
structures. The East Asian nations were at the forefront of this transition; other regions,
including Latin America, began their transitions later, in the 1960s and ‘70s. Yet other
areas – notably some countries in the Middle East and Africa – have not yet fully begun,
or are in the early phases of this transition.


8
  The text, tables, and figures for this paper draw heavily on United Nations, World Population Prospects:
The 2000 Revision. Unless otherwise noted, we use the UN's "medium variant" for all data. The UN's
methodology has been criticized for its reliance on the assumption that all countries will converge to a
fertility rate of 2.1 children per woman. The concern here is that this suggests fertility will rise in quite a few
countries where the total fertility rate is currently below the replacement level of 2.1. Regardless of the
merits of this critique, we note that most of the results presented in this paper are qualitatively insensitive
to the difference between the "medium" and "low-fertility" variants of the data.


                                                         3
THE ESSENTIAL POLICY ENVIRONMENT

Nations undergoing this transition have an opportunity to capitalize on the “demographic
dividend” offered by the maturing of formerly young populations. The demographic
dividend is not, however, automatic. Given the right kind of policy environment, this
demographic dividend can help to produce a sustained period of economic growth, as it
did in several East Asian economies. The critical policy areas include

   • Public health

   • Family planning

   • Education

   • Economic policies that promote labor-market flexibility, openness to trade, and
       savings.

Policymakers in developing countries have a window of opportunity for exploiting the
maturation of previously young populations. Policymakers should consider how to
maximize and capture this dividend by accelerating the demographic transition, and
allowing extra labor to be absorbed productively in the market. Finally, policymakers
must plan for the future health care and pension income needs of this baby boom
generation when it ages. The demographic transition offers policymakers a window of
opportunity. Seizing it could prove vital to the economic and social development of their
countries.

Before proceeding, note that policies that enhance the free operation of markets are
frequently referred to, below. In most simple economic models, such policies will tend to
promote a country's ability to take advantage of the demographic dividend. However, two
caveats are in order.

First, policy reforms that make labor markets more flexible are not unambiguously
beneficial, especially in the short run. Political feasibility can also be an issue. Workers


                                               4
who suffer pay reductions, who are displaced, or who fear these outcomes can be a
potent political force resisting change. In principle, social protection programs can ease
the impact of labor market reforms, but there are few successful models to which one can
point (see, for example, Lustig (2001)). Nevertheless, capture of the potential
demographic dividend can be impeded by labor market rigidities that pervade many
developing countries. These include rules governing the hiring and firing of individuals
that prevent employers from taking risks and thus deter investment; minimum wages that
exceed market rates and thereby discourage hiring and training; government pay
practices that are grossly out of line with the market; and labor market inertia caused by
labor-management bargaining.

Second, similar issues arise with respect to free trade, since it is well established that
trade liberalization creates both winners and losers. Openness to trade can provoke
economic adjustments that lead to unemployment and poverty. There are also some
important issues about the fundamental fairness of outcomes that result when countries
become more integrated into the world economy. These questions relate, for example, to
intellectual property rights, immigration restrictions, and developed country protectionism.

Devising economically and politically realistic programs to deal with these challenges is
hugely important, though beyond the scope of this report.




                                               5
Chapter 1 The Debate over the Effects of Population Change on
Economic Growth

The relationship between population change and economic growth remains a subject of
debate among economists and demographers. They continue to disagree about whether
population change is (a) restricts, (b) promotes, or (c) is independent of economic
growth. Proponents of each view can point to research evidence to support their cases.

The utility of this debate has been hampered by one shortcoming: its almost exclusive
focus on population size and growth. Little attention has been paid to a critical variable,
the age structure of the population (that is, the way in which the population is distributed
across different age groups) and how it changes when populations grow.

This report attempts to address this limitation. It reviews the debate over the effects of
demographic change on economic growth and examines the evidence on the relevance of
changes in age structure for economic growth. It also examines the relationship between
population change and economic development in particular regions of the world. Finally, it
discusses key policies that, combined with reduced fertility and increases in the working-
age population, have contributed to economic growth in the developing world.

Understanding the relationship between population change and economic growth has
taken on immense significance in recent years because of demographic trends in the
developing world. The world’s developing countries – home to the vast majority of the
world’s population – are in varying stages of a demographic transition from high to low
rates of mortality and fertility. This transition is producing a boom generation that is
gradually working its way through nations’ age structures. In conjunction with the right
kinds of policies, this phenomenon creates opportunities for economic growth in
developing countries. For this reason, policymakers should benefit from a clearer
understanding of the relationship between economic development and the shifting age
structure that results from the unfolding demographic transition.


                                              6
THE “PESSIMISTIC” THEORY: POPULATION GROWTH RESTRICTS ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT

Following the Second World War, rapid population growth, resulting from the gap
between declining mortality and continuing high fertility, began occurring in much of Asia.
By the mid-1960s, more countries, including a number in Latin America and the Middle
East, were experiencing unprecedented rates of population growth. At such rates, their
                                                            9
populations would double in less than 25 years.

Concerns about rapid population growth voiced by demographers, social scientists, and
others were based largely on the assumption that such growth would “serve as a brake”
on economic development.10 In the late 1940s, conservationists began to write about
excessive population growth being a threat to food supplies and natural resources.
Concerns about the impact of rapid population growth and high fertility underlay the
widespread implementation of family planning programs in many areas of the developing
world (see Seltzer, RAND, forthcoming 2001). Policymakers presumed that by helping to
reduce high fertility, family planning programs would slow population growth, which in
turn would contribute to improved economic performance by freeing resources that
otherwise would be devoted to child-rearing as well as reducing strains on infrastructure
and the environment.

The “pessimistic” theory traces its lineage to Thomas Malthus. Writing in the 1790s,
Malthus asked whether “the future improvement of society” was possible in the face of
ever larger populations. He reached his famously dismal conclusion:

         “Taking the population of the world at any number, a thousand millions, for instance...the
        human species would increase in the ratio of 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 516, etc. and
        subsistence as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc. In two centuries and a quarter the




9
  Some of these countries, in fact, more than doubled their population between 1965 and 1990, while some
of them saw their growth rate slow down.
10
   For a discussion of trends in global population growth since the 1950s and the implications of high fertility
for economic growth, see Bulatao, 1998, pp. 3-20.


                                                       7
       population would be to the means of subsistence as 512 to 10; in three centuries as 4096
       to 13, and in two thousand years the difference would be incalculable.”11


In a world with fixed resources for growing food, and slow technical progress, Malthus
theorized, food production would quickly be swamped by the pressures of a rapidly
growing population. The available diet would then fall below subsistence level, until
population growth was halted by a high death rate. Living standards could only ever
improve in the short term – before they set in motion more rapid population growth. The
balance between population and income growth was the “great law of our nature.”
Accordingly, “No fancied equality, no agrarian regulations in their utmost extent, could
remove the pressure of it even for a single century. And it appears, therefore, to be
decisive against the possible existence of a society, all the members of which should live
in ease, happiness, and comparative leisure; and feel no anxiety about providing the
means of subsistence for themselves and families.”12

Malthus’s pessimism remains with us. In 1968, for instance, Paul Ehrlich opened his
influential book "The Population Bomb" with the words, "The battle...is over. In the 1970s
hundreds of millions of people are going to starve to death."13 More measured studies
undertaken by the US National Academy of Sciences (NAS) in 1971 and the United
Nations in 1973 also predicted that the net effect of population growth would be
negative.14 Rapid population growth continues to press on the modern consciousness.
The world’s population has grown sixfold since 1800, when it stood at about one billion.
It took less than 130 years to add another billion. Things have quickened considerably
since. The 6 billionth baby was born in October 1999 – and world population is forecast
to be 9.3 billion people by the year 2050 (see Table 1). Table 2 shows the current


11
   Malthus, T. R. (1798). Essay on the Principle of Population, As It Affects the Future Improvement of
Society with Remarks on the Speculation of Mr. Godwin, M. Condorcet, and Other Writers, Penguin Classics
ed. (Harmondsworth, 1982).
12
   Ibid.
13
   Ehrlich, P. 1968. The Population Bomb. New York: Ballantine
14
   National Academy of Sciences (1971): Rapid population growth: consequences and policy implications. 2
volumes. Baltimore: John Hopkins Press for the National Academy of Sciences; United Nations (1973): The
determinants and consequences of population trends. Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
Population studies N0 50. 2 volumes. New York: United Nations.


                                                    8
population of all regions and countries, along with the share of the world's total
population in each region. With the population of many developed countries decreasing by
2050, all of this explosive population growth is happening in developing countries15 (see
Figure 1) – most rapidly in those geographic regions that are most fragile and least
hospitable (due to adverse climate, lack of resources, or unfavorable location) to
economic growth16 – encouraging predictions of demographic catastrophe.

For a time, it seemed the pessimists had the right answer. Innovations in agriculture, such
as irrigation in China and potato cultivation in Ireland, were accompanied by vast
increases in population that hampered improvements in living standards. Until 1700,
income gaps between countries were fairly small and, even in 1820, real income levels in
the advanced European nations were only about two to three times those found in Africa,
Asia, and Latin America (see Figure 2).

In addition to the effect of population numbers on the demand for fixed resources, there
is also a potentially negative impact of population growth on capital intensity. In
principle, higher population numbers require more homes, factories and infrastructure to
house, employ and provide for their needs. In the long run such capital can be
constructed, but periods of rapid population growth may well lead to reductions in capital
per worker and lower living standards. When population growth is rapid, a large part of
investment is used to supply the needs of the growing population rather than enabling an
increase in the level of provision per capita.

Both these theories give grounds for pessimism. However, by the early 1980s economists
were beginning to reject the pessimist view. Empirical research had weakened the
pessimists’ case; economic theory had begun to give increasing importance to technology
and human capital accumulation compared to the old key growth factors of physical
capital; and demographic theory started to look to the intermediate and long term, where
the short-term effects of population growth were likely to have at least partly smoothed

15
     UN Population Division: World Population Prospects – The 2000 Revision. 28 February 2001: 6




                                                      9
out.17 In response to these developments, organizations like the National Academy of
Sciences began to revise their earlier views, as economists, with their greater faith in
markets’ ability to respond to population growth, gained prominence over the social and
biological scientists who previously dominated population thinking.18


THE “OPTIMISTIC” THEORY: POPULATION CHANGE CAN FUEL ECONOMIC
GROWTH

Recent history has cast further doubt on the pessimists’ theory. In the last 30 years –
when the world’s population has doubled – per capita incomes have increased by about
two thirds. Famines have occurred, but Ehrlich’s “hundreds of millions” of people have
not starved; the famines that have occurred were largely caused by poverty and lack of
funds among a section of the population to buy food rather than any absolute shortage of
food (as Amartya Sen has noted, there has never been a famine in a functioning
democracy, whatever its population growth rate19). Technological progress, in both
agriculture and industry, has been more rapid than any other time in human history.
There have been equally dramatic social and institutional innovations, in the way people
work, the standard of their education and health and the extent to which they participate
in the political process20. Rather than being constrained by fixed resources, the prices of
many raw materials are in long-term decline, and some parts of the economy are
becoming “dematerialized” as knowledge becomes an increasingly vital asset.21


16
 Jeffrey D Sachs, Andrew D Mellinger and John L Gallup: The Geography of Poverty and Wealth. Scientific
American March 2001
17
   On the importance of human capital in explaining differences in standards of living across countries, see
Mankiw, Romer, and Weil (1992). On demographics, see Allen C Kelley (2001): The population debate in
historical perspective: revisionism revisited. In Population Matters: Demography, Growth, and Poverty in the
Developing World, Nancy Birdsall, Allen C. Kelley and Steven Sinding, editors, Oxford University Press, 2001.
18
   National Research Council (1986): Population growth and economic development: policy questions.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press, cited in Kelley (2001): ibid
19
   Amartya Sen (1999): Developpment as Freedom. Oxford University Press.
20
   Amartya Sen: Development as Freedom. Knopf 1999; Bloom, David E., Patricia H. Craig and Pia N.
Malaney, 2001, The Quality of Life in Rural Asia. Oxford University Press.
21
   World Bank: World Development Report 1997: The State in a Changing World. OUP 1997; Task Force on
Higher Education and Society: Higher Education in Developing Countries: Peril and Promise. World Bank
February 2000


                                                     10
These trends have supported the views of a group of “population optimists” who have
sought to promote the idea that population growth can be an economic asset. Simon
Kuznets and Julian Simon, for example, argue (separately) that as populations increase,
so does the stock of human ingenuity. Larger societies – with the capacity to take
advantage of economies of scale – are better positioned to develop, exploit, and
disseminate the increased flow of knowledge they receive.22 Simon, in his influential book
"The Ultimate Resource", showed how positive feedbacks – such as the tendency of
natural resource prices to decline in the long-term due to technological progress induced
by the growing demands of rising populations – can mean that rapid population growth
can lead to positive impacts on economic development.23 Ester Boserup uses similar
arguments to turn the Malthusian world-view around. Population growth creates pressure
on resources. People are resourceful and are stimulated to innovate, especially in
adversity. When rising populations swamped traditional hunter-gatherer arrangements,
slash-burn-cultivate agriculture emerged. When that, too, became inadequate, intensive
multi-annual cropping was developed.24 More recently the Green Revolution, which has
almost quadrupled world food production since 1950 using just 1 percent more land, was
a direct reaction to population pressure. “Without high yield agriculture,” comments
Norman Borlaug, an initiator of the Green Revolution, “either millions would have starved
or increases in food output would have been realized through losses of pristine land a
hundred times greater than all losses to urban and suburban expansion.”25

The Optimists, while refuting the alarmist tendencies of the Pessimists’ theory, were not
dogmatic about the positive impacts of population growth. Instead, they took a broader
view, suggesting that a multiplicity of external factors were responsible for the
consequences of population growth. These factors could have either positive or negative

22
   Kuznets, S. 1960. Population Change and Aggregate Output. In Universities--National Bureau Committee
for Economic Research, Demographic and Economic Change in Developed Countries. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.; Kuznets, S. 1967. ‘Population and economic growth’, Proceedings of the American
Philosophical Society 111, 170–93.
23
   Simon, Julian L (1981): The Ultimate Resource. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
24
   Boserup, E. 1965. The Conditions of Agricultural Progress. London: Allen and Unwin; Boserup, E. 1981.
Population and Technological Change: A Study of Long-Term Trends. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
25
   uk@earth.people, Department for International Development, United Kingdom, 1997.


                                                   11
economic consequences – as TN Srinivasan said: “many of the alleged deleterious
consequences result more from inappropriate policies and institutions than from rapid
population growth.”26 This broadening of the discussion on population growth eventually
led to population neutralism emerging as the dominant view in the demographic debate.27



THE “NEUTRALIST” THEORY: POPULATION CHANGE HAS NO SIGNIFICANT
EFFECT ON ECONOMIC GROWTH

In his great "Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations" (1776), Adam
Smith asked why some countries were richer than others. He found his answer in the
division of labor, which allowed workers to become more productive by honing their skills
at ever more specialized tasks. In recent years, economists considering the economic
effects of demographic change have been more interested in Adam Smith, and his
narrative of the power of the market, than in Thomas Malthus’s dire predictions about
population. Most economic analysis has examined the statistical correlation between
population and economic growth and found little significant connection. Though countries
with rapidly growing populations tend to have more slowly growing economies (see Figure
3), this negative correlation typically disappears (or even reverses direction) once other
factors such as country size, openness to trade28, educational attainment of the
population, and the quality of civil and political institutions are taken into account (see
Figure 4). In other words, when controlling for other factors, there is little cross-country
evidence that population growth impedes economic growth.29 This result seems to justify
a third view, population neutralism.


26
   TN Srinivasan (1988): Population growth and economic development. Journal of Policy Modeling. Spring,
10 (1), pp 7-28.
27
   A more recent position is that of Galor and Weil (1999) who propose that the Malthusian and growth regimes should
not be seen as competitors but rather, respectively, the beginning and end of a historical process. The world begins in
the Malthusian regime and eventually evolves from an intermediate stage they call Post-Malthusian, into the current
Modern Growth Regime.
28
   Sachs and Warner (1995) judge openness to trade on the basis of tariffs, quotas and licensing, black market premia,
and export taxes.
29
   This result, however, refers to the average experience across countries. The economic performance of any
specific country, however, will be determined by many forces.


                                                          12
The neutralist theory is the dominant view today. Although there are some variations
within the neutralist school, with the NAS concluding in 1986 that, “on balance…slower
population growth would be beneficial to economic development of most developing
countries”30 (our italics), and the World Bank suggesting that in some countries bigger
populations can boost economic growth, the overall tendency is to accord population
issues a relatively minor place in the context of the wider policy environment.

Allen Kelley has suggested that population neutralism has in fact been the predominant
school in thinking among academics about population growth for the last half-century; for
example, the academic background papers to even the most pessimistic UN and NAS
reports are much more moderate in tone than the reports themselves.31 Kelley cites three
major research areas that influenced the rise of population neutralism in the 1980s:

      -   Natural resources: Exhaustion of natural resources was found not to be as strongly
          affected by population growth as the Pessimists thought. Technology, conservation,
          and efficient market allocation of resources all play a part in preserving natural
          resources, and per capita income has been shown to be a key determinant of
          supply and demand for these resources.

      -   Saving: The impact on economic growth of reduced saving as a result of population
          growth is not borne out by studies.

      -   Diversification of resources: Where the Pessimists had thought that population
          growth would lead to a diversion of resources from productive physical capital
          formation to less economically productive areas such as education and social
          welfare programs, multi-country studies showed that this did not in fact happen to
          any great extent.

According to Kelley, these studies, coupled with the impact of Julian Simon’s "The
Ultimate Resource" on extending demographers’ view into the longer term, were crucial in

30
     National Research Council (1986): ibid
31
     Kelley (2001): ibid


                                                 13
bringing neutralism to the fore, and the theory has since had an enormous influence on
policymakers in developing countries and on the international development community.
The Reagan Administration and several donor agencies sought to limit lending to
population programs and simultaneously appealed to neutralist theory.32


THE IMPORTANCE OF AGE STRUCTURE

Proponents of population pessimism, optimism, and neutralism can all fall back on
theoretical models and more or less robust data to back up their positions. But, as
discussed below, the policy environment and the influence of markets and institutions are
at least as important as the population growth rate itself in determining whether countries
with expanding populations suffer or thrive.

All of these theories, however, tend to ignore a critical dimension of population dynamics:
populations’ evolving age structure. Economists have tended to focus on population
growth, ignoring the changing age distribution within populations as they grow.33 Yet
these changes are arguably as important as population growth. Each age group in a
population behaves differently, with distinct economic consequences: the young require
intensive investment in health and education, prime-age adults supply labor and savings,
and the aged require health care and retirement income (Figure 5 is a schematic
representation of life cycle income and consumption). When the relative size of each of
these groups in a population changes, so does the relative intensity of these economic
behaviors. (Figure 6 illustrates the period of high population growth preceding the period
during which there is a high share of working-age people.) This matters significantly to a

32
   World Bank economists for a long time thought that the macroeconomic case for population lending was
weak (Steven W Sinding, Professor of Clinical Public Health, Columbia University, personal communications),
and excluded population issues from most policy discussions (Tom Merrick, Senior Population and
Reproductive Health Adviser, World Bank, personal communications). The Reagan Administration’s Mexico
City statement in 1984 stated that, “population is neither a positive nor a negative factor” in development,
but is neutral. This statement was associated with the new policy of denying federal funding to NGOs that
performed or promoted abortion as a means of family planning in other nations. This policy, which had been
overturned by President Clinton in 1993, was reinstated by the Bush Administration in January 2001.
33
   The exception was the seminal Coale-Hoover study, which used India and Mexico as case studies to
emphasize the costs associated with a high dependency ratio in the early stage of the demographic
transition. See Coale, A. and Hoover, E. 1958. Population Growth and Economic Development in Low
Income Countries. Princeton: Princeton University Press.


                                                     14
country’s income growth prospects. Policymakers with a broad view of development and
the complex relation between economic and human development must factor these
effects of changing age structure into decisions about their countries’ future.

This challenge is especially pressing in the developing world. In those countries whose
mortality and fertility rates are beginning to fall (South-central Asia and much of Sub-
Saharan Africa, for example), there is an opportunity for governments to capitalize on the
consequent demographic transition, where the number of working-age adults grows large
relative to the dependent population and potentially acts as a major economic spur.
Conversely, if the appropriate policy environment is not in place, unemployment and
instability may result, and health, education and social welfare systems may come under
unbearable strain. Those developing countries whose transition is advanced, on the other
hand (Southeast Asia and Latin America), need to look to the future, putting in place
policies to cope with an aging population and make the most of the remaining years of
low dependency ratios. The next section will go on to assess how countries can make the
most of the age structure of their populations.




                                             15
Chapter 2 Demographic Transitions and the “Demographic
Dividend”

This chapter examines the “demographic transition” that all countries experience as
economic development progresses, discusses the mechanisms by which its impacts are
felt, and highlights the opportunity for economic growth – the “demographic dividend” –
that this transition offers to developing nations.


THE DEMOGRAPHIC TRANSITION: DECLINING MORTALITY AND FERTILITY

In much of the developing world, a “demographic transition” transition is under way,
accelerating with the declines in mortality that began around the end of the Second World
War. Improvements in medicine and public health, including the introduction of
antibiotics such as penicillin, treatments for diseases such as tuberculosis and diarrhea,
and the use of DDT, which helps control malaria, have contained or eradicated diseases
that once killed millions of people.34 This was accompanied by improved sanitation,
nutrition, and the wider practice of healthier behaviors. All this gradually led to higher life
expectancies, by as much as twenty years in some countries, and naturally to population
growth (see Figures 7 and 8). Yet despite higher life expectancies, these countries had
populations that were, on average, growing younger.35 This is because mortality declines
were not evenly distributed across the population. Infectious diseases are particularly
ruthless killers of the young, so their containment had the most powerful impact on the
mortality of infants and children which fell earlier and more quickly than mortality at other
ages (Figure 9 shows the decline in infant mortality rates over time). The larger surviving
youth cohorts served to drive down the average age of populations.



34
   See Bloom, River Path Associates, and Fang, 2000, “Social Technology and Human Health,” Background
paper prepared for Human Development Report 2001.
35
   From 1950 to 1960, the median age decreased in all regions and subregions of Africa, Asia, and Latin
America. This time period captures the early stages of the demographic transition in most of the developing
world. See United Nations, World Population Prospects: The 2000 Revision.


                                                    16
The mortality decline which began the demographic transition has been succeeded by
equally dramatic reductions in fertility (see Figure 10). Fertility decisions seem to respond
strongly to changes in child mortality as parents realize that if fewer children are likely to
die in childhood, they can give birth to fewer children to attain their desired number of
offspring. This desire to rein in fertility is reflected in trends in the use of contraceptives.
Worldwide, more than half of couples now use contraception, compared with 10% in the
1960s36. In Bangladesh, for example, the percentage of couples using contraception
tripled, to 31 percent, in just fourteen years.37

Other changes have reinforced the trend towards lowered fertility, as it becomes
advantageous to have smaller families. If children have a higher chance of survival and a
long life expectancy, it is wise to invest intensively in them. A major form of investment is
education – an investment that becomes more tempting when economic changes are
likely to increase the potential returns on education. However, this requires a long-term
commitment. In a rural society, children typically start working on the land quite early
and become economically productive at a young age. Educating children limits their
productivity during childhood (they are at school rather than working). However, with
increasing urbanization, children are less likely to be economically productive, while, in a
labor market that places a greater premium on skills, education makes a greater
difference to their future productivity. Thus urbanization raises the incentive of parents to
educate their children at the same time as it reduces the opportunity cost of education in
terms of forgone labor income. Education is expensive. It therefore becomes more likely
that couples will choose to invest greater resources in fewer children. A greater emphasis
on education will inevitably lead to more educated women. This reinforces the likelihood
that families will become smaller: women’s time becomes more valuable and they are less




36
     uk@earth.people: poverty and the environment, 1997, Department for International Development,
London
37
  MD Shahid Ullah and Nitai Chakraborty (1993): Factors affecting the use of contraception in Bangladesh:
a multivariate analysis. Asia Pacific Population Journal, Vol 8 No 3 (1993, pp 19-30). UNESCAP.




                                                     17
likely to want to spend so much of their adult life bearing and raising children.38 For many
reasons, then, smaller families make increasingly sound economic sense once the
demographic transition gets underway.39

The decline in mortality and the decline in fertility jointly form the demographic transition
– but they are not synchronized. The lag between the two causes population growth – as
fertility only begins to decline some time after mortality has dropped (see Figures 11 and
12). This growth at the beginning of the demographic transition has preoccupied the
prevailing views of population change and economic growth. However, the demographic
transition also has a predictable impact on a country’s age structure. At first, there is a
cohort of children that includes many who would previously have suffered an early death.
This baby boom generation is unique: as fertility rates decline and families grow smaller,
successive cohorts tend to be smaller. The result is a “bulge” in the age structure, a
demographic wave that works its way through the population. (Figures 13, 14, and 15
show this moving bulge, and successive waves of it, for developing countries, East Asia,
and Ireland, respectively. Figure 16 shows that only the beginnings of such a bulge are
evident in Sub-Saharan Africa ). First there are many young people, who need to be fed,
clothed, housed, cared for medically, and educated. Then they become adults who are
more likely to spend only part of the income they generate on their own needs. The rest
is used to provide for children or is saved, most often for retirement. Finally, there is a
large cohort of elderly people, who work less – or not at all – and become dependent
again. They either live off their own savings or are supported by their families or the
state.

The effects of the modern demographic transition can be felt for several generations. An
initial spurt of population growth occurs between the beginning of the mortality decline
and the end of the fertility decline. But when the baby boom generation itself reaches the

38
   Birdsall, Nancy, Allen C. Kelley, and Steven W. Sinding, eds., Population Matters: Demographic Change,
Economic Growth, and Poverty in the Developing World. Oxford University Press, 2001, p. 13.
39
   See, for example, http://www.popcouncil.org/publications/wp/prd/123.html for Mark R. Montgomery,
Mary Aruends-Kuenning and Cem Mete’s paper, “The Quantity-Quality Transition in Asia” (1999), which
discusses the dynamics between fertility rates and education in Asia.


                                                     18
prime reproductive years, it creates its own echo: a succeeding baby-boom. Subsequent
echo effects produce further spurts. In other words, even if total fertility rates have been
reduced to replacement level (2.1 children per woman), the population will continue to
grow until the members of the bulge generation and successive echo generations tend to
have passed through their prime reproductive years.40 This process is called population
momentum, and its effects will be felt for 70 to 100 years before the population age
structure settles down. Due to the effect of population momentum alone, the population
of developing countries as a whole is expected to increase by 40 per cent between 1995
and 2100.41

While population growth has been explored quite fully by economists, far less attention
has been paid to changes in the age structure brought about by the demographic
transition. Combining the population growth rate and the growth rate of the economically
active population captures the way that age structures change and delivers striking
results.42 While population growth has a large and statistically significant negative effect
on per capita income growth, this effect is counteracted by a statistically significant
positive effect from growth in the share of the population that is economically active.
While the age structure remains constant, therefore, the effect of population growth is
neutral, but as the proportion of workers rises or falls, so do opportunities for economic
growth. The demographic dividend, for example, was essential to East Asia’s
extraordinary economic achievements, accounting for as much as one-third of its
"economic miracle".43 The “Celtic Tiger” (referring to the rapid economic growth in
present-day Ireland) appears to be another powerful illustration of this same

40
   Assuming constant rates of age-specific fertility, the echo generations will perturb the population pyramid
in less and less pronounced fashion, as they are further removed from the initial baby boom.
41
   See John Bongaarts, "Future Population Growth and Policy Options" and David E. Bloom, "Population
Growth, Structure, and Policy: Comment", both in Andrew Mason, Thomas Merrick, and R. Paul Shaw, eds.,
Population Economics, Demographic Transition, and Development: Research and Policy Implications,
Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 1999.
42 The economically active population comprises all persons of either sex who furnish the supply of labour
for the production of economic goods and services as defined by the United Nations systems of national
accounts and balances during a specified time-reference period. International Labour Office. 1997.
Economically Active Population1950-2010. Geneva: International Labour Office.
43 D. E. Bloom and J. G. Williamson, World Bank Econ. Rev. 12 (3), 419 (1998[0]). D. E. Bloom, D. Canning,
P. N. Malaney, Popul. Dev. Rev. 2000, Supplement to Vol. 26, pp. 257-290.


                                                      19
phenomenon. Figure 17 shows how the share of the working-age population has varied
over time in different regions of the world. Figure 18 highlights the same fact for East
Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa, and Ireland.

However, this demographic dividend is not inevitable. It has to be earned. Without the
right policy environment, countries will be too slow to adapt to their changing age
structure and, at best, will miss an opportunity to secure high growth. At worst, where an
increase in the working-age population is not matched by increased job opportunities,
they will face costly penalties, such as rising unemployment and perhaps also higher crime
rates and political instability. With no policies in place to provide for rising numbers of old
people, many will face destitution in their final years.44 In addition, the demographic
dividend is time-limited. Many developed nations are facing the end of their demographic
transition, and now must plan for their aging populations and a decline in their worker-to-
dependents ratio. Additionally, some are experiencing shrinking populations. Low fertility
rates over an extended period of time, where replacement fertility (2.1 children per
woman) is not reached, eventually lead to population decline. Italy’s population, currently
at 57 million, is projected to decline to 43 million by 2050. Japan’s population is expected
to decrease from 127 million to 109 million by 2050.45 The available labor force will
decrease, and the elderly will increasingly make up a larger proportion of the population,
bringing with it further social and economic challenges.46 Through the lens of
demography at least, the next 50 years presents the developed world with significant
challenges, at the same time as it offers the developing world a number of appealing
opportunities.47


44 Bloom, D. and Williamson, J. 1998. ‘Demographic transitions and economic miracles in emerging Asia’,
World Bank Economic Review 12, 419–56.
45 United Nations, World Population Prospects: The 2000 Revision
46 See Bloom, Nandakumar, and Bhawalkar, 2001, “The Demography of Aging in Japan and the United
States”, paper presented at the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.
47
   See Teitelbaum and Winter. Also, it is worth noting that a declining population, particularly in a country
such as Japan, can carry with it the benefit of lessened pressure on natural resources. If the degradation of
natural resource capital were accounted for properly, the trajectory of net national income would rise faster
(or decline slower) as compared to a stationary or growing population. In addition, putative population
decline does not necessarily translate into a comparable decline in the size of the labor force. This is due to
the potential for (a) increased labor force participation among women, (b) increased retirement age, and (c)


                                                      20
The Demographic “Dividend”

The demographic dividend is delivered through a number of mechanisms. The most
important are labor supply48, savings, and human capital.

Labor supply:

The demographic transition affects labor supply in two ways. First, there is an essentially
mechanical effect, based on the regular and inevitable aging of the baby boom
generation. When this generation is between 15 and 64, it is more likely to be working,
thus lowering the ratio of dependents to non-dependents. (Figure 19 shows labor force
participation rates by age group.) During the peak working years of 25 to 59, this effect is
especially strong. The number of people who would like to work (labor supply) therefore
gets bigger, and provided the labor market can absorb the larger numbers of workers, per
capita production increases.

Second, women are more likely to enter the workforce, as family size declines. 49 This
effect is magnified by the fact that, with adult women themselves more likely to have
been brought up in small families, they are more likely to be educated. This increases
their productivity in the labor market, underlining progress towards a stronger workforce
and smaller families.

Savings:

increases in net in-migration, which tends to be selective of working-age individuals. For example, the
female labor force participation rate in Italy is 33%, while in Japan it is 44%. These contrast with rates of
48% in Canada and 51% in Sweden. Even more telling is the fact that the difference between the male and
female labor force participation rate in Italy (23%) and Japan (21%) are higher than for most high-income
countries (e.g., the differences for France and the United Kingdom are 12% and 14%, respectively). (World
Development Indicators 2001, data for 1999). Finally, retirement ages have been relatively stagnant in
comparison with life expectancy. Between 1965 and 2000, Italy's life expectancy increased from 71 to 79,
and Japan's from 71 to 81. By comparison, retirement age in Italy is 62 (up from 61 for men and 56 for
women during that period) and 65 in Japan. An upward adjustment of the retirement age could mitigate the
labor force effects of population aging.
48 See Bloom, Canning, and Sevilla, 2000, “Labor Force Dynamics and Economic Growth,” paper presented
at the August 2000 Summer Institute of the National Bureau of Economic Research, Labor Studies Program.
49 See http://www.ilo.org/public/english/bureau/stat/newsletr/nine.htm


                                                     21
The demographic transition also encourages the growth of savings, thus improving a
country’s prospects for investment and growth. Again, there is an accounting and a
behavioral effect at work. The young and the old consume more than they generate,
unlike working-age people, who tend to have a higher level of economic outputs, and also
a higher level of savings.50 Further, people tend to save more between the ages of 40
and 65, when they are less likely to be investing in their children and the need to prepare
for their retirement is becoming more pressing.51 So when large numbers of baby
boomers start hitting their forties, national savings will tend to rise.52 Incentives to make
certain choices can reinforce this tendency to save among the new young baby boomers.
Improved health, and longevity, make saving easier and more attractive.53 A healthy
population must plan far in advance if it is to maintain its standard of living through
decades of retirement.54 Pensions are made even more important by smaller families and
the mobility urbanization brings. An extended family often takes care of its own elderly
relatives. A nuclear family, with both parents working, is far less likely to do so, although
the latter’s increased assets make it better able to provide care financially, if not
physically. Additionally, private household savings can provide the capital accumulation



50 Higgins 1998, Higgins and Williamson 1997; Kelley and Schmidt, 1996; Lee, Mason, and Miller, 1998; Leff
1969; Mason 1988; and Webb and Zia 1990
51 Data from household surveys (C.H. Paxson (1996), "Savings and Growth: Evidence from Micro Data,"
European Economic Review, Vol. 40, pp. 255-288; and A. S. Deaton A.S. and C. H. Paxson (1997), "The
Effects of Economic and Population Growth on National Savings and Inequality," Demography, Vol. 34, pp.
97-114.). A. J. Coale and E. Hoover (1958) suggest that the dip in savings rate for people in their early
thirties is related to the consumption needs of people with young families in Population Growth and
Economic Development in Low-Income Countries, Princeton University Press, Princeton.
52 Studies examining the relationship between age structure and savings include N.D. Leff (1969),
"Dependency Rates and Savings Rates," American Economic Review, Vol. 59, pp. 886-896; A. Mason
(1981), "An Extension of the Life-Cycle Model and its Application to Population Growth and Aggregate
Saving," East-West Institute Working Paper No. 4, Honolulu; A. Mason (1987). "National Saving Rates and
Population Growth: A New Model and New Evidence," in Johnson D.G. and Lee R. Eds., Population Growth
and Economic Development: Issues and Evidence, Madison: University of Wisconsin Press 1987; S. Webb
and H. Zia (1990), "Lower birth Rates = Higher savings in LDCs," Finance and Development, Vol. 27, pp.
12-14; A. C. Kelley, and R. M. Schmidt (1996), "Savings, Dependency and Development," Journal of
Population Economics, Vol. 9, pp. 365-386; M. Higgins and J. G. Williamson Structure (1997), "Age
Dynamics in Asia and Dependence of Foreign Capital," Population and Development Review, Vol. 23, pp.
261-293; and D. Bloom, D. Canning, and B. Graham, 2000, “Health, Longevity, and Life Cycle Savings,”
paper presented to the WHO Commission on Macroeconomics and Health, November 2000.
53 Mason 1998; Meltzer 1995
54 Lee, Mason and Miller, 1998


                                                    22
needed to finance growth, as seen in East Asia.55,          56
                                                                 Further work is needed, however, to
take account of the institutional features of pension systems when assessing the
importance of the demographic transition to the determination of national savings.

Human capital:

Finally, the demographic transition has significant effects on investments in human
capital, effects which are the least tangible, but may be the most significant and far-
reaching. The demographic transition begins with changes in mortality that result in a
population that lives longer and stays healthier. A longer life expectancy causes
fundamental changes in the way that people live. Attitudes to education, family,
retirement, the role of women and work all tend to shift. A society, especially if it is
taking full advantage of the demographic dividend, is certain to experience deep-rooted
changes in its culture, as its people become more valuable assets. Take education, for
example: The positive correlation between education and earnings is well known. In
Latin America, for example, a worker with 6 years of education earns an average of 50
per cent more than someone who has no formal education. The premium increases to 120
per cent for those with 12 years of education (i.e. finishing secondary school), and
exceeds 200 per cent for those with 17 years of education (i.e. completing tertiary
education).57 As life expectancy increases, parents are likely to choose to educate their
children to more advanced levels. Healthier children, in turn, tend to experience greater
cognitive development per year of schooling than their less healthy counterparts.58 The


55 P. Krugman, "The Myth of Asia's Miracle," Foreign Affairs, 1994 Vol.73, pp. 62-78; A. Young, "Lessons
from the East Asian NIC’s: A Contrarian View," European Economic Review, 1994 Vol. 38, pp. 964-973; A.
Young , "The Tyranny of Numbers: Confronting the Statistical Realities of the East Asian Growth
Experience," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1995 Vol. 110, pp. 641-680; Asian Development Bank, 1997,
Emerging Asia, Asian Development Bank, Manila, Philippines, esp. Chapter 3 (“Demographic Change and
Human Resource Development”, pp. 141-197).
56 Higgins, M. 1998. ‘Demography, national savings, and international capital flows’, International Economic
Review 39, 343–69. Kelley, A. and Schmidt, R. 1995. 1996. ‘Savings, dependency, and development’,
Journal of Population Economics 9, 365–86

57 Inter-American Development Bank, Facing up to Inequality in Latin America, Washington DC, IDB,1999
58 Jamison DT, Wang J, Hill K and Londono J-L (1996): Income, mortality and fertility in Latin America:
country-level performance, 1960-1990. Revista de análisis económico, 11: 219-261


                                                     23
parents also know that there is a good chance that each child will benefit from schooling
investments over a long working life and, with fewer children, can devote more time and
money to each child. The result of this educational investment is that the labor force as a
whole becomes more productive, promoting higher wages and a better standard of living.
Women and men therefore tend to enter the workforce later, partly because they are
being educated for longer, but they are likely to be more productive once they start
working.59

All these mechanisms are heavily dependent on the policy environment. A growing
number of adults will only be productive if there is sufficient flexibility in the labor market
to allow its expansion, and macroeconomic policies that permit and encourage
investment. Similarly, people will only save if they have access to adequate saving
mechanisms and have confidence in domestic financial markets. Finally, the demographic
transition creates conditions where people will tend to invest in their health and
education, offering great economic benefits, especially in the modern world’s increasingly
sophisticated economies. But governments invariably play a vital role in creating an
environment where high quality health and education provision is possible – necessary
steps to make the most of their country’s demographic opportunities.




59 ILO, ibid. See, also, Bloom, Canning, and Sevilla, op cit.


                                                       24
Chapter 3 Case Studies of Population Change and Economic Growth

This chapter examines the interplay between demographic change and economic growth
in five specific areas of the world: East Asia, Latin America, Sub-Saharan Africa, the
Middle East and North Africa, and Japan. The East Asian nations have experienced the
most success in exploiting the “demographic dividend” made available by reduced fertility.
Latin America has undergone a less dramatic transition and has had far less success in
creating conditions for economic growth. The Middle East and North Africa are still in
much earlier stages of the demographic transition, and indeed many parts of Sub-Saharan
Africa have seen virtually no decreases in traditionally high fertility rates. Japan, a
developed country with an aging population, illustrates the “back end” of the demographic
transition: it is facing the issues posed by a declining work force and an increasing ratio
of elderly dependents.


East Asia

The East Asian "economic miracle" offers some of the most compelling evidence in recent
history of the "demographic dividend".60 The East Asian demographic transition occurred
with relative rapidity, over a 50- to 75-year period – the fastest demographic transition to
date.61 Modern transitions are faster because countries gain the benefit of knowledge,
experience, or technology developed by others.62

Throughout the world, dramatic improvements in public health emerged from the late
1940s onwards, largely through improved sanitation, safer water, and the development of
broad-spectrum antibiotics and antimicrobials (for example, penicillin, sulfa drugs,

60
  For a detailed and compelling set of analyses on similar topics, see Andrew Mason, ed., Population
Change and Economic Development in East Asia: Challenges Met, Opportunities Seized, forthcoming 2002,
Stanford University Press. Among other topics, Mason addresses the issue of reverse causality, i.e., from
economic growth to demographic change.
61 In Western Europe, for example, the process began in the mid-18th century, and was to last nearly 150
years. In Sweden, the transition took even longer, occupying the better part of 300 years; see also Bloom,
Nandakumar, Bhawalkar (2001)




                                                    25
streptomycin, bacitracin, chloroquine, and tetracycline, discovered and introduced
between 1920 and 1940, and the use of DDT from 1943). From the 1950s onwards, there
were significant and sustained declines in infant and child mortality. The infant mortality
rate (the proportion of babies who die before their first birthday) in Asia as a whole
dropped from 182 per 1,000 in 1950 to 53 per 1,000 in 2000.63 In time, the effect of the
decrease in mortality carried through to a fall in fertility rates. This was assisted by family
planning programs, which made birth control both easier and more socially acceptable. In
the 1950s East Asia’s developing countries used voluntary programs of incentives to
encourage families to have fewer children, and the transition from high to replacement
level fertility took less than 30 years.64 In 1950 the typical East Asian woman had six
children – today she has two. In the lag between the decrease in infant mortality and the
decline in fertility, a ‘baby boom’ generation was created.65

The East Asian demographic transition was one of the critical factors in the region’s
spectacular economic growth.66 Between 1965 and 1990, per capita income rose annually
by over 6 per cent. One explanation for this phenomenal growth is that in the late 1960s,
when the baby boom generation started work, their entry into the workforce changed the
proportion of workers to dependents in the population. With the benefits of a good
education and a liberalized trade environment, this generation was absorbed into the job
market and into gainful employment, thereby increasing the region’s capacity for
economic production. The region’s working-age population grew nearly four times faster
(an average of 2.4% a year) than its dependent population between 1965 and 1990. A
virtuous spiral was thus created, whereby population change increased income growth,
and income growth pushed down population growth – and therefore the number of


62 In Ireland, for example, since modern contraception was legalized – first among married couples, and
then generally – there has been a steep decline in fertility since the early 1980s.
63 United Nations, World Population Prospects: The 2000 Revision.
64 Mason (2001) ibid: 31
65 The working-age population rose from around 57% of East Asia’s total population in 1965 to around 68%
in 2000.
66 See Bloom, David E. and Jeffrey Williamson, “Demographic Transitions and Economic Miracles in
Emerging Asia”, World Bank Economic Review, 1998; Bloom, David, David Canning, and Pia Malaney.
(2000). “Demographic Change and Economic Growth in East Asia.” Population and Development Review.


                                                   26
dependents – by reducing fertility.67 East Asia’s high savings rates were also affected by
the demographic transition, as the baby boom generation entered the workforce and
parents had fewer children to take care of, although the extent of the effect is disputed in
the literature.68 Results from Bloom and Sachs (1998), Bloom and Williamson (1998), and
Bloom, Canning, and Malaney (2000) suggest that the demographic dividend accounts for
between one-fourth and two-fifths of East Asia’s "economic miracle". Growth accounting
presented by Mason (2001) further confirms the results of the regression analyses in
these works.

Yet as its baby boom cohort ages, East Asia must prepare for an aging population. Not
only did infant mortality decrease, but mortality at other ages fell as well and, as a result,
life expectancy has risen from around 43 years in 1950 to 72 years today. Population
growth has slowed dramatically – from a peak of 2.4 per cent a year in the late 1960s, it
is now 0.66 per cent a year, and predicted to be only 0.2 per cent by 2025. When the
baby boom retires, the ratio of dependents to workers will change again, and bring added
challenges to policy makers and the economy. Japan’s dependency ratio, which remained
around the 0.45 mark throughout the 1990s, will reach 0.96 by 205069 (see detailed
discussion of Japan below). Pensions and health care for the elderly will come under
strain and economic growth is likely to shrink as the labor force declines.

An aging population is, fundamentally, a mark of development success. However, the
aged face a range of potential problems, including poverty (Japan has elderly poverty
rates above 18%70). Additionally, the speed of change in the modern world – including
profound changes in family and social patterns – means that policymakers worldwide will
be hard pressed to ensure that the challenge of an aging society does not become a



67 For discussion of how the spheres of globalization, liberalization, and sustainable human development
can be managed to help capture the demographic dividend, see Bloom, Mahal et al (2001) ibid
68 See Mason (2001) ed for a discussion of the literature on savings rates and the transition.
69 United Nations, World Population Prospects: The 2000 Revision
70 Jonathan Gruber, David Wise: An International Perspective on Policies for an Aging Society. Working
Paper 8103. National Bureau of Economic Research. January 2001



                                                    27
crisis.71 They will also need to address the fact that a significant proportion of the elderly
are women, who often suffer a double disempowerment based on age and gender.

East Asia, with its mix of advanced and developing economies, can expect a variable set
of challenges to emerge in the next decade or so. The challenge is already present in
some of the richest countries in the region, like Korea and Hong Kong. In the medium
term, over the next decade or so, the problem of aging populations will also become more
pressing in less wealthy countries such as China.72


Japan

Japan is the world’s most rapidly aging country, with life expectancy the highest in the
world. A Japanese person born today can expect to live until 81. Whereas in 1920 the
median age of a person in Japan was only 27 years, today it stands at over 40 years.
Fertility rates are low in Japan – at 1.3 children per woman. The consequences of Japan’s
rapidly aging population are already being felt, as policymakers strive to prepare for the
challenge of an increasingly elderly population. Today, around four people of working age
support each pensioner, but in 2025 falling birth rates are expected to halve that figure.
In 1950 the figure was 12:1.73

Japan is coming towards the end of its demographic transition, having enjoyed the
economic successes of its demographic gift, combined with strong policies. After the
Second World War, Japan was in economic crisis. The war had destroyed nearly half of
the nation’s industrial plants and infrastructure. However, with a series of policies
concentrating on building modern factories, and a well-educated and highly literate work
force, Japan was able to push its economy to the forefront of technology and modernity,
establishing itself as one of the world’s most powerful economies.


71 With more women working and a decrease in co-residence of elderly parents with their adult children,
the Japanese tradition of family members looking after their elderly is waning. See Bloom, Nandakumar,
Bhawalkar (2001) ibid: 12
72 The Ageing and Development Report: Poverty, Independence and the World’s Older People, 1999,
HelpAge International and Earthscan, London
73 United Nations, World Population Prospects: The 2000 Revision


                                                    28
Government/industry cooperation, a well-educated and motivated work force, a focus on
technology, and a comparatively small defense allocation (1 per cent of GDP) contributed
to Japan’s economic success.

But now 17% of Japan’s population is 65 years old or over (see Figure 20). In 2050, 42%
of the population will be aged 60+, with 15% aged 80+; the dependency ratio will rise
from 47% to 96%.74 Their care needs (medical, social, and financial) represent a
significant challenge. Forty per cent of the 65+ population in Japan live either alone or as
a couple. With the breakdown of extended families, the elderly cannot depend on their
families to provide for them, and the state must prepare to step into the gap.

Pensions are a particular challenge, given that many countries finance pension payments
from current taxation. With a smaller, young workforce supporting a pay-as-you-go
pension system, spending on pensions could push Japan’s budget deficit up to 20 per cent
of GDP by 2030. Pension contributions will have to increase to 35 per cent of salaries to
maintain the current level of payouts.

Finally, with the drop in fertility rates, and many people retiring, the number of people
working will become smaller, further challenging Japan’s economy and slowing growth. 75
But Japan will not be alone in having to face such challenges in the coming decades.
Several of the available reforms proposed by, among others, the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development76, including labor and product reforms and fiscal
consolidation, represent good governance strategies irrespective of the aging issue.
Nevertheless, the growing proportion of the elderly will no doubt exert significant
additional pressure on policymakers.




74 UN, World Population Prospects: The 2000 Revision.
75 Japan’s labor force will fall by 13% between now and 2050, and income growth will slow to 0.25% by
2040. (Dave Turner, Claude Giorno, Alain de Serres, Ann Vourc’h and Pete Richardson: The Macroeconomic
Implications of Ageing in a Global Context. OECD Working Paper 1998 AWP 1.2.)
76 For an accessible overview see, for example, The Economic Impacts of Ageing, Nicholas Vanston, The
OECD Observer No. 212, June/July 1998


                                                  29
OECD, North America and Western Europe77

The developed world has reached an advanced stage of the demographic transition.
Fertility rates are below replacement level, and populations are growing at a slow pace.
North America continues to grow largely because of its high rates of net migration and
large population of childbearing age, while Western Europe’s population has plateaued
and will begin a slight decline in a few decades. From 2001 to 2025, the population of
Europe as a whole is expected to decline by 6%, that of Japan by 3%, and North
America’s will grow by 21%. Sub-Saharan Africa, on the other hand, is projected to grow
by 74%.78

The demographic transition in the developed world began in the 19th century. Infant
mortality in England and Wales declined from 154 deaths per 1000 live births in 1861 to
21 deaths 100 years later. Life expectancy also rose over the same period, with male life
expectancy rising from 40 to 68. Fertility also fell, in most countries by about                   50%
between 1870 and 1940.79 During the late 19th and early 20th century, the working-age
population began to grow more quickly than the young dependent population, potentially
contributing to the acceleration of economic development that occurred in the West in this
period.80 After World War II, however, increased optimism about the future saw fertility
rates in the West shoot up. From a low of 2.2 children per woman in the 1930s, US
fertility rates rose to a high of 3.8 in 1957. The pattern in the United Kingdom, Australia,
Canada and New Zealand was similarly dramatic.81 Fertility rates only began to fall again
in 1960, declining sharply and reaching replacement levels in the mid-1970s. Other
Western European countries also experienced fertility rises after World War II, although
on a smaller scale. The famous “baby boom” generation was thus created. Some research


77 OECD includes Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico, The Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovak Republic, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom, United
States.
78 UN, World Population Prospects: The 2000 Revision.
79 Michael S Teitelbaum, Jay M Winter (1985): The Fear of Population Decline. Academic Press, Inc.
London: 14
80 Malmberg and Lindh (2000).
81 Teitelbaum (1985) ibid: 69


                                                   30
finds that these post-World War II demographic changes had a significant effect on
growth.      Population growth among middle-aged adults promotes income growth,
population growth among the old-aged tends to slow growth, while population growth
among young adults seems to make no contribution.82

Caplow, Hicks, Wattenberg (2001) note that fertility in the wealthy industrial countries has
continued to fall, and is likely to remain below the replacement level of 2.1 births per
woman well into the 21st century. The baby boom generation is now approaching
retirement age, and the continued decline in fertility rates has meant that the West now
faces the problem of an aging society, where an increased cohort of elderly relies on a
reduced working-age population. The UN Population Division has forecast that the
percentage of people aged 60 or over in the developed regions will rise from 19% in 2000
to 33% by 2050.83 Furthermore, the dependency balance has shifted. In 1950, children
made up 27% of the population in these regions and people aged 60 or over 12%. By
2050, however, this situation will be reversed, with the proportion of older people rising to
33% and that of children falling to 16%.

Population aging is most advanced in Europe and Japan. The median age of Europeans is
expected to rise from 38 in 2000 to 49 in 2050, and the median age in Japan is already
41.84 So, whereas South-central Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa’s policymakers should be
looking at ways to capture a future demographic dividend, the governments of the
developed world, whose dividend is about to expire, are likely to find coping with an aging
population high up their list of priorities. Aging populations will put pressure on social
security systems, health services and pensions, as the smaller working-age group
contributes fewer taxes and the economy, potentially, shrinks.

The United States’ welcoming of immigrants, which will ensure that the working-age
population continues to grow, is in marked contrast to Japan’s policy, where immigrants


82
  Lindh and Malmberg (1999a) and Malmberg (1994).
83 United Nations, World Population Prospects: The 2000 Revision.
84 United Nations, World Population Prospects: The 2000 Revision.


                                                   31
make up just 1.2% of the population. Western Europe is more open than Japan, although
current policies will see its population shrink slightly and age over the next 50 years.

Public sector reform will focus on health care, pensions and social security. Private health
care and pensions are likely to become more important along with public/private
partnerships in health care provision,85 and raising the retirement age and encouraging
people to work into retirement via tax breaks and lifelong training have also been
mooted.86

Some have even predicted great difficulties for the West as a result of the aging boom,87
but changing habits, whereby people turn to private health care and pensions, retire later
and do more work for longer are likely to soften the blow. Changing immigration patterns
will also play a part in averting economic collapse.88 The private sector is likely to have a
vital role to play both in provision of public services and attracting immigration. Engaging
private enterprise will require a change in attitudes, particularly in those Western
European countries used to overbearing public sector bureaucracies, so change is likely to
be slow. Policymakers will have to focus on facilitating these changes, and prompt action
now will ease the pain later.




85 Victor Fuchs (1999): Health care for the elderly: How much? Who will pay for it? Health Affairs, Vol 18,
Number 1, 1999; Bloom et al (2001) ibid
86 Wattenberg (1987) ibid: 68, Bloom et al (2001) ibid
87 Peter G. Peterson, Gray Dawn: How the Coming Age Wave Will Transform America – And the World.
Times Books. 2000. On the other hand, Weil (1999) argues that trying to reverse this process may entail its
own large transitory costs.
88
   See Section 2.3 of Weil (1997) on the effects that immigration can have on slowing growth in the dependency ratio.




                                                         32
South-central and Southeast Asia89

South and Southeast Asia have lagged behind East Asia in the demographic transition.
However, Southeast Asia has recently begun to benefit from the demographic dividend,
and South-central Asia is likely to follow.90

Until 1950, population growth rates across Asia had remained relatively stable at less than
1% per year for at least the previous 70 years. However, from 1950 to 1990, rates in
South-central and Southeast Asia shot up, averaging well over 2% per year. These rates
were lower than in Africa, but similar to Latin America and well ahead of East Asia, North
America and Europe. This growth can firstly be attributed to falling mortality rates. The
introduction of drugs to treat diseases such as tuberculosis, scarlet fever and pneumonia,
coupled with the use of anti-malaria drug DDT, saw infant mortality rates in particular
decline dramatically. As in East Asia, fertility declines followed the fall in mortality. Health
improvements have meant that families have needed fewer children in order to ensure
desired family sizes. Family planning programs have also had an impact. The fall in
Southeast Asia's fertility rate has been nearly as dramatic as that of East Asia, while
South-central Asia’s average number of births per woman has been nearly halved since
1960. Southeast Asia’s rate is expected to come close to East Asia’s rate by 2020. This will
eventually lead to a decline in growth rates to around 1% by a few by approximately
2020.91,92

As well as the size of the region’s population, therefore, its structure has also changed. As
shown in Table 3, although South-central and Southeast Asia’s economically active
population grew in comparison with their economically dependent population from 1965-

89 It is often difficult to compare results across studies because the geographical definitions of different
regions vary from one source to another. For example, many of the demographic facts cited here are based
on UN data and regional groupings, whereas some of the economic analysis is based on a somewhat
different set of regional groupings used by the Asian Development Bank. The demographic data reflect the
following UN definitions: South-central Asia consists of Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Iran,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan.
South-eastern Asia consists of Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, East Timor, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia,
Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam.
90 Asian Development Bank (1997): Emerging Asia: Changes and Challenges. ADB: 142
91 ADB (1997) ibid: 150



                                                     33
1990, the difference was much less marked than that in East Asia (Table 4 gives the
analogous figures for all regions of the world through 2015). As a consequence, the
demographic dividend has so far been less pronounced. While East Asia’s working
population made up over 65% of the total population in 1990, Southeast and South-
central Asia’s was less than 60%. Moreover, the ratio in East Asia rose sharply in the 15
years from 1975, while in the rest of Asia it rose more steadily. By 2025, Southeast Asia
will match, and South-central Asia will nearly match, the figure for East Asia. Consistent
with this, dependency ratios have fallen more slowly in Southeast and South-central Asia,
with the latter's youth dependency ratios in particular (the percentage of under 15 year
olds compared to the working age population) experiencing only modest declines.

While Southeast Asia has already gained considerable economic benefit from its
demographic change (which accounts for about 1% of per capita annual income growth)
and is likely to see this benefit reduced over the next 25 years as the population ages,
South-central Asia’s transition is still continuing, suggesting growing potential for
economic growth. More specifically, the current demographic dividend of approximately
0.7% of per capita annual income growth could well double as the boom reaches its
peak.93

In order to fully capitalize on the demographic dividend, however, South-central Asia will
do well to follow the policy initiatives employed so successfully by East Asia. Fertility in the
region is still high at around 3.2 births per woman in 2000 (the rates in Southeast Asia
and East Asia are 2.5 and 1.8 respectively94). Family planning programs will help to push
fertility rates down, and will have the corollary effect of limiting the spread of HIV/AIDS.
As the Asian Development Bank has shown, there is a large unmet demand for
contraception across South and Southeast Asia and eliminating all unwanted births would
go a long way towards reducing fertility to replacement levels.




92 United Nations, World Population Prospects: The 2000 Revision.
93 ADB (1997) ibid: 158-9
94 UN, World Population Prospects: The 2000 Revision


                                                   34
Education and training are other key areas that determine the success of a country’s
efforts to capture a demographic dividend. Although primary and secondary enrollment
levels in Asia have risen dramatically in recent decades, the demand for quality tertiary
education is as yet largely unmet. The emerging global economy places increasing
emphasis on higher education. Many countries in the region may not be able to take full
advantage of their favorable demographic indicators because of relatively low rates of
tertiary enrollment. New approaches to funding and a new focus on high-value areas such
as technology and tourism will be required if the region is to catch up with the likes of
North America.95 India, with its burgeoning information technology sector, has already
seen, via job creation, remittances, and FDI, the benefits of investment in quality higher
education and a focus on core new economy subjects.96

The new economy will also require a focus on lifelong training. As a country’s economy
moves up the value chain, workers will need to be re-trained to cope with the demands of
a flexible labor market. This should be combined with labor market flexibility. If the South-
central Asian labor market cannot cope with the huge influx of workers produced by the
demographic shift, a potential virtuous spiral, with a bigger labor force contributing to
increased productivity and higher savings rates, could be reversed, with rising
unemployment levels leading to crime, poverty and civil disorder.

As in East Asia and the West, policy will also need to look to the long-term, when the
boom generation retires. Health care systems and pensions will come under pressure, and
the private sector may be usefully harnessed to help drive reform efforts.

The importance of policy to the success of attempts to capture the demographic dividend
was demonstrated in East Asia. Southeast Asia, whose transition is fairly well advanced,
and South-central Asia, whose potential boom is yet to come, cannot assume that
demography alone will guarantee economic growth. Many governments in these regions

95 For a fuller discussion of the importance of higher education and approaches to reforming it, see World
Bank/UNESCO Task Force on Higher Education and Society (2000): Higher Education in Developing
Countries: Peril and Promise. March 2001




                                                     35
have made a good start in certain key areas – Bangladesh has had great success with
family planning programs, for example, India with basic and secondary education and the
technology sector, Thailand with health efforts which have limited the spread of AIDS,
and many of the countries of Southeast Asia in liberalizing labor markets and attracting
foreign investment. However, there is more work to be done, and, with the demographic
shift advancing, the quicker it is done the better. Fertility levels are still high, tertiary
education is weak and exports are underdeveloped. The potential is there for the rest of
Asia to do as well as East Asia, and the region’s success will depend on its policymakers.


Latin America

Latin America’s population growth is following a similar pattern to East Asia’s. In 1965 life
expectancy in Latin America and East Asia was in the upper 50s. Following similar
improvements in public health, Latin America's life expectancy now stands at 70 years,
slightly behind East Asia’s 72. There have also been significant reductions in infant
mortality in Latin America, which decreased from 91 deaths per 1,000 live births in 1965
to 32 in 2000: a figure very similar to East Asia’s 34. The fertility rate has also fallen –
from around 5 children per woman in 1975 to the present 2.5. In some countries in the
region, such as Brazil, Chile, and Uruguay, the fertility rate is just above replacement
levels (2.1 children per woman).97 Barbados, Cuba, and Trinidad and Tobago are far
below this level. Other countries, however, have much higher rates. In Bolivia,
Guatemala, Haiti, Nicaragua, and Paraguay, women are having approximately 4 children.98
It may be significant that income disparities in the region are also the widest for any
region in the world (although Sub-Saharan Africa runs a close second).

Although Latin American demographic changes have been favorable for growth since
1970, economic growth has yet to follow the East Asian example. So while East Asia

96
   David E. Bloom and Henry Rosovsky, "Higher education and international development," Current Science,
Vol 81, No 3, August 10, 2001, 252-256.
97
   Reducing the number of young family members in Brazil has had a significant negative impact on poverty
in that country. See Ricardo Paes de Barros, Sergio Firpo, Roberta Guedes Barreto, and Phillippe George
Pereira Leite, "Demographic Changes and Poverty in Brazil," in Birdsall, Kelley, and Sinding, op cit.



                                                    36
shows a per capita annual growth rate between 1975 and 1995 of 6.8 per cent, the
growth rate for Latin America over the same period is one-eighth of that, at 0.7 per cent.
Although there has been much debate surrounding Latin America’s failure to thrive, there
appears to be a growing consensus that the heart of the matter concerns policy.99 Military
juntas and dictators ruled much of Latin America for most of the 20th century, until the
late 1970s. Between 1978 and 1990, 15 Latin American countries abandoned such
regimes and took tentative steps towards democracy.

Economic changes in the region were also dramatic, with a growing adoption of the
Washington Consensus in the late 1980s and 1990s.100 Between 1965 and 1990, Latin
America was largely closed off from the world economy. By 1980, only 12 per cent of the
region counted as being open. Cross-country regression analysis suggests that a country
with a working-age population growing 3 percent per year, and 1.5 percent faster than its
overall population, will see its growth boosted by 0.5 per cent a year if its economy is
closed, but by 1.5 percent a year if its economy is open.101 In other words, a policy of
openness can triple the size of the demographic dividend the country collects. A
retrospective analysis suggests that had the region been completely open between 1965

98 United Nations, World Population Prospects: The 2000 Revision.
99 Inter-American Development Bank, Development Beyond Economics, IDB 2000 report, Washington DC,
2000.
100 John Williamson, the inventor of the term “Washington consensus”, has made it clear that he believes
the term has two quite different meanings. First, there is the meaning he gave the term, which involved
consensus around a set of ten policy reforms which he believed were widely accepted as beneficial by
economists. In the original formulation, these were: fiscal discipline; a redirection of public expenditure
priorities toward fields offering both high economic returns and the potential to improve income distribution,
such as primary health care, primary education, and infrastructure; tax reform (to lower marginal rates and
broaden the tax base); interest rate liberalization; a competitive exchange rate; trade liberalization;
liberalization of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) inflows; privatization; deregulation (in the sense of
abolishing barriers to entry and exit); and secure property rights. Then there is the meaning the term has
acquired: “market fundamentalism or neo-liberalism: laissez-faire, Reaganomics, let's bash the state, the
markets will resolve everything.” We use the term in the latter, now more common, usage. (What Should
The Bank Think About The Washington Consensus? John Williamson, background paper for the World
Bank's World Development Report 2000, July 1999.

101 David E. Bloom, David Canning, David K. Evans, Bryan S. Graham, Patrick Lynch, and Erin E. Murphy.
Population Change and Human Development in Latin America. Background paper for IPES 2000. Harvard
Institute for International Development, 1999. See also, David E. Bloom and David Canning, "Cumulative
Causality, Economic Growth, and the Demographic Transition," in Nancy Birdsall, Allen C. Kelley, and Steven




                                                      37
and 1985, Latin America’s growth would have averaged 0.9 percentage points, per
annum, higher. This would have doubled growth for each year, on average, during that
period.102

A combination of weak governance and a lack of openness to trade appears to have
slowed the potential growth that demographic changes might have brought to Latin
America. This interaction is important. Analysis shows that the direct effect of changing
age structure accounts for only 11 per cent, or 0.6 percentage points, of the growth gap
between Latin America and the fastest-growing East Asian economies. However, when
the interactive effect of policy and demography are also accounted for, some 50 per cent
of the gap is accounted for.103 In other words, countries in East Asia pursued a range of
policies (especially trade policies that created substantial numbers of new jobs) that
allowed them to take much fuller advantage of their demographic dividend. Latin America
has yet to take such advantage of its population dynamics.

So while the demographic transition produces favorable conditions, it does not guarantee
that an increased supply of workers will be gainfully employed. Nor does it ensure that
those who wish to save will find themselves encouraged to do so. Neither can it provide
institutions to press home health advantages or to create the educated population vital to
a high-value society. Latin America began its transition, but was over-reliant on domestic
demand and did not export vigorously. Many of its governments were corrupt, and
repeated financial disasters had the effect of making saving ill-advised.104

There are signs of hope, however. Between 1990 and 1995, approximately 70 per cent of
the region opened up to the world economy, reflecting substantial policy reform. And it
could have been worse, of course. With even more unsuitable policies, the baby-boomers
could have become a heavy burden, rather than a help, as the unemployed acted as a

Sinding, Population Matters: Demographic Change, Economic Growth and Poverty in the Developing World,
pp. 165-197. Oxford 2001: New York.
102 Measured in 1985 purchasing power parity international dollars. See R. Summers and A. Heston The
Penn World Tables (Mark 5); An Expanded Set of International Comparisons, 1950 –1988. Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 1991 106: 327-68
103 Bloom et al 1999



                                                  38
drag on the economy and damaged the fabric of society. The opportunity to benefit from
a dividend is not yet lost. Mortality and fertility rates are still in decline, so Latin America
can still benefit – but only if its policymakers act decisively and appropriately.


Middle East and North Africa

Most Middle East and North African (MENA) countries are at relatively early stages of their
demographic transitions, having achieved relatively high life expectancy. Across the
region life expectancy is 65 years, the world average. Fertility rates, however, remain
relatively high, and as a region are second only to Sub-Saharan Africa, with an average of
over four children per woman. In 1997 in Jordan, for example, the average woman would
have 5 babies; while in Egypt she would have 3 or 4 and in Yemen 7 or 8.105

The region has also seen healthy economic growth over the last two decades, and some
of this is due to the growth in the working-age population. In Egypt, the demographic
transition through 1990 is estimated to have accounted for one-sixth of the growth of
Egypt’s income per capita between 1965 and 1990.106 Jordan’s transition started earlier,
and the country will see dependency ratios falling from 1.0 in 1990 to around 0.48 in
2040. This has been estimated to account for nearly half of Jordan’s future predicted per
capita growth rate.107

However, if fertility rates do not fall, the ratio of workers to dependents will not change
dramatically, and the region will see population growth without the opportunity for
dramatic economic growth. Models show that the effect of fertility rates on the annual
growth rate of GDP per capita is substantial – in Syria, for example, economic growth
could be raised significantly if the ratio of working-age to total population was changed



104 Latin America ranks worse than any other region except Africa on corruption indices (IDB 2000)
105 Population Council (2001): In Egypt and Morocco, delayed childbirth contributes to lower fertility. News
release 14 March.
106 From Demographic Lift to Economic Lift-off: The Case of Egypt, David E. Bloom and David Canning,
Conference Paper for Growth Beyond Stabilization: Prospects for Egypt, February 3-4, 1999.
107 David E. Bloom, David Canning, Kinga Huzarski, David Levy, A. K. Nandakumar, and Jaypee Sevilla:
Demographic Transition and Economic Opportunity: The Case of Jordan. July 2000


                                                     39
through a low fertility rate: analysis suggests an effect as great as 1.62 percentage points
on the annual growth rate of GDP per capita.108

Policy will be a significant factor in determining whether MENA countries are to enjoy the
demographic dividend. Openness to global trade, as well as policies to support
employment and education, can help countries to absorb the baby boom generation of
workers into productive and remunerative employment. Saudi Arabia, for example, is
currently facing the prospect of mass unemployment among graduates and school-
leavers. Sixty per cent of the current population is under 25. Some analysts blame
foreign investment trickling out of Saudi Arabia, alongside an outdated education system,
which has not equipped Saudi nationals for work in a global economy. Among other
factors, some blame Saudi labor laws, which discourage private companies from
employing Saudis because it is extremely difficult to dismiss a Saudi national who is not
doing his job.

People are naturally enterprising, provided their opportunities to work are not stifled by
bureaucracy, uncompetitive environments, lack of available capital for investment, or an
absence of skills. The region needs to work towards more liberal labor markets, while
also investing in education and training to ensure wider access to opportunities. It will
also need to encourage foreign and internal investment. If it can achieve these changes,
combined with decreasing fertility, then the Middle East and North Africa could benefit
from its dividend; if it doesn’t it will increasingly face the problems that Saudi Arabia is
struggling to resolve today.


Sub-Saharan Africa

This region has yet to experience the typical demographic transition. While mortality has
declined, following the pattern in other areas (infant mortality fell by 43% from 1960 to
2000), fertility has not (declining only 19% in the same period). Rather than a baby boom

108 The Demographic Transition and Economic Growth in the Middle East and North Africa, David E. Bloom
and David Canning, Conference Paper for the Fourth Annual Conference of the Middle East Institute and the
World Bank, April 14, 1999.


                                                   40
– where the number of births rises for a period before falling as fertility declines – this has
resulted in an unprecedented population explosion, with the 1950 population expected to
have quadrupled to 718 million by 2004. Dependency ratios have, unlike in all other
regions of the world, correspondingly risen. Whereas most areas’ working-age (15-64 year
old) population makes up 60% to 70% of the total, only 53% of Sub-Saharan Africa’s
people are in this age group. The baby boom has seen the working-age population in
most areas grow 0.35% per year faster than the total population, but in Sub-Saharan
Africa it has grown at a similar rate to the total.109 With AIDS now killing off large sections
of that working population and actually bringing average age down in many countries, the
region has had no demographic dividend to reap.110

Although demographers tend to agree that Sub-Saharan Africa will experience a fertility
transition, there remain disputes concerning its timing, the reasons underpinning
continued high fertility rates, and what the best interventions might be. As Bloom and
Sachs have noted, "Africa’s demographic uniqueness [over the past half century]…is not
in the level of fertility but in the persistence of such a high level of fertility in the face of
mortality declines."111 High fertility has been the major component of its sluggish
demographic transition and a major cause of its massive population growth. Compared
with other developing regions in 1960, Sub-Saharan Africa started with a slightly higher
total fertility rate of 6.7 children per woman. By the mid-1990s, dramatic reductions had
occurred elsewhere – to 3.0 children per woman in Latin America, 3.8 in South-central
Asia, and 2.2 in East Asia. During that period, all three regions saw a surge in
contraception use: the percentage of married women aged 15-49 using contraception
rose from around 13 percent to 80 percent in East Asia, from 7 to 40 percent in South
Asia, and from 14 to 67 percent in Latin America. The figures for Africa over that time
period are much less dramatic, rising from around 5 percent to just 18 percent, with

109 David E Bloom, Jeffrey D Sachs: Geography, Demography and Economic Growth in Africa. Harvard
Institute for International Development. October 1998: 24
110
    In addition to its negative effect on workforce growth, adult AIDS mortality also has a negative effect on numbers
of births. Although these effects operate in different directions with respect to the dependency ratio, our
calculations indicate that the former effect outweighs the latter. See below, in this section's discussion of
AIDS mortality data from Thailand.



                                                           41
fertility remaining at 5.7 children per woman.112 While some countries, in particular those
of Southern Africa (Namibia, Botswana, South Africa and Zimbabwe) and Kenya, have
achieved this rate, and are seeing the beginnings of a transition, the majority of Sub-
Saharan African countries have yet to reach this threshold, and face a much longer road
to declining fertility rates.113

There are various reasons for this continued high fertility. With limited financial
infrastructure in rural areas offering little incentive or means to save, children are still
viewed as insurance against old age. They are also a key source of labor. Furthermore,
and despite medical advances, infectious disease is still widespread, particularly in rural
areas, so cultural norms and policies encouraging high fertility in order to achieve desired
family sizes (such as child fosterage, polygyny and the distribution of land according to
family size) are changing only slowly.

Africa is a continent of extremes, and in the last 30 years, it has faced a series of
prolonged and debilitating wars. Wars not only kill and injure soldiers and civilians alike;
they also destroy infrastructure and social structures, which in turn has a negative impact
on a population’s health. Life expectancy in Mozambique, for example, is now down to 38
years. There is an argument, however, that the relationship between war and health runs
two ways, creating a vicious spiral: because a shorter life expectancy can lead to different
perceptions of risk, it contributes to the belligerence of a population, and thus greater
willingness to engage in war.

Another aspect of the problems facing Sub-Saharan Africa is the virulence of infectious
diseases. Despite some impressive health gains over the last century, malaria, HIV/AIDS,
and TB are just three of the big killers that are not yet successfully controlled. Malaria and
HIV alone currently account for 3-4 million of Sub-Saharan Africa’s roughly 10 million


111 Bloom, Sachs (1998) ibid: 25
112 Population and Reproductive Health in Sub-Saharan Africa, Thomas J. Goliber, 1997. Population
Reference Bureau, Washington DC.
113 As Bloom and Sachs have said, “The youthful structure of Africa’s population pyramid and the
sluggishness of its transition to lower fertility rates indicate that African economies will be burdened by rapid
population growth for several decades.” (Bloom, Sachs (1998) ibid: 4)


                                                       42
annual deaths. HIV is particularly virulent in Sub-Saharan Africa, where many countries
have ten or more people living with HIV for each person who has already died from the
disease. Between 1985 and 1995, more than 4 million Sub-Saharan Africans died of AIDS.
Fifteen million more deaths are expected by 2005, with 70% of the world’s new infections
and 80% of AIDS deaths occurring in Sub-Saharan Africa alone. In December 1999,
UNAIDS reported that 8.8% of adults in Sub-Saharan Africa were HIV positive. The UN
estimates that life expectancy today in Sub-Saharan Africa is 7 years lower than it would
be in the absence of AIDS. As a result of HIV/AIDS, the population of the 35 Sub-Saharan
African countries most affected will be 10% lower in 2015 than it otherwise would have
been, and this despite continuing high fertility in the region.114 The outcome of this is hard
to predict, but the ratio of working young adults to dependents will certainly continue to
dwindle.

Furthermore, in addition to children and the elderly as dependents, many will be suffering
the ravages of HIV disease in adulthood. Heterosexual sex is the dominant means of
transmission, and the majority of people dying of AIDS are between 20 and 59 years of
age. In other words, it is a disease that particularly hits those who should be economically
productive – and threatens not only health, but also the economic stability and potential
of a country.115

Data are far from adequate, but calculations made for Thailand may be instructive for
understanding the potential economic effect of AIDS in Sub-Saharan Africa. Thailand’s
ratio of working-age to total population is projected to be 0.70 in 2015.116 We estimate
that cumulative AIDS deaths by that year will be about 1 million, a relatively small number
because risky behaviors have declined as a result of Thailand's highly successful anti-HIV
policies. Yet if we simulate cumulative AIDS deaths in the absence of these substantial

114 UN Population Division (2001): World Population Prospects – The 2000 Revision Highlights. New York
28 February. DRAFT
115 David E. Bloom, Lakshmi Reddy Bloom, and River Path Associates (2000): Business, AIDS and Africa.
The Africa Competitiveness Report 2000-2001. World Economic Forum, Harvard Center for International
Development. Oxford University Press. David E. Bloom, Ajay Mahal, Jaypee Sevilla, and River Path
Associates, "AIDS and Economics," paper prepared for Working Group 1 of the WHO Commission on
Macroeconomics & Health. 2001.



                                                   43
behavioral improvements, they could be as high as 10 million. Add to this an estimate of
the number of children that would not have been born because of these deaths and the
population could be about 11.6 million smaller than it otherwise would have been. AIDS
mortality is disproportionately selective of adults, and we project that of the 10 million
deaths, 92% or 9.2 million would be among adults. To this number, we add the .75
million children these adults would have had, and who would have had the chance to
reach working age by 2015, and we find that this high risk scenario causes the working
age population to be smaller by about 9.95 million.117 This combined effect on the total
and working age population would result in a decline in the working-age share of the
population to 0.67. This difference could reduce the growth in per capita GDP by about
.65 percentage points every year from a projected rate of 3.46 to 2.81. As a result, the
level of GDP per capita in 2015 would be $1272 lower than its projected $8500. At
Thailand’s current prevalence rates, still among the highest outside Africa at an adult rate
of 2.15 percent, the impact on GDP is minimal. Nevertheless, the example demonstrates
that an unchecked AIDS epidemic – as some African countries are experiencing – can
have a substantial effect on the growth of income per capita because it is so highly
concentrated in working-age individuals.

Ill health undermines a nation at every level, and precipitates and contributes to a vicious
downward development spiral. Poverty increases susceptibility to illness, itself a prime
cause of poverty. High mortality and fertility rates discourage investment in human
capital: a family cannot afford to spend its limited resources on only one or two children,

116
   United Nations, World Population Prospects: The 2000 Revision
117
    Given an estimated cumulative number of females dead in 2015, we estimate the number of children
these females would have had by assuming that over the 25 year period from 1990 to 2015 over which we
are performing the projections, each female who dies from AIDS loses an average of 12.5 years of child-
bearing life (the midpoint of the 25-year interval). We divide the 1995 Thai total fertility rate of 1.94
(UNPOP 2000) by 35, the number of child-bearing years (from 15 to 50 years of age), to obtain the average
number of children born to a woman each year, about .06. We multiply this by 12.5, the number of child-
bearing years lost to AIDS, to obtain the number of children lost to an AIDS death, about .75. We then
calculate the total number of children lost by multiplying this number by the cumulative number of female
deaths. Given this total number of children who were not born because of AIDS deaths, we (again roughly)
compute the fraction of these children who would have reached working age by the year 2015 by simply
assuming that the same number of children would have been born every year, and that those born by 2000
would reach working age by the year 2015.]


                                                   44
because their survival rate is relatively low. The reduced incentive to invest in the future
threatens the economy as well as the political stability of a nation. The UN Security
Council recently acknowledged the seriousness of the situation when the impact of AIDS
on Africa’s peace and security made the agenda on 10 January, 2000: the first time in
over 4,000 debates that they had tabled a health issue. UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan
has also given the issue prominence, reporting in his millennium statement that “the
pandemic is destroying the economic and social fabric in the countries most affected,
reversing years of declining death rates and causing dramatic rises in mortality among
young adults.”118

As long as fertility remains high and families have large numbers of children, Sub-Saharan
African countries are unlikely to see rising incomes or healthier and better-educated
workers. Poverty, low educational attainment, and poor health outcomes across much of
Sub-Saharan Africa will slow fertility decline. Despite these problems, fertility is expected
to fall from 5.5 to 3.5 in the next 25 years.119 Still, a potential virtuous spiral has inverted
and there are no simple solutions for dramatically speeding a rise in incomes. There are
opportunities to tackle this, however, and perhaps the most promising is that of gender: if
policy makers can urgently place much more emphasis on educating and empowering
African women, who represent one of the continent’s most important economic and social
engines, they can expect their countries to yield corollary rewards.

One other possible trend deserves mention: that of substantially increased migration from
Sub-Saharan Africa to Europe, discussed in some detail in Hatton and Williamson
(2001)120 Two forces are working together to impel such migration: (a) wage rates are
much higher in Europe than Sub-Saharan Africa; and (b) the two regions are at totally
different, but complementary points in the demographic transition: specifically, Sub-
Saharan Africa has a huge percentage of young people and Europe has a high proportion
of working-age individuals. The ratio of working-age to non-working-age individuals is

118 UN (2000): Report of the Secretary-General on the Work of the Organization. New York 2000: 28
119
  United Nations, World Population Prospects: The 2000 Revision.




                                                   45
reasonably constant over time when the total population of Europe and Africa are
combined. By contrast, this ratio trends upward in Africa for many decades to come, but
downward in Europe after 2010. This pattern suggests, at first, that migration of workers
from Sub-Saharan Africa to Europe could be beneficial for the economies of both regions.
In practice, of course, European restrictions on immigration are likely to hold down the
number of Africans who succeed in emigrating to Europe. Moreover, even if 1 million
Sub-Saharan working-age immigrants moved to Europe each year from 2000 through
2024 (which would be on the order of a ten-fold increase over current levels121), the ratio
of working-age to non-working-age people in Europe would decrease only a bit more
slowly than it would otherwise, with the ratio falling from 2.02 in 1995 to 1.97 in 2025
instead of to 1.85.122 Of course, such a scenario would have enormous cultural, economic,
and political effects in Sub-Saharan Africa.


Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union

Patterns of fertility Eastern Europe have historically been very different from those in the
West. Fertility rates fell throughout the 20th century, with only a slight increase after
World War II, quickly followed by further declines after abortion was legalized in the
1950s (seven out of every ten Russian pregnancies end in abortion, although increased
contraceptive use has recently begun to push abortion rates down).123 The fertility rate in
Russia has fallen from 7 children per woman to just 1 in the last 100 years.124 Latvia,
Bulgaria, Ukraine, Slovenia, the Russian Federation and Czech Republic all currently figure
in the ten lowest-fertility countries in the world, with rates well below replacement

120 Hatton, Timothy J., and Jeffrey G. Williamson, "Demographic and Economic Pressure on Emigration Out
of Africa," NBER Working Paper No. W8124, February 2001.
121
    Current data are difficult to find, but the Netherlands Interdisciplinary Demographic Institute states that
"Annual migration from Sub-Saharan Africa increased dramatically, from 15 thousand people in 1985 to 82
thousand in 1993." See http://www.nidi.nl/research/prj30201.html
122
    In the interest of simplicity, this calculation assumes that African immigrants all remain in the working
ages through 2025 and that they do not bear children in Europe. Undoing either of these assumptions
suggests that the age distribution benefits of African migration to Europe would be even less.
123 Teitelbaum et al (1985) ibid: 103
124 Zakharov, Sergei V, and Elena I Ivanovna (1996): Fertility decline and recent changes in Russia: On the
threshold of the second demographic transition. In Julie DaVanzo ed, Russia’s Demographic Crisis. Santa




                                                      46
levels.125   The ten countries with lowest population growth rates are all found in this
region, with Estonia, Georgia, Bulgaria and Ukraine seeming likely to remain at very low
rates for at least the next two decades.

Rising death rates have sped up the population decline. A high dependence on alcohol has
contributed to a steep rise in cardiovascular diseases, circulatory problems and violence,
and the death rate among Russian males in particular has soared. Furthermore, health
systems in the region have deteriorated, leading to the spread of both old infectious
diseases like tuberculosis, and new ones like HIV/AIDS. Reported HIV infection rates in
Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union rose by 67% between the end of 1999 and
the end of 2000, with the number of new infections in the Russian Federation in 2000
alone almost double the total number reported in the previous 12 years.126

Fertility rates in the region are likely to begin to rise again by 2025, but total population
sizes will continue to fall for the next 50 years. Russia’s population will fall from 145
million today to 104 million in 2050, for example, and Ukraine’s will drop from 50 million
to 30 million over the same period. The continuous decline in fertility and the rise in death
rates have meant that Eastern Europe, and Russia in particular, have experienced very
different demographic changes from those of other world regions. In the next 50 years
Russia will see a growth in its elderly population and a shrinkage in its working-age and
youth population. Although countries such as Japan will see the same pattern, they have
had the benefit of a baby boom generation helping to boost the economy and make it
better able to cope with an increased elderly cohort. The former Soviet Union has had no
such dividend. Moreover, health systems in the region are struggling to keep up with the
illnesses affecting the population today, and as that population ages, the pressure will be
even greater.




Monica, Calif.: RAND CF-124: 36-82; Institut National d’Etudes Demographiques (2000): Demographie de la
Russie sur la Toile
125 United Nations Population Division (2001) ibid
126 UNAIDS (2000): AIDS Epidemic Update. Geneva. December 2000.


                                                  47
Policy issues in this region are complex in the light of demography. The first priority must
be health. The rise in death rates needs to be reversed and governments should take
urgent action to prevent the spread of HIV/AIDS via both education and condom
distribution. Vulnerable groups, such as drug users and sex workers, should be targeted,
with business encouraged to play a role in prevention efforts. As several companies in
Africa and Thailand have shown, the private sector can play a useful role in AIDS efforts,
bringing its skills to the problem and helping to ease the burden on health systems.127

In short, and in the absence of any demographic dividend to benefit from, the region is
likely to be best served by focusing on health, welfare and the economy as a means of
reaching long-term demographic stability and positioning itself to cope with an aging
society.




127 David Bloom, Ajay Mahal and River Path Associates (2001): HIV/AIDS and the Private Sector – A
Literature Review. American Foundation for AIDS Research. Forthcoming.


                                                   48
Chapter 4 The Importance of the Policy Environment

As the case studies show, several key policy variables influence nations' abilities to realize
their “demographic dividend.” This chapter explores several of these: health policies to
improve public health and access to care; family planning and related reproductive health
policies to help families achieve their desired size; education policies to increase access to
schooling; and economic policies that promote labor-market flexibility, openness to trade,
adequate credit and savings.


A. HEALTH EQUALS WEALTH

Improvements in public health are at the heart of the demographic transition. Decreased
infant and child mortality, combined with increased life expectancy and finally a fall in
fertility, brought about by improved sanitation, immunization programs, DDT, antibiotics
and contraceptives, initiate the declines in mortality that lead to declines in fertility, which
together cause changes in the age distribution and size of a population.

The health story does not end there, however. In recent years, evidence is mounting that
health is also a key determinant of economic performance, counter to the frequently
made assumption that causation runs only from wealth to health.128 The WHO
Commission on Macroeconomics and Health has found “substantial evidence showing that
improved health of the population contributes to higher economic growth and poverty
alleviation.”129 On the other hand, these findings are not clearly robust to the introduction
of country fixed effects, which potentially suggests that the significant life expectancy
coefficients are picking up more than just health effects on economic growth (i.e., they



128
   David E. Bloom and David Canning, "The Health and Wealth of Nations," Science No. 287: 1207-1209, 18
February, 2000. Also, David E. Bloom and David Canning, "The Health and Poverty of Nations: From Theory
to Practice," unpublished manuscript, May 2001. Also, David E. Bloom, David Canning, and Jaypee Sevilla,
"The Effect of Health on Economic Growth: Theory and Evidence." NBER Working Paper 8587.
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8587
129 Jeffrey Sachs, Chairman of the Commission, quoted in WHO South East Asia press release. 17 April
2000.


                                                   49
may be reflecting unobserved influences on growth that are correlated with life
expectancy).130

If a country is to promote the demographic transition and take advantage of the
demographic dividend, five health policies should be prioritized:

      -   First, ensuring that infants receive effective medical care is of paramount
          importance, as a high degree of certainty about a child’s chances of survival is vital
          to the completion of the demographic transition. Such certainty precludes the need
          to have more offspring and will mean that investment in education is concentrated
          in fewer children.

      -   Second, the health of women is critical for two main reasons. Women’s access to
          reproductive health services is important for achieving desired family sizes.
          Women are also essential conduits of knowledge about health: A healthier woman
          will likely improve the health of her family.

      -   Third, children need to have adequate support for their health needs in order to
          ensure they maximize their opportunities in the education system, where poor
          health often contributes to educational under-achievement.131

      -   Fourth, as the baby boom generation enters the workforce, a proportion of the
          prosperity they generate will have to be channeled back into policies that improve
          their health. This is not an area where the market will necessarily suffice, as
          market failures in the public health area are pervasive, and the institutions and




130
   Caselli, F., Esquivel, G., and Lefort, F. 1996. Reopening the convergence debate: a new look at cross-
country growth empirics. Journal of Economic Growth 1: 363-89. Similar findings arise using different
specifications in unpublished work by the authors of this paper.
131 Jennifer Prah Ruger, Dean T. Jamison, and David E. Bloom, “Health and the Economy”, in Michael
Merson, B. Black, and Anne Mills, eds., International Public Health: Diseases, Programs, Systems and
Policies, Aspen Publishers, 2001, pp. 617-666.


                                                    50
        technologies that support health must instead be generated through efforts by the
        state, civil society, and families.132

    -   Fifth, policies to improve health can prove a powerful weapon against social
        exclusion, which lessens or eliminates the contribution that certain groups make to
        the development of a society and to its positive demographic transition. Ill health
        causes poverty and it keeps people in poverty, both at a family and a national
        level. The World Bank has reported that when households become poorer, the
        most common reason is illness, injury, or death.133

Implementation of policies to improve health is a complex process, with a range of
medical, public health, and non-health interventions to choose from. Medical
interventions, such as vaccines and drugs, primary health care centers, and clinics, offer
the opportunity for high-profile, cost-effective action against clearly identified health
problems. So called “vertical” interventions, such as vaccination campaigns, work best
when they are conducted on a massive scale and where near-universal take-up multiplies
the benefit. However, vertical interventions are currently poorly funded, and there is an
overwhelming need for increased funding at an international level both for the
development of new vaccines and cures, and for more effective delivery. This
international public good is not being delivered by the market, with only 11 of 1223 new
compounds launched on the market between 1975 and 1997 designed to tackle tropical
diseases. Potential solutions include governments receiving more assistance from
international organizations such as the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization, or
working more constructively with the private sector to fill the breach.134

Non-medical interventions are aimed at working more broadly to strengthen health
systems. Priorities include the need to develop better data for decision-making and to use
these data to set priorities for decision-making. Ministries should aim to develop a new


132 How beneficent is the market? A look at the modern history of mortality. Richard A Easterlin. European
Review of Economic History, 3, 257-294, 1999
133 The Voices of the Poor, available at http://www.worldbank.org
134 “Balms for the poor”, Economist, 14th August 1999, available at http://www.economist.com


                                                    51
role that emphasizes facilitation, sponsorship of innovation, finance, and supervisory
capabilities, beyond the traditional emphasis on delivery. Partnerships between the public
sector, civil society, and the private sector have the potential to be fruitful, but these
partnerships need leadership if they are to develop.135

Health outcomes can also be improved by non-health policies and by exploiting positive
feedback between different policy areas. “Virtuous spirals” are possible as, for example,
educated people seek better health, while healthy people are more receptive consumers
of education.


B. POPULATION POLICY AND THE FAMILY

Population policy has a direct impact on the speed, timing, and completion of the
demographic transition, with corresponding effects on the amplitude of the demographic
bulge. Although unproven, it is also plausible that a sharper transition has greater
potential to lift an economy out of a poverty trap and onto a sustainable growth
trajectory. This could have important policy implications, highlighting, for example, family
planning as an instrument of economic growth above and beyond its contribution to
reproductive health.

The Population Council estimates that at least 120 million women in developing countries
have an unmet need for contraception, while the United Nations Population Fund
estimates that half of the world’s 175 million pregnancies a year are unwanted or
mistimed.136 In developing countries, excluding China, approximately one-fourth of all
births are unwanted.137 Research suggests that if women were to reach (but not exceed)
their desired family size, this would achieve targets for fertility reduction in 13 out of 17



135
      Michael R Reich (2000): Public-Private Partnerships for Public Health. Nature Medicine 6 (6): 617-620
136
    Population Council, Why Women Who Don't Want to Get Pregnant Don't Use Contraception, Population
Briefs Volume 1, Number 2, June, 1995; 6 Billion – A Time for Choices, The State of World Population, 1999,
United Nations Population Fund
137
    John Bongaarts, 1999, op cit.


                                                        52
countries whose governments have quantitative targets to reduce fertility.138 Lack of
knowledge about contraceptive methods, concern about possible side effects, and the
possibility of disapproval from partners and other members of the community, have been
identified as key factors limiting access.139 The impact of family planning programs on
fertility rates has been highly significant, exceeding the impact of socioeconomic factors
such as rising income. It has been estimated that programs have reduced fertility by
between 1 and 1.5 births per woman and accounted for roughly 40 percent of the decline
in fertility in the 1960s, 70s and 80s. 140 However, not all programs are equally effective.
The most successful take advantage of latent demand for contraception and focus on
lowering barriers to the take-up of services. This requires an emphasis on convenience,
broad choice, and measures like social marketing that gradually overcome institutional
resistance to women using contraception.141

Without trying to dictate the number of children couples may or should have,
governments can at least put in place policies to facilitate family planning and respond to
demand. Political support can help facilitate institutional change and encourage new forms
of behavior. It is also vital for ensuring proper financing, especially in the critical phase
where pilot programs are built on to provide near-universal coverage. As the use of
contraception becomes institutionalized, however, governments may be able to withdraw,
at least partially, from provision and financing, as other actors take responsibility for
meeting a constant and established demand. Donor support is also important, through
establishing an international climate that encourages the research, development, and roll-
out of contraceptive services; by sponsoring a political dialogue to help build a consensus
about the need for effective population policy; and by supporting governments as they
develop national programs. Donors can also help promote delivery standards, provide


138
    Sinding, S., J. A. Ross, and A. G. Rosenfield (1994). "Seeking Common Ground: Unmet Need and
Demographic Goals." In International Family Planning Perspectives, (20:1):23-27
139
    Bongaarts, John and Judith Bruce. 1995. "The causes of unmet need for contraception and the social
content of services," Studies in Family Planning 26(2):57-75
140
    Bongaarts, John, “The Role of Family Planning Programs in Contemporary Fertility Transitions” in The
Continuing Demographic Transition, ed GW Jones and J Caldwell, London: Oxford University, 1997
141
    The Value of Family Planning Programs in Developing Countries, Rodolfo A Bulatao,1998, RAND.


                                                     53
training at all levels, and help evaluate the comparative success – or otherwise – of
national programs.142

Other policies can have a powerful influence on reproductive behavior and health.
Education is a vital influence on family size – more-educated parents face higher
opportunity costs as their families grow, and are also likely to wish to educate their
children to a high standard. Policies to improve the socio-economic position of women will
have an impact on fertility similar to that of increasing the quantity and quality of
education. Anti-discrimination regulation in the workplace and credit market, for example,
will help improve women’s opportunities for employment and raise opportunity costs of
having children. As women’s standing increases within a household, they are also more
likely to drive institutional and cultural change, which will also lead to smaller families and
improved opportunities for children.

The effect of the demographic transition on women is part of a more general impact on
family structures and gender relations. Smaller families, increased empowerment of
women, and urbanization are also associated with rising divorce rates. Family breakdown
can have catastrophic social effects. Single-parent families and single-person households
have become more common across the developed world, with approximately half of
American marriages now ending in divorce and the marriage rate in Sweden now only 3.6
per 1000 inhabitants143 (less than half the US rate). Children in single-parent families are
more likely to be living in poverty than those from two-parent families. Additionally,
working mothers will find child care prohibitively expensive without the support of
extended families. Social exclusion can be the result.

Developing country policymakers in some countries may therefore be well advised to
anticipate the time when their demographic transition has matured. They can expect
declining or low and stable fertility rates; declining rates of marriage; high but stable
divorce rates; increased cohabitation, lone parenting, and out-of-wedlock childbearing;

142
      See Bulatao 1998, op cit




                                              54
and medium to high rates of female labor force participation. By taking measures at this
stage to support the development of a “new” family, they can attempt to leapfrog many
of the problems that developed countries have faced.


C. POLICIES FOR LABOR AND FINANCIAL MARKETS, AND HUMAN CAPITAL

Having a larger, healthier and better-educated workforce will only bear economic fruit if
the extra workers can find jobs. Open economies, flexible labor forces, and modern
institutions that can gain the confidence of the population and markets alike may help
countries to reap the potential benefit created by their demographic transition.

Openness to trade can be a key driver of economic growth, helping to significantly boost
the benefits a country receives from the demographic transition.144 If Latin America’s
economy had been as open, as measured by the Sachs-Warner index, as East Asia’s
between 1965-1990, it is estimated that per capita income would have reached US$4,000
instead of US$2,950, and poverty would have been substantially lower.145 Access to world
markets, backed up by export promotion, is thought by many to be an effective way to
                                                     146
find sufficient demand for a nation’s output.              . However, this view has been contested
                                                    147
on both conceptual and empirical grounds.

A healthy degree of flexibility in labor markets is also vital if a country is to accommodate
a burgeoning working-age population. Flexibility means that employers are able to rapidly

143
    The Great Disruption: Human Nature and the Reconstitution of Social Order, Francis Fukuyama, The Free
Press, 1999
144
    Barro, R. 1997. The Determinants of Economic Growth: A Cross Country Empirical Study. Cambridge:
MIT Press; Bloom, D. and Sachs, J. 1998. ‘Geography, demography, and economic growth in Africa’,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 207–73
145
    Bloom, D., Canning, D., Evans, D., Graham, B., Lynch, P., and Murphy, E. Population Change and Human
Development in Latin America. In Inter-American Development Bank. 1999-2000 Report on Economic and
Social Progress in Latin America
146
    Jeffrey Sachs and Andrew Warner, 1995. "Economic Reform and the Process of Global Integration,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol 1: 1-118.
147
    See, for example, Dani Rodrik ("Trading in Illusions," Foreign Policy, March-April 2001), who concludes,
"Neither economic theory nor empirical evidence guarantees that deep trade liberalization will deliver higher
economic growth. Economic openness and all its accouterments do not deserve the priority they typically
receive in the development strategies pushed by leading multilateral organizations." For another provocative




                                                     55
expand and contract their businesses, to shift workers from one area of the business to
another, and to raise and lower pay more easily. Flexibility also means a workforce that is
able to adapt its working patterns as the business environment shifts. Flexibility can be
difficult to “sell” to a workforce, as employers are commonly thought to reap the benefits
while employees bear the costs, although the provision of adequate safety nets and
generous re-training programs can help persuade workers to become less risk-averse.148
Although recent history shows that designing and implementing effective programs along
these lines is a challenging task in low- and middle-income countries, the incentives for
proceeding in this direction are substantial. Many wealth industrial countries have
successful programs that provide a good starting point for thinking both conventionally
and imaginatively along these lines. In addition, recent research suggests that the
presence of social protection programs is not closely correlated with different measures of
labor market flexibility.149

Minimum wage policy should be especially carefully designed. If wage levels are set (and
enforced) above market rates, they effectively push low-skilled workers out of the formal
economy into the informal economy. They also make legitimate companies less able to
compete in foreign markets. In Brazil for instance, the minimum wage stood at 100 reales
per month in May 1995, a level that exceeded actual earnings of almost 20 percent of
workers. National and subnational governments may be able to create a sustainable
balance by actively involving both workers and employers in discussions about minimum
wage levels.




critique, see Arthur MacEwan, Neoliberalism or Democracy?: Economic Strategy, Markets, and Alternatives
for the 21st Century. Zed Books, 2001.
148
    As a recent UNCTAD/UNDP paper on Jamaica has noted: “Policy-makers need to tread a particularly
complex path as they try to deliver growth, improve Jamaica’s competitiveness, help displaced workers find
new jobs in more productive sectors and provide some kind of security for those who lose out.” David E
Bloom, Ajay S Mahal, Damien King, Fiorina Mugione, Aldrie Henry-Lee, Dillon Alleyne, Philip Castillo and
River Path Associates (2001): ‘Jamaica: Globalisation, Liberalization and Sustainable Human Development’
UNCTAD/UNDP Programme on Globalisation, Liberalization and Sustainable Human Development. February
2001: 42
149
    Rebecca M. Blank, ed., Social Protection Versus Economic Flexibility: Is There a Trade-off? University of
Chicago Press. Chicago. 1994.


                                                      56
Absorbing the baby boom generation into productive employment is more than just a
matter of labor market flexibility. Any expanding economic enterprise (from small
business to large country) is hungry for capital. Investment can come from savings – by
government, business, or private individuals – or from overseas development assistance
or foreign direct investment. Private household savings are one of the most powerful
ways of financing growth, as the East Asian experience has shown. Individual savings are,
in turn, dependent on demography and longevity. People save at different points in their
lives, and they save for different purposes, most notably, their retirement.

Encouraging private savings and efficiently allocating them to investment requires reform
of macroeconomic policy and financial institutions. Governance affects how much a
country saves and whether those savings are productively invested. Latin America
provides an example of a region where savings are low, while East Asia’s much higher
savings rates contributed substantially to its development. The demographic transition
can encourage people to save – but only if saving seems relatively safe and relatively
profitable. In order to promote saving, governments must attempt to provide price
stability, as incentives to save are higher in environments with low inflation, and
encourage competition, transparency and efficiency in the financial institutions.

When credit is scarce, the poor generally lose out more than others. However, the past
two decades have seen the development of successful new models of microfinance by the
private sector, NGOs, and the state. These have demonstrated the power of widespread
credit in improving the lives of people in rural areas. Targeting low-income households,
and giving credit that is often collateral-free and at significantly lower interest rates than
those in the informal credit market, these institutions help microenterprises develop in
rural areas and provide income-generation opportunities to poorer segments of the rural
population. The work of Bangladeshi economist Professor Muhammad Yunus, and the
Grameen Bank which he set up, have more than demonstrated the value of microcredit.
Beginning with US$50 and 20 borrowers, Grameen expanded rapidly: it now lends over
US$400 million annually to a membership base of over 2 million. The Grameen Bank
concentrates on lending to women – who now make up 94 per cent of its clientele. So


                                               57
far, almost half a million houses have been built as a result of its efforts. Meanwhile, the
Grameen Bank’s repayment rate of over 98 per cent would be the envy of all mainstream
banks – and persuasively refutes the argument that the poor are inherently high-risk
borrowers. Professor Yunus has also used the Grameen Bank to develop a range of social
initiatives, including housing, sanitation, and education programs.150

As countries pass through the demographic transition, they have the opportunity to
examine past errors and learn from them. Many developing countries have been tempted
to copy institutions and practices that evolved in the industrialized countries. Yet, in the
current period of global transition, this may be a misguided strategy. Not only do
industrialized countries operate in mature economies that have developed over long
periods, but many of them are also finding that they, too, need to re-invent their
institutional base, often rooted in the 19th century, for the challenge of the 21st. There is
an interesting analogy with technological progress. No one suggests that developing
countries should install analog telephone systems just because developed countries have
these legacies. Instead, developing countries are free to leapfrog over the old and adopt
new technologies more suited to the modern world.

Another advantage for developing countries lies in the very youth of the people striving to
deliver the demographic dividend and the opportunity to invest in positioning them for
future economic challenges. Much better positioned by their recent education and long
work horizon to adapt to new and changing technology, they can bring their creativity and
energy to bear in order to use it advantageously. Using the youthful population to make
progress in the knowledge economy is a formidable – but not insuperable – task. It will
require a willingness to invest in education at all levels, including higher education, and to
attempt to offer people “education for life”, enabling them to retrain for fast-moving labor
markets. Policymakers can use the demographic dividend to begin to shift resources
towards broadening access to more advanced forms of education. As fertility rates fall,
demand for primary education will drop and, over time, this effect will be repeated at


150
      Grameen Bank: www.grameen.org also lists several other academic and non-academic resources.


                                                    58
secondary level. However, demand for higher education will simultaneously be rising (at
least for a period of time), as those leaving secondary education consider attempting to
gain more advanced qualifications.151

Collectively, then, there are major problems to address, and no ready-made regulatory
environment of proven success across many countries with which to address them. Yet
some lessons can be learned from the past, and developing country policy-makers have
the opportunity to build on these. By tapping into the energy and initiative of their baby
boomers, they can promote the demographic dividend of economic growth. But, in order
to avoid increasing social exclusion and unrest, they must do so in a way that protects
and creates opportunities for the poor during a time of major economic transition. The
economic and political challenge is to devise policies and programs in both the public and
private arenas that judiciously blend social protection and economic flexibility. The long-
run advantages of such a blend need to be balanced against concerns about possible
short-run adjustment costs.


D. POLICIES FOR THE FUTURE: PLANNING FOR AN OLDER POPULATION

The powerful consequences of the demographic transition have the benefit of being
persistent and predictable. Demography provides a crystal ball that allows a policymaker
to make policies for tomorrow’s world, not yesterday’s.

In some regions of the world, planning now for rising numbers of old people is essential.
As populations get older, and older people remain healthier, countries face a new set of
challenges. People over 65 can expect another 15 years of healthy life. Over time, these
will be increasingly healthy years. Retirement in most countries is currently between 60
and 65. Increased life expectancy and an aging population are the final iterations of the
demographic transition. With the changing structures of families, older people can easily
become more isolated, financially as well as emotionally. Pension systems that were
designed to support a small older population will come under increasing strain. Developed

151
      See the Task Force on Higher Education’s report: Higher Education in Developing Countries: Peril and



                                                       59
countries are likely to feel this pressure first. Spending on pensions could push Japan’s
budget deficit up to 20 percent of GDP by 2030, as the country becomes the oldest in the
world.152 Either pension contributions will have to increase to 35% of salaries, or the level
of pension benefits will have to decrease. Japan's pension system is particularly at risk
because of the rapidity of its population aging.

Pension reform in developing countries is therefore a high priority. Pay-as-you-go
pensions systems, where pensions are funded from current government revenues, are
likely to become increasingly difficult to sustain, and the demographic transition should
hasten the worldwide trend towards fully-funded pensions. In a fully-funded system,
individuals save for their own retirement and, since the vast majority contain some
element of compulsion, increase levels of national savings. Fully-funded systems come
with their own problems, of course; in particular, they require countries to have a financial
system developed enough to provide sufficient high-quality savings vehicles, and a
government to have the ability to prudently regulate the financial institutions that will
manage these funds. However, pioneering schemes, such as those found in Latin
America, have provoked much debate and opened up a series of new methods of pension
provision.153 It is worth noting that pension reform is a particularly important issue for
women, who live significantly longer lives than men in most countries in the world.
Women typically outnumber men at older ages, and the difference is large among the
oldest old. At ages 60 or older, there were an estimated 81 men for every 100 women
globally in 2000, and at ages 80 or older there were only 53 men for every 100 women.
Female advantage in life expectancy at birth is currently around 3 years in developing
countries, but may eventually reach the average difference of 8 years in developed
regions.




Promise available at www.tfhe.net
152
    David E Bloom, AK Nandakumar, Manjiri Bhawalkar (2001): The Demography of Aging in Japan and the
United States. 2001 forthcoming
153
    Nitsch, M.; Schwarzer, H.: Recent development in financing social security in Latin America. Issues in
Social Protection, discussion paper 1. (Geneva, ILO, Social Security Department, 1996, 59 p.) ISBN 92-2-
110275-0, http://www.ilo.org/public/english/protection/socsec/publ/discus1.htm


                                                     60
As the demographic transition progresses, financing for health care becomes even more
important, with countries undergoing an epidemiological transition where non-
communicable diseases (such as diabetes, heart disease, and cancer) become
predominant. These changes lead to sizable increases in health care expenditures. Data
from the world’s wealthy industrial countries reveal that health care expenditures per
capita are roughly three times higher for the elderly than for the non-elderly. Elder care
will be borne increasingly by institutions other than the family, most likely nursing homes.
Again, many developing countries will need to move towards systems that link an
individual's benefits to his/her contributions and thus limit inequitable intergenerational
transfers. Peru, for example, has created legislation to allow workers to choose between
the traditional social insurance system and private insurance.

Public-private partnerships are likely to be needed in many areas of social policy, as
governments alone will be unable to cope with vast demographic changes, and markets
alone will leave some areas unattended. Such partnerships provide innovative ways for
the public and private sector to share costs and administrative duties associated with the
provision of social services. In the developed world, it is interesting to note how
government is under pressure to act in a more business-like fashion, while business
(especially large corporations) is facing increasing demands to accept more social
responsibility. While government must become more efficient trustees of the taxpayers'
money, business needs to explore the effects on its bottom line of a whole range of
factors – from better educated workers to improved environmental performance.154




154
   David E Bloom, Patricia Craig, Marc Mitchell (2000): Public and Private Roles in Providing and Financing
Social Services: Health and Education. ADBI Publishing. October 2000; Michael R Reich (2000): Public-
Private Partnerships for Public Health. Nature Medicine 6 (6): 617-620


                                                     61
Chapter 5 Conclusions

Population neutralism, which has focused on the effects of population growth, has
encouraged economists to neglect demography when considering the future prosperity
and development of the world’s countries. A focus on population structure, however,
offers policymakers a vital tool as they plan for and manage the changes their countries
face.

For developing countries, the demographic transition offers significant opportunities, but
opportunities that are unlikely to recur. They must therefore act soon to implement the
policy mix required to accelerate the demographic transition and make its effects more
pronounced. As mortality declines, policies to facilitate family planning and push down
fertility rates should follow. Such measures will have broader collateral impacts than just
reducing fertility – women will have more time to work and their health will be improved.

A focus on education at all levels will prepare the baby boom generation for its future
incorporation into the workforce. Practical, relevant curricula (taking into account the
importance of changing technology as well as, for example, the health problems that
beset societies) can give developing countries a better chance of catching up to some of
the more advanced societies, many of whose education systems have problems of their
own.

As they begin to realize their demographic dividend, countries will be able to continue to
invest in the development process. In principle, openness to trade combined with flexible
labor markets will create work opportunities for the enlarged working-age cohort.
Encouraging savings and investment via reform of financial institutions and targeting the
poor with microfinance programs will give countries the resources to prepare for the
future, when the boom generation passes out of the workforce.

A failure to act on these issues could have a damaging effect on future prospects, as
unemployment rises, the social fabric crumbles, and rising numbers of old people begin to
overwhelm available resources. Reform will be needed, and necessary reform will


                                              62
inevitably be controversial. The demographic transition changes society profoundly and
fundamentally influences family structure, the status of women and children, and the way
people work. Policymakers must therefore work hard to explain the changes that are
happening and articulate the policies that are needed to take full advantage of them.

Demography provides a clear narrative within which policies can be framed and a
powerful lens through which priorities can be identified. Embracing and understanding
demographic challenges must therefore be a priority for all governments, as they build the
broad partnerships that will be necessary to secure change.




                                            63
References

Asian Development Bank. 1997. Emerging Asia. Manila.
Becker, G. 1960. An Economic Analysis of Fertility, in Universities--National Bureau Committee for Economic
        Research. Demographic and Economic Change in Developed Countries. Princeton: Princeton
        University Press, pp 209-31.
Becker, G. 1981. A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Bloom, D. and Canning, D., "The Health and Wealth of Nations," Science No. 287: 1207-1209, 18 February,
        2000.
Bloom, D., and Canning, D., "The Health and Poverty of Nations: From Theory to Practice," unpublished
        manuscript, May 2001.
Bloom, D., Canning, D., and Sevilla, J., "The Effect of Health on Economic Growth: Theory and Evidence."
        NBER Working Paper 8587. http://www.nber.org/papers/w8587
Bloom, D., Mahal, A., Sevilla, J., and River Path Associates, "AIDS and Economics," paper prepared for
        Working Group 1 of the WHO Commission on Macroeconomics & Health. 2001.
Bloom, D., and Canning, D. 2001. “Cumulative Causality, Economic Growth, and the Demographic
        Transition,” In Birdsall, N., Kelley, A., and Sinding, S. eds. Population Matters: Demography,
        Growth, and Poverty in the Developing World. pp. 165-197. Oxford University Press.
Bloom, David E., Patricia H. Craig, and Pia N. Malaney. 2001. The Quality of Life in Rural Asia. Oxford
        University Press.
Bloom, D., Canning, D., and Malaney, P. 2000. “Demographic Change and Economic Growth in Asia.”
        Population and Development Review. Vol. 26, supp., pp 257-290.Bloom, David E., A. K.
        Nandakumar, and Manjiri Bhawalkar. "The Demography of Aging in Japan and the United States" in
        Gail B. Hedges, ed., Aging and Health: Environment, Work and Behavior, Harvard University Printing
        and Publication, forthcoming 2001.
Bloom, D., and Sachs, J. 1998. “Geography, Demography, and Economic Growth in Africa.” Brookings
        Papers on Economic Activity 2, 207-73.
Bloom, D. and Williamson, J. 1998. “Demographic Transitions and Economic Miracles in Emerging Asia.”
        World Bank Economic Review 12, 419-56.
Bloom, David E., "Population Growth, Structure, and Policy: Comment", in Andrew Mason, Thomas Merrick,
        and R. Paul Shaw, eds., Population Economics, Demographic Transition, and Development:
        Research and Policy Implications, Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 1999.




                                                      64
Bongaarts,John. "Future Population Growth and Policy Options" in Andrew Mason, Thomas Merrick, and R.
        Paul Shaw, eds., Population Economics, Demographic Transition, and Development: Research and
        Policy Implications, Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 1999.
Bongaarts, John. 1994. “Population Policy Options in the Developing World.” Science 263, 771-6.
Boserup, E. 1965. The Conditions of Agricultural Progress. London: Allen and Unwin.
Boserup, E. 1981. Population and Technological Change: A Study of Long Term Trends. Chicago: University
        of Chicago Press.
Coale, A. and Hoover, E. 1958. Population Growth and Economic Development in Low-Income Countries.
        Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Condorcet, M. J. A. N. 1795. Sketch for a Historical Picture of the Progress of the Human Mind, trans. J.
        Barraclough (London, 1955).
Ehrlich, P. 1968. The Population Bomb. New York: Ballantine.
Fogel, R. 1994b. The Relevance of Malthus for the Study of Mortality Today: Long-Run Influences on
        Health, Mortality, Labour Force Participation, and Economic Growth. NBER WP H0054
Fogel, R. 1994a. Economic Growth, Population Theory, and Physiology: the Bearing of Long-Term
        Processes on the Making of Economic Policy. NBER WP 4638.
Fogel, R. 1995. The Contribution of Improved Nutrition to the Decline in Mortality Rates in Europe and
        America, in Julian Simon, ed., The State of Humanity. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishers.
Furedi, F. 1997. Population and Development: a critical introduction. New York: St. Martin's Press.
Galor, O., and Weil, D. (1999). “From Malthusian Stagnation to Modern Growth” American Economic
        Review, Papers and Proceedings 89(2): 150-4.
Godwin, W. 1793. An enquiry concerning political justice, and its influence on general virtue and happiness.
        New York: Woodstock Books, 1992.
Godwin, W. 1820. Of Population. London: J. McGowan.
Hayek, F.A. 1988. the fatal conceit: the errors of socialism (from The Collected Works of F A Hayek, volume
        1, 1988). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Higgins, M. 1998. “Demography, National Savings, and International Capital Flows.” International Economic
        Review 39, 343-69.
Hirschman, Albert. 1958. The Strategy of Economic Development. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Jones, G. 1986. Social Hygiene in Twentieth Century Britain. Wolfeboro, N.H.: Croom Helm.
Kelley, A. 2001. "The Population Debate in Historical Perspective: Revisionism Revised." In Birdsall, N.,
        Kelley, A., and Sinding, S. eds. Population Matters: Demography, Growth, and Poverty in the
        Developing World. pp. 24-54. Oxford University Press.
Kelley, A. and Schmidt, R. 1995. “Aggregate Population and Economic Growth Correlations: The Role of the
        Components of Demographic Change.” Demography 32, 543-55.
-----. 1996. “Savings, Dependency, and Development.” Journal of Population Economics 9, 365-86.


                                                      65
-----. 2000. “Economic and Demographic Change: A Synthesis of Models, Findings, and Perspectives.” In
        Birdsall, N., Kelley, A., and Sinding, S. eds. Population Matters: Demography, Growth, and Poverty
        in the Developing World. Oxford University Press.
Kennedy, P. 1993. Preparing for the Twenty-First Century. New York: Random House.
Keynes, J.M. 1920. The Economic Consequences of the Peace. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
Keynes, J.M. 1937. Some Economic Consequences of a Declining Population. Eugenics Review 29, 13-17.
Kuznets, S. 1960. Population Change and aggregate output. In Universities--National Bureau Committee for
        Economic Research, Demographic and Economic Change in Developed Countries. Princeton:
        Princeton University Press.
Kuznets, S. 1967. “Population and Economic Growth.” Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society
        111, 170-93.
Lewis, W.A. 1955. Theory of Economic Growth. London: Allen & Unwin.
Lindh, T. and B. Malmberg. 1998. “Age structure and inflation - a Wicksellian interpretation of the OECD
        data.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 36(1): 19-37.
Lindh, T. and B. Malmberg. 1999a. “Age structure effects and growth in the OECD, 1950-1990.” Journal of
        Population Economics 12: 431-449.
Lindh, T. and B. Malmberg. 1999b. Age Structure and the Current Account. A Changing Relation? Uppsala,
        Uppsala University, Dept. of Economics.
Lindh and B. Malmberg. 2000. “Can Age Structure Forecast Inflation Trends?” Journal of Economics and
        Business 52(1/2): 31-49.
Lustig, Nora, ed., 2001. Shielding the Poor: Social Protection in the Developing World. Washington, DC:
        Brookings Institution Press and Inter-American Development Bank.
Malmberg, B. 1994. “Age Structure Effects on Economic Growth--Swedish Evidence.” Scandinavian
        Economic History Review 42(3): 279-95.
Malmberg, B. and T. Lindh. 2000. “Population Change and Economic Growth in the Western World, 1850-
        1990.” Social Science History Association meeting, Pittsburgh.
Malthus, T. R. (1798). Essay on the Principle of Population, As It Affects the Future Improvement of Society
        with Remarks on the Speculation of Mr. Godwin, M. Condorcet, and Other Writers, Penguin Classics
        ed. (Harmondsworth, 1982).
Mankiw, N.G., Romer, D., and Weil, D. (1992). “A Contribution to the Empirics of Economic Growth.”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 1992, 407-437.
Mason, Andrew, ed., 2001. Population Change and Economic Development in East Asia: Challenges Met,
        Opportunities Seized, Stanford University Press.
Meade, J. 1967. Population Explosion, the Standard of Living, and Social Conflict. Economic Journal 77: 233-
        55.




                                                     66
Mill, J.S. 1848. Principles of Political Economy. The World's Classics, 1994. New York: Oxford University
        Press.
Myrdal, G. 1940. Population: A Problem for Democracy. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
North, D. and Thomas, R. 1970. An Economic Theory of the Growth of the Western World. Economic History
        Review, 23(1): 1-17.
Paes de Barros, R., Firpo, S., Guedes Barreto, R., and Pereira Leite, P. G., "Demographic Changes and
        Poverty in Brazil." In Birdsall, N., Kelley, A., and Sinding, S. eds. Population Matters: Demography,
        Growth, and Poverty in the Developing World. pp. 296-321. Oxford University Press.
Petty, W. 1682. Another Essay in Political Arithmetic. in Hull, C.H. ed. 1899. The Economic Writings of Sir
        William Petty. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ricardo, D. 1817. The Principles of Political Economy and Taxation. (London: Dent, 1984).
Samuelson, P. 1958. An Exact Consumption Loan Model of Interest With or Without the Social Contrivance
        of Money', Journal of Political Economy 66, 923-33.
Samuelson, P. 1975. The Optimum Growth Rate for Population', International Economic Review 16, 531-8.
Schultz, T.W. 1974. Population Effects of the Value of Human Time. Journal of Political Economy 82(2): S2-
        S10, reprinted in The Economics of Being Poor, 1993. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Sen, A. 1994. Population and Reasoned Agency. in Lindahl-Kiesling, K. and Londberg, H. 1994. Population,
        Economic Development and the Environment: The Making of Our Common Future. New York:
        Oxford University Press.
Simon, J. 1981. The Ultimate Resource. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Simon, J. 1986. Theory of Population and Economic Growth. New York: Blackwell.
Solow, R. 1956. A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 70. 531-
        38.
Spengler, Joseph. 1966. Was Malthus Right? in Population Economics: Selected Essays of Joseph Spengler,
        compiled by Robert Smith, Frank de Vyver, and William Allen, 1972. Durham: Duke University Press.
Stone, R. 1976. Demographic Variables in the Economics of Education. In Ansley Coale, ed., Economic
        Factors in Population Growth. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
United Nations. 2001. World Population Prospects: The 2000 Revision. CD-ROM.
Weil, D. (1997). The Economics of Population Aging. In Rosenzweig, M., and Stark, O., eds., Handbook of
        Population and Family Economics. Elsevier Science Press.
Weil, D. (1999). “Population Growth, Dependency, and Consumption.” American Economic Review,
        Papers and Proceedings 89(2): 251-5
Willis, R. 1994. Economic Analysis of Fertility in Lindahl-Kiesling, K. and Londberg, H. 1994. Population,
        Economic Development and the Environment: The Making of Our Common Future. New York:
        Oxford University Press.
World Bank. 1994. The East Asian Miracle. New York: Oxford University Press.


                                                      67
                   TABLES AND FIGURES


                          Table 1
                        World Billions

                         1 billion in 1804
              2 billion in 1927 (123 years later)
               3 billion in 1960 (33 years later)
               4 billion in 1974 (14 years later)
               5 billion in 1987 (13 years later)
               6 billion in 1999 (12 years later)
               7 billion in 2012 (13 years later)
               8 billion in 2026 (14 years later)
               9 billion in 2043 (17 years later)
   Source: Population Division, Department of Economic and Social
Affairs, UN Secretariat. Population Newsletter No 66, December 1998;
 and United Nations, World Population Prospects: The 2000 Revision
                                     Table 2
         Total Population in 2001, by Region, Sub-Region, and Country
                                                  (thousands)

                                                                             Share of
                      Area, region, sub-region, or country   Population       world
                                                                            population
                     WORLD                                      6,134,135
                                              1
                       More developed regions                   1,193,861     19.5%
                       Less developed regions2                  4,940,274     80.5%
                           Least developed countries3            674,954      11.0%
                     AFRICA                                      812,603      13.2%
                       Eastern Africa                            256,673       4.2%
                          Burundi                                  6,502
                          Comoros                                    727
                          Djibouti                                   644
                          Eritrea                                  3,816
                          Ethiopia                                64,459
                          Kenya                                   31,293
                          Madagascar                              16,437
                          Malawi                                  11,572
                          Mauritius                                1,171
                          Mozambique                              18,644
                          Réunion                                    732
                          Rwanda                                   7,949
                          Seychelles                                  81
                          Somalia                                  9,157
                          Uganda                                  24,023
                          United Republic of Tanzania             35,965
                          Zambia                                  10,649
                          Zimbabwe                                12,852
                       Middle Africa                              98,151       1.6%
                          Angola                                  13,527
                          Cameroon                                15,203
                          Central African Republic                 3,782
                          Chad                                     8,135
                          Congo                                    3,110
                          Democratic Republic of the Congo        52,522
                          Equatorial Guinea                          470
                          Gabon                                    1,262
                          Sao Tome and Principe                      140




1
  United Nations, World Population Prospects: The 2000 Revision defines "more developed regions" as "all
regions of Europe plus Northern America, Australia/New Zealand and Japan."
2
  United Nations, World Population Prospects: The 2000 Revision defines "less developed regions" as "all
regions of Africa, Asia (excluding Japan), Latin America and the Caribbean plus Melanesia, Micronesia and
Polynesia."
3
  United Nations, World Population Prospects: The 2000 Revision follows the United Nations General
Assembly's 1998 definition of "least developed countries" as these 48 countries: Afghanistan, Angola,
Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad,
Comoros, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Kiribati, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Niger, Rwanda, Samoa, São Tomé and Príncipe,
Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sudan, Togo, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu,
Yemen and Zambia. These countries are also included in the less developed regions, except where otherwise
stated.
                                                     Share of
Area, region, sub-region, or country   Population     world
                                                    population
  Northern Africa                         177,391      2.9%
     Algeria                               30,841
     Egypt                                 69,080
     Libyan Arab Jamahiriya                 5,408
     Morocco                               30,430
     Sudan                                 31,809
     Tunisia                                9,562
     Western Sahara                           260
  Southern Africa                          50,129      0.8%
     Botswana                               1,554
     Lesotho                                2,057
     Namibia                                1,788
     South Africa                          43,792
     Swaziland                                938
  Western Africa                          230,259      3.8%
     Benin                                  6,446
     Burkina Faso                          11,856
     Cape Verde                               437
     Côte d'Ivoire                         16,349
     Gambia                                 1,337
     Ghana                                 19,734
     Guinea                                 8,274
     Guinea Bissau                          1,227
     Liberia                                3,108
     Mali                                  11,677
     Mauritania                             2,747
     Niger                                 11,227
     Nigeria                              116,929
     Saint Helena                               6
     Senegal                                9,662
     Sierra Leone                           4,587
     Togo                                   4,657
ASIA                                    3,720,705     60.7%
  Eastern Asia                          1,491,772     24.3%
     China                              1,284,972
     China, Hong Kong SAR                   6,961
     China, Macao SAR                         449
     Dem. People's Republic of Korea       22,428
     Japan                                127,335
     Mongolia                               2,559
     Republic of Korea                     47,069
  South-central Asia                    1,506,727     24.6%
     Afghanistan                           22,474
     Bangladesh                           140,369
     Bhutan                                 2,141
     India                              1,025,096
     Iran (Islamic Republic of)            71,369
     Kazakhstan                            16,095
     Kyrgyzstan                             4,986
     Maldives                                 300
     Nepal                                 23,593
     Pakistan                             144,971
     Sri Lanka                             19,104
     Tajikistan                             6,135
     Turkmenistan                           4,835
     Uzbekistan                            25,257
                                                      Share of
Area, region, sub-region, or country    Population     world
                                                     population
  South-eastern Asia                       529,762      8.6%
     Brunei Darussalam                         335
     Cambodia                               13,441
     East Timor                                750
     Indonesia                             214,840
     Lao People's Democratic Republic        5,403
     Malaysia                               22,633
     Myanmar                                48,364
     Philippines                            77,131
     Singapore                               4,108
     Thailand                               63,584
     Viet Nam                               79,175
  Western Asia                             192,445      3.1%
     Armenia                                 3,788
     Azerbaijan                              8,096
     Bahrain                                   652
     Cyprus                                    790
     Georgia                                 5,239
     Iraq                                   23,584
     Israel                                  6,172
     Jordan                                  5,051
     Kuwait                                  1,971
     Lebanon                                 3,556
     Occupied Palestinian Territory          3,311
     Oman                                    2,622
     Qatar                                     575
     Saudi Arabia                           21,028
     Syrian Arab Republic                   16,610
     Turkey                                 67,632
     United Arab Emirates                    2,654
     Yemen                                  19,114
EUROPE                                     726,312     11.8%
  Eastern Europe                           302,619      4.9%
     Belarus                                10,147
     Bulgaria                                7,867
     Czech Republic                         10,260
     Hungary                                 9,917
     Poland                                 38,577
     Republic of Moldova                     4,285
     Romania                                22,388
     Russian Federation                    144,664
     Slovakia                                5,403
     Ukraine                                49,112
  Northern Europe                           95,236      1.6%
     Channel Islands                           145
     Denmark                                 5,333
     Estonia                                 1,377
     Faeroe Islands                             47
     Finland                                 5,178
     Iceland                                   281
     Ireland                                 3,841
     Isle of Man                                76
     Latvia                                  2,406
     Lithuania                               3,689
     Norway                                  4,488
     Sweden                                  8,833
     United Kingdom                         59,542
                                                      Share of
Area, region, sub-region, or country    Population     world
                                                     population
  Southern Europe                          145,050      2.4%
      Albania                                3,145
      Andorra                                   90
      Bosnia and Herzegovina                 4,067
      Croatia                                4,655
      Gibraltar                                 27
      Greece                                10,623
      Holy See                                   1
      Italy                                 57,503
      Malta                                    392
      Portugal                              10,033
      San Marino                                27
      Slovenia                               1,985
      Spain                                 39,921
      TFYR Macedonia                         2,044
      Yugoslavia                            10,538
  Western Europe                           183,407      3.0%
      Austria                                8,075
      Belgium                               10,264
      France                                59,453
      Germany                               82,007
      Liechtenstein                             33
      Luxembourg                               442
      Monaco                                    34
      Netherlands                           15,930
      Switzerland                            7,170
LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN            526,533      8.6%
  Caribbean                                 38,329      0.6%
     Anguilla                                   12
     Antigua and Barbuda                        65
     Aruba                                     104
     Bahamas                                   308
     Barbados                                  268
     British Virgin Islands                     24
     Cayman Islands                             40
     Cuba                                   11,237
     Dominica                                   71
     Dominican Republic                      8,507
     Grenada                                    94
     Guadeloupe                                431
     Haiti                                   8,270
     Jamaica                                 2,598
     Martinique                                386
     Montserrat                                  3
     Netherlands Antilles                      217
     Puerto Rico                             3,952
     Saint Kitts and Nevis                      38
     Saint Lucia                               149
     Saint Vincent and the Grenadines          114
     Trinidad and Tobago                     1,300
     Turks and Caicos Islands                   17
     United States Virgin Islands              122
  Central America                          137,480      2.2%
     Belize                                    231
     Costa Rica                              4,112
     El Salvador                             6,400
     Guatemala                              11,687
     Honduras                                6,575
     Mexico                                100,368
     Nicaragua                               5,208
     Panama                                  2,899
                                                                   Share of
 Area, region, sub-region, or country           Population          world
                                                                  population
  South America                                     350,724             5.7%
     Argentina                                       37,488
     Bolivia                                          8,516
     Brazil                                         172,559
     Chile                                           15,402
     Colombia                                        42,803
     Ecuador                                         12,880
     Falkland Islands (Malvinas)                          2
     French Guiana                                      170
     Guyana                                             763
     Paraguay                                         5,636
     Peru                                            26,093
     Suriname                                           419
     Uruguay                                          3,361
     Venezuela                                       24,632
NORTHERN AMERICA                                    317,068             5.2%
     Bermuda                                             63
     Canada                                          31,015
     Greenland                                           56
     Saint Pierre et Miquelon                             7
     United States of America                       285,926
OCEANIA                                              30,915             0.5%
   Australia/New Zealand                             23,146             0.4%
       Australia                                     19,338
       New Zealand                                    3,808
   Melanesia                                          6,627             0.1%
       Fiji                                             823
       New Caledonia                                    220
       Papua New Guinea                               4,920
       Solomon Islands                                  463
       Vanuatu                                          202
   Micronesia                                           528             0.0%
       Guam                                             158
       Kiribati                                          84
       Marshall Islands                                  52
       Micronesia (Federated States of)                 126
       Nauru                                             13
       Northern Mariana Islands                          76
       Palau                                             20
   Polynesia                                            613             0.0%
       American Samoa                                    70
       Cook Islands                                      20
       French Polynesia                                 237
       Niue                                               2
       Pitcairn                                           0
       Samoa                                            159
       Tokelau                                            1
       Tonga                                             99
       Tuvalu                                            10
       Wallis and Futuna Islands                         15
Less developed regions excluding China            3,647,893             59.5%
Less developed regions excluding the
                                                  4,265,320             69.5%
least developed countries
Sub-Saharan Africa                                  667,022             10.9%



Source: United Nations, World Population Prospects: The 2000 Revision
                                              Table 3
                                   Annual Population Growth Rates
                                       Asia and Sub-regions
                                             (percent)

                                   1965 - 1990                         1990-2015                        2015-2040

                                                   Non-                             Non-                             Non-
                                    Working-                            Working-                         Working-
                        Total                     working-    Total                working-    Total                working-
                                      age                                 age                              age
                      population                    age     population               age     population               age
                                   population                          population                       population
                                                 population                       population                       population

ASIA                     2.06         2.51          1.44       1.30       1.64       0.69       0.72       0.57       1.02

 Eastern Asia            1.75         2.43          0.66       0.74       0.94       0.32       0.18      -0.36       1.24

 South-central Asia      2.28         2.49          2.02       1.69       2.17       0.94       1.00       1.11       0.77

 South-eastern Asia      2.26         2.66          1.74       1.43       2.00       0.43       0.80       0.68       1.04

 Western Asia            2.76         3.06          2.39       2.17       2.51       1.65       1.58       1.68       1.42
                                          Table 4
                          Annual Population Growth Rates, Percent

                                                                   1965 - 1990                       1990-2015
                                                                                Non-                             Non-
                                                                    Working-                         Working-
                                                          Total                working-    Total                working-
                                                                      age                              age
                                                        population               age     population               age
                                                                   population                       population
                                                                              population                       population
WORLD                                                      1.84       2.14       1.39       1.27      1.54        0.81
  More developed regions                                   0.69       0.90       0.29       0.22      0.24        0.19
  Less developed regions                                   2.23       2.63       1.70       1.52      1.87        0.94
     Least developed countries                             2.52       2.50       2.55       2.54      2.78        2.26
  Less developed regions excluding China                   2.39       2.63       2.07       1.78      2.20        1.14
  Less developed regions excl the least dev countries      2.19       2.65       1.57       1.36      1.75        0.67
  Sub-Saharan Africa                                       2.82       2.74       2.91       2.51      2.73        2.26
AFRICA                                                     2.77       2.77       2.77       2.36      2.67        1.99
  Eastern Africa                                           2.92       2.86       2.98       2.50      2.71        2.26
  Middle Africa                                            2.78       2.48       3.11       3.05      3.06        3.04
  Northern Africa                                          2.57       2.87       2.22       1.76      2.46        0.65
  Southern Africa                                          2.48       2.75       2.14       0.90      1.25        0.35
  Western Africa                                           2.83       2.70       2.98       2.66      2.97        2.30
ASIA                                                       2.06       2.51       1.44       1.30      1.64        0.69
  Eastern Asia                                             1.75       2.43       0.66       0.74      0.94        0.32
  South-central Asia                                       2.28       2.49       2.02       1.69      2.17        0.94
  South-eastern Asia                                       2.26       2.66       1.74       1.43      2.00        0.43
  Western Asia                                             2.76       3.06       2.39       2.17      2.51        1.65
EUROPE                                                     0.52       0.69       0.20      -0.10      0.00       -0.30
  Eastern Europe                                           0.61       0.76       0.33      -0.40      -0.09      -1.07
  Northern Europe                                          0.34       0.38       0.27       0.16      0.22       0.06
  Southern Europe                                          0.60       0.79       0.22      -0.02      -0.06       0.07
  Western Europe                                           0.38       0.64       -0.10      0.19       0.08       0.41
LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN                            2.28       2.74       1.71       1.44      1.91        0.65
  Caribbean                                                1.62       2.06       1.02       1.00      1.31        0.47
  Central America                                          2.67       3.19       2.08       1.67      2.27        0.72
  South America                                            2.23       2.67       1.64       1.41      1.85        0.64
NORTHERN AMERICA                                           1.01       1.40       0.37       0.93      0.99        0.79
OCEANIA                                                    1.66       1.96       1.17       1.30      1.35        1.20
  Australia/New Zealand                                    1.48       1.82       0.88       1.01      1.02        1.01
  Melanesia                                                2.38       2.57       2.15       2.21      2.57        1.69
  Micronesia                                               2.57       2.98       2.05       2.18      2.21        2.14
  Polynesia                                                1.69       2.36       0.90       1.18      1.55        0.60


 Source: United Nations, World Population Prospects: The 2000 Revision
                                    Figure 1


                 Shares of the World Population, 1950


                         8%
                                                       More Developed
                                      32%
                                                       Regions
                                                       Less Developed
                                                       Regions
                                                       Least Developed
                   60%                                 Regions




                 Shares of the World Population, 2000


                      11%           20%
                                                       More Developed
                                                       Regions
                                                       Less Developed
                                                       Regions
                                                       Least Developed
                                                       Regions
                       69%




                Shares of the World Population, 2050



                                                       More Developed
                     20%       13%                     Regions
                                                       Less Developed
                                                       Regions
                                                       Least Developed
                                                       Regions
                              67%



Source: United Nations, World Population Prospects: The 2000 Revision.

Note: The UN defines "Least Developed Nations" to be a subset of "Less Developed Nations." By
contrast, these charts completely separate the two categories, removing the "least developed"
nations from the "less developed."
                                                                          Figure 2




                                     Source: David E Bloom (2000): Demographic Transitions and Economic Miracles. Prepared for
                                     the Video Conference on 17 May 2000 between the American University in Cairo and the World
                                     Bank Institute, Washington DC.



                                                                          Figure 3
                                                 GDP per capita growth against population growth, 1965-1990


                            8


                            6                                                                                    R2 = 0.1109
GDP per capita growth (%)




                            4


                            2


                            0
                                 0              1                     2                    3                     4             5

                            -2


                            -4


                            -6
                                                                    Population growth rate (%)

                                                         0.0243777 0.0225006      Linear (0.0243777 0.0225006)
                                                                                        Figure 4
                                                      Overall population growth rate and the economic growth residual

                           4



                           3



                           2
Residual economic growth




                           1



                           0



                           -1



                           -2



                           -3
                                0   0.5               1         1.5             2              2.5                3             3.5         4             4.5   5
                                                                                    Population growth rate (%)




                                                                                        Figure 5
                                                                      Life cycle income and consumption
                                          Money




                                                  0   5   10   15     20   25   30     35     40      45     50       55   60    65   70   75   80   85
                                                                                                 Age

                                                                                     Income                 Consumption
                                                                      Figure 6



    Population Growth and the Age Structure

                                                                                             share
                                                                                             working




                                                                   growth


                                                                       time



                                                                      Figure 7


                                World Population, 1750 - 2150
                                                         12
                          World Population in Billions




                                                         10

                                                         8

                                                         6

                                                         4
                                                                                 Developing Regions
                                                         2

                                                         0                         Developed Regions
                                                          1750 1800 1850 1900 1950 2000 2050 2100
Source: Population Reference Bureau (2001). Human Population: Fundamentals of Growth, Population
Growth and Distribution. Available at
http://www.prb.org/Content/NavigationMenu/PRB/Educators/Human_Population/Population_Growth/Population_Growth.htm
                                                                                                                                   Figure 8

                                                                                                            Population by Region

           6


           5


           4
Billions




           3


           2


           1


           0
           1950                                                   1960            1970              1980            1990            2000             2010              2020             2030           2040            2050
               Source: United Nations, World Population
                                                                                                                                    Year
               Prospects: The 2000 Revision


                                                                                Africa          Asia               Europe           Lat Am & Carib              US & Canada                    Oceania




                                                                                                    Figure 9
                                                                           Infant Mortality Rate at Different Levels of Development
                                                                  200                                                                                                          Source: UN, World Population
                                                                                                                                                                               Prospects 1950-2050, 2000
                        Infant Mortality (per 1000 live births)




                                                                  180
                                                                                                                                                                               Revision
                                                                  160                                                                                                          Post-2000 data are projections.

                                                                  140


                                                                  120


                                                                  100


                                                                  80


                                                                  60


                                                                  40


                                                                  20


                                                                   0
                                                                        1950   1955   1960   1965    1970   1975    1980    1985   1990   1995    2000   2005   2010    2015     2020   2025   2030   2035   2040   2045

                                                                                                                                            Year
                                                                                             More Developed Countries                            Less Developed Countries                        World
                                                                                   Figure 10
                                                             Fertility Rate at Different Levels of Development

                                                                                                                                                  Source: UN, World
                                                                                                                                                  Population Prospects: The
                                         6.0                                                                                                      2000 Revision
Fertility Rate (live births per woman)



                                                                                                                                                  Post-2000 data are
                                                                                                                                                  projections.
                                         5.0


                                         4.0


                                         3.0


                                         2.0


                                         1.0
                                               1950   1955   1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995    2000   2005   2010   2015    2020   2025   2030    2035   2040   2045
                                                                                                                     Year

                                                                       More Developed Countries                       Less Developed Countries                          World




                                                                                          Figure 11
                                                                                   The Demographic Transition




                                                                                                                       Population growth rate


                                                                                                                     Birth rate



                                                                                                          death rate
                                                                                                                                    time
                                                           Figure 12
                              Population Growth Rate Over the Course of the Demographic Transition

                                                    birth rate
                                                    minus
                                                    death rate




                                                                                                               TIME




                                                                                         Figure 13

                                P o p u la tio n b y A g e G ro u p a n d Y e a r, L e s s D e v e lo p e d R e g io n s




                              600


                              500
      Population (millions)




                              400

                              300

                                                                                                                                                  2050
                              200
                                                                                                                                           2025

                              100                                                                                                   2000           Year
                                                                                                                             1975
                                0                                                                                     1950
                                                                                                               0+
                                4

                                      4


                                            4


                                                       4


                                                                  4


                                                                              4


                                                                                      4


                                                                                             4


                                                                                                   4


                                                                                                         4
                                    -1


                                          -2


                                                     -3


                                                                -4


                                                                            -5


                                                                                    -6


                                                                                           -7


                                                                                                 -8


                                                                                                       -9
                               0-




                                                                                                             10
                                    10


                                          20


                                                  30


                                                              40


                                                                          50


                                                                                    60


                                                                                          70


                                                                                                 80


                                                                                                       90




                                                                         Ag e g ro u p
S o u rce : U N , W o rld P o p u latio n P ros p e cts : Th e 20 0 0 R ev isio n
                                                                                   Figure 14

                                             P o p u latio n b y Ag e G ro u p an d Y ear, E as t Asia




                               16 0

                               14 0
      Population (millions)




                               12 0

                               10 0

                                80

                                60                                                                                                20 5 0
                                                                                                                             20 2 5
                                40
                                                                                                                        20 0 0        Y ea r
                                20                                                                                 19 7 5
                                 0                                                                            19 5 0




                                                                                                         0+
                                 4

                                         4

                                                4

                                                        4

                                                               4

                                                                      4

                                                                             4

                                                                                      4

                                                                                            4

                                                                                                  4
                                       -1

                                              -2

                                                      -3

                                                             -4

                                                                    -5

                                                                           -6

                                                                                    -7

                                                                                          -8

                                                                                                -9
                               0-




                                                                                                       10
                                      10

                                             20

                                                    30

                                                            40

                                                                   50

                                                                          60

                                                                                   70

                                                                                          80

                                                                                                90
                                                                   Ag e g ro u p
S ource: U N , W o rld P op ula tion P rosp ects: T he 2000 R ev ision




                                                                                   Figure 15

                                                  P o p u latio n b y Ag e G ro u p an d Y e ar, Ire lan d




                               400

                               350
      Population (thousands)




                               300

                               250

                               200

                               150                                                                                                2 0 50
                                                                                                                             2 02 5
                               100
                                                                                                                        20 0 0        Year
                                50                                                                                 1 9 75
                                 0                                                                            1 9 50
                                                                                                         0+
                                 4

                                        4

                                                4

                                                        4

                                                               4

                                                                      4

                                                                             4

                                                                                      4

                                                                                            4

                                                                                                   4
                                      -1

                                              -2

                                                      -3

                                                             -4

                                                                    -5

                                                                           -6

                                                                                    -7

                                                                                          -8

                                                                                                 -9
                               0-




                                                                                                       10
                                      10

                                             20

                                                    30

                                                            40

                                                                   50

                                                                          60

                                                                                   70

                                                                                          80

                                                                                                90




                                                                   Ag e g ro u p
S ource : U N , W orld P opu la tion P rospects: T he 2 000 R ev ision
                                                                                     Figure 16

                                     P o p u latio n b y Ag e G ro up a nd Y ear, S u b -S ah ara n Afric a




                              1 80
                              1 60
                              1 40
      Population (millions)




                              1 20
                              1 00
                               80
                               60                                                                                                                2 0 40

                               40                                                                                                      2 0 10
                                                                                                                                                      Y ea r
                               20                                                                                             1 9 80

                                0                                                                                     1950




                                                                                                               0+
                                4

                                        4

                                                4

                                                        4

                                                                4

                                                                            4

                                                                                   4

                                                                                          4

                                                                                                  4

                                                                                                         4
                                      -1

                                              -2

                                                      -3

                                                              -4

                                                                          -5

                                                                                 -6

                                                                                        -7

                                                                                                -8

                                                                                                       -9
                              0-




                                                                                                             10
                                     10

                                            20

                                                     30

                                                             40

                                                                     50

                                                                                60

                                                                                       70

                                                                                              80

                                                                     Ag e g ro u p                    90
S ource : U N , W orld P opulation P rospects: T he 20 00 R ev ision




                                                                                     Figure 17

                                                 Share of Working-Age Population by Region

                 0.70


                 0.65



                 0.60


                 0.55


                 0.50
                    1950               1960          1970          1980         1990        2000      2010     2020     2030           2040        2050

                                                                                            Year

                                            Africa          Asia           Europe           Lat Am & Carib      US & Canada            Oceania
                                                                                      Figure 18
                                                                    Share of Working-Age Population, Specific Areas



                             0.75



                             0.70



                             0.65



                             0.60



                             0.55



                             0.50
                                  1950                 1960                  1970                 1980       1990           2000      2010        2020     2030       2040          2050
                                                                                                                            Year
                          Source: United Nations, World Population Prospects: The 2000 Revision



                                                                                   Ireland                       East Asia                   Sub-Saharan Africa




                                                                                                                 Figure 19
                                                                                        Labor force participation by age group, 1990


                         100

                         90

                         80

                         70
Participation rate (%)




                         60

                         50

                         40

                         30

                         20

                         10

                            0
                                     10-14             15-19             20-24             25-29         30-34      35-39     40-44   45-49      50-54   55-59    60-64      65+
                                                                                                                     Age group

                                               Africa                 Asia                 Latin America and the Caribbean             North America       Europe         Oceania
                                                Figure 20
                                        Population share 65+

0.40




0.30




0.20




0.10




0.00
   1950   1960       1970      1980      1990          2000           2010   2020   2030   2040   2050
                                                      Year


                                                USA           Japan


                 Source: United Nations, World Population Prospects: The 2000 Revision
