                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            EQUITY PORTFOLIO DIVERSIFICATION


                                       William N. Goetzmann
                                            Alok Kumar


                                         Working Paper 8686
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w8686


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2001




We would like to thank K. Geert Rouwenhorst for helpful discussions and valuable comments. In addition,
we would like to thank Itamar Simonson for making the investor data available to us and Terrance Odean
for answering numerous questions about the investor database. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by William N. Goetzmann and Alok Kumar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Equity Portfolio Diversification
William N. Goetzmann and Alok Kumar
NBER Working Paper No. 8686
December 2001
JEL No. G0, G1, G2



                                               ABSTRACT


        In this paper we examine the portfolios of more than 40,000 equity investment accounts from a
large discount brokerage during a six year period (1991-96) in recent U.S. capital market history. Using
the historical performance for the equities in these accounts, we find that a vast majority of investors in
our sample are under-diversified. Even accounting for the likelihood we have selected on speculators, the
magnitude of the diosyncratic risk taken by investors in our sample is surprising. Investors are aware of
the benefits of diversification but they appear to adopt a "naive" diversification strategy where they form
portfolios without giving proper consideration to the correlations among the stocks. Over time, the degree
of diversification among investor portfolios has improved but these improvements result primarily from
changes in the correlation structure of the US equity market. Cross-sectional variations in diversification
across demographic groups suggest that investors in low income and non-professional categories hold
the least diversified portfolios. In addition, we find that young, active investors are over-focused and hold
under-diversified portfolios.    Overall, our results indicate that investors realize the benefits of
diversification but they face a daunting task of "implementing" and maintaining a well-diversified
portfolio.




William N. Goetzmann                                               Alok Kumar
Yale University                                                    Cornell University
School of Management                                               Department of Economics
and NBER                                                           Uris Hall
william.goetzmann@yale.edu                                         Ithaca, NY 14853
                                                                   ak272@cornell.edu
I   Introduction


U.S. equity risk has a large idiosyncratic component, much of which may be reduced through


portfolio diversification. Virtually all asset pricing models posit that securities are priced by a

diversified, marginal investor who demands little or no compensation for holding idiosyncratic


risk. As a consequence, most rational models of investor choice suggest that investors hold


diversified portfolios to reduce or eliminate non-compensated risk. But do they?


    In this paper we examine the portfolios of more than 40, 000 equity investment accounts


from a large discount brokerage during a six year period (1991-96) in recent U.S. capital market


history. Using the historical performance for the equities in these accounts, we find that a vast

majority of investors in our sample are under-diversified. Even accounting for the likelihood


we have selected on speculators, the magnitude of the idiosyncratic risk taken by investors in


our sample is surprising. Investors are certainly aware of the benefits of diversification. Over


time, the average number of stocks in investor portfolios has increased and this has resulted

in a decrease in the average portfolio variance. In addition, the average correlation among


stocks in the US equity market has declined steadily over the 1991-96 time period and that


has led to a significant decrease in the variance of investor portfolios. However, over time,

there is no decrease in either the excess average correlation (relative to benchmark portfolios)


or the excess normalized variance. This suggests that investors adopt a “naive” diversification


strategy where they form portfolios without giving proper consideration to the correlations


among the stocks.


    It is possible that investors do not diversify appropriately due to the small size of their


portfolio.   The inability of investors to buy in round lots and overall higher stock prices


may prevent investors with smaller portfolios from diversifying.        However, given that the

mean portfolio size of investors in our sample is $35,629 (median is $13,869), these factors


are less likely to be the dominant factors responsible for the observed lack of diversification


                                                2
among investor portfolios. Clearly, investors that hold larger portfolios are more diversified

and earn higher risk-adjusted performance but there is no evidence that investors that hold a


larger number of stocks are able to reduce the variance of their portfolios through better stock


selection. The average correlation among the stocks in portfolios containing a larger number of


stocks is not lower than the average correlation among stocks in portfolios with fewer stocks.

This indicates that investors with larger portfolios have better diversified portfolios merely


because they hold a larger number of stocks and not due to any inherent superior portfolio


composition skills.


   One might argue that the investment accounts we are analyzing are “play money” accounts

that people keep for gambling and entertainment purpose while the bulk of their actual invest-


ment including retirement money is elsewhere. This seems quite unlikely. At any given instant


of time, the aggregate value of investor portfolios is approximately $2.5 billion. Furthermore,

the average ratio of account size to annual income level is approximately 1.45 if maximum


portfolio value is used as a measure of portfolio size and 0.79 if the average portfolio value is


used as a measure of portfolio size. The portfolio size to income ratio is much higher for lower


income groups. For example, this ratio is 3.62 for investors that earn less than $15,000 per

year and 1.79 for investors with annual income between $20,000 and $30,000. So the money


in the investment accounts do not represent an insignificant fraction of the entire household


portfolio.


   Turning to the cross-sectional differences in our sample, we find that the degree of diversifi-

cation varies dramatically across investor accounts. Diversification level increases with income


as well as age and this reflects an increasing degree of risk aversion with age and income.


The degree of diversification also varies across occupation categories. Investors that belong


to non-professional job categories (blue-collar workers, clerical workers and sales and service

workers) hold the least diversified portfolios in our sample while investors who are retired are


on the other end of the diversification spectrum where they hold the most diversified portfolios.


                                                3
The cross-sectional variation in diversification across occupation categories further support the

view that risk aversion may increase with age.


   Overall, our results suggest that investors are unable to (or unwilling to) choose stocks


in a judicious manner. They appear to adopt a “naive” diversification strategy where they

hold portfolios with several stocks but without giving proper consideration to the correlations


among the stocks they hold. These results are consistent with the findings of Rode (2000)


who emphasizes the importance of “implementation” - investors may realize the benefits of

diversification but they may face difficulty in implementing a well-diversified portfolio. As a


result, investors may use simple “rules of thumb” to form their portfolios. The use of simple


diversification heuristics has also been documented in Benartzi and Thaler (2001) who find that


investors adopt a simple “1  /n”   rule when formulating their retirement-fund asset allocation

decisions.


   So   why do investors hold only a handful of stocks and why is the average correlation among

stocks in their portfolios so high? Merton (1987) suggests that due to search and monitoring

costs investors may limit the number of stocks in their portfolios. Investors may also develop a


false perception that they can manage their portfolio risks better by a thorough understanding


of a small number of firms rather than diversifying. Using survey data from a set of large

and experienced investors, DeBondt (1998) finds that such a belief is quite common among


investors. On the issue of why the average correlation among stocks in investor portfolios is


high, previous studies have documented that investors appear to ignore correlations among


stocks when forming their portfolios (Kroll, Levy, and Rapoport 1988), possibly due to the

sequential nature of the portfolio formation process. Motivated by these experimental results,


Shefrin and Statman (2000) develop a descriptive theory of portfolio choice where mental


accounting (Thaler 1985) induces investors to form portfolios in a layered manner and the

correlations among these layers are often ignored.


   Lack of diversification may also result from psychological factors, in particular, due to


                                                4
an “illusion of control” (Langer 1975).    In experimental settings it has been observed that

when factors such as involvement, choice and familiarity are introduced into chance situations,


people become more confident and they start to believe that they can control the outcome of


chance events. Investors may develop an illusory sense of control because they are directly


involved in the investment process and they make their own choices instead of relying on others

(as in the case of mutual funds) for their investment decisions. Familiarity with a certain set


of stocks may further exacerbate the illusion of control where investors may fail to realize


that more knowledge or more information does not necessarily imply control over the outcome

(i.e., returns earned by the portfolio). Huberman (2001) finds that investors do indeed have a


strong tendency to invest in stocks that they are familiar with. An illusion of control creates an


inappropriate level of over-confidence and over-confident investors may mistakenly believe that


they can earn superior performance by active trading and consequently they may choose not

to diversify. As suggested in Kelly (1995), a sense of over-confidence can also emerge among


investors simply because they may believe that their stock-picking abilities are superior to that


of the market.


   In our sample, we find that investors with higher monthly portfolio turnover rates (active


investors) hold fewer stocks. Their portfolios have higher normalized portfolio variance and


they eventually earn lower risk-adjusted returns. These results are consistent with the findings

of Odean (1999) who documents that over-confident investors trade more actively and thus


earn a lower net return. The lower level of diversification among active investors is another


manifestation of investor over-confidence.




I.A Background: Household Investment Behavior

There is a considerable empirical literature on household investment choice. Beginning with

Uhler and Cragg (1971), researchers have sought to understand the degree to which household


asset allocation decisions conform to rational models of investor behavior. Blume and Friend


                                                5
(1975) use tax filing and survey data to investigate diversification in household portfolios and

find that the household portfolios are grossly under-diversified and the degree of diversification


increases with wealth. In another study, Cohn, Lewellen, Lease, and Schlarbaum (1975) find


that as wealth increases, a higher proportion of the total wealth is allocated to risky assets


and investors exhibit decreasing relative risk aversion.


   A number of authors recently have focused on the apparent under-investment in risky as-


sets and explore possible explanatory factors. Guiso, Japelli, and Terlizze (1996) use Italian


household survey data to test whether expected future borrowing constraints and exposure


to non-diversifiable risks such as labor income risk (which may be reinforced by borrowing

constraints) explain differences in equity holdings.   Bertaut (1998) analyzes the stock mar-


ket participation decisions of households and finds that the propensity to invest in equities is


higher for investors with lower risk aversion, higher wealth and higher education because their

information costs are lower. Heaton and Lucas (2000) study the asset holdings of investors


who hold stocks and find that entrepreneurial stakes substitute for investment in equities.


Consistent with these results, Gentry and Hubbard (2000) examine the portfolios of entre-


preneurial households and find that their portfolios are grossly undiversified where more than

40% of their portfolios consist of active business assets. Perraudin and Sorensen (2000) suggest


that frictions restrict the ability of investors to hold a large number of assets. Moskowitz and


Vissing-Jorgensen (2001) provide further empirical evidence of improper diversification among

households by examining their investments in private equity. They find that households hold


concentrated portfolios of private equity even though private equity does not offer a better


risk-return trade-off compared with a diversified portfolio of public equity.


   Most of these previous studies use survey data which do not contain any information on


the trading activities of households. In contrast, our dataset provides details of the composi-

tion of investor portfolios and it contains a direct account of investor trades during a 6-year


period. This allows us to measure the level of portfolio diversification accurately and more


                                                6
importantly, the trading data allows us to examine the relationship between the behavior of

undiversified investors and market returns. Our dataset does not contain information about


the entire household portfolio and so we are unable to answer questions about the broader asset


allocation decisions and the proportion held in risky assets. Instead, we are able to focus on the


question of diversification within an asset class. It is important to point out that factors such

as entrepreneurial risk or income exposure to particular industry risk factors can and should


affect the selection of individual assets within the equity portfolio. In fact, Souleles (2001) has


already shown that consumption risk, labor income risk, past returns as well as households’

expectations about future returns (i.e., their sentiment) are important determinants of house-


holds’ portfolio composition and their buying decisions of risky assets. However, most income


hedging arguments focus on systematic risk and neither of these important considerations is


likely to convincingly explain long positions that include large idiosyncratic risk.


   Our work is closest in spirit to Kelly (1995) who also examines equity portfolio diversifica-


tion among households in the U.S. Using data from the 1983     Survey of Consumer Finances, she

documents poor diversification among households. She finds that the median number of stocks


in an investor portfolio is only two and less than one third of the households hold more than

ten stocks. Our results are broadly consistent with the findings of Kelly (1995) and reinforce


the evidence of poor diversification within a specific asset class documented in her study. We


provide evidence of lack of diversification among investors in a different setting using a longer

account of trading. In addition, we are able to develop a profile of diversified and undiversified


investor groups using their trading characteristics, portfolio characteristics and demographic


information. Furthermore, using the investor trading data, we are able to provide preliminary


evidence in support of the hypothesis that idiosyncratic risk may be priced in equilibrium.


   The rest of the paper is organized as follows: a brief description of the investor database and

the sample used in the study is provided in Section II. In Section III we present the aggregate


level diversification results and document the time variation in diversification among investors.


                                                7
The cross-sectional variation in diversification across age, income and occupation categories is

described in Section IV. In Section VI, we examine the asset pricing implications of portfolio


diversification and estimate the strength of the contemporaneous relationship between the


trading behavior of diversified and undiversified investor groups and market returns.          We


conclude in Section VI with a summary and a brief discussion.




II    Data


The data for this study consists of trades and monthly portfolio positions of investors at a major


discount brokerage house in the U.S. for the period of 1991-96. The database consists of three


types of data files: (i) position files that contain the end-of-month portfolios of all investors,


(ii) a trade file that contains all transactions carried out by the investors in the database, and

(iii) a demographics file that contains information such as age, gender, marital status, income


code, occupation code, geographical location (zip code), etc. for a subset of investors. There


                   ,                                             ,
are a total of 77 995 households in the database of which 62 387 have traded in stocks. More


than half of the households in our database have 2 or more accounts. Approximately 27% of

the households have 2 accounts, 13% have 3 accounts, 6% have 4 accounts and 6% have 5 or


more accounts. All accounts for a given investor are combined to obtain a portfolio at the


household level.


     In addition to the investor database, we obtain monthly security prices and returns data


from CRSP and use this data in combination with the position files to obtain a time series of

monthly portfolio return for each household. These monthly portfolio return series are used


to compute the various characteristics of investor portfolios.


     Table I provides a summary of the key attributes of the investor database. The aggregate

value of investor portfolios in our database is close to $2.5 billion at any given instant of time.


An average investor holds a 4-stock portfolio (median is 3) with an average size of $35,629


                                                8
   (median is $13,869). Less than 10% of the investors hold portfolios over $100,000 and less than

   5% of them hold more than 10 stocks. The average portfolio turnover rate which measures


   the frequency of trading is 7.59% (median is 2.53%) for our chosen sample. A typical investor


   makes less than 10 trades per year where the average trade size is $8,779 (median is $5,239).


   The average number of days an investor holds a stock is 187 trading days (median is 95).


          Table II reports the 20 most widely held and 20 most actively traded stocks in our sample. It


   is clear that investor portfolios are heavily tilted towards stocks from technology and consumer


   companies. Household names such as IBM, Microsoft, General Motors, General Electric, Coca

   Cola, etc. dominate the list.




   III       Portfolio Diversification

   The observed degree of under-diversification among investor portfolios in our sample is quite


   surprising. More than 25% of investor portfolios contain only 1 stock and more than 50% of


   them contain fewer than 3 stocks. This pattern of holding concentrated portfolios is present


   throughout the 1991-96 sample period though, over time, there has been an increase in the

   average number of stocks held by the investors (see Table III, Panel A). These results are


   boradly consistent with the findings of Blume and Friend (1975) and Kelly (1995).              It is


   commonly believed that a well-diversified portfolio should consist of at least 10-15 stocks1 . In

   our sample, at any given monthly time-period, only 5-10% of the portfolios consist of more


   than 10 stocks.


          It is possible that investors who hold relatively less diversified portfolios compensate for


   their lack of diversification by investing in mutual funds. However, we find that the average

   asset allocation to mutual funds is approximately 15% of the overall portfolio and more im-


   portantly, the allocation differences across diversification deciles are not significant. In other


   words, there is no evidence that investors with less diversified equity portfolios compensate

1 This   is a conservative estimate. Statman (1987) estimates this number to be 30.


                                                        9
for their lack of diversification by investing more in mutual funds. Another possibility is that

investors who are less diversified hold less risky stocks, i.e., they may disregard correlations


among stocks and mistakenly belief that a collection of less risky stocks leads to a less risky


portfolio. In our sample, we do not find any evidence of such diversification strategies. In


fact, we find that less diversified investors hold riskier stocks. The mean standard deviation of

stocks held by investors in the top and bottom diversification quartiles are 3.38% and 8.62%


respectively.


   In order to formally quantify the degree of under-diversification among the investor port-

folios, we use three different (but related) measures of diversification. The first measure is


a normalized version of the portfolio variance. The expected portfolio variance of an equal


weighted portfolio with   N stocks is defined as:
                                                          
                                      σp2 = N1 σ̄2 + N N− 1 cov.                                 (1)



where   σ̄2 is the average variance of all stocks in the portfolio and cov is the average covariance
among stocks in the portfolio. The normalized portfolio variance is obtained by dividing the


portfolio variance by the average variance of stocks in the portfolio:


                             σ 2 1  N − 1   cov  1  N − 1 
                D1 = NVEWP = σ̄2 = N + N
                               p
                                               σ̄2 = N + N corr                                  (2)



where corr is the average correlation among stocks in the portfolio. We measure the portfolio


variance in a normalized unit so that portfolios of different sizes can be aggregated.         The

expression for normalized variance clearly indicates that the portfolio variance can be reduced


in two different ways. Firstly, it can be reduced by increasing the number of stocks in the


portfolio (i.e., by increasing   N ) and secondly, it can be reduced by a proper selection of stocks
such that the average correlation among the stocks in the portfolio is lower. Variance reduction

through proper stock selection reflects “skill” in portfolio composition while addition of stocks


in the portfolio without lowering the average correlation is a reflection of a “naive” notion of


                                                  10
                           2
      diversification . In the limit, when      N → ∞, the portfolio variance (σp2) converges to the average
      covariance among the stocks in the portfolio (cov) and the normalized variance converges to


      1. The degree of diversification can also be measured as the deviation of a portfolio from the


      market portfolio (Blume and Friend 1975). The weight of each security in the market portfolio


      is very small, so the diversification measure is approximately:


                                          N
                                                        2 (wi − 1 )2 ≈  w2
                                                            N           N
                                   D2 =       (wi − wm ) =
                                                                Nm i=1 i                                       (3)
                                          i=1              i=1

      where  N is the number of securities held by the investor, Nm is the number of stocks in the
      market portfolio, wi is the portfolio weight assigned to stock i in the investor portfolio and

      wm is the weight assigned to a stock in the market portfolio (wm = 1/Nm). A lower value of
      D2 is indicative of a higher level of diversification. Finally, we also use the number of stocks
      in the portfolio as a “crude” measure of the degree of diversification:



                                                         D3 = N.                                               (4)



            Each month, the expected return vector and the covariance matrix for the entire set of


      stocks traded by investors in our sample are estimated using past 5 years of monthly stock

                       3
      returns data . These estimates are then used to compute the expected return, variance and


      average correlation among stocks for all investor portfolios. Table III (Panels B and C) report


      the normalized portfolio variance and the average correlation among stocks in investor portfo-


      lios. As expected, the normalized variance decreases as the number of stocks in the portfolio

      (N ) increases. The normalized variance of concentrated portfolios is approximately 3-4 times
      the normalized variance of well diversified portfolios. For example, in 1996, the normalized


                                                                            .
      variance of well-diversified portfolios with 11-15 stocks is 0 163 while concentrated portfolios


      with only 2 stocks on average have a normalized variance of 0 407.        .
   2 The                                                                                                              N
           idea of decomposing portfolio variance into two parts, one representing the effect of the number of stocks (   )
and the other representing the average correlation among the stocks in the portfolio (corr) is proposed in Goetzmann,

Li, and Rouwenhorst (2001).
   3 Stocks   with less than 2 years of returns data are excluded from the analysis.




                                                            11
   Over time, the normalized portfolio variance of investor portfolios has decreased but to

a large extent due to changes in the correlation structure of the US equity market.                    The


reduction in variance in the set of well-diversified portfolios is much larger than the variance


improvement in the set of concentrated portfolios. For example, the normalized variance of


2-stock portfolios has improved from 0.508 in 1991 to 0.407 in 1996, a 20% decline. However,

during the same period, the normalized variance of portfolios containing more than 15 stocks


has decreased from 0.291 to 0.130, a 55% decline. We also compute the average correlation


among the stocks in investor portfolios (see Table III, Panel C) and find that the average

correlation among stocks in investor portfolios also decreases over time for portfolios of all


sizes but the average correlation does not vary across portfolios at a given instant in time.


The observed differences in average correlation are not statistically significant. This suggests


that the reduction in portfolio variance during the 1991-96 time-period occurs primarily from

an increase in the number of stocks in the portfolio and not due to an improvement in the


stock picking abilities of investors.




III.A Investor Portfolios Relative to Benchmark Portfolios

To better quantify the level of under-diversification among investor portfolios, we compare the

investor portfolios with two simple benchmark portfolios, namely, the market portfolio and


a large number of randomly chosen set of portfolios. Several sets of investor portfolios are


formed, each set containing 1500        k -stock   portfolios, where   k   = 2, . . . , 15. The average risk

characteristics of each of the random set of portfolios is compared with the average character-


istics of matching investor portfolios. The market portfolio represents the risk-return trade-off


the investors could have achieved with a passive trading style just by investing in one of the


many available index funds. The set of random portfolios represents the risk-return trade-off

a “naive” investor could have achieved by arbitrarily picking stocks. So these portfolios by no


means constitute a “desirable” set but rather they represent the “minimum” level of risk-return


                                                     12
trade-off the investor portfolios should exhibit.



   Figure 1 shows the positions of investor portfolios relative to the market portfolio (and


the capital market line) in the mean-standard deviation (µ      − σ) plane.   Two monthly time-


periods are chosen in the first half of the sample period (February 1991 and June 1993) and


two monthly time-periods are chosen in the second half of the sample period (September 1995

and June 1996). The past 5 years of monthly returns data is used to estimate the means and


the standard deviations of the market portfolio and investor portfolios and the riskfree rate


corresponds to the 90-day T-Bill rate.



   We find that only a very small fraction of investor portfolios are above the capital market


line (CML). In a month chosen in the first year of the sample period (February 1991), for


instance, only 9.53% of the portfolios are above the CML and in a month in the last year


of our sample (June 1996), 13.96% of the portfolios are above the CML. In other monthly

time-periods also, only a small fraction of investor portfolios exhibit better risk-return trade-


off than the market portfolio.    Consistent with our previous results, we find that investor


portfolios are more “spread out” in the    µ−σ      plane during the initial years but during the

latter years a relatively larger proportion of investors are closer to the CML though still only


a small proportion of them are above the CML.



   Comparing the variance of observed investor portfolios with the variance of randomly cho-


sen portfolios, we again find that investor portfolios have relatively higher risk exposures.

Figure 2 shows the average normalized variance of investor portfolios of different sizes rela-


tive to the matching benchmark portfolios during the month of June 1996. The normalized


variance of investor portfolios is approximately 25% higher than the normalized variance of


benchmark portfolios and this difference increases with the size of the investor portfolio. This

clearly indicates that the portfolios in our sample are not better than even those portfolios


that in a sense provide a lower bound on the attainable risk-return trade-off.


                                               13
      III.B       Diversification Over Time

      During the 1991-96 sample period, the average number of stocks in investor portfolios has


      increased almost monotonically from 4.19 in January 1991 to 6.51 in November 1996. The

      normalized portfolio variance has steadily decreased from 0.48 in January 1991 to 0.31 in


      November 1996 (see Figure 3(a)). On surface, these two results seem to imply that the average


      diversification characteristics of investor portfolios have improved over time. However, when we


      compare investor portfolios with a benchmark of randomly chosen portfolios, we find that the

      risk exposure of investor portfolios are significantly higher than the benchmark portfolios and in


      fact, during the 1991-96 period the extra normalized variance has increased from approximately


      40% to 65%. So the improvements in investor portfolios result primarily from changes in the


      correlation structure of the equity market4 . In Figure 4, we show the average correlation of both

      investor portfolios and a set of randomly chosen portfolios. Clearly, the average correlation


      for both sets of portfolios decreases during the 1991-96 time period but at each monthly time


      period, the average correlation among stocks in randomly chosen portfolios is significantly

      lower than the average correlation among stocks in actual investor portfolios.


          In the analysis above we have combined portfolios of different sizes and find that at an


      aggregate level reduction in portfolio variance over time is driven primarily by changing market


      correlation structure. However, potential improvements in portfolio variance cross-sectionally

      are not revealed by this analysis. In Figure 5 we show the cross-sectional variation in average


      correlation across portfolios with different number of stocks for two monthly time-periods.


      The two monthly periods are chosen in the first and the last years of our sample period.


      For comparison, we also plot the average correlations of matched random portfolios.                    The

      procedure for constructing random portfolios is similar to the one described earlier.                  The


      average correlations of investor portfolios containing        k -stocks and 1500 random portfolios with
   4 Malkiel   and Xu (1997) report a similar finding by tracking the variation in correlations among industry portfolios
during the 1970-95 time-period. They find that the mean correlation among the portfolios decreases over time thereby
suggesting that the risk reduction benefits of holding a diversified portfolio has increased over time.




                                                            14
       k -stocks   are compared for    k = 2, . . . , 15.

             Three immediate observations can be made from the figure. First, the average correlations


       for both investor portfolios and random portfolios are lower in 9601 in comparison with 9101.

       This is consistent with our earlier result that portfolio variance decreases over time. Secondly,


       during both monthly time-periods, the average correlations of investor portfolios are higher


       than those of the random portfolios for all5 values of                k.   The differences are statistically


       significant for all values of   k (p-value < 0.05).      Finally, the average correlations decrease with   k

       for the set of random portfolios but for investor portfolios, the average correlations increase as


       k   increases. This suggests that portfolios of all sizes have worse diversification characteristics


       than the benchmark portfolios and this result holds throughout our 6-year sample period. In

       Section IV, we investigate the cross-sectional variations in portfolio diversification in more


       detail.




       III.C Diversification and Performance

       Does better diversification translate directly into better portfolio performance? Figure 6 shows

       the positions of concentrated portfolios (portfolios with 1-3 stocks) and relatively more diver-


       sified portfolios (portfolios with 7 or more stocks) relative to the market portfolio and the


       capital market line (CML) in the             µ−σ     plane. About 28% of portfolios that have 7 or more


       stocks are above the CML while only 17% of concentrated portfolios are above the CML. The

       results are shown for one time period, namely September 1995, but similar results are obtained


       for other time periods. These are, of course,             ex ante   measures of portfolio performance. In


       Figure 7 we plot the variation in realized risk-adjusted performance (measured using Sharpe


       Ratio) as the number of stocks in investor portfolios increase. There is a strong positive re-

       lationship between the degree of diversification and portfolio performance. Better diversified

   5 There   is an exception.   In 9601, for   k   = 2, the average correlation of random portfolios is higher than that of
investor portfolios.




                                                                15
portfolios earn higher risk-adjusted performance. To check the robustness of our results, we

split the sample into two 3-year sub-periods and compute the portfolio performance separately


for each of the two sub-periods. As shown in Figure 7, the strong positive relationship between


diversification and performance is observed during both of the 3-year sub-periods. During the


1994-96 sub-period, for instance, the average Sharpe ratio for 2-stock portfolios is 0.34 while

portfolios with 15 or more stocks, on average, earn a Sharpe ratio of 0.56. Overall, better di-


versification does translate into better risk-adjusted portfolio performance. However, investors


can achieve these levels of performance by simply investing in one of the many available index

funds.




IV    Cross-Sectional Variation in Diversification


Having established that at an aggregate level investors are highly under-diversified, we now

focus on the cross-sectional variation in diversification across investor portfolios. We investigate


the role of relevant psychological factors in the portfolio formation decisions of investors and


analyze diversification variation across various demographic groups to identify factors that can


successfully explain the observed levels of under-diversification among investor portfolios.




IV.A Illusion of Control and Over-confidence

Investors may mistakenly believe that they can earn superior performance by active trading

and consequently they may choose not to diversify their portfolios. If this hypothesis is true,


investors with higher portfolio turnover rates are likely to be the less diversified group. Odean


(1999) has already shown that over-confident investors trade more actively and as a result earn


lower net returns. However, another manifestation of investor over-confidence is the lower level

of diversification among the active group of investors. As discussed earlier, an inappropriate


degree of over-confidence may arise from an illusory sense of control the investors may develop


                                                16
        due to their direct involvement in the investment process and due to their familiarity with a

        certain set of stocks. These factors are known to induce confidence among people in experi-


        mental settings (Langer 1975) and a similar behavioral mechanism may influence the portfolio


        formation decisions of investors in our sample.


            Figure 8 shows how the degree of diversification varies with the frequency of trading. The


        second diversification measure, namely, the sum of squared portfolio weights (                        D2) is used to
        measure the average diversification level and the monthly portfolio turnover rate is used to
        measure the frequency of trading. There is a strong positive relationship between     D2 and
        portfolio turnover rate. Portfolios in turnover deciles 1 and 2 have a D2 measure of 0.35
        and 0.37 respectively while the top 2 turnover deciles have a D2 measure of 0.54 and 0.55
        respectively. Note that a higher value of D2 implies a lower level of diversification. The
        average number of stocks (D3 measure) in portfolios in the bottom 2 turnover deciles are 7.91
        and 7.22 respectively while the average number of stocks in portfolios in the top 2 turnover
        deciles are 5.38 and 5.05 respectively. Using Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test6 we find that the
        difference between the distributions of D2 and D3 for the bottom 2 turnover deciles and the
        top 2 turnover deciles are statistically significant (p-value < 0.01). To test the robustness
        of our results, we also compute the diversification measures across the turnover deciles for
   6 The   Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test (Press, Teukolsky, Vetterling, and Flannery 1992) is a non-parametric proce-
dure that makes no assumptions about the underlying population distributions and compares the entire distribution
instead of a distribution parameter.       To compare two distributions (say       S N 1 (x )   and   SN2 (x)),   the KS-test uses the
maximum value of the absolute difference between the two cumulative distributions as a test statistic:


                                           Dobserved = −∞<x<∞
                                                         max   S N 1 (x ) − S N 2 ( x ) 

A large value of Dobserved provides a strong evidence against the null hypothesis of no difference between the two
cumulative distributions. The significance level (p-value) of Dobserved is approximately given by:
                                                                      ( N + 0.12 + √0.11 ))
                                                                       √
                         Prob{D        >D          } = Q (D                        e
                                      actual     observed        KS    observed
                                                                                                      Ne
where
                   Ne = NN1+NN2           QKS(x) = 2
                                                        ∞ ( 1) n− e− n x
                                                             −   (    1)   2 2 2
                                                                                    QKS (0) = 1, QKS(∞) = 0
                          1       2                    n=1
Ne is the effective number of data points and QKS (x) is a monotonically decreasing function.
                                                                 17
      the 1991-93 sub-period and the results are similar. As shown in the figure, the average                D2
      measure is higher for all turnover deciles during 1991-93 and this reflects the fact that investor


      portfolios are less diversified during the 1991-93 sub-period.




      IV.B Diversification and Demographics

      To identify the main factors that may be responsible for the observed levels of under-diversification


      among the investors in our sample, we analyze the variations in diversification across three


      demographic variables: (i) age, (ii) occupation, and (iii) income. Previous studies have es-


      tablished that risk aversion increases with age7 and wealth. If this is indeed true, portfolio

      diversification (an indirect indicator of an investor’s risk aversion) must increase with age and


      income. In addition, if occupation and income are proxies for the amount of information (and


      education) investors have, an analysis of cross-sectional variations can reveal if better informed

      investors hold better diversified portfolios. More importantly, having shown earlier that there


      exists a strong relationship between the level of diversification and portfolio performance, our


      results from this section can help us target the investor groups that are likely to suffer the


      most from the lower levels of diversification.




      Age

      Figure 9 shows the relationship between diversification and age during the 1991-93 and the


      1994-96 sub-periods.       The degree of diversification increases with age during both the sub-

      periods. The average   D2 diversification measure for investors in the age group of 26-36 (the
      bottom age decile) is 0.53 during the 1994-96 sub-period while the average D2 is only 0.42 for


      the top age decile which consists of investors in the age group of 70-82. Using the Kolmogorov-


      Smirnov test we find that the distributions of            D2   for the top and bottom age deciles are

   7 King   and Leape provide an alternative explanation. They suggest a life-cycle hypothesis of diversification where
the portfolio diversification increases with age because with experience, investors acquire more information about
the market.




                                                           18
                                          p
significantly different from one other ( -val   < 0.01).   Other diversification measures yield

similar results.   For instance, the average number of stocks (     D3    measure) is 4.69 for the


bottom decile and 6.65 for the top decile during the 1994-96 sub-period. Overall, there is a


strong positive relationship between age and the degree of diversification.


   In order to understand better why diversification increases with age, we investigate the


relationship between age and the frequency of trading.       Are younger people less diversified

because of their higher level of over-confidence? We find that the trading frequency decreases


with age. The portfolio turnover rate is 6.82% for the bottom age decile (age between 26-36)


and 5.02% for the top age decile (age between 70-82). The difference between the turnover

                                                             p
distributions of the two groups is statistically significant ( -value   < 0.01). This suggests that
young, active investors are over-focused and hold concentrated and under-diversified portfolios.




Occupation

To investigate the variations in diversification across occupation, we form three broad occu-


pation categories, namely, (i) professional category, consisting of investors that hold technical

or managerial positions, (ii) non-professional category, consisting of investors who are either


blue-collar workers, sales and service workers or clerical workers, and finally, (iii) the retired


category.   Other occupation codes such as student, housewife, etc. exist in our sample but


given the small sizes of these groups, we do not include them in our analyses.


   Table IV reports the average diversification measures for the 3 broad occupation categories

during the 1991-93 and the 1993-96 sub-periods. During both sub-periods, we find that the


non-professional category holds the least diversified portfolios while investors in the retired


fall on the other end of the diversification spectrum. For example, during the 1994-96 sub-


period, investors in the non-professional category hold 4.56 stocks (the average normalized

variance is 0.356) on average while investors in the retired category hold 6.89 stocks (the


average normalized variance is 0.302). Using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test we find that the


                                                19
distributions of the 3 diversification measures for the non-professional and retired categories

                                                p
are significantly different from one other ( -value        < 0.01).   The average diversification level


of investor portfolios in the professional category falls in between the average diversification


level of non-professional and retired categories and again, the differences in distributions are


                          p
statistically significant ( -value   < 0.01).
   As shown earlier, there is a positive relationship between the degree of diversification

and performance. Consistent with our earlier results, we find that the average risk-adjusted


performance (Sharpe ratio) during the 1991-96 period for the non-professional category has


                     .                                                        .
the lowest value (0 321) and it is highest for the retired category (0 398). The Sharpe ratio

                                     .
for the professional category is 0 373. The performance differences between these 3 categories


are statistically significant at 0.05 level.




Income

The third demographic variable we consider is income. We investigate the variations in diver-


sification across different income categories because income may be a proxy for information


or education level. We divide investors into 3 broad income groups: (i) low income category:


the annual income is less than $30,000, (ii) medium income category: the annual income is

between $ 40000 and $ 75,000, and (iii) high income category: the annual income is above than


$75,000. Table V reports the average diversification measures for these 3 income categories


during 1991-93 and 1993-96 sub-periods. During the 1991-93 sub-period, the diversification

differences across income categories are not statistically significant. However, during the 1994-


96 sub-period, the degree of diversification is higher for the high income category. The low


income category holds on average of 4.71 stocks while the average number of stocks held by


investors in the high income category is 5.84.           Using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test we find

that the distributions of low income and high income categories are significantly different from


             p
each other ( -val   < 0.01).   Other diversification measures show a similar variation and yield


                                                    20
statistically significant differences.




IV.C Regression Results

Our results so far suggest that degree of portfolio diversification varies cross-sectionally across


age, occupation and income. To measure the relative impact of age, income and occupation

on the degree of portfolio diversification, we estimate a regression specification with dummy


variables where we control for both portfolio size and trading frequency (portfolio turnover


rate). The functional specification estimated is:



                  DIVi    =   b + b (PortfSize ) + b
                              0     ps             i        pt                          b
                                                                 (PortfTurnoveri ) + a (Agei )


                          +   b (IncDummy1 ) + b
                              id1              i         id2   (IncDummy2i )


                          +   b (JobDummy1 ) + b
                              jd1               i           jd2   (JobDummy2i ) +   i                         (5)



Here,   DIV   is the portfolio diversification measure (normalized portfolio variance),                  PortfSize

variable measures the size of investor portfolios,           PortfTurnover     is the monthly turnover rate


(the mean of monthly buy and sell turnover rates) which measures the frequency of trading, and


Age   is the age of the head of the household. The two income dummy variables,                         IncDummy1

and   IncDummy2,     correspond to the low and high income categories.                      Finally,   JobDummy1

and   JobDummy2     are the dummy variables for the non-professional and the retired occupation


categories respectively.


   The regression results are reported in Table VII. The sample is split into two sub-periods,

1991-93 and 1994-96, and the regression coefficients are estimated for each of these two 3-


year sub-periods. During the 1991-93 sub-period, the coefficients are positive and statistically


significant for   PortfTurnover, IncDummy1         and      JobDummy1       and negative and significant for


PortfSize, Age,    and   JobDummy2.      During the 1994-96 sub-period, this sign pattern for the

coefficient estimates is maintained. The coefficient of             IncDummy2    is positive but insignificant


during the 1991-93 sub-period but negative and significant during the 1994-96 sub-period.


                                                       21
     These regression results reinforce the results documented earlier. The coefficient estimate

of   PortfSize   has a negative sign which suggests that the normalized variance is lower for larger


portfolios, i.e., larger portfolios are better diversified. In Figure 8 we illustrated a negative


relationship between the degree of portfolio diversification and trading frequency. A positive


coefficient for the   PortfTurnover variable confirms this earlier result.   Investors who trade more

often hold relatively less diversified portfolios. The coefficient for the    Age   variable is negative


and this supports the result in Figure 9 where we illustrate a positive relationship between age


and diversification.


     The effect of income on diversification is captured by the two income dummy variables.


A positive value for the coefficient of     IncDummy1     suggests that low income investors have

higher portfolio variance relative to the medium income investors and hence they are less


diversified. In contrast, the coefficient on the dummy variable for high income (IncDummy3)


is negative which suggests that high income investors hold more diversified portfolios relative


to the medium income group investors.


     Finally, we find that the coefficients of   JobDummy1     is positive and significant while the


coefficient of    JobDummy2    is negative and significant during both the sub-periods. This pro-

vides evidence that investors in both professional and retired categories hold better diversified


portfolios compared with the non-professional category.         Furthermore, the group of retired


investors hold the most diversified portfolios.




V      Trading Behavior of Investor Groups and Market Returns


In order to analyze the impact of trading behavior of investor groups on asset prices, we first


classify investors into diversified and undiversified groups using the average correlation between

stocks in the portfolio as a measure of diversification. The investors in the bottom quartile


are identified as diversified while those in the top quartile are identified as undiversified. The


                                                   22
remaining investors are identified as unclassified. Next, we construct a daily and a monthly

buy-sell imbalance (BSI) time-series for diversified and undiversified investor groups.                                               The


normalized buy-sell imbalance for time-period                     t is defined as:
                                                           Nbt V B −  st V S
                                                            bt V B +  st V S
                                                                                      N
                                                            i=1           it          i=1       it
                                               BSIt =                                                                                  (6)
                                                            N                         N
                                                            i=1           it          i=1       it


where

    N   bt          =       Number of stocks purchased by the investor group during time-period ,                                 t
    N   st          =       Number of stocks sold by the investor group during time-period ,                             t
    VB       it     =       Buy volume of stock   i during time-period t, and
    VS      it      =       Sell volume for stock i during time-period t.


The strength of the contemporaneous relationship between flows and market returns is esti-


mated using the following regression specification:


                               rmt =     α+β   u (BSIut )   +    β (BSI
                                                                  d            dt )   +    t = 1, 2, . . . , T
                                                                                           t                                           (7)


Here,   r
        mt                                                            t
                  is the return of the market in period , BSIut is the buy-sell imbalance in period                                   t for
the undiversified investor group, BSIdt is the buy-sell imbalance in period                                       t for the diversified
investor group, and            t   is the error term.


   The contemporaneous relationship is estimated using both daily and monthly BSI time-

series. The regression results are reported in Table VII (Panel A). At the monthly frequency,


both the coefficients,              β
                               β , are negative (β = −0.136, β = −0.062). However, only
                                     u   and   d                               u                     d


one of the coefficients, namely, β , is statistically significant (t-values are −2.83 and −1.22
                                                   u


respectively). Qualitatively similar results are obtained when the regression specification is


estimated using daily data. At the daily frequency, again, both the coefficients,                                            β
                                                                                                                             u   and   β,d


are negative (β = −0.382, β = −0.278) and both the coefficients are statistically significant
                        u                  d


(t-values are −5.34 and −2.59 respectively).

    The evidence that both coefficients, β and β , are negative at daily as well as monthly
                                                             u                 d


frequencies suggests that the diversified and undiversified investor groups behave as contrar-


                                                                      23
      ians. This is consistent with the findings of other recent studies that have used the investor

      database8 . More importantly, we find that β > β  and the magnitude of the t-value for
                                                         u        d


      β is larger than the magnitude of the t-value for β . This suggests that the trading behavior
        u                                                     d


      of undiversified investors is more strongly correlated with the market returns.           To test the


      robustness of our results, we divide the 6-year sample period into two 3-year sub-periods and

      estimate the strength of contemporaneous relationship between flows and market returns in


      each of the two sub-periods. The results are reported in Table VII (Panels B and C). Once


      again, we find that    β < 0, β < 0,  β > β , and  t > t  for both the sub-periods
                              u       d         u        d            u       d


      and at both daily and monthly frequencies.


            These results suggest that the trading behavior (measured using BSI) of the group of


      undiversified investors is more strongly correlated with the market returns and the group of


      undiversified investors is likely to be the more salient of the two investor groups. The salience of

      the undiversified group of investors provide support to recent studies (Goyal and Santa-Clara


      2001, Malkiel and Xu 2002) that posit that idiosyncratic risk is priced in equilibrium.




      VI       Summary and Conclusion

      An examination of the portfolios of more than 40, 000 equity investment accounts from a large


      discount brokerage during a six year period (1991-96) in recent U.S. capital market history


      revealed that a vast majority of investors are under-diversified.           Over time, the degree of


      diversification among investor portfolios has improved but these improvements result primarily

      from changes in the correlation structure of the US equity market. Investors are certainly aware


      of the benefits of diversification but they appear to adopt a “naive” diversification strategy


      where they hold portfolios with several stocks but without giving proper consideration to the

      correlations among the stocks. In addition to the lack of proper diversification that results

   8 Barber   and Odean (2001), Hirshleifer, Myers, Myers, and Teoh (2002), and Hong and Kumar (2002) document
that individual investors behave as contrarians around different types of public announcement events and market-wide
news events.




                                                        24
from inappropriate stock selection, investor hold under-diversified portfolios due to an illusory

sense of control which makes them over-confident.       A significant group of investors in our


sample believe that they can earn superior performance by active trading and consequently


they choose not to hold well-diversified portfolios. Cross-sectional variations in diversification


across demographic groups suggest that investors in low income and non-professional categories

hold the least diversified portfolios.   In addition, we find that young, active investors are


over-focused and they are more inclined to hold under-diversified portfolios. Analyzing the


relationship between the trading behavior of investor groups and market returns, we find that

the trading behavior of the group of undiversified investors is more strongly correlated with


the market returns and hence, the undiversified investor group is likely to be the more salient


of the two investor groups.   Overall, our results indicate that investors realize the benefits


of diversification but they face a daunting task of “implementing” and maintaining a well-

diversified portfolio.


   What implications do the widespread presence of under-diversified portfolios have for asset-


pricing? If investors diversify “naively”, they may falsely believe that they hold diversified

portfolios and as a result the perception of market risk will vary across investors. Consequently,


investors are likely to demand different amounts of risk compensation for holding stocks, in


accordance with their heterogeneous but mistaken beliefs. If the degree of under-diversification


among the investors in our sample is a good representation of the level of diversification among

the investor population in the market, asset-pricing models should be calibrated to take into


account the level of under-diversification among the investor population.      Empirical results


have already started to emerge (Goyal and Santa-Clara 2001, Malkiel and Xu 2002) which

suggest that idiosyncratic risk is in fact priced in equilibrium.




                                               25
References
Barber, Brad, and Terrance Odean, 2001, All that glitters: The effect of attention and news on


  the buying behavior of individual and institutional investors, Working Paper, Haas School


  of Business, University of California at Berkeley, November 2001.


Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard H. Thaler, 2001, Naive diversification strategies in retirement


  saving plans,   American Economic Review     91, 79—98.


Bertaut, Carol C., 1998, Stockholding behavior of us households: Evidence from 1983-1989


  survey of consumer finances,   Review of Economics and Statistics     80, 263—275.


Blume, Marshall E., and Irwin Friend, 1975, The asset structure of individual portfolios and

  some implications for utility functions,   Journal of Finance   30, 585—603.


Cohn, Richard A., Wilbur G. Lewellen, Ronald C. Lease, and Gary G. Schlarbaum, 1975,


  Individual investor risk aversion and investment portfolio composition,        Journal of Finance

  30, 605—620.


DeBondt, Werner, 1998, A portrait of the individual investor,     European Economic Review      42,


  831—844.


Gentry, William M., and R. Glenn Hubbard, 2000, Entrepreneurship and household saving,


  Working Paper, Columbia Business School, July 2000.


Goetzmann, William N., Lingfeng Li, and K. Geert Rouwenhorst, 2001, Long-term global


  market correlations, Working Paper International Center for Finance, Yale School of Man-


  agement, May 2001.


Goyal, Amit, and Pedro Santa-Clara, 2001, Idiosyncratic risk matters, Working Paper, An-


  derson Graduate School of Management, UCLA, November 2001.


Guiso, L., T. Japelli, and D. Terlizze, 1996, Income risk, borrowing constraints and portfolio


  choice,   American Economic Review   86, 158—172.


                                                26
Heaton, John, and Deborah Lucas, 2000, Portfolio choice and asset prices: the importance of

  entrepreneurial risk,   Journal of Finance   55, 1163—1198.


Hirshleifer, David A., James N. Myers, Linda A. Myers, and Siew H. Teoh, 2002, Do individual


  investors drive post-earnings announcement drift?, Working Paper, January 2002.


Hong, Dong, and Alok Kumar, 2002, What induces noise trading around public announcement


  events?, Working Paper, Department of Economics, Cornell University, February 2002.


Huberman, Gur, 2001, Familiarity breeds investment,       Review of Financial Studies   14, 659—680.


Kelly, Morgan, 1995, All their eggs in one basket: Portfolio diversification of us households,


  Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization          27, 87—96.


King, Mervyn, and Jonathan Leape, 1987, Asset accumulation, information and life cycle,


  Journal of Financial Economics     29, 97—112.


Kroll, Yoram, Haim Levy, and Amnon Rapoport, 1988, Experimental tests of the separation


  theorem and the capital asset pricing model,        American Economic Review   78, 500—519.


Langer, Ellen J., 1975, The illusion of control,   Journal of Personality and Social Psychology

  32, 311—328.


Malkiel, Burton G., and Yexiao Xu, 1997, Risk and return revisited,          Journal of Portfolio

  Management     23, 9—14.


       , 2002, Idiosyncratic risk and security returns, Working Paper, School of Management,


  University of Texas at Dallas, January 2002.


Merton, Robert C., 1987, A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete in-

  formation,   Journal of Finance   42, 483—510.


Moskowitz, Tobias J., and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2001, The returns to entrepreneurial


  investment: A private equity premium puzzle?,         American Economic Review   Forthcoming.


                                                 27
Odean, Terrance, 1999, Do investors trade too much?,     American Economic Review     89, 1279—

  1298.


Perraudin, W.R.M., and Bent E. Sorensen, 2000, The demand for risky assets: Sample selection

  and household portfolios,   Journal of Econometrics   97, 117—144.


Press, William H., Saul A. Teukolsky, William T. Vetterling, and Brian P. Flannery, 1992,

  Numerical Recipes in C: The Art of Scientific Computing, Second Edition      (Cambridge Uni-


  versity Press, Cambridge, UK.).


Rode, David, 2000, Portfolio choice and perceived diversification, Working Paper, Department


  of Social and Decision Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University.


Shefrin, Hersh M., and Meir Statman, 2000, Behavioral portfolio theory,     Journal of Financial

  and Quantitative Analysis   35, 127—151.


Souleles, Nicholas S., 2001, Household portfolio choice, transaction costs, and hedging motives,


  Working Paper, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, September 2001.


Statman, Meir, 1987, How many stocks make a diversified portfolio?,     Journal of Financial and

  Quantitative Analysis   22, 353—363.


Thaler, Richard H., 1985, Mental accounting and consumer choice,       Marketing Science   4, 199—


  214.


Uhler, R.S., and J.G. Cragg, 1971, The structure of the asset portfolios of households,    Review

  of Economic Studies   38, 341—357.




                                              28
                                                 Table I
                                       The Investor Database
This table summarizes the characteristics of the households in our sample. The primary dataset consists
of trades and monthly portfolio positions of investors at a ma jor discount brokerage house in the U.S. for
the period of 1991-96.   The database consists of three types of data files: (i) position files that contain
the end-of-month portfolios of all investors, (ii) a trade file that contains all transactions carried out
by the investors in the database, and (iii) a demographics file that contains information such as age,
gender, marital status, income code, occupation code, geographical location (zip code), etc. for a subset
of investors.




  Time Period:                                                                     Jan. 1991 - Nov. 1996.


                                               Panel A: Households
  Number of households:                                                            79, 995
  Number of accounts:                                                              158, 031
  Number of households with position in equities:                                  62, 387
  Number of households with 5 or more trades:                                      41, 039


                                      Panel B: Household Characteristics
  Aggregate value of investor portfolios in a typical month:                       $2.48 billion
  Average size of investor portfolios:                                             $35,629 (Median = $13,869)
  Average number of trades:                                                        41 (Median = 19)
  Average number of stocks in the portfolio:                                       4 (Median = 3)
  Average age of the household:                                                    50 (Median = 48)


                                                 Panel C: Securities
  Total number of traded common stocks:                                            10, 486
  Number of common stocks for which data is available from CRSP:                   9, 893


                                                  Panel D: Trades
  Total number of trades:                                                          2, 886, 912
  Number of trades in common stocks:                                               1, 854, 776
  Number of trades in common stocks executed by the households:                    1, 677, 547
  Number of trades in stocks traded on NYSE, NASDAQ and AMEX:                      1, 546, 016
  Average Portfolio Turnover:                                                      7.59% (Median: 2.53%)
  Average Holding Period:                                                          187 trading days (Median = 95)




                                                     29
                                               Table II
  Most Widely Held and Most Actively Traded Stocks in our Investor Database
This table reports (a) 20 most widely held stocks and (b) 20 most actively traded stocks in our investor
database. The relative holding strength is computed using the end of month portfolio position data.




     Company              Relative Holding Strength Company                       Num of Trades
     IBM                                1.00                  IBM                       26343
     AT&T                               0.73                  Intel                     20566
     Wal-Mart                           0.72                  Merck                     19377
     Merck                              0.64                  Wal-Mart                  16734
     Glaxo                              0.54                  Microsoft                 15156
     Micron                             0.53                  Micron                    12950
     Boeing                             0.44                  Apple                     12435
     Philip Morris                      0.40                  Motorola                  10884
     Bristol Myers                      0.37                  Philip Morris             10513
     PG&E Corp                          0.35                  Cisco                      9703
     Ford                               0.34                  Ford                       9702
     General Electric                   0.33                  Compaq                     9694
     Pepsico                            0.33                  General Motors             9637
     General Motors                     0.33                  Novell                     9234
     GTE Corp                           0.32                  Chrysler                   9173
     Exxon                              0.31                  K-Mart                     8912
     Pacific Telesis                    0.30                  Home Depot                 8821
     Coca Cola                          0.30                  Charles Schwab             8700
     Bellsouth                          0.30                  AMD                        8568
     Citicorp                           0.28                  Boeing                     8445




                                                  30
                                                   Table III
        Aggregate Level Diversification Characteristics of Investor Portfolios
This table summarizes the aggregate level diversification characteristics of investor portfolios over time.
The normalized variance and the average correlation of the portfolios are estimated using past 5 years of
monthly returns data. The normalized variance of a portfolio is defined as:

                                               
                     NVEWP σ̄σp2
                               2
                                       1           N −  
                                                     1     cov
                                                               
                                                                 N−   1              1
                             =     =
                                       N   +
                                                    N    σ̄2 N    N=       +              corr



where corr is the average correlation among the stocks in the portfolio.




                                                Panel A: Percent of Portfolios
      N(stocks)         1991               1992       1993        1994         1995                      1996
           1             33.02             29.71           27.88               27.06             26.75   25.50
           2             20.55             19.60           18.65               17.91             17.99   17.37
           3             13.51             13.59           13.14               13.03             12.50   12.01
           4             8.86              9.20            9.50                9.46              9.36    9.30
           5             6.11              6.55            6.87                6.87              6.70    6.59
         6-10            12.36             14.49           15.56               16.26             16.81   17.40
         11-15           3.28              3.93            4.80                5.18              5.30    6.13
       Over 15           2.31              2.93            3.59                4.23              4.59    5.70


                                  Panel B: Normalized Portfolio Variance
      N(stocks)         1991          1992       1993         1994       1995                            1996
           2             0.645             0.612           0.601               0.589             0.570   0.563
           3             0.508             0.470           0.459               0.443             0.417   0.407
           4             0.441             0.397           0.385               0.366             0.337   0.329
           5             0.396             0.347           0.338               0.322             0.293   0.278
         6-10            0.355             0.300           0.291               0.267             0.234   0.218
         11-15           0.309             0.246           0.239               0.217             0.182   0.163
       Over 15           0.291             0.224           0.220               0.192             0.151   0.130


                     Panel C: Average Correlation among                    Stocks in the Portfolio
      N(stocks)         1991               1992            1993              1994        1995            1996
           2             0.323             0.251           0.228               0.203             0.160   0.146
           3             0.312             0.250           0.231               0.203             0.157   0.143
           4             0.314             0.251           0.233               0.202             0.154   0.143
           5             0.314             0.246           0.231               0.202             0.158   0.139
         6-10            0.325             0.259           0.245               0.210             0.161   0.139
         11-15           0.329             0.260           0.249               0.214             0.165   0.140
       Over 15           0.341             0.271           0.264               0.224             0.168   0.143


                                                      31
                                               Table IV
                        Diversification across Occupation Categories.
This table reports the three diversification measures for the three broad occupation categories.      The
non-professional category consists of blue-collar workers, sales and service workers, and clerical workers
while the professional job category includes investors who hold technical and managerial positions. The
three diversification measures reported are: (i) the normalized portfolio variance, (ii) the average number
of stocks in a portfolio, and (iii) the sum of the squared portfolio weights.




                   Panel A: Time Period: 1991-93
                               Diversification Measures 
      Job Category    Avg Norm Var Avg N(stocks) Avg w2                                 i

      Non-Professional               0.467                  3.55                0.584
      Professional                   0.441                  4.25                0.546
      Retired                        0.413                  5.41                0.478


                   Panel B: Time Period: 1994-96
                               Diversification Measures 
      Job Category    Avg Norm Var Avg N(stocks) Avg w2                                 i

      Non-Professional               0.356                  4.56                0.530
      Professional                   0.324                  5.57                0.479
      Retired                        0.302                  6.89                0.416




                                                    32
                                                Table V
                             Diversification across Income Levels.
This table reports the three diversification measures for the three broad income categories.    The three
diversification measures are: (i) the normalized portfolio variance, (ii) the average number of stocks in a
portfolio, and (iii) the sum of the squared portfolio weights.




                           Panel A: Time Period: 1991-93
                                          Diversification Measures 
  Income Level                    Avg Norm Var Avg N(stocks) Avg w2                        i

  Low (Less than 40,000)                   0.431                  4.33             0.547
  Medium (40,000 - 75,000)                 0.442                  4.22             0.540
  High (Above 75,000)                      0.447                  4.24             0.551


                           Panel B: Time Period: 1994-96
                                          Diversification Measures 
  Income Level                    Avg Norm Var Avg N(stocks) Avg w2                        i

  Low (Less than 40,000)                   0.335                  4.71             0.523
  Medium (40,000 - 75,000)                 0.317                  5.45             0.485
  High (Above 75,000)                      0.308                  5.84             0.459




                                                    33
                                        Table VI
                         Determinants of Degree of Diversification
This table reports the results from the following pooled regression with dummy variables:

                     DIVi = b0 + bps (PortfSizei ) + bpt (PortfTurnoveri ) + ba (Agei )
                            + bid1 (IncDummy1i ) + bid2 (IncDummy2i )
                            + bjd1 (JobDummy1i ) + bjd2 (JobDummy2i ) + i
DIV is the portfolio diversification measure (normalized portfolio variance), PortfSize variable measures
the size of investor portfolios, PortfTurnover is the monthly turnover rate (the mean of monthly buy
and sell turnover rates) which measures the frequency of trading, and Age is the age of the head of
the household. The two income dummy variables, IncDummy1 and IncDummy2, correspond to the low
and high income categories. Finally, JobDummy1 and JobDummy2 are the dummy variables for the
non-professional and the retired occupation categories respectively.

                                       N = 9797 R̄2 = 0.0458
                                                   ,                        N = 5632, R̄2 = 0.0451
                                             1991-93                               1994-96
  Variable                            Coefficient t-value                   Coefficient t-value
  Intercept                                6.29             45.21                5.94           32.66


  Portfolio Size                          -0.013            -11.77              -0.010          -8.64
  Portfolio Turnover                       0.507            12.01                0.554          9.12


  Investor Age                            -0.254            -9.55               -0.239          -6.72


                         ,
  Income: Less than 40 000                 1.537            2.48                 2.722          1.94
  Income: More than 75 000   ,             0.210            0.33                -1.245          -1.96


  Occupation: Non-Professional             3.019            3.37                 3.859          3.22
  Occupation: Retired                     -1.301            -2.39               -1.790          -2.43




                                                       34
                                                  Table VII
Trading Behavior of Diversified and Undiversified Investor Groups and Market Returns
  This table reports the results from the following regression:


                            r   mt   =+ βu (BSIut ) + βd (BSIdt ) + t t = 1, 2, . . . , T
                                         α

  rmt is the return of the market in period t, BSIut is the buy-sell imbalance in period t for the undiversified
  investor group, BSIdt is the buy-sell imbalance in period t for the diversified investor group, and t is the
  error term. Using the average correlation between stocks in the portfolio as a measure of diversification,
  the investors in the top diversification quartile are identified as diversified while those in the bottom
  diversification quartile are identified as undiversified. Panel A reports the results for the entire 1991-96
  sample period while Panels B and C report the coefficient estimates for the two sub-samples, 1991-93
  and 1994-96, respectively.

              Panel A: Time Period: 1991-96
        Frequency      α     βu      βd                         R̄2
        Daily           0.059 -0.382 -0.278                 0.029
                        (3.59) (-5.34) (-2.59)
        Monthly         0.008 -0.136 -0.062                 0.208
                        (1.69) (-2.83) (-1.22)


                 Panel B: Time Period: 1991-93
        Daily           0.065 -0.387 -0.209                 0.026
                        (2.42) (-3.52) (-1.92)
        Monthly         0.006 -0.165 -0.051                 0.208
                        (0.66) (-2.39) (-0.60)


                 Panel C: Time Period: 1994-96
        Daily           0.056 -0.375 -0.256                 0.029
                        (2.65) (-4.00) (-1.69)
        Monthly         0.011 -0.123 -0.063                 0.145
                        (1.80) (-1.87) (-1.21)




                                                       35
                                                                           Figure 1
                                               Investor Portfolios Relative to the Market Portfolio
                       This figure shows the positions of investor portfolios relative to the market portfolio (and the Capital
                       Market Line). Two monthly time-periods are chosen in the first half of the sample period (February 1991
                       and June 1993) and two of them are chosen in the second half of the sample period (September 1995 and
                       June 1996). The past 5 years of monthly returns data is used to estimate the means and the standard
                       deviations of the market portfolio and investor portfolios.    The riskfree rate corresponds to the 90-day
                       T-Bill rate.




                                            Time Period: 9102                                         Time Period: 9306
                                      Investors above CML = 9.53%                               Investors above CML = 10.55%
                       5                                                               5
                                                        Capital Mkt Line
Exp Monthly Ret (%)




                               Mkt Portf

                       0 Rf                                                            0




                      −5                                                              −5
                           0               5      10         15        20                  0      5         10         15           20

                                            Time Period: 9509                                         Time Period: 9606
                                      Investors above CML = 20.15%                              Investors above CML = 13.96%
                       5                                                               5
Exp Monthly Ret (%)




                       0                                                               0




                      −5                                                              −5
                           0               5      10         15        20                  0      5         10         15           20
                                       Monthly Std Dev (%)                                        Monthly Std Dev (%)




                                                                              36
                                                     Figure 2
               Variance of Investor Portfolios Relative to a Set of Randomly Chosen Portfolios
      This figure shows the normalized variance of actual investor portfolios and 1500 randomly chosen port-
      folios (the benchmark portfolios) during the month of June 1996. Similar results are obtained for other
      months during our 1991-96 sample period.




                                                   Time Period: 9606
                      0.7




                      0.6




                      0.5
Normalized Variance




                      0.4




                      0.3


                                                                 Actual Investor Portfolios
                      0.2


                                     Randomly Chosen Portfolios
                      0.1




                       0
                            0   2    4         6             8          10          12         14          16
                                    Average Number of Stocks in the Portfolio




                                                        37
                                                                     Figure 3
                                                            Diversification over Time
          The figure shows the variations in investor portfolio characteristics over time. The top figure shows the
          average number of stocks in investor portfolios and the normalized variance of their portfolios over time
          while the bottom figure shows the extra variance taken by the investor portfolios relative to a set of
          randomly chosen portfolios.




                                      7                                                                      0.5


                                 6.5
Num of Stocks in the Portfolio




                                                                                                                    Normalized Variance of EWP
                                                                                                             0.45
                                      6
                                                                                             Num of Stocks

                                 5.5
                                                                                                             0.4

                                      5

                                                                                                             0.35
                                 4.5

                                                                                             Norm Var
                                      4
                                                                                                             0.3
                                 3.5


                                      3                                                                      0.25
                                          Jan 91   Jan 92   Jan 93     Jan 94    Jan 95   Jan 96




                                     80

                                     75
     Extra Norm. Var. (in Percent)




                                     70

                                     65

                                     60

                                     55

                                     50

                                     45

                                     40

                                     35

                                     30
                                          Jan 91   Jan 92   Jan 93     Jan 94    Jan 95   Jan 96
                                                            Time (Jan 1991 − Nov 96)


                                                                        38
                                                                  Figure 4
                                      Correlation Structure of the US Equity Market Over Time
     This figure shows the variation in the correlation structure of the US equity market during the 1991-96
     time period. Each month 2000 portfolios containing upto 10 stocks are formed by selecting stocks ran-
     domly from the available list of stocks. Using the historical monthly returns data the portfolio correlation
     matrix is estimated and the average correlation among the stocks in the portfolio is computed. Finally,
     the average correlation for the month is obtained by taking the average across the 2000 randomly chosen
     portfolios. The monthly average correlations are also computed using the actual investor portfolios.




                       0.4



                      0.35



                       0.3
Average Correlation




                      0.25


                                                                                   Actual Investor Portfolios
                       0.2



                      0.15


                                             Randomly Chosen Portfolios
                       0.1



                      0.05



                        0
                             Jan 91         Jan 92       Jan 93           Jan 94    Jan 95        Jan 96
                                                       Time (Jan 1991 − Nov 1996)




                                                                     39
                                                                                                           Figure 5
                                                                                     Variation in Average Correlation
The figure shows the variation in average correlation across portfolios with different number of stocks.
The average correlations of investor portfolios containing                                                             k -stocks   and 1500 random portfolios with   k-
stocks are compared for                                                  k   = 2   , . . . , 15.   Two monthly time-periods are chosen, one in the first year of the
sample period (January 1991) and the other in the last year of the sample period (January 1996).




                                                                                                    Time Periods: 9101, 9601
                                                   0.45


                                                                                                             Actual Investor Portfolios
   Avg Correlation among Stocks in the Portfolio




                                                    0.4
                                                              9101

                                                   0.35

                                                                                                              Randomly Chosen Portfolios

                                                    0.3




                                                   0.25
                                                                                                               Actual Investor Portfolios


                                                    0.2
                                                              9601

                                                   0.15


                                                                                                               Randomly Chosen Portfolios
                                                    0.1
                                                          0          2                4                6           8          10           12        14        16
                                                                               Average Number of Stocks in the Portfolio




                                                                                                              40
                                                                      Figure 6
                               Diversification and the Position of Investor Portfolios Relative to the Market
                       This figure shows the positions of two types of investor portfolios relative to the market portfolio (and
                       the Capital Market Line): (a) portfolios with 1-3 stocks, (b) portfolios with 7 or more stocks. The results
                       are shown for September 1995 but similar results are observed during other monthly time-periods. The
                       past 5 years of monthly returns data is used to estimate the means and the standard deviations of the
                       market portfolio and investor portfolios. The riskfree rate corresponds to the 90-day T-Bill rate.




                                          Time Period: 9509                                                          Time Period: 9509
                                    Investors above CML = 16.95%                                               Investors above CML = 28.32%
                       5                                                                               5
                                               Capital Mkt Line
Exp Monthly Ret (%)




                                                                                Exp Monthly Ret (%)




                           Mkt Portf

                       0 Rf                                                                            0




                      −5                                                                              −5
                           0           5        10         15       20                                     0    5          10         15      20
                                       Monthly Std Dev (%)                                                      Monthly Std Dev (%)




                                                                           41
                                                    Figure 7
                                  Diversification and Portfolio Performance
     The figure shows the relationship between portfolio diversification (measured using the average number of
     stocks in the portfolio) and risk-adjusted portfolio performance (measured using Sharpe Ratio). Similar
     results are obtained if other measures of diversification (for example, normalized portfolio variance) are
     used.




                        0.6



                       0.55
                                                                                1994−96

                        0.5
Average Sharpe Ratio




                       0.45
                                                                                              1991−93

                        0.4



                       0.35



                        0.3



                       0.25



                        0.2
                              1     2       3          4           5        6−10      10−15       15+
                                    Average Number of Stocks in the Portfolio




                                                        42
                                                                            Figure 8
                                                            Diversification and Frequency of Trading
           This figure shows the relationship between portfolio diversification (measured using number of stocks
           in the portfolio) and the frequency of trading (measured using portfolio turnover).         Similar results are
           obtained if other measures of diversification (for example, normalized portfolio variance) and trading
           frequency (for example, number of days between trades) are used.




                                            0.6
                                                                                                                 1991−93
Average Sum of Squared Portfolio Weights




                                           0.55
                                                                                                                 1994−96




                                            0.5




                                           0.45




                                            0.4




                                           0.35
                                                  D1   D2       D3     D4     D5       D6   D7    D8   D9     D10
                                                                     Portfolio Turnover Deciles




                                                                               43
                                                                                          Figure 9
                                                                         Diversification and Investor Age
          This figure shows the relationship between portfolio diversification (measured using the average number
          of stocks in the portfolio) and investor age. Similar results are obtained if other diversification measures
          such as normalized portfolio variance or squared portfolio weights are used.




                                            0.6
Average Sum of Squared Portfolio Weights




                                           0.56




                                           0.52




                                           0.48


                                                                                                                                                  1991−93


                                           0.44

                                                                                                                                                  1994−96



                                            0.4
                                                  D1(26−36) D2(36−40) D3(40−42) D4(42−46) D5(46−48) D6(48−52) D7(52−56) D8(56−60) D9(60−70) D10(70−82)
                                                                                           Age Deciles




                                                                                              44
