                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             A NOTE ON INFLATION PERSISTENCE


                                              Steinar Holden
                                             John C. Driscoll


                                          Working Paper 8690
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8690


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2001




We are grateful to Olivier Blanchard, Jeff Fuhrer, Kai Leitemo, Asbjørn Rødseth, Øistein Røisland and Lars
Svensson for helpful comments on previous versions of the paper. However, none bear any responsibility
for the content of the paper. Steinar Holden is also grateful to NBER for the hospitality when this paper was
written. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Steinar Holden and John C. Driscoll. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
A Note on Inflation Persistence
Steinar Holden and John C. Driscoll
NBER Working Paper No. 8690
December 2001
JEL No. E31, E3, E5



                                              ABSTRACT


        Macroeconomists have for some time been aware that the New Keynesian Phillips curve, though
highly popular in the literature, cannot explain the persistence observed in actual inflation. We argue that
two of the more prominent alternative formulations, the Fuhrer and Moore (1995) relative contracting
model and the Blanchard and Katz (1999) reservation wage conjecture, are highly problematic. Fuhrer
and Moore (1995)’s formulation generates inflation persistence, but this is a consequence of their
assuming that workers care about the past real wages of other workers. Making the more reasonable
assumption that workers care about the current real wages of other workers, one obtains the standard
formulation with no inflation persistence. The Blanchard and Katz conjecture turns out to imply that
inflation depends negatively on itself lagged, i.e. the opposite of the empirical regularity.




Steinar Holden                                            John C. Driscoll
Department of Economics                                   Brown University
University of Oslo                                        Department of Economics
Box 1095 Blindern, 0317 Oslo, Norway                      Box B
steinar.holden@econ.uio.no                                Providence, RI 02912
http://folk.uio.no/~sholden/                              and NBER
                                                          John_Driscoll@brown.edu
                                                          http://econ.pstc.brown.edu/~jd
The short run relationship between inflation and unemployment, which has been highly

controversial for decades, is now even more puzzling. Much of the literature has

converged on one particular specification, the “New Keynesian Phillips curve”, based on

John Taylor (1980) and Guillermo Calvo (1983). Indeed, Bennett McCallum (1997) has

called it the “the closest thing there is to a standard formulation”. Richard Clairda, Jordi

Gali and Mark Gertler (1999) have used a version of it as the basis for deriving some

general principles about monetary policy. However, as has been recently pointed out by

N. Gregory Mankiw (2001): “Although the new Keynesian Phillips curves has many

virtues, it also has one striking vice: It is completely at odd with the facts.” Larry Ball

(1994) gave an early indication of this, by showing that this model predicts that an

anticipated disinflation is expansionary, which seemed inconsistent with the experiences

of many countries in the 1980s and 90s. More forcefully, Jeff Fuhrer and George Moore

(1995) showed that the model predicts stickiness in prices, but not in inflation, and thus is

unable to explain the inertia of actual inflation.

       The empirical failure of the standard formulation of the short-run aggregate

supply curve has led to a number of new models that do exhibit persistence in inflation.

One formulation, by Fuhrer and Moore (1995) (which they refer to as the relative

contracting model) has been widely used in the literature and in popular graduate text

books (e.g. Carl Walsh (1998), pp. 224-225, 460-467, 472-474, and David Romer (2001)

pp. 295-296). Another suggestion, by Olivier Blanchard and Larry Katz (1999), is that

inflation persistence may be explained by taking into account the dependence of workers’

reservation wages on past wages. A third route, adopted by John Roberts (1998) and Ball




                                                                                               2
(2000), is to apply different varieties of near-rational expectation formation, essentially a

form of adaptive expectations, to staggered wage-setting models.

          In this note we argue that the proposals by Fuhrer and Moore (1995) and

Blanchard and Katz (1999) are highly problematic. As a justification for their new model,

Fuhrer and Moore argue that agents care about relative real wages, and not about nominal

wages. We show that this motivation is misleading. Fuhrer and Moore’s model is based

on agents caring about the real wages that other workers obtained in the past. If Fuhrer

and Moore’s model were modified so that workers cared about the contemporaneous real

wages of other workers, which is arguably the more reasonable assumption, then the

model coincides with the standard formulation of Taylor (1980), and there is no inflation

persistence.1

          Blanchard and Katz do not formally model their point, but refer among other

things to that fact that unemployment benefits institutionally depend on previous wages,

suggesting that reservation wages will move with lagged wages. They conclude (page 73)

“that taking into account the dependence of the reservation wage on past wages holds a

key to understanding the dependence of inflation on itself lagged.” We propose two

alternative representations of their idea, and show that in contrast to the presumption by

Blanchard and Katz (1999), this idea implies that inflation depends negatively on itself

lagged.




                                                                                                3
The Fuhrer and Moore model

Consider the two-period framework used by Taylor (1980) and Fuhrer and Moore (1995).

Wages are set in contracts lasting for two periods. Contracts are staggered, so that half of

the contracts are set in each period. Let xt denote the log of the contract wage set in

period t. Prices are a constant unit markup over wages so that the log of the price index in

period t, pt, is the average of the contract wages negotiated in period t and period t-1.



    (1)    pt = ½ (xt + xt-1).



Taylor (1980) assumed that contract wages are set as a average of the lagged and the

expected future wage contracts, adjusted for excess demand yt.



    (2)    xt = ½ (xt-1 + Etxt+1) + kyt                        k > 0.



(2) can be rearranged to



    (3)    ∆xt = Et∆xt+1 + 2kyt,




1
  This paper is not the first to question the microfoundations of Fuhrer and Moore (1995);
c.f. Roberts (1998) and Taylor (1999). However, their arguments are different from ours.
Roberts’ criticism is that the model implies agents “are concerned about having a large
change in their nominal wage relative to inflation when employment is high. Hence, the
Fuhrer and Moore model “slips a derivative” relative to the conventional
microeconomics”. Taylor argues that the wage should be related to the price level over
the full contract period, a point already acknowledged by Fuhrer and Moore in their
appendix B.

                                                                                            4
where ∆xt ≡ xt – xt-1. First difference (1) to obtain the rate of inflation as:

                              1
    (4)        π t ≡ ∆p t =     (∆xt + ∆xt −1 ) .
                              2

Substituting out for (3) and (3) lagged in (4), we obtain



    (5)      πt = Etπt+1 + k(yt + yt-1)



Thus, as emphasized by Fuhrer and Moore (1995), in the Taylor model any persistence in

πt must derive from persistence in yt. In contrast, Fuhrer and Moore propose a new

contracting equation, where agents care about relative real wages:



    (6)      xt - pt = ½ (xt-1 - pt-1 + Et(xt+1 - pt+1)) + kyt.



Substituting the definition of xt in equation (6) into the price index equation (1), yields



    (7)      πt = ½ (πt-1 + Etπt+1) + (k/2) (yt + yt-1).



Thus, there is persistence in inflation, as lagged inflation enters with a positive

coefficient.

          To justify their model, Fuhrer and Moore (page 131) argue: “In the relative wage

specification, however, agents compare the real value of their wage contracts with the

real value of wage contracts previously negotiated and still in effect, and with contracts

expected to be negotiated over the duration of the contract period ..” However, this

justification is misleading. Presumably, the most natural interpretation of “the real value


                                                                                              5
of wage contracts previously negotiated that are still in effect” is xt-1 – pt, i.e. the nominal

wages set in the previous period evaluated at current prices. In contrast, according to (6),

agents care about xt-1 – pt-1, that is, the real wages that the other group of workers had in

the previous period.2

          Much more importantly, however, the assumption implicit in (6) is difficult to

defend theoretically. It is not difficult to explain why agents may compare their own real

wage with the real wage that other groups obtain at the same time, and many other

studies make this assumption (eg V. Bhaskar, 1990). However, it is harder to understand

why workers should compare their own real wage with the real wage other groups had

last period.

          To explore the consequences of the more reasonable assumption, that workers

care about the real wage other groups obtain at the same time, we substitute xt-1 - pt for

xt-1 - pt-1 in (6). Furthermore, we also make the theoretically preferable assumption that

the real wage to be determined is the expected real wage over the contract period, and not

the real wage in the first period of the contract period (as also argued by Fuhrer and

Moore, 1995, in their appendix B). Thus, we substitute xt – ½(pt + Etpt+1) for xt - pt on the

RHS of (6)3, to obtain



    (8)        xt – ½(pt + Etpt+1) = ½ (xt-1 - pt + Et(xt+1 - pt+1)) + kyt.




2
  Later in the paper, Fuhrer and Moore note (p. 141) that defining preferences over xt-1 –
pt-1 is “a convenient simplification”.
3
  Retaining xt - pt would not change the conclusion qualitatively.

                                                                                                6
However, it is immediate that (8) can be simplified to (2), that is, the standard framework

of Taylor (1980). Thus, the crucial feature of the model of Fuhrer and Moore is not that

agents care about relative real wages; indeed, the standard formulation of Taylor is

consistent with that. The crucial feature of the model of Fuhrer and Moore is that agents

are assumed to care about the real wages that other groups had in the previous period,

which is an assumption that is harder to justify.



Effect of past wages

From Fuhrer and Moore’s formulation one might also expect inflation persistence to be

generated if workers cared about their own past wages; this is the conjecture of

Blanchard and Katz (1999). One can think of various ways in which past wages may

affect the wage setting. Blanchard and Katz refer to the fact that unemployment benefits

depend on past wages. In a bargaining setting, the outcome might then depend on past

wages, through the effect of the unemployment benefits, as well as on the expected real

wages of other workers. Observe however that benefits are linked to past nominal wages,

while the real value depends on current prices. Thus, workers who negotiate in period t

had their past wages negotiated in period t-2, implying that real benefits depend on xt-2 –

pt. Extending the Taylor formulation to include this aspect suggests the following

formulation (where 0 < γ < 1):



                1                                        1−γ
   (9)      xt − ( pt + Et pt +1 ) = γ ( xt − 2 − pt ) +     (xt −1 − pt + Et [ xt +1 − pt +1 ]) + kyt .
                2                                         2



Substituting (1) in (9) and rearranging yield


                                                                                                      7
            2+γ                  2 −γ
    (10)        ∆xt = −γ∆xt −1 +      Et ∆xt +1 + kyt .
             4                     4



Using the definition of πt from (4) in (10), we obtain



                                 2 −γ
    (11)    ∆xt = −γ∆xt −1 +          Et π t +1 + yt .
                                   2



Using (4) and (11), we obtain



                               2 −γ
    (12)    π t = −γπ t −1 +        (Et π t +1 + Et −1π t ) + k ( yt + yt −1 ) .
                                 4                            2



Thus, the direct effect of lagged inflation is negative, the opposite of the inflation

persistence evident in data.4 As in the Taylor model, any persistence must derive from

persistence in yt. The intuition for the negative effect of lagged inflation is that high

inflation in period t-1 reduces the real value of the workers’ benefits’, and thus weakens

workers’ bargaining position. This dampens wage growth in period t, and consequently

lowers period t inflation.




4
  The negative direct effect of lagged inflation is the result of the negative effect of
lagged wage growth, as is evident from a comparison of (10) with the corresponding
Taylor equation (3).




                                                                                             8
   Past wages may also affect wage setting if workers’ aspirations in job search and

wage bargaining are shaped by their previous earnings, as also suggested by Blanchard

and Katz (1999). One justification for this, proposed by Tore Ellingsen and Steinar

Holden (1998), is that past expectations may affect wage setting via workers’ choice of

durable consumption goods. To see whether this idea may explain inflation persistence,

consider a formulation where the wage outcome depends on the real wages that the

workers had in the previous period, xt-2 – pt-1, as well as on the expected wages of other

workers:



                1                                           1−γ
   (13)     xt − ( pt + Et pt +1 ) = γ ( xt − 2 − pt −1 ) +     (xt −1 − pt + Et [ xt +1 − pt +1 ]) + kyt
                2                                            2



Substituting (1) in (13) and rearranging yield



            2 −γ        γ         2 −γ
   (14)          ∆xt = − ∆xt −1 +      Et ∆xt +1 + kyt .
              4         2           4



Using (4), (14) can be further rearranged to



                        γ                             2k
   (15)     ∆x t = −          ∆xt −1 + Et π t +1 +        yt .
                       2 −γ                          2 −γ



Using (4) and (15), we obtain




                                                                                                      9
                      γ                1
   (16)     πt = −          π t −1 +     (Etπ t +1 + Et −1π t ) + k ( yt + yt −1 ) .
                     2 −γ              2                         2 −γ

Again, we find negative direct effect of lagged inflation, the opposite of the inflation

persistence evident in the data.



Conclusions

Macroeconomists are faced with a puzzle: the standard theoretical formulation of the

short run aggregate supply curve seems to be an empirical failure. The standard

formulation exhibits stickiness in prices but not in inflation, in contrast with the

persistence in actual inflation. A number of alternative formulations have been proposed.

We argue that two of the more prominent ones, the Fuhrer and Moore (1995) relative

contracting model and the Blanchard and Katz (1999) reservation wage conjecture, are

highly problematic. Fuhrer and Moore (1995)’s formulation generates inflation

persistence, but this is a consequence of their assuming that workers care about the past

real wages of other workers. Once one replaces their formulation with the more

reasonable assumption that workers care about the current real wages of other workers,

the resulting formulation immediately reduces to the standard formulation with no

inflation persistence. To explore the Blanchard and Katz conjecture, we specify two

formulations where workers’ reservation wages depend on their own past wages (either

because unemployment insurance is related to own past wages or because the past real

wage has a more direct effect). We find that inflation depends negatively on itself lagged,

ie the opposite of the empirical regularity.

       This leaves open the question of how to generate inflation persistence in

contracting models. Recently, several different alternative types of explanations have


                                                                                            10
been proposed. Roberts (1998) and Ball (2000) have suggested models that relax the

assumption that expectations are rational. Estaban Jadresic (2000) proposes a staggered

price-setting model with a flexible distribution of price durations. Mankiw and Ricardo

Reis (2001) argue that information about macroeconomic conditions diffuses slowly

through the economy. In a companion paper (John Driscoll and Holden, 2001), we show

that inflation persistence may be caused by coordination problems associated with

workers being concerned about fair treatment, in the sense that they care

disproportionately more about being paid less than other workers than they do about

being paid more.




                                                                                          11
References
Ball, Laurence S. (2000). “Near-Rationality and Inflation in Two Monetary Regimes.”
NBER Working Paper No. 7988.

Bhaskar, V. (1990). “Wage relatives and the natural range of unemployment.” Economic
Journal 100, 60-66.

Blanchard, Olivier and Lawrence F. Katz (1999). “Wage dynamics: Reconciling theory
and evidence.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 69-74.

Calvo, Guillermo A. (1983). “Staggered prices in a utility maximizing framework”.
Journal of Monetary Economics 12, pp. 383-398.

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler (1999). “The Science of Monetary Policy:
A New Keynesian Perspective.” Journal of Economic Literature, XXXVII(4), pp. 1161-
1707.

Driscoll, John and Steinar Holden (2001). “Fair Treatment and Inflation Persistence.”
Mimeo, Brown University and University of Oslo.

Ellingsen, Tore and Steinar Holden (1998). “Sticky Consumption and Rigid Wages.” In
S. Brakman, H. van Ees and Kuipers (eds). Market Behaviour and Macroeconomic
Modelling. MacMillan Press Ltd.

Fuhrer, Jeffrey and Gerald Moore (1995). “Inflation persistence.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, CX, pp.127-160.

Jadresic, Estaban (2000). “Can Staggered Price Setting Explain Short-Run Inflation
Dynamics?” Mimeo, International Monetary Fund.

Mankiw, N. Gregory and Ricardo Reis (2001). “Sticky Information Versus Sticky Prices:
A Proposal to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve.” Mimeo, Harvard University.

Romer, David (2001). Advanced Macroeconomics. McGraw-Hill.

Roberts, John (1998). “Inflation expectations and the transmission of monetary policy.”
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Taylor, John. (1980). “Aggregate dynamics and staggered contracts.” Journal of Political
Economy LXXXVIII, pp. 1-24.

--------------- (1999). “Staggered wage and price setting in macroeconomics.” Chapter 15
in J. B. Taylor and M. Woodford (eds). Handbook of Macroeconomics. North-Holland.



                                                                                          12
Walsh, Carl (1998) Monetary Theory and Policy, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.




                                                                               13
