                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE EPIDEMIOLOGY OF MACROECONOMIC EXPECTATIONS


                                         Christopher D. Carroll


                                          Working Paper 8695
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8695


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2001




I am grateful to Jason Harburger, Jirka Slacalek, and Johanna Francis for excellent research assistance, to
Carl Christ, Bill Dickens, Daniel Leigh, Jennifer Manning, Serena Ng, John Roberts, and Martin Sommer,
for valuable feedback, and to Richard Kwok for guidance to the relevant epidemiology literature. The data,
econometric programs, and simulation programs that generated all of the results in this paper are available
on the author‘s website, http://www.econ.jhu.edu/people/carroll. The views expressed herein are those of
the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Christopher D. Carroll. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
The Epidemiology of Macroeconomic Expectations
Christopher D. Carroll
NBER Working Paper No. 8695
December 2001
JEL No. E0, E3



                                             ABSTRACT


        Since the foundational work of Keynes (1936), macroeconomists have emphasized the
importance of agents' expectations in determining macroeconomic outcomes. Yet in recent decades
macroeconomists have devoted almost no effort to modeling actual empirical expectations data, instead
assuming all agents' expectations are `rational.' This paper takes up the challenge of modeling empirical
household expectations data, and shows that a simple, standard model from epidemiology does a
remarkably good job of explaining the deviations of household inflation and unemployment expectations
from the `rational expectations' benchmark. Furthermore, a microfoundations or `agent-based' version
of the model may be able to explain, in a way that still permits aggregation, stark rejections of the pure
rational expectations framework like Souleles's (2002) finding that members of different demographic
groups have sharply different predictions for macroeconomic aggregates like the inflation rate.




Christopher D. Carroll
Department of Economics
The Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218-2685
and NBER
ccarroll@jhu.edu
1    Introduction
Ever since the foundation of macroeconomic theory by John Maynard Keynes (1936),
economists have understood that macroeconomic outcomes depend critically upon ex-
pectations about those outcomes. Keynes himself believed that in the short run,
economies could experience booms and busts that reﬂected movements in the ‘ani-
mal spirits’ of business leaders (a view that has some appeal at the current moment
of dot-com hangover), but the basis for most of today’s macro models was laid in the
‘rational expectations revolution’ of the 1970s. Led by Lucas, Sargent, Barro, and
others, this approach made a set of assumptions that were much stronger than ra-
tionality alone. In particular, the framework assumes that all agents in the economy
are not merely rational, but also share identical (correct) beliefs about the structure
of the economy, and have instantaneous and costless access to all the latest economic
data. Each agent combines these data with the true macroeconomic model to obtain
a forecast for the future path of the economy, on the assumption that all other agents
have identical beliefs and information (and therefore forecasts).
    This set of assumptions has turned out to be a powerful vehicle for macroeconomic
modeling, but has never been free from the criticism that it does not resemble the real
world of conﬂicting opinions and forecasts, workers (and even some business leaders)
who may not pay much attention to macroeconomic matters, and information that can
sometimes be costly to obtain and process. Rational expectations models also have
problems explaining some robust stylized facts, such as the apparent inexorability of the
tradeoﬀ between inﬂation and unemployment rate (see Ball (1994) or Mankiw (2001)).
Despite these problems, the rational expectations framework remains the dominant
approach in macro theory, partly because it tends to be mathematically more tractable
than alternatives that relax one or another of the framework’s assumptions.
    This paper proposes a tractable alternative framework for the formation of a typical
person’s expectations. Rather than having their own macroeconomic model and con-
stantly feeding it the latest statistics, typical people are assumed to obtain their views
about the future path of the economy from the news media. Furthermore (and im-
portantly), not every person pays close attention to all macroeconomic news; instead,
people are assumed to absorb the economic content of news reports probabilistically,
so that it may take quite some time for news of changed macroeconomic circumstances
to penetrate to all agents in the economy.
    Roberts (1998) and Mankiw and Reis (2001) have recently proposed aggregate
expectations equations that are mathematically very similar to aggregate implications
of the baseline model derived here. Roberts’s work was motivated by his separate
ﬁndings in Roberts (1995, 1997) that empirical macro models perform better in a
variety of dimensions when survey-based inﬂation expectations are used in place of
constructed model-consistent rational expectations. Mankiw and Reis (2001) obtain


                                            1
similar ﬁndings, and particularly emphasize the point that these models can explain
the inexorability of an inﬂation-unemployment tradeoﬀ much better than the standard
model with rational expectations does.
    However, neither Roberts (1998) nor Mankiw and Reis (2001) devoted much eﬀort
to explaining why the dynamics of aggregate expectations should evolve as they pro-
posed (though Roberts does oﬀhandedly suggest that his equation might result from
the diﬀusion of press reports). Mankiw and Reis motivate their model loosely by sug-
gesting that there are calculation and information-processing costs that must be paid
every time an agent updates his macroeconomic forecast; however, they do not pro-
vide an explicit processing-costs microfoundation, and indeed it seems unlikely that
any plausible assumption about information costs would lead to exactly the aggregate
equation they use.
    In contrast, I provide an explicit microfoundation for an aggregate expectations
equation, grounded in mathematically precise models from theoretical epidemiology.
Rather than tracking the spread of a disease through a population, the model will track
the spread of a piece of information (speciﬁcally, the information corresponding to the
latest rational forecast of inﬂation).
    The model’s foundation in epidemiology should prove fruitful, both because it has
novel direct implications of its own, and because the rich preexisting literature on
more complex models of the spread of disease may yield further important and testable
insights.1 For example, taking literally the proposition that exposure to news stories
is analogous to contact with an infectious agent leads to the hypothesis that during
periods when there is more news coverage of inﬂation, news should spread faster and
household expectations should be closer to rational expectations. These predictions are
tested and conﬁrmed using an index of the intensity of news coverage about inﬂation.
    The paper’s ﬁnal contribution is to relate the model to the burgeoning literature on
agent-based modeling and social networks that has been pioneered, among other places,
at the Santa Fe Institute and the Center for Social and Economic Dynamics (CSED)
at the Brookings Institution. The agent-based modeling approach is useful here for
two reasons. First, this approach permits tests of the robustness of the baseline model;
using agent-based simulations it is straightforward to explore a variety of plausible
alternative assumptions about the spread of information that do not yield the simple
analytical equation for the dynamics of aggregate expectations obtained for the baseline
model. The main ﬁnding in these explorations is that the equation implied by the
baseline model is a good approximation to the dynamics of aggregate expectations
under several alternative assumptions about the information transmission process. The
second advantage of the agent-based approach is that it generates agent-level statistics
that can be compared to the household-level survey data (heretofore mostly neglected)
from which the aggregate expectations indexes are constructed. As a large literature
  1
      For another example of the application of epidemiological models to economics see Kremer (2000).


                                                   2
over the last decade has shown, the ability to test aspects of a macro model with micro
data can enrich both micro and macroeconomics. Here, I show that the qualitative
pattern of the changes in the cross-household standard deviation of expectations in the
data roughly matches the predictions of the model (though the level of the standard
deviation is greater in the data than in the baseline model).


2     The Epidemiology of Expectations
2.1    A Special Case of the Kermack-McKendrick Model
Epidemiologists have developed a rich set of models for the transmission of disease in a
population. The baseline framework is called the Kermack-McKendrick (1927) model.
This model consists of a set of assumptions about who is susceptible to the disease,
who among the susceptible becomes infected, and whether and how individuals recover
from the infection (leading to an alternate designation as the ‘SIR’ framework).
    The standard assumption for the discrete-time Kermack-McKendrick/SIR model is
that a susceptible individual who is exposed to the disease in a given period has a ﬁxed
probability p of catching the disease. Designating the set of newly infected individuals
in period t as Nt and the set of susceptible individuals as St ,

                                      Nt = pSt .                                      (1)

    The next step is to determine susceptibility. The usual assumption is that in order
to be susceptible, a healthy individual must have contact with an already-infected
person. In a population where each individual has an equal probability of encountering
any other person in the population (a ‘well-mixed’ population), the growth rate of the
disease will depend upon the fraction of the population already infected; if very few
individuals are currently infected, the small population of diseased people can infect
only a small absolute number of new victims.
    However, there is a special case that is even simpler. This occurs when the disease is
not spread person-to-person, but through contact with a ‘common source’ of infection.
The classic example is Legionnaire’s disease, which was transmitted to a group of
hotel guests via a contaminated air conditioning system. Another application is to
illness caused by common exposure to an environmental factor such as air pollution.
In these cases, the transmission model is extremely simple: Any healthy individual is
simply assumed to have a constant probability per period of becoming infected from
the common source. This is the case we will examine, since below we will assume that
news reports represent a ‘common source’ of information available to all members of
the population.



                                            3
    One further assumption is needed to complete the model: The probability that
someone who is infected will recover from the disease. The simplest possible assumption
(which we will use) is that infected individuals never recover.
    Under this set of assumptions, the dynamics of the disease are as follows. In the ﬁrst
period, proportion p of the population catches the disease, leaving (1 − p) uninfected.
In period 2, proportion p of these people catch the disease, leading to a new infection
rate of p(1 − p) and to a fraction p + p(1 − p) of the population being infected. Spinning
this process out, it is easy to see that starting from period 0 at the beginning of which
nobody is infected, the total proportion infected at the end of t periods is
                 Fraction Ill = p + p(1 − p) + p(1 − p)2 . . . + p(1 − p)t                     (2)
                                  t
                              = p    (1 − p)s                                                  (3)
                                       s=0

whose limit as t → ∞ is p/p = 1, implying that (since there is no recovery) everyone will
eventually become infected. In the case where ‘infection’ is interpreted as reﬂecting an
agent’s knowledge of a piece of information, this simply says that eventually everyone
in the economy will learn a given piece of news.
    The last section of the paper explores a richer epidemiological model in which diease
is spread person-to-person as well as through contact with the news media. And further
extensions are possible, and would probably prove interesting; as an illustration of some
of the possibilities, see Kremer (2000).

2.2     The Epidemiology of Inﬂation Expectations
Now consider a world where most people form their expectations about future inﬂation
by reading newspaper articles. Imagine for the moment that every newspaper inﬂation
article contains a complete forecast of the inﬂation rate for all future quarters, and sup-
pose (again momentarily) that any person who reads such an article can subsequently
recall the entire forecast. Finally, suppose that at any point in time t all newspaper
articles print identical forecasts.
    Assume that not everybody reads every newspaper article on inﬂation. Instead,
reading an article on inﬂation is like becoming infected with a common-source disease:
In any given period each individual faces a constant probability λ of becoming ‘infected’
with the latest forecast by reading an article. Individuals who do not encounter an
inﬂation article simply continue to believe the last forecast they read about.2
    Call πt+1 the inﬂation rate between quarter t and quarter t + 1,
                                 πt+1 = log(pt+1 ) − log(pt ),                                 (4)
   2
    This is mathematically very similar to the Calvo (1983) model in which ﬁrms change their prices
with probability p.


                                                4
where pt is the aggregate price index in period t. If we deﬁne Mt as the operator that
yields the population-mean value of inﬂation expectations at time t and denote the
Newspaper forecast printed in quarter t for inﬂation in quarter s ≥ t as Nt [πs ], by
analogy with equation (2) we have that

       Mt [πt+1 ] = λNt [πt+1 ] + (1 − λ) {λNt−1 [πt+1 ] + (1 − λ) (λNt−2 [πt+1 ] + . . . )}
                                                                                               (5)

    The derivation of this equation is as follows. In period t a fraction λ of the popula-
tion will have been ‘infected’ with the current-period newspaper forecast of the inﬂation
rate next quarter, Nt [πt+1 ]. Fraction (1 − λ) of the population retains the views that
they held in period t−1 of period t+ 1’s inﬂation rate. Those period-t−1 views in turn
can be decomposed into a fraction λ of people who encountered an article in period
t − 1 and obtained the newspaper forecast of period t + 1’s forecast, Nt−1 [πt+1 ], and a
fraction (1 − λ) who retained their period-t − 2 views about the inﬂation forecast in
period t + 1. Recursion leads to the remainder of the equation.
    This expression for inﬂation expectations is identical to the one proposed by Mankiw
and Reis (2001).3 Mankiw and Reis loosely motivate the equation by arguing that de-
veloping a full-blown inﬂation forecast is a costly activity, which people might therefore
engage in only occasionally.
    It is undoubtedly true that developing a reasonably rational quarter-by-quarter
forecast of the inﬂation rate arbitrarily far into the future would be a very costly
enterprise for a typical person (for example, it might require obtaining an economics
Ph.D. ﬁrst!). If this were really what people were doing, one might expect them to
make forecasts only very rarely indeed.
    However, reading a newspaper article about inﬂation, or hearing a news story on
television or the radio, is not costly in either time or money. There is no reason to
suppose that people need to make forecasts themselves if news reports provide such
forecasts essentially for free. Thus the epidemiological derivation of this equation seems
considerably more attractive than the loose calculation-costs motivation provided by
Mankiw and Reis, both because this is a fully speciﬁed model and because it delivers
further testable implications (for example, if there is empirical evidence that people
with higher levels of education are more likely to pay attention to news, the model
implies that their inﬂation forecasts will on average be closer to the rational forecast;
see below for more discussion of possible variation in λ across population groups).
    Of course, real newspaper articles do not contain a quarter-by-quarter forecast of
the inﬂation rate into the inﬁnite future as assumed in the derivation of (5), and even
if they did it is very unlikely that a typical person would be able to remember the
   3
     It is also similar to a formulation estimated by Roberts (1997), except that Roberts uses past
realizations of the inﬂation rate rather than past rational forecasts.



                                                 5
detailed pattern of inﬂation rates far into the future. In order to relax these unrealistic
assumptions it turns out to be necessary to impose some structure on households’
implicit views about the inﬂation process.
    Suppose people believe that at any given time the economy has an underlying “fun-
damental” inﬂation rate. Furthermore, suppose people believe that future changes in
the fundamental rate are unforecastable; that is, after the next period the fundamental
rate follows a random walk. Furthermore, suppose the person believes that the actual
inﬂation rate in a given quarter is equal to that period’s fundamental rate plus an
error term t which reﬂects unforecastable transitory inﬂation shocks (reﬂected in the
‘special factors’ that newspaper inﬂation stories often emphasize). Thus, the person
believes that the inﬂation process is captured by
                                      πt = πtf + t                                           (6)
                                     f
                                    πt+1 = πtf + ηt+1                                        (7)
                                     f      f
                                    πt+2 = πt+1 + ηt+2                                       (8)
                                     ...
where t is a transitory shock to the inﬂation rate in period t while ηt is the permanent
innovation in the fundamental inﬂation rate in period t. We further assume that
consumers believe that values of η beyond period t + 1, and values of beyond period
t, are unforecastable white noise variables; that is, future changes in the fundamental
inﬂation rate are unforecastable, and transitory shocks are expected to go away.4
    Before proceeding it is worth considering whether this is a plausible view of the
inﬂation process; we would not want to build a model on an assumption that people
believe something patently absurd. Certainly, it would not be plausible to suppose that
people always and everywhere belive that the inﬂation rate is characterized by (6)-(8);
for example, Ball (2000) shows that in the US from 1879-1914 the inﬂation rate was not
persistent in the US, while in other countries there have been episodes of hyperinﬂation
(and rapid disinﬂation) in which views like (6)-(8) would have been nonsense.
    However, the relevant question for the purposes of this paper is whether this view of
the inﬂation process is plausible for the period for which I have inﬂation expectations
data. Perhaps the best way to examine this is to ask whether the univariate statistical
process for the inﬂation rate implied by (6) and (7) is strongly at odds with the actual
univariate inﬂation process. In other words, after allowing for transitory shocks, does
the inﬂation rate approximately follow a random walk?
    The appropriate statistical test is an augmented Dickey-Fuller test. Table 1 presents
the results from such a test. The second row shows that even with more than 160 quar-
ters of data it is not possible to reject at a 5 percent signiﬁcance level the proposition
  4
     Note that we are allowing people to have some idea about how next quarter’s fundamental rate
may diﬀer from the current quarter’s rate, because we did not impose that consumers’ expectations
of ηt+1 must equal zero.


                                               6
                       Lags    Degrees of Freedom         ADF Test Statistic
                        0             166                       3.59∗∗∗
                        1             165                       2.84∗
                        2             164                       2.28

This table presents results of standard Dickey-Fuller and Augmented Dickey-Fuller tests for the pres-
ence of a unit root in the core rate of inﬂation (results are similar for CPI inﬂation). The column
labelled ‘Lags’ indicates how many lags of the change in the inﬂation rate are included in the re-
gression. With zero lags, the test is the original Dickey-Fuller test; with multiple lags, the test is an
Augmented Dickey Fuller test. In both cases a constant term is permitted in the regression equation.
The sample is from 1959q3 to 2001q2 (quarterly data from my DRI database begin in 1959q1. In order
to have the same sample for all three tests, the sample must be restricted to 1959q3 and after.) One,
two, and three stars indicate rejections of a unit root at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and one percent
thresholds. RATS code generating these and all other empirical results is available at the author’s
website.

Table 1: Dickey-Fuller and Augmented Dickey-Fuller Tests for a Unit Root in Inﬂation

that the core inﬂation rate follows a random walk with a one-period transitory com-
ponent - that is, it is not possible to reject the process deﬁned by (6)-(8).5 When the
transitory shock is allowed to have eﬀects that last for two quarters rather than one,
it is not possible to reject a random walk in the fundamental component even at the
10 percent level of signiﬁcance (the last row in the table).
    Note that the unit root (or near unit root) in inﬂation does not imply that future
inﬂation rates are totally unpredictable, only that the history of inﬂation by itself
is not very useful in forecasting future inﬂation changes (beyond the disappearance
of the transitory component of the current period’s shock). This does not exclude
the possibility that current and lagged values of other variables might have predictive
power. Thus, this view of the inﬂation rate is not necessarily in conﬂict with the vast
and venerable literature showing that other variables (most notably the unemployment
rate) do have considerable predictive power for the inﬂation rate (see Staiger, Stock,
and Watson (2001) for a recent treatment).
    Suppose now that rather than containing a forecast for the entire quarter-by-quarter
future history of the inﬂation rate, newspaper articles simply contain a forecast of the
inﬂation rate over the next year. This is not an implausible assumption; newspaper
articles on inﬂation (which are usually published the day after inﬂation statistics are
released) often contain interviews with expert forecasters, who are frequently asked
   5
     The near-unit-root feature of the inﬂation rate in the post-1959 period is well known to inﬂation
researchers; some authors ﬁnd that a unit root can be rejected for some measures of inﬂation over
some time periods, but it seems fair to say that the conventional wisdom is that at least since the
late 1950s inﬂation is ‘close’ to a unit root process. See Barsky (1987) for a more complete analysis,
or Ball (2000) for a more recent treatment.



                                                   7
for their forecasts of future inﬂation rates. The most common such forecast is for the
inﬂation rate over the next year. It is not implausible, therefore, to suppose that at
least part of what readers take away from such stories is a sense of what to expect for
the average inﬂation rate over the next year.
    The next step is to ﬁgure out how such a one-year forecast for inﬂation can be inte-
grated into some modiﬁed version of equation (5). To capture this, we must introduce
a bit more notation. Deﬁne πs,t as the inﬂation rate between periods s and t, converted
to an annual rate. Thus, for example, in quarterly data we can deﬁne the inﬂation rate
for quarter t + 1 at an annual rate as
                                πt,t+1 = 4(log pt+1 − log pt )                                            (9)
                                       = 4πt+1                                                           (10)
where the factor of four is required to convert the quarterly price change to an annual
rate.
   Our hypothetical person’s view is that the true ex-post inﬂation rate over the next
year will be given by
       πt,t+4 = πt+1 + πt+2 + πt+3 + πt+4                                                                (11)
                  f                    f                   f                  f
               = πt+1 +       t+1   + πt+2 +      t+2   + πt+3 +       t+3 + πt+4   +   t+4              (12)
                    f                    f                             f
               =   πt+1   +   t+1   +   πt+1   + ηt+2 +     t+2   +   πt+1 + ηt+2   + ηt+3 +   t+3   +
                    f
                   πt+1   + ηt+2 + ηt+3 + ηt+4 +            t+4 .                                        (13)
     To proceed, it will be necessary to consider people’s expectations about future
inﬂation rates. Deﬁne Ft [•s ] as the agent’s forecast (expectation) as of date t of •s , for
an agent who updates his views from a news report in period t. Using this notation,
the assumptions we made earlier about the stochastic processes for and η imply that
Ft [ t+n ] = Ft [ηt+n+1 ] = 0 for all n > 0.
     Applying the Ft operator to both sides of (13) implies that the person’s forecast of
the inﬂation rate over the next year is simply equal to four times his forecast of the
fundamental inﬂation rate for next quarter:
                                                             f
                                        Ft [πt,t+4 ] = 4Ft [πt+1 ]                                       (14)
                                                                 f
                                                    =       Ft [πt,t+1 ]                                 (15)
    Now for an important conclusion: If people believe that the forecasts printed in
the newspaper also embody the same view of the inﬂation process embodied in (6)-
(8), then an identical analysis leads to the conclusion that (deﬁning the ‘newspaper
expectations’ operator Nt similarly to the consumer’s expectations operator):
                                                             f
                                        Nt [πt,t+4 ] = 4Nt [πt+1 ]                                       (16)
                                                                 f
                                                    =       Nt [πt,t+1 ]                                 (17)


                                                        8
    Thus, the newspaper forecast contains only a single important piece of informa-
tion about the future: a projection of the fundamental inﬂation rate over the next
year, which the unit root theory implies is the expected fundamental rate in all of
the year’s constituent quarters and all subsequent quarters as well. A consumer who
reads the newspaper in period t, therefore, will update his expectations to equal the
corresponding newspaper forecasts:
                                                  f              f
               Ft [πt,t+1 ] = Ft [πt,t+4 ] = Ft [πt,t+4 ] = Nt [πt,t+4 ] = Nt [πt,t+4 ].          (18)

   The rightmost equality holds because the consumer assumes the newspaper has
no information about t+n or ηt+n+1 , so for n > 0, Nt [ t+n ] = Nt [ηt+n+1 ] = 0. The
next equality to the left holds because we assume that when the consumer reads the
newspaper his views are updated to the views printed in the newspaper. The other
two equalities similarly hold because Ft [ t+n ] = Ft [ηt+n+1 ] = 0.
   Now note a crucial point: the assumption that changes in the inﬂation rate beyond
period t + 1 are unforecastable means that

                                 Ft−1 [πt−1,t+3 ] = Ft−1 [πt,t+4 ]                                (19)
                                 Ft−2 [πt−2,t+2 ] = Ft−2 [πt,t+4 ]                                (20)
                                             ...                                                  (21)

   Now note that an equation similar to (5) can be written for projections of the
inﬂation rate over the next year:

   Mt [πt,t+4 ] = λFt [πt,t+4 ] + (1 − λ) {λFt−1 [πt,t+4 ] + (1 − λ) (λFt−2 [πt,t+4 ] + . . . )} ,

and substituting (19)-(21) into this equation and replacing Ft with Nt on the assump-
tion that the newspaper forecasts are the source of updating information, we obtain

Mt [πt,t+4 ] = λFt [πt,t+4 ] + (1 − λ) {λFt−1 [πt−1,t+3 ] + (1 − λ) (λFt−2 [πt−2,t+2 ] + . . . )}
             = λFt [πt,t+4 ] + (1 − λ)Mt−1 [πt−1,t+3 ]                                       (22)
             = λNt [πt,t+4 ] + (1 − λ)Mt−1 [πt−1,t+3 ].                                      (23)

    That is, mean measured inﬂation expectations for the next year should be a
weighted average between the current ‘rational’ (or newspaper) forecast and last
period’s mean measured inﬂation expectations. This equation is therefore directly
estimable, assuming an appropriate proxy for newspaper expectations can be con-
structed.6
   6
    This equation is basically the same as equation (5) in Roberts (1998), except that Roberts proposes
that the forecast toward which household expectations are moving is the ‘mathematically rational’
forecast (and he simply proposes the equation without examining the underlying logic that might
produce it).


                                                  9
   Readers uncomfortable with the strong assumptions needed to derive (23) may be
happier upon noting that the equation
                    Mt [πt,t+4 ] = λNt [πt,t+4 ] + (1 − λ)Mt−1 [πt,t+4 ]             (24)
can be derived without any assumptions on consumers’ beliefs about the inﬂation pro-
cess; the diﬀerence between (23) and (24) is only in the subscript on the π term inside
the Mt−1 operator. The assumptions made above were those necessary to rigorously
obtain Mt−1 [πt,t+4 ] = Mt−1 [πt−1,t+3 ]. In practice, however, even a much more realistic
view of the inﬂation process would likely imply a very high degree of correlation be-
tween the period-t−1 projection of the inﬂation rate over the year beginning in quarter
t and the period-t − 1 projection of the inﬂation rate over the year beginning in quarter
t + 1. Indeed, three of out of the four quarters (t + 2, t + 3, and t + 4) are identical
between the two projections; the only diﬀerences between the two measures would have
to spring from the consumer’s projection of the diﬀerence between the inﬂation rates
in quarters t + 1 and t + 5.


3    Estimation
Estimating equation (23) requires us to identify data sources for population-mean
inﬂation expectations and for ‘newspaper’ forecasts of inﬂation over the next year.
    The University of Michigan conducts a monthly survey of households that is in-
tended to be representative of the population of the United States. One component
of the survey asks households what they expect the inﬂation rate to be over the next
year (for details on the exact questions, and the controls for question validity, see
Curtin (1996)). I will directly use the mean inﬂation forecast from this survey as my
proxy for Mt [πt,t+4 ].
    Identifying the ‘newspaper’ forecast for next-quarter inﬂation might seem more
problematic, but there is a surprisingly good candidate: The median four-quarter inﬂa-
tion forecast from the Survey of Professional Forecasters (henceforth, SPF). The SPF,
currently conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia and previously a joint
product of the National Bureau of Economic Research and the American Statistical
Association, has collected and summarized forecasts from leading private forecasting
ﬁrms since 1968. The survey instrument is distributed once a quarter, just after the
middle of the second month of the quarter, and responses are due within a couple
of weeks. The survey asks participants for quarter-by-quarter forecasts, spanning the
current and next 5 quarters, for a wide variety of economic variables, including GDP
growth, various measures of inﬂation including CPI inﬂation, and the unemployment
rate. For more details on the SPF, see Croushore (1993).
    As noted above, the typical newspaper article on inﬂation interviews some ‘experts’
on inﬂation. The obvious candidates for such experts are the set of people who forecast


                                            10
the economy for a living, so the pool of interviewees is likely to be approximately the
same group of forecasters whose views are summarized by the SPF. Hence, it seems
reasonable to identify Nt with the SPF inﬂation expectations data.

3.1     Do the Forecasts Forecast?
There is a substantial existing literature on the forecasting performance of various
survey measures of inﬂation expectations including the Michigan Survey and the SPF.
Early papers (Turnovsky (1970), Bryan and Gavin (1986)) claimed to ﬁnd statistically
signiﬁcant biases in some survey measures of expected inﬂation, but a recent review
paper by Croushore (1998) shows that some of those results were spurious (due to
improper treatment of the data or econometric problems), and that none of the results
hold up when the sample period is updated to include data for the last 10 or 15 years.
Croushore speciﬁcally examines both the Michigan survey and the SPF, and ﬁnds no
evidence of bias over the entire sample for either survey. In most respects he ﬁnds the
SPF a better forecaster of inﬂation outcomes than the Michigan survey.7
    For the purposes of this paper, there are two important ‘sniﬀ-test’ questions that
should be addressed before attempting formal estimation of the model (23). First, do
both the Michigan and SPF survey measures of inﬂation expectations have statistically
signiﬁcant ability to predict future inﬂation? And, second, is the SPF forecast better
in some sense than the Michigan forecast, as assumed in the model?
    As a ﬁrst step, consider the implications of the statistical test performed in Table 1,
which was unable to reject the hypothesis that inﬂation has a unit root. The high serial
correlation in the inﬂation rate discovered by the unit root test means that future
levels of the inﬂation rate will be highly predictable based on the recent past history
of inﬂation. The interesting question is therefore whether the survey forecasts have
predictive power for the future inﬂation rate beyond what could be predicted based on
past inﬂation data.
   7
    Unfortunately, the well-known recent survey paper by Thomas (1999) largely neglects the SPF,
and focuses instead mainly on comparisons of the Michigan survey and the Livingston survey. Thomas
ﬁnds the median of the Michigan survey to be a better forecaster than the mean, but my model delivers
predictions only for the mean and not for the median, so I neglect the Michigan median in my empirical
work. See the appendix to Roberts (1997) for more evidence on the ineﬃciency of the Michigan survey.




                                                 11
                                    Dependent Variable: πt,t+4
  Constant       πt−4,t−1           Mt [πt,t+4 ]         St [πt,t+4 ]              DW Stat        R̄2
   0.070          0.083                0.732                                        0.46         0.52
  (0.526)        (0.145)              (0.204)∗∗∗
   0.480        −0.220                                      1.036                     0.52       0.64
  (0.323)        (0.153)                                  (0.161)∗∗∗
   0.437        −0.219                 0.027                1.015                     0.52       0.64
  (0.545)        (0.152)              (0.261)             (0.241)∗∗∗

                              Dependent Variable: πt+4,t − πt−2,t−1
  Constant                    Mt [πt,t+4 ] − πt−2,t−1 St [πt,t+4 ] − πt−2,t−1      DW Stat        R̄2
  −0.760                               1.005                                        0.60         0.73
   (0.158)∗∗∗                         (0.140)∗∗∗
  −0.263                                                       1.252                  0.45       0.77
   (0.131)∗∗                                                  (0.140)∗∗∗
  −0.440                               0.360                   0.854                  0.43       0.78
   (0.189)∗∗                          (0.239)                 (0.219)∗∗∗


Mt [πt,t+4 ] is the period-t mean of the Michigan survey measure of household expectations for inﬂation
over the next year. St [πt,t+4 ] is the period-t mean of the Survey of Professional Forecasters forecast
of the inﬂation rate over the next year. πt−2,t−1 is the inﬂation rate between quarter t − 2 and t − 1,
expressed at an annual rate. The column labelled DW Stat reports the Durbin-Watson statistic.
All equations were estimated over the 1981q3 to 2000q2 period for which both Michigan and SPF
inﬂation forecasts are avvailable. Errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation using
a Newey-West (1987) procedure (a Bartlett modiﬁed kernel) with 4 lags. Results were not sensitive to
alternative lag length choices. One, two, and three stars indicate, respectively, statistical signiﬁcance
at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels.

                Table 2: Forecasting Power Of Michigan and SPF Indexes

    To answer this question, Table 2 presents a regression of the actual inﬂation rate
over the next year on the Michigan and SPF measures of expected inﬂation, along with
the most recent annual inﬂation statistic available at the time the SPF and Michigan
forecasts were made. Both measures have highly statistically signiﬁcant predictive
power for future inﬂation even controlling for the inﬂation rate’s recent past history,
but the SPF measure has substantially more predictive power.8 Both measures of inﬂa-
tion expectations remain highly statistically signiﬁcant even controlling for previously
   8
    Actually, quarter t − 1’s inﬂation rate is included among the regressors even though it is not
known until about the middle of the ﬁrst month of quarter t, so about a sixth of the people whose
views are summarized in the Michgian survey cannot have known πt−1 . This makes it harder for


                                                   12
known inﬂation rates, and the ‘horserace’ regression results indicate that the Michigan
survey measure contains no information that is not also included in the SPF measure,
while the SPF forecast has highly statistically signiﬁcant predictive power that is not
contained in the Michigan survey.9
    An alternative, and more stringent, test of the predictive power of the surveys is
whether they can predict the change in the inﬂation rate. Under the assumption that
the fundamental inﬂation rate follows the unit root process outlined in equations (6) to
(8) (which was consistent with the empirical tests from Table 1), the diﬀerence between
the inﬂation rate over the coming year and the most recently published quarterly
inﬂation statistic is (cf. (13))

πt,t+4 − πt−2,t−1 =      4 Ft [πt ] + 4ηt+1 + 3ηt+2 + 2ηt+3 + ηt+4 +              t+1   +   t+2   +   t+3   +   t+4
                       −4(Ft−1 [πt−1 ] + t−1 )
                     = 4ηt + 4ηt+1 + 3ηt+2 + 2ηt+3 + ηt+4
                       + t+1 + t+2 + t+3 + t+4 − 4 t − 4 t−1

   Earlier we assumed that people believe that professional forecasters have some
knowledge of t , ηt , and ηt+1 , so even under the assumption that the inﬂation process
has a unit root this equation tells us that there should be a substantial component
of predictability in the change in the inﬂation rate. Furthermore, we have thus far
made no assumptions about what the professional forecasters actually know about
the future; for example, they may use the unemployment rate to forecast changes in
inﬂation. Thus, there is even more scope for the SPF than for the Michigan survey to
predict changes in the inﬂation rate.
   Results from regressions of πt,t+4 − πt−2,t−1 on the two survey forecasts of inﬂation
are presented in the next three rows of table 2. Again, both survey measures have
highly statistically signiﬁcant explanatory power for the change in the inﬂation rate,
and again the SPF forecast wins the horserace by a big margin.10
   In sum, all these results are qualitatively what would be expected from the model as
described above: the forecast from the survey of households has signiﬁcant predictive
the Michigan survey to be statistically signiﬁcant because the lagged inﬂation statistic has an unfair
advantage since it incorporates information some surveyed people could not have known; the survey
is signiﬁcant despite this handicap. This issue does not arise with the SPF forecast because πt−1 has
been reported by the time the SPF survey is conducted.
    9
      Technical considerations suggest that it might be more appropriate to include several lags of
quarterly inﬂation rates as the control variables for past inﬂation rates in the regressions reported in
table 2. When this is done the results remain substantially the same. Results for the annual inﬂation
rate are reported because they are less cumbersome to present. Quarterly results are available from
the author, or can be generated by running the set of RATS programs available on the author’s web
page that generated all empirical results in this paper.
   10
      Similar results are obtained when last quarter’s inﬂation rate is replaced by the inﬂation rate over
the year leading up to the previous quarter.


                                                   13
power for future inﬂation, but the SPF forecast has much more power.
    Of course, a ﬁnding that the SPF forecast is better than the Michigan forecast does
not necessarily imply that the SPF forecast is fully rational. It remains possible that
inﬂation forecasts could have been constructed that were even better than those of the
SPF. However, Croushore (1998) shows that it would have been diﬃcult to improve
upon the SPF forecasts using information that was available at the time the SPF fore-
casts were made.11 Furthermore, from the standpoint of the model the appropriate
measure of Nt [πt,t+1 ] is what people might actually be able to read about in a news-
paper or hear about in a news report on television. Since the Survey of Professional
Forecasters is designed to incorporate forecasts from the leading macroeconomic fore-
casters in each period, it is likely that the economists who are contacted by journalists
writing about inﬂation will be the same people contributing their forecasts to the SPF.
If this is true, the SPF forecast would be the right one to use for our purposes even if
there were systematic biases in its forecasts.

3.2     Estimating the Stickiness of Inﬂation Expectations
We can now turn to the main question, which is whether the Michigan forecast can be
reasonably well represented as a distributed lag of the SPF forecast; that is, whether
(23) provides a good empirical description of the dynamics of the Michigan survey’s
measure of household inﬂation expectations.
  11
    Croushore points out an important ﬂaw in previous studies of the rationality of forecasts; previous
authors regressed inﬂation outcomes on information that was available at the time the SPF forecasts
were made, and concluded that any ﬁnding of statistical signiﬁcance indicated a failure of rationality.
But such a test implicitly assumes that rationality means that forecasters should have known in
advance not just that a data realization had occurred, but also the eﬀects that that realization should
have on future inﬂation rates. For example, it supposes that ‘rational’ forecasters in 1973 would
have known the precise eﬀects oil shocks would have on subsequent inﬂation rates. But no similar
experience existed upon which forecasters could base their forecasts, so ﬁnding ex post that an oil
shock variable is statistically signiﬁcant does not imply that forecasters were irrational not to have
predicted its eﬀects ex ante.




                                                  14
    Estimating Mt [πt,t+4 ] = α0 + α1 St [πt,t+4 ] + α2 Mt−1 [πt−1,t+3 ] + α3 Pt [πt−5,t−1 ] +        t


                                                                      Durbin-                        Test
                                                                 2
  Eqn           α0           α1         α2          α3         R̄     Watson       StdErr          p-value
 Memo:        4.34                                            0.00     0.29         0.88            α0 = 0
             (0.19)∗∗∗                                                                              0.000
     1                     0.36        0.66                   0.76      1.97         0.43        α1 + α2 = 1
                          (0.09)∗∗∗   (0.08)∗∗∗                                                     0.178
     2                     0.27        0.73                   0.76      2.12         0.43         α1 = 0.25
                          (0.07)∗∗∗   (0.07)∗∗∗                                                     0.724
     3        1.22         0.51        0.26                   0.84      1.74         0.35           α0 = 0
             (0.20)∗∗∗    (0.08)∗∗∗   (0.09)∗∗∗                                                     0.000
     4                     0.49        0.67       −0.15      0.79       2.26         0.40     α1 + α2 + α3 = 1
                          (0.09)∗∗∗   (0.08)∗∗∗    (0.05)∗∗∗                                        0.199
     5        1.26         0.50        0.25         0.01     0.84       1.72         0.35           α3 = 0
             (0.27)∗∗∗    (0.08)∗∗∗   (0.11)∗∗     (0.05)                                           0.814
     6                                 1.02       −0.04      0.71       2.63         0.47        α2 + α3 = 1
                                      (0.04)∗∗∗    (0.05)                                           0.239
Mt [πt,t+4 ] is the Michigan household survey measure of mean inﬂation expectations in quarter t,
St [πt,t+4 ] is the Survey of Professional Forecasters mean inﬂation forecast; Pt is the published inﬂation
rate for the most recent one-year period. All equations are estimated over the period 1981q3 to 2000q2
for which both Michigan and SPF inﬂation forecasts are available. All standard errors are corrected
for heteroskedasticity and serial correlation using a Newey-West procedure (a Bartlett kernel) with
four lags. Results are not sensitive to the choice of lags.

                    Table 3: Estimating and Testing the Baseline Model

    To provide a baseline for comparison, the ﬁrst line of Table 3 presents results for the
simplest possible model: that the value of the Michigan index of inﬂation expectations
Mt [πt,t+4 ] is equal to a constant, α0 . By deﬁnition the R̄2 is equal to zero; the standard
error of the estimate is 0.88. The last column of the table is reserved for reporting
the results of various tests that will be conducted as the analysis progresses. By
way of example, the test performed for the benchmark expectations-constant model is
whether the average value of the expectations index is zero, α0 = 0. Unsurprisingly,
this nonsensical proposition can be rejected with an overwhelming degree of statistical
conﬁdence, as indicated by a p-value that says that the probability that the proposition
is true is zero.
    We begin to examine the baseline model’s ability to explain the Michigan data by
estimating
                         Mt [πt,t+4 ] = α1 St [πt,t+4 ] + α2 Mt [πt−1,t+3 ] + νt ,                   (25)


                                                    15
where St [πt,t+4 ] is the corresponding SPF forecast. Comparing this to (23) provides
the testable restriction that α2 = 1 − α1 or, equivalently,

                                      α1 + α2 = 1.                                  (26)

    Results from the estimation of (25) are presented as equation 1 in Table 3. The point
estimates of α1 = 0.36 and α2 = 0.66 suggest that the restriction (26) is very close to
holding true, and the last column presents formal statistical evidence on the question:
It shows the statistical signiﬁcance with which the proposition that α1 + α2 = 1 can be
rejected. The p-value indicates that the restriction is easily accommodated by the data
at the conventional level of signiﬁcance of 0.05 or greater. Estimation results when the
restriction is imposed in estimation are presented in the next row of the table, which
provides our ﬁrst unambiguous estimate of the crucial coeﬃcient: λ = 0.27. Note that
the Durbin-Watson statistic indicates that there is no evidence of serial correlation
in the residuals of the equation (a Q-test yields the same result), which is impressive
because the individual series involved have very high degrees of serial correlation (cf.
the unit root tests in table 1 and the Durbin-Watson statistics in table 2). This is
evidence that the two variables are cointegrated, as would be expected if one were a
distributed lag of the other.
    The point estimate λ = 0.27 is remarkably close to the value of 0.25 assumed
by Mankiw and Reis (2001) in their simulation experiments; unsurprisingly, the last
column for equation 2 indicates that the proposition α1 = λ = 0.25 is easily accepted
by the data. This indicates that in each quarter, only about one fourth of households
have a completely up-to-date forecast of the inﬂation rate over the coming year. On
the other hand, this estimate also indicates that only about 32 percent (= (1 − 0.25)4 )
of households have inﬂation expectations that are more than a year out of date.
    As noted above, Roberts (1998) estimated a similar equation, except that his pro-
posal was that expectations move toward the mathematically rational forecast of in-
ﬂation. Since such a forecast is unobservable, he used the actual inﬂation rate and
instrumented using a set of predetermined instruments, on the usual view that if the
instruments are valid the estimation should yield an unbiased estimate of the coeﬃcient
on the true but unobservable rational forecast. However, this procedure is problematic
if there was anything that the ‘rational’ forecaster did not know about the structure of
the economy and had to learn from realizations over time; as Roberts acknowledges, it
is also problematic if the structure of the economy changes over time. A further draw-
back to this approach is that instrumenting can cause a severe loss of eﬃciency. Since
the theory proposed here is quite literally that household expectations move toward
the SPF forecast, there is no reason to instrument. In the end, however, Roberts’s pa-
rameter estimates are similar to those obtained here, though considerably less precise.
    Intutitively it might seem that if almost 70 percent of agents have inﬂation expec-
tations that are of a vintage of a year or less, the behavior of the macroeconomy could


                                           16
not be all that diﬀerent from what would be expected if all expectations were com-
pletely up-to-date. The surprising message of Roberts (1997, 1995) and Mankiw and
Reis (2001) is that this intuition is wrong. Mankiw and Reis show that an economy
with λ = 0.25 behaves in ways that are sharply diﬀerent from an economy with fully
rational expectations (λ = 1), and argue that in each case where behavior is diﬀerent
the behavior of the λ = 0.25 economy corresponds better with empirical evidence (for
example with respect to the eﬀect of interest rate shocks on aggregate output).
    Mankiw and Reis (2001) simply postulated λ = 0.25. What equation 2 of Table 3
indicates is that if the data are forced to choose a λ they are happy with that choice.
However, we have not allowed the data to speak to the question of whether there is a
better representation of inﬂation expectations than (25).
    The ﬁrst avenue by which we might wish to let the data reject the speciﬁcation is to
allow a constant into the equation. Equation 3 of table 3 presents the results. The last
column indicates that the proposition that the constant term is zero can be rejected
at a very high level of statistical signiﬁcance; the data do indeed want a constant in
the regression equation. On the other hand, the improvement in ﬁt that comes with
a constant is rather modest: the standard error declines from about 0.43 without the
constant to about 0.35 with it. Compared with a standard deviation for the dependent
variable of about 0.88, this improvement in ﬁt is not very impressive, even if it is
statistically signiﬁcant.
    Furthermore, if the model is to be treated as a structural description of the true
process by which inﬂation expectations are formed, the presence of a constant term
does not make much sense. It implies, for example, that if both actual inﬂation and the
rational forecast for inﬂation were to go to zero forever, people would continue to believe
in a positive inﬂation rate (of about 2 percent) forever. It seems much more likely that
under these circumstances people would eventually learn to expect an inﬂation rate of
zero. This point can be generalized to show that if the actual inﬂation rate and the
rational forecast were ﬁxed forever at any constant value, people’s expectations would
never converge to the true, constant inﬂation rate, but instead would be perpetually
biased unless the true value happened to be exactly equal to the single stable point of
the estimated equation. (See the ﬁnal section of the paper for a demonstration that
the presence of a signiﬁcant constant term could reﬂect the presence of some social
transmission of inﬂation expectations via conversations with neighbors, in addition to
the news-media channel examined here).
    A modiﬁcation to the model that makes more sense than a constant term is to allow
for the possibility that some people update their view of the fundamental inﬂation rate
to the most recent past inﬂation rate rather than to the SPF forecast of the future
inﬂation rate. Indeed, since most news coverage of inﬂation is prompted by the release
of the most recent past inﬂation statistics (and since the new number is often in the
headline of the news article) one might argue that it would be more likely for people


                                            17
to update their expectations to the past inﬂation rate than to a forecast of the future
rate.
   We can examine this possibility by estimating an equation of the form

             Mt [πt,t+4 ] = α1 St [πt,t+4 ] + α2 Mt−1 [πt−1,t+3 ] + α3 Pt [πt−5,t−1 ].   (27)

where Pt [πt−5,t−1 ] represents the most recently published annual inﬂation rate as of
time t.
    In the epidemiological sense, derivations similar to those provided above for the
baseline model can be performed to show that this equation can be interpreted as rep-
resenting a model in which there are two competing sources of ‘infection,’ the forecast
of the future inﬂation rate and the actual past inﬂation rate. A given person’s view of
the fundamental inﬂation rate may come from either of these two sources, but a given
person can be infected from only one of these sources at a time.
    Results from estimating this equation are presented in the next row of Table 3.
The past inﬂation rate is indeed highly statistically signiﬁcant - but with a negative
coeﬃcient! The negative coeﬃcient makes no sense, as it implies that a higher past
inﬂation rate convinces people that the fundamental inﬂation rate is lower. The ﬁnal
row of the table, however, shows that when a constant is included in this regression, the
past inﬂation rate is no longer statistically signiﬁcant, while the forecast of the future
inﬂation rate remains highly statistically signiﬁcant. This seems to indicate that the
signiﬁcance of the past inﬂation rate is spurious, in the sense that the past inﬂation rate
is just proxying for the missing constant term, which we have already acknowledged to
be statistically signiﬁcant. The last row in the table shows, surprisingly, that even when
the SPF forecast is entirely absent, the lagged inﬂation rate has no explanatory power
for the Michigan survey after controlling for the lagged value of the survey; furthermore,
the Durbin-Watson suggests a substantial amount of negative serial correlation in the
residuals of this equation.
    In sum, it seems fair to say that the simple ‘sticky expectations’ equation (23) does
a remarkably good job of capturing much of the predictable behavior of the Michigan
inﬂation expectations index.

3.3    Timing Issues: Monthly vs Quarterly, Michigan vs SPF
However, there is a potential problem. If we want to take our model’s updating equa-
tion (23) seriously as reﬂecting the eﬀect of news reports on people’s perceptions, it is
logically necessary for the news reports to have been published before people’s expec-
tations can move toward them. This obvious point raises some conceptual diﬃculties
about the empirical results presented thus far, because the actual timing of the quar-
terly Michigan and SPF surveys does not match up with the implied time structure in
the model we have presented and estimated.


                                                18
    Most newspaper stories on inﬂation appear the day after the monthly release of
inﬂation statistics, which happens around mid-month every month. Between mid-
month and the beginning of the next month, there are typically few economic statistics
released that would have much impact on a rational forecast of the inﬂation rate. Given
these facts, if the Michigan survey for month t + 1 were conducted entirely on the ﬁrst
day of month t + 1, there would be little reason to object to an updating equation of
the form

                 Mt+1 [πt+1,t+13 ] = λNt [πt,t+12 ] + (1 − λ)Mt [πt,t+12 ],         (28)

where Nt designates the inﬂation forecast embodied in the typical newspaper article
published in the middle of month t.
    Now consider the circumstances under which it would be appropriate to proxy the
newspaper forecasts Nt with the Survey of Professional Forecasters’ forecast St . The
SPF is conducted once a quarter, during the quarter’s middle month. Forecasts are
collected beginning right after the inﬂation data for the previous month are reported,
which is exactly the time that most news articles on inﬂation are being written; al-
though survey participants have a week or so to turn in their forecasts, typically little
or no important economic data are released before the survey deadline, so there is little
reason to expect the views reﬂected in the SPF to be much diﬀerent from the views the
news media will have reported in mid-month. Hence, if month t was an SPF survey
month there would be little reason to object to proxying Nt with St in (28).
    However, an analogous substitution would not be appropriate for month t + 1 or
t + 2, because these months will have no new survey data and substituting an out-of-
date SPF forecast for the newspaper forecast could lead to biases. Thus, equation (28)
should be estimated using data only from the set of months for which an SPF was done
in the prior month.
    Appendix A discusses results of estimating the model using monthly data from
months in which there was an SPF forecast in the previous month. The conclusion is
that results obtained using monthly data are close to what would have been expected if
there were no timing problems for the quarterly estimates. Thus there is no reason to
worry that the baseline estimate of λ = 0.25 is biased by the timing diﬃculties laid out
above. (The results are presented in an appendix because there are several technical
and econometric issues that must be addressed that would interrupt the ﬂow of the
main argument of the paper without contributing anything of substantive prominence.)

3.4    Measuring Inﬂation News
If we take literally the assumption that people derive their inﬂation expectations from
news stories, we should expect that when there are more news stories on inﬂation
people should be better informed.


                                            19
    This is testable. Appendix B describes the construction of an annual index of the
number of news stories containing the word ‘inﬂation’ that began on the front pages
of the New York Times or the Washington Post.12 The index is plotted against the
actual inﬂation rate in the top panel of Figure 1; unsurprisingly, the intensity of news
coverage of inﬂation was highest in the early 1980s when the actual inﬂation rate was
very high, and inﬂation coverage has generally declined since then.
    The bottom panel of Figure 1 plots the SPF and Michigan forecasts since the third
quarter of 1981 when the SPF ﬁrst began to include CPI inﬂation. One striking feature
of the ﬁgure is that during the high-news-coverage period of the early 1980s, the size of
the gap between the SPF forecast and the Michigan forecast is distinctly smaller than
the gap in the later period when there was less news coverage of inﬂation.
    A formal statistical test of whether greater news coverage is associated with ‘more
rational’ household forecasts (in the sense of forecasts that are closer to the SPF fore-
cast) can be constructed as follows. Deﬁning the square of the gap between the Michi-
gan and SPF forecasts as GAPSQt = (Mt − St )2 , and deﬁning the inﬂation index as
NEWSt , we can estimate the simple OLS regression equation

                                 GAPSQt = α0 + α1 NEWSt                                         (29)

    Table 4 presents the results. Estimated over the entire sample from 1981q3 to
2000q2 the regression ﬁnds a negative relationship that is statistically signiﬁcant at
the 5 percent level after correcting for serial correlation. The second row shows that
that if the ﬁrst year of the SPF CPI forecasts is excluded the negative relationship is
much stronger and statistically signiﬁcant at better than the 1 percent level; however,
aside from the possibility that the ﬁrst few SPF CPI forecasts were problematic in
some undetermined way, there seems to be little reason to exclude the ﬁrst year of SPF
data.
  12
    The ‘began on the front page’ criterion is a standard way to control for the possibility that
newspapers may shrink or grow substantially over time. Since the size of the front page has remained
the same size over time, an increase in the number of ﬁrst-page stories should be a genuine reﬂection
of greater news importance.




                                                 20
Figure 1: Inﬂation Versus News Stories, and Michigan Versus SPF Forecasts
                                    21
                            Estimating GAPSQt = α0 + α1 NEWSt

                    Sample               α0          α1      D-W Stat          R̄2
                 1981q3-2000q2         0.94       −1.03        1.01          0.08
                                      (0.26)∗∗∗    (0.50)∗∗

                 1982q3-2000q2         1.22       −1.72        1.08          0.14
                                      (0.25)∗∗∗    (0.46)∗∗∗

GAPSQ is the square of the diﬀerence between the Michigan and SPF inﬂation forecasts. NEWS is
an index of the intensity of news coverage of inﬂation in the New York Times and the Washington
Post from 1981 to 2000. All standard errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity and serial correlation
using a Newey-West (1987) procedure with four lags. Results are not sensitive to the choice of lags.
{***,**,*} = {1 percent, 5 percent, 10 percent} signiﬁcance.

Table 4: Household Inﬂation Expectations Are More Accurate When There Is More
News Coverage

    The ﬁnding that household inﬂation forecasts are better when there is more news
coverage is an indirect implication of the model under the assumption that ‘infection’
is more likely when there is more coverage. The proposition that the infection rate is
higher when there are more news stories can also be tested directly. Table 5 presents
estimation results comparing the infection rate estimated during periods when there
is more news coverage than average (NEWSt >mean(NEWS)) and less coverage than
average (NEWSt <mean(NEWS)). The estimate of the infection rate is almost 0.7
during periods of intensive news coverage, but only about 0.2 during periods of less
intense coverage; an F-test indicates that this diﬀerence in coeﬃcients is statistically
signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level (and nearly at the 1 percent level).




                                                  22
                                                                     Durbin-     Q-Test
             Eqn                Sample                     λ         Watson      p-value
              1                 All obs                 0.273         2.12        0.971
                                                       (0.066)∗∗∗
               2     NEWSt > mean(NEWS)                 0.699         1.57        0.216
                                                       (0.176)∗∗∗
               3     NEWSt < mean(NEWS)                 0.210         1.93        0.451
                                                       (0.077)∗∗

The equation is estimated in the form Mt − Mt−1 = λ(St − Mt−1 ) which imposes the condition
λ + (1 − λ) = 1. All standard errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity and serial correlation using a
Newey-West (1987) procedure with four lags. Results are not sensitive to the choice of lags. {***,**,*}
= {1 percent, 5 percent, 10 percent} signiﬁcance.

        Table 5: Updating Speed Is Faster When There Is More News Coverage

    There are two strands of the existing literature that deserve comment at this point.
In two important recent papers, Akerlof, Dickens, and Perry (1996, 2000) have proposed
a model in which workers do not bother to inform themselves about the inﬂation rate
unless inﬂation gets high enough that ignorance would become costly. Since periods of
high news coverage have coincided with periods of high inﬂation, this model is obviously
consistent with the ﬁnding that mean inﬂation expectations are more rational during
periods of high coverage. Indeed, in a way the ADP models are deeper than the one
proposed here, because they provide an explanation for the intensity of news coverage
which is taken as exogenous here: The news media write more stories on inﬂation in
periods when workers are more interested in the topic.
    These results can also be viewed as somewhat similar to some ﬁndings by
Roberts (1998), who estimates a model like (23), performs a sample split, and ﬁnds the
speed of adjustment parameter much larger in the post-1976 period than in the pre-76
era. He interprets this as bad news for the model. However, the pre-76 era was one of
much more stable inﬂation (until the last years) than the post-76 era, so the ﬁnding of
a higher coeﬃcient in the later years is very much in the spirit of the tests performed
above, and is therefore consistent with the epidemiological interpretation of the model
proposed here.


4     Unemployment Expectations
If the epidemiological model of expectations is to be generally useful to macroe-
conomists, it will need to apply to other variables in addition to inﬂation. Another
potential candidate is unemployment expectations; in previous work (Carroll (1992),
Carroll and Dunn (1997)) I have found unemployment expectations to be a powerful


                                                  23
predictor of household spending decisions, and since household spending accounts for
two thirds of GDP, understanding the dynamics of unemployment expectations (and
any deviations from rationality) should have considerable direct interest.
    Unfortunately, however, the Michigan survey’s question on unemployment does not
ask households to name a speciﬁc ﬁgure for the future unemployment rate; instead,
households are asked whether they expect the unemployment rate to rise, stay the same,
or fall over the next year. Traditionally, the answers to these questions are converted
into an index by subtracting the “fall” from the “rise” proportion. This diﬀusion index
can then be converted into a forecast of the change in the unemployment rate by using
the predicted value from a regression of the actual change in unemployment on the
predicted change.
    That is, the regression

                             Ūt,t+4 − Ūt−4,t = γ0 + γ1 MtU                         (30)

is estimated, where Ūt,t+4 is the average unemployment rate over the next year and
Ūt−4,t is the unemployment rate over the year to the present, and MtU is the Michigan
index of unemployment expectations. With the estimated {γ̂0 , γ̂1 } in hand a forecast
of next year’s inﬂation rate can be constructed from
                            ˆ
                            Ū                    U
                               t,t+4 = γ̂0 + γ̂1 Mt + Ūt−4,t .                      (31)

    When (30) is estimated, the coeﬃcient on MtU is has a t-statistic of over 8, even
after correcting for serial correlation. However, in a horserace regression of the actual
change in unemployment on the Michigan diﬀusion index and the SPF forecast of the
change in unemployment, the Michigan forecast has no predictive power. Thus, as
with inﬂation, it appears that on average people have considerable information about
how the unemployment rate is likely to change, but forecasters know a lot more than
households do.
    Table 6 presents a set of regression results for the household unemployment forecast
that is essentially identical to the tests performed in Table 3 for inﬂation expectations.




                                            24
   Estimating Mt [Ut,t+4 ] = α0 + α1 St [Ut,t+4 ] + α2 Mt−1 [Ut−1,t+3 ] + α3 Pt [Ut−5,t−1 ] +    t


                                                                   Durbin-                       Test
                                                              2
  Eqn          α0          α1          α2          α3       R̄     Watson      StdErr          p-value
 Memo:        6.38                                         0.00     0.08        1.29            α0 = 0
             (0.29)∗∗∗                                                                          0.000
    1                     0.32        0.68                 0.94     1.73         0.32        α1 + α2 = 1
                         (0.07)∗∗∗   (0.07)∗∗∗                                                  0.109
    2                     0.31        0.69                 0.94     1.72         0.32         α1 = 0.25
                         (0.07)∗∗∗   (0.07)∗∗∗                                                  0.375
    3       −0.03         0.32        0.68                 0.94     1.74         0.32           α0 = 0
             (0.18)      (0.07)∗∗∗   (0.07)∗∗∗                                                  0.847
    4                     0.32        0.67        0.01     0.94     1.73         0.33     α1 + α2 + α3 = 1
                         (0.07)∗∗∗   (0.09)∗∗∗   (0.05)                                         0.112
    5       −0.04         0.32        0.67        0.01     0.94     1.72         0.33           α3 = 0
             (0.18)      (0.07)∗∗∗   (0.09)∗∗∗   (0.06)                                         0.855
Mt [Ut,t+4 ] is a forecast of the average unemployment rate over the next year in quarter t derived as
described in the text from the Michigan survey measure of unemployment expectations; St [Ut,t+4 ]
is the mean of the SPF unemployment forecast over the next four quarters; Pt is the published un-
employment rate for the most recent one-year period. All equations are estimated over the period
1978q1 to 2000q2 for which both Michigan and SPF unemployment forecasts are available. All stan-
dard errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity and serial correlation using a Newey-West procedure
with four lags. Results are not sensitive to the choice of lags.

        Table 6: Estimating and Testing the Baseline Model for Unemployment

    The point estimate of the speed of adjustment parameter in row 3 is α1 = 0.31;
the test reported in the last column of that row indicates that this is statistically
indistinguishable from the estimate of λ = 0.25 obtained for inﬂation expectations. In
most respects, in fact, the epidemiological model performs even better in explaining
unemployment expectations than explaining inﬂation expectations. For example, row
3 indicates that the equation does not particularly want a constant term in it, while
row 4 ﬁnds that the lagged level of the unemployment rate has no predictive power for
current expectations even when a constant is excluded.
    Nonetheless, this evidence should be considered with some caution. The process
of constructing the forecast for the average future level of the unemployment rate,
while apparently reasonable, may be econometrically and conceptually problematic. In
particular, this method assumes that the amount by which unemployment is expected
to change on average is related to the proportion of people who expect unemployment to
rise or fall; in fact, there is no necessary linear relationship between these two quantities.


                                                  25
Other econometric diﬃculties may come from the use of constructed variables on both
the left and right hand sides of the equation. I view this model of unemployment
expectations merely as secondary supporting evidence for the expectations modeling
strategy pursued here, and therefore am not inclined to pursue these conceptual and
econometric problems further, though they might be worth pursuing in later work.
    Other extensions are also possible. The Michigan survey contains questions about
future income, interest rates, and other important macro variables. In addition, an-
other monthly survey of consumers conducted by the Conference Board has a wide
variety of other forward-looking questions. It would be interesting to see whether the
epidemiological model of expectations is broadly applicable, with a parameter value of
around 0.25, for many of these variables.


5    Agent Based Models of Inﬂation Expectations
One of the most fruitful trends in empirical macroeconomics over the last ﬁfteen years
has been the growing eﬀort to construct microfoundations that can be tested by exam-
ining microeconomic data. Broadly speaking, the goal is to ﬁnd empirically sensible
models for the behavior of the individual agents (people, ﬁrms, banks), which can then
be aggregated to derive implications about macroeconomic dynamics. Separately, but
in a similar spirit, researchers at the Santa Fe Institute, the CSED, and elsewhere
have been exploring ‘agent-based’ models that examine the complex behavior that can
sometimes emerge from the interactions between collections of simple agents.
    One of the primary attractions of an agent-based or microfoundations approach to
modeling household expectations is the prospect of being able to test the model using
large microeconomic datasets. However, to my knowledge only two existing research
papers have examined the raw household-level survey data underlying the University of
Michigan’s aggregate expectations index, both by Nicholas Souleles (2002, 2000). For
present purposes, the more interesting of these is Souleles (2002), which demonstrates
(among other things) that there are highly statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences across
demographic groups in forecasts of aggregate economic variables like the inﬂation rate.
Clearly, in a world where everyone’s expectations were purely rational, there should be
no demographic diﬀerences in expectations about the inﬂation rate.
    An agent-based version of the framework proposed above could in principle account
for such demographic diﬀerences. The simplest approach would be to assume that
there are diﬀerences across demographic groups in the propensity to pay attention to
economic news (diﬀerent λ’s); it is even conceivable that one could calibrate these
diﬀerences using existing facts about the demographics of newspaper readership (or
CNBC viewership).
    Without access to the underlying micro data it is diﬃcult to tell whether demo-
graphic heterogeneity in λ would be enough to explain Souleles’s ﬁndings about sys-


                                          26
tematic demographic diﬀerences in macro expectations. Even without the raw micro
data, however, an agent-based model has considerable utility. In particular, an agent-
based approach permits us to examine the consequences of relaxing some of the model’s
assumptions to see how robust its predictions are. Given our hypothesis that Soule-
les’s results on demographic diﬀerences in expectations might be due to diﬀerences
in λ across groups, the most important application of the agent-based approach is to
determining the consequences of heterogeneity in λ.

5.1    Heterogeneity in λ
Consider a model in which there are two categories of people, each of which makes up
half the population, but with diﬀerent newspaper-reading propensities, λ1 and λ2 .
    For each group it will be possible to derive an equation like (23),

                Mi,t [πt,t+4 ] = λi Nt [πt,t+4 ] + (1 − λi )Mi,t−1 [πt−1,t+3 ].   (32)

    But note that (dropping the π arguments for simplicity) aggregate expectations
will just be the population-weighted sum of expectations for each group,

            Mt = (M1,t + M2,t )/2                                                 (33)
                          
                   λ1 + λ2
               =             Nt + ((1 − λ1 )M1,t−1 + (1 − λ2 )M2,t−1 )/2          (34)
                      2

   Replace M1,t−1 by Mt−1 + (M1,t−1 − Mt−1 ) and similarly for M2,t−1 to obtain
                                                                             =0
                                                        
                                                                             
           λ1 + λ2                  λ1 + λ2               M1,t−1 + M2,t−1
  Mt   =              Nt + 1 −                 Mt−1 +                       − Mt−1
               2                       2                         2
                                                       
              λ1 (M1,t−1 − Mt−1 ) + λ2 (M2,t−1 − Mt−1 )
         −                                                                       (35)
                                  2
                                                                           
                                  λ1 (M1,t−1 − Mt−1 ) + λ2 (M2,t−1 − Mt−1 )
  Mt   = λ̂Nt + (1 − λ̂)Mt−1 −                                                   (36)
                                                      2

where λ̂ = (λ1 + λ2 )/2.
   Thus, the dynamics of aggregate inﬂation expectations with heterogeneity in λ
have a component λ̂Nt + (1 − λ̂)Mt−1 that behaves just like a version of the model
when everybody has the same λ equal to the average value in the population, plus a
term (in big parentheses in (36)) that depends on the joint distribution of λ’s and the
deviation by group of the diﬀerence between the previous period’s rational forecast and
the group’s forecast.


                                              27
   Now consider estimating the baseline equation
                               Mt = λNt + (1 − λ)Mt−1                                  (37)
on a population with heterogeneous λ’s. The coeﬃcient estimates will be biased in a
way that depends
                     on the correlations of Nt , Mt−1 and Mt with the last term in equa-
             λ1 (M1,t−1 −Mt−1 )+λ2 (M2,t−1 −Mt−1 )
tion (36),                     2
                                                   . There is no analytical way to determine
the magnitude or nature of the bias without making a speciﬁc assumption about the
time series process for Nt , and even with such an assumption all that could be obtained
is an expected asymptotic bias. The bias in any particular small sample would depend
on the speciﬁc history of Nt in that sample.
    The only sensible way to evaluate whether the bias problem is likely to be large
given the actual history of inﬂation and inﬂation forecasts in the US is to simulate
a model with households who have heterogeneous λ’s and to estimate the baseline
equation on aggregate statistics generated by that sample.
    Speciﬁcally, the experiment is as follows. A population of P agents is created,
indexed by i; each of them begins by drawing a value of λi from a uniform distribution
on the interval (λ, λ). In an initial period 0, each agent is endowed with an initial value
of Mi,0 = 2 percent. Thus the population mean value M0 = (1/P ) Pi=1 Mi,0 = 2. For
period 1, each agent draws a random variable distributed on the interval [0, 1]. If that
draw is less than or equal to the agent’s λi , the agent updates Mi,1 = N1 where N1 is
taken to be the ‘Newspaper’ forecast of the next year’s inﬂation rate in period t; if the
random draw is less than λi the agent’s Mi,1 = Mi,0 . The population-average value of
M1 is calculated, and the simulation then proceeds to the next period.
    For the simulations, the ‘news’ series Nt is chosen as the concatenation of 1) the
actual inﬂation rate from 1960q1 to 1981q2 and 2) the SPF forecast of inﬂation from
1981q3 to 2001q2. Then regression equations corresponding to (37) are estimated on
the subsample corresponding to the empirical subsample, 1981q3 to 2001q2. Thus, the
simulation results should indicate the dynamics of Mt that would have been observed
if actual newspaper forecasts of inﬂation had been a random walk until 1981q2 and
then had tracked the SPF once the SPF data began to be published.
    The results of estimating (23) on the data generated by this simulation when the
population is P = 250, 000 are presented in Table 7. For comparison, and to verify
that the simulation programs are working properly, equation (1) presents results when
all agents’ λ’s are exogenously set to 0.25. As expected, the simulation returns an
estimate of λ = 0.25, and the equation ﬁts so precisely that there are essentially no
residuals.
    The remaining rows of the table present the results in the case where λ values are
heterogeneous in the population. The second row presents the most extreme example,
[λ, λ] = [0.00, 0.50]. Fortunately, even in this extreme case the regression yields an
estimate of the speed-of-adjustment parameter λ that, at around 0.26, is still quite


                                            28
                Estimating Mt [πt,t+4 ] = α1 St [πt,t+4 ] + α2 Mt−1 [πt−1,t+3 ] +      t


                   λ                                                 Durbin-
                                                               2
                Range            α1             α2          R̄       Watson       StdErr
              [0.25,0.25]     0.250          0.750        1.000       2.58        0.002
                             (0.000)∗∗∗     (0.000)∗∗∗
              [0.00,0.50]     0.261          0.746        0.999        0.10       0.039
                             (0.010)∗∗∗     (0.009)∗∗∗
              [0.20,0.30]     0.249          0.751        1.000        2.20       0.002
                             (0.000)∗∗∗     (0.000)∗∗∗
              [0.15,0.35]     0.245          0.755        1.000        0.50       0.006
                             (0.001)∗∗∗     (0.001)∗∗∗

Mt [πt,t+4 ] is mean inﬂation expectations in quarter t, Nt [πt,t+4 ] is the news signal corresponding to
the SPF mean inﬂation forecast after 1981q3 and the previous year inﬂation rate before 1981q3. All
equations are estimated over the period 1981q3 to 2001q2.

 Table 7: Estimating the Baseline Model on Simulated Data with Heterogeneous λs



close to the true average value 0.25 in the population. Interestingly, however, one
consequence of the heterogeneity in λ is that there is now a very large amount of
serial correlation in the residuals of the equation; the Durbin-Watson statistic indicates
that this serial correlation is postive and a Q test shows it to be highly statistically
signiﬁcant.
    Heterogeneous λ’s induce serial correlation primarily because the views of people
with λ’s below λ̄ are slow to change. For example, if the ‘rational’ forecast is highly
serially correlated, an agent with a λ close to zero will be expected to make errors of
the same size and direction for many periods in a row before ﬁnally updating.
    The comparison of the high serial correlation that emerges from this simulation to
the low serial correlation that emerged in the empirical estimation in Table 3 suggests
that heterogeneity in λ is probably not as great as the assumed uniform distribution
between 0.0 and 0.5. Results are therefore presented for a third experiment, in which λ’s
are uniformly distributed between 0.2 and 0.3. Estimation on the simulated data from
this experiment yields an estimate of λ very close to 0.25 and a Durbin-Watson statistic
that indicates much less serial correlation than emerged with the broad [0, 0.5] range of
possible λ’s. Finally, the last row presents results when λ is uniformly distributed over
the interval [0.15,0.35]. This case is intermediate: the estimate of λ is still close to 0.25,
but the Durbin-Watson statistic now begins to indicate substantial serial correlation.


                                                   29
    On the whole, the simulation results suggest that the serial correlation properties of
the empirical data are consistent with a moderate degree of heterogeneity in λ, but not
with extreme heterogeneity. It is important to point out, however, that empirical data
contain a degree of measurement and sampling error that is absent in the simulated
data. To the extent that these sources can be thought of as white noise, they should
bias the Durbin-Watson statistic up in comparison to the ‘true’ Durbin-Watson, so the
scope for heterogeneity in λ is probably considerably larger than would be indicated by
a simple comparison of the measured and simulated Durbin-Watson statistics. Thus the
serial correlation results should not be taken as very serious evidence against substantial
heterogeneity in λ.
    A few last words on serial correlation. The important point in Mankiw and
Reis (2001), as well as in work by Ball (2000) and others, is that the presence of
some people whose expectations are not fully and instantaneously forward-looking pro-
foundly changes the behavior of macro models. Thus, the discussion of serial correlation
has an importance here beyond its usual econometric ramiﬁcations for standard errors
and inference. If there are some consumers whose expectations are very slow to up-
date, they may be primarily responsible for important deviations between the rational
expectations model and macroeconomic reality.

5.2    Matching the Standard Deviation of Inﬂation Expecta-
       tions
Thus far all our tests of the model have been based on its predictions for behavior
of mean inﬂation expectations. Of course, the model also generates predictions for
other statistics like the standard deviation of expectations across households at a point
in time. Some households will have expectations that correspond to the most recent
inﬂation forecast, while others will have expectations that are out of date by varying
amounts. One prediction of the model is that (for a constant λ) if SPF inﬂation
forecasts have remained stable for a long time, the standard deviation of expectations
across households should be low, while if there have been substantial recent changes in
the rational forecast of inﬂation we should expect to see more cross-section variability
in households’ expectations.
    This is testable. Curtin (1996) reports average values for the standard deviation for
the Michigan survey’s inﬂation expectations over the period from 1978 to 1995; results
are plotted as the solid line in ﬁgure 2. It is true that the empirical standard deviation
was higher in the early 1980s, a time when inﬂation rates and SPF inﬂation expectations
changed rapidly over the course of a few years, than later when the inﬂation rate was
lower and more stable.
    The short and long dashed loci in the ﬁgure depict the predictions of the homo-
geneous λ = 0.25 and heterogeneous λ ∈ [0.0, 0.5] versions of the agent-based model.


                                            30
Figure 2: Standard Deviation of Inﬂation Expectations from Data and Simulations




                                      31
There is considerable similarity between the time paths of the actual and simulated
standard deviations: The standard deviation is greatest for both simulated and actual
data in the late 1970s and early 1980s, because that is the period when the levels of
both actual and expected inﬂation changed the most. In both simulated and real data
the standard deviation falls gradually over time, but shows an uptick around the 1990
recession and recovery before returning to its downward path.
    However, the levels of the standard deviations are very diﬀerent between the simu-
lations and the data; the scale for the Michigan data on the right axis ranges from 4 to
11, while the scale for the simulated standard deviations on the left axis ranges from
0 to 3. Over the entire sample period, the standard deviation of household inﬂation
expectations is about 6.5 in the real data, compared to only about 0.5 in the simulated
data.
    Curtin (1996) analyzes the sources of the large standard deviation in inﬂation expec-
tations across households. He ﬁnds that part of the extreme variability is attributable
to small numbers of households with very extreme views of inﬂation. Curtin’s inter-
pretation is that these households are probably just ill-informed, and he proposes a
variety of other ways to extract the data’s central tendency that are intended to be
robust to the presence of these extreme outlying households. However, even Curtin’s
preferred measure of dispersion in inﬂation expectations, the size of the range from the
25th to the 75th percentile in expectations, has an average span of almost 5 percentage
points over the 81q3-95q4 period, much greater than would be produced by any of the
simulation models considered above.13
    The ﬁrst observation to make about the extreme variability of household inﬂation
expectations is that such variability calls into question almost all standard models of
wage setting in which well-informed workers demand nominal wage increases in line
with a rational expectation about the future inﬂation rate.14 If a large fraction of
workers have views about the future inﬂation rate that are a long way from rational,
it is hard to believe that those views have much impact on the wage-setting process.
Perhaps it is possible to construct a model in which equilibrium is determined by aver-
age inﬂation expectations, with individual variations making little or no no diﬀerence
  13
     Curtin advocates use of the median rather than the mean as the summary statistic for ‘typical’
inﬂation expectations. However, the epidemiological model has simple analytical predictions for the
mean but not the median of household expectations, so the empirical work in this paper uses the
mean.
  14
     The only prominent exception I am aware of is the two papers by Akerlof, Dickens, and
Perry (1996, 2000) mentioned brieﬂy above. In these models workers do not bother to learn about
the inﬂation rate unless it is suﬃciently high to make the research worthwhile. However such a model
would presumably imply a modest upper bound to inﬂation expectation errors, since people who sus-
pected the inﬂation rate was very high would have the incentive to learn the truth. In fact, Curtin
(1996) ﬁnds that the most problematic feature of the empirical data is the small number of households
with wildly implausibly high forecasts.



                                                 32
to individual wages. Constructing such a model is beyond the scope of this paper; but
whether or not such a model is proposed, it seems likely that any thorough understand-
ing of the relation between inﬂation expectations in the aggregate and actual inﬂation
will need a model of how individuals’ inﬂation expectations are determined.
    The simplest method of generating extra individual variability in expectations is to
assume that when people encounter a news report on inﬂation, the process of commit-
ting the associated inﬂation forecast to memory is error-prone.15
    To be speciﬁc, suppose that whenever an agent encounters a news report and up-
dates his expectations, the actual expectation stored in memory is given by the ex-
pectation printed in the news report times a mean-one lognormally distributed storage
error. Since the errors average out in the population as a whole, this assumption gen-
erates dynamics of aggregate inﬂation expectations that are identical to those of the
baseline model. Figure 3 plots the predictions for the standard deviation of inﬂation
expectations across households of the baseline λ = 0.25 model with a lognormally dis-
tributed error with a standard error of 0.5. The ﬁgure shows that the change in the
standard deviation of inﬂation residuals over time is very similar in the model and in
the data, but the level of the standard deviation is still considerably smaller in the
model. This could of course be rectiﬁed by including an additive error in addition to
the multiplicative error. Such a proposed solution could be tested by examining more
detailed information on the structure of expectations at the household level like that
examined by Souleles (2002).

5.3     Social Transmission of Inﬂation Expectations
As noted above, the standard model of disease transmission is one in which illness is
transmitted by person-to-person contact. Analogously, it is likely that some people’s
views about inﬂation are formed by conversations with others rather than by direct
contact with news reports. For the purposes of this paper the most important question
is whether the simple formula (23) would do a reasonably good job in capturing the
dynamics of inﬂation expectations even when social transmission occurs.
    Simulation of an agent-based model with both modes of transmission is straight-
forward. The extended model works as follows. In each period, every person has a
probability λ of obtaining the latest forecast by reading a news story. Among the (1−λ)
who do not encounter the news source, the algorithm is as follows. For each person
i, there is some probability p that he will have a conversation about inﬂation with a
randomly-selected other person j in the population. If j has an inﬂation forecast that
is of more recent vintage than i’s forecast, then i adopts j’s forecast, and vice-versa.16
  15
     Alternatively, one could assume that retrieval from memory is error-prone. The implications are
very similar but not identical.
  16
     This rules out the possibility that the less-recent forecast would be adopted by the person with



                                                 33
Figure 3: Standard Deviation of Inﬂation Expectations from Simulation with Memory
Errors




                                       34
                         Estimating Mt = α0 + α1 St + α2 Mt−1 +            t


     Prob. of                                                          Durbin-                    Test
                                                                 2
 Social Exchange           α0          α1           α2         R̄      Watson      StdErr       p-value
     p = 0.25                        0.311        0.689       1.000     2.19       0.020      α1 + α2 = 1
                                    (0.003)∗∗∗   (0.003)∗∗∗                                      0.1010
                        0.008        0.302        0.694       1.000     2.07       0.020        α0 = 0
                       (0.008)      (0.006)∗∗∗   (0.006)∗∗∗                                      0.3149
      p = 0.10                       0.276        0.724       1.000     2.05       0.009      α1 + α2 = 1
                                    (0.001)∗∗∗   (0.001)∗∗∗                                      0.1099
                        0.002        0.273        0.726       1.000     1.95       0.008        α0 = 0
                       (0.004)      (0.002)∗∗∗   (0.002)∗∗∗                                      0.5321
Mt is the mean value of inﬂation expectations across all agents in the simulated population; St is
the actual annual inﬂation rate from 1960q1 to 1981q2, and the SPF inﬂation forecast from 1981q3
to 2000q2. Estimation is restricted to the simulation periods corresponding to 1981q3 to 2000q2 for
which actual SPF data are available. All standard errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity and
serial correlation using a Newey-West procedure (a Bartlett kernel) with four lags. Results are not
sensitive to the choice of lags.

          Table 8: Estimating Baseline Model on Random Mixing Simulations

    Table 8 presents results of estimating equation (23) on the aggregate inﬂation ex-
pectations data that result from this agent-based simulation under a uniform ﬁxed
λ = 0.25 probability of news-reading. The ﬁrst two rows present results when the
probability of a social transmission event is p = 0.25. The primary eﬀect of social
transmission is to bias upward the estimated speed of adjustment term. The point
estimate is about 0.31, or about 6 percentage points too high. However, the R̄2 of the
equation is virtually 100 percent, indicating that even when there is social transmis-
sion of information, the common-source model does an excellent job of explaining the
dynamics of aggregate expectations. The next row shows the results when the rate of
social transmission is p = 0.10. Unsurprisingly, the size of the bias in the estimate of
λ is substantially smaller in this case, and the model continues to perform well in an
R̄2 sense.
    A potential objection to these simulations is that they assume ‘random mixing.’
That is, every member of the population is equally likely to encounter any other mem-
ber. Much of the literature on agent-based models has examined the behavior of
populations that are distributed over a landscape in which most interactions occur
a more-recent information. The reason to rule this out is that if there were no directional bias (more
recent forecasts push out older ones), the swapping of information would not change the distribution
of forecasts in the population and therefore would not result in aggregate dynamics any diﬀerent from
those when no social communication is allowed.


                                                 35
between adjacent locations on the landscape. Often models with local but no global
interaction yield quite diﬀerent outcomes from ‘random mixing’ models.
    To explore a model in which social communication occurs locally but not globally,
I constructed a population distributed over a two dimensional lattice, of size 500x500,
with one agent at each lattice point. I assumed that a fraction η of agents are ‘well
informed’ - that is, as soon as a new inﬂation forecast is released, these agents learn
the new forecast with zero lag. Other agents in the population obtain their views of
inﬂation solely through interaction with neighbors.17 Thus, in this model, news travels
out in concentric patterns (one step on the landscape per period) from its geographical
origination points (the news agents, who are scattered randomly across the landscape).
As in the random mixing model, I assume that new news drives out old news.

                          Estimating Mt = α0 + α1 St + α2 Mt−1 +            t


 Up-to-date                                                       Durbin-                    Test
                                                            2
   Agents            α0          α1           α2         R̄       Watson        StdErr     p-value
  η = 0.25                     0.223        0.708       0.992      0.10         0.135    α1 + α2 = 1
                              (0.025)∗∗∗   (0.035)∗∗∗                                       0.0000
                  0.393        0.306        0.505       1.000      0.91         0.009      α0 = 0
                 (0.003)∗∗∗   (0.001)∗∗∗   (0.001)∗∗∗                                       0.0000
   η = 0.15                    0.098        0.854       0.988      0.13         0.116    α1 + α2 = 1
                              (0.017)∗∗∗   (0.027)∗∗∗                                       0.0000
                  0.473        0.183        0.589       1.000      1.03         0.009      α0 = 0
                 (0.005)∗∗∗   (0.001)∗∗∗   (0.001)∗∗∗                                       0.0000
Mt is the mean value of inﬂation expectations across all agents in the simulated population; St is
the actual annual inﬂation rate from 1960q1 to 1981q2, and the SPF inﬂation forecast from 1981q3
to 2000q2. Estimation is restricted to the simulation periods corresponding to 1981q3 to 2000q2 for
which actual SPF data are available. All standard errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity and
serial correlation using a Newey-West procedure (a Bartlett kernel) with four lags. Results are not
sensitive to the choice of lags.

         Table 9: Estimating Baseline Model on Local Interactions Simulations

    Results from estimating the baseline model on data produced by the ‘local interac-
tions’ simulations are presented in table 9. For comparability with the baseline estimate
of λ = 0.25 in the common-source model, I have assumed that proportion η = 0.25
of the agents in the new model are the ‘well-informed’ types whose inﬂationary ex-
pectations are always up to date. Interestingly, estimating the baseline model yields a
  17
    For the purposes of the simulation, an agent’s neighbors are the agents in the eight cells surround-
ing him. For agents at the borders of the grid, neighborhoods are assumed to wrap around to the
opposite side of the grid; implicitly this assumes the agents live on a torus.


                                                  36
coeﬃcient of about α1 = 0.22 on the SPF forecast, even though 25 percent of agents
always have expectations exactly equal to the SPF forecast. The coeﬃcient on lagged
expectations gets a value of about 0.71, and the last column indicates that a test of
the proposition that α1 + α2 = 1 now rejects strongly. However, the regression still has
an R̄2 of around 0.99, so the basic common-source model still does an excellent job of
capturing the dynamics of aggregate inﬂation expectations.
    The most interesting result, however, is shown in the next row: The estimation now
ﬁnds a highly statistically signiﬁcant role for a nonnegligible constant term. Recall that
the only real empirical problem with the common-source model was that the estimation
found a statistically signiﬁcant role for a constant term.
    Results in the next rows show what happens when the proportion of news agents is
reduced to η = 0.15. As expected, the estimate of α1 falls; indeed, the downward bias
is now even more pronounced than with 25 percent well-informed. However, when a
constant is allowed into the equation, the constant term itself is highly signiﬁcant and
the estimate of α1 jumps to about 0.18, not far from the fraction of news agents in the
population.
    What these simulation results suggest is that the empirical constant term may some-
how be reﬂecting the fact that some transmission of inﬂation expectations is through
social exchange rather than directly through the news media. Furthermore, and hap-
pily, it is clear from the structure of the local interactions model that this population
would eventually learn the true correct expectation of inﬂation if the SPF forecasts
permanently settled down to a nonstochastic steady-state. Thus it is considerably
more appealing to argue that the constant term reﬂects misspeciﬁcation of the model
(by leaving out social interactions) than to accept the presence of a true constant term
(and its associated implication of permanent bias).
    It is tempting to view the social learning simulations as a bit of a sideshow to the
main thrust of this paper, which is about the surprisingly good ﬁt of the common
source epidemiological model. However, it is worth repeating the central lesson of
Mankiw and Reis (2001) and others: The extent to which inﬂation can be reduced
without increasing unemployment depends upon the speed with which a new view of
inﬂation can be communicated to the entire population. It is not at all clear that
the predictions about the medium-term inﬂation/unemployment tradeoﬀ of a model
with social transmission of expectations, or even of the common-source model with
heterogeneous λ’s, are similar to the predictions of the homogeneous λ model examined
by Mankiw and Reis (2001). Investigating these questions should be an interesting
project for future research.


6    Conclusions
This paper has three main points.


                                           37
    The ﬁrst is that it is high time, more than 25 years after the ‘rational expectations
revolution’ and 65 years after Keynes’s emphasis on the centrality of expectations, that
the examination of empirical data on expectations became a central part of macroe-
conomics. While there have been a few important prior contributions (particularly by
Roberts (1997, 1998)), and a modest literature on consumer sentiment and consumption
expenditures (see, e.g., Carroll, Fuhrer, and Wilcox (1994)), the bulk of the macroe-
conomics profession has ignored the rich empirical data available on actual household
and business expectations in favor of the theoretical purity of rational expectations
models.
    The second point is that the abandonment of rational expectations need not lead
macroeconomics into an atheoretical wilderness where the Lucas critique lurks behind
every equation. There is an existing body of theory, in epidemiology as well as in
the ‘small worlds’ literature, that can be directly applied to explain expectations data.
This paper has shown that for inﬂation expectations and unemployment expectations,
a remarkably simple epidemiological model does an excellent job in explaining the
deviations of mean household expectations from a rational forecast.
    The ﬁnal point is that if we want to have macroeconomic models that are built
on really secure microfoundations, and are therefore as immune as can reasonably be
hoped from the Lucas critique, there is no substitute for building the model from
the ground up, and comparing its predictions to whatever microeconomic data are
available. Whether the enterprise is described as a search for the ‘microfoundations’ of
macroeconomics or as ‘agent-based’ modeling, it seems reasonable to suppose that in
the long run no macro model will be counted on as a reliable guide to macro behavior if
its predictions for the expectations of individual actors bear little empirical resemblance
to the observable expectations of actual individuals.




                                            38
                               Appendix A: Timing Issues

    This appendix explores implications of the very diﬀerent sampling methodologies
of the Michigan household survey and the Survey of Professional Forecasters.
    As noted in the main text, timing issues suggest that when estimating the model
with monthly data the timing problems are least serious when the sample is restricted
to months t in which a Survey of Professional Forecasters was conducted and published.
The appropriate estimating equation in this case is

                   Mt+1 [πt+1,t+13 ] = λNt [πt,t+12 ] + (1 − λ)Mt [πt,t+12 ].                   (38)

    However, there is a problem in estimating this equation directly. The monthly
Michigan data reﬂect surveys of only 500 households, and the estimated sampling
error with such a small sample is no longer trivial enough to be ignored. Fortunately,
Curtin (1996) has provided estimates of the magnitude of the sampling error. Curtin’s
results imply a typical sampling variance of about 0.09 per month, large enough to
cause substantial bias in our estimate of λ if not corrected for. Fortunately, standard
econometric formulas can be used to adjust parameter estimates when the variance of
the sampling error is known.
    The corrected point estimate of the speed-of-adjustment parameter is 1−λ = 0.91.18
Reassuringly, this estimate is right in the ballpark of what would have been expected
if there were no data or reporting diﬃculties in the quarterly estimation procedure:
The quarterly estimation of the baseline model produced a quarterly updating frac-
tion of (1 − λ) = 0.73, which is statistically indistinguishable from the estimate of
0.923 ≈ 0.78 implied by the fact that a quarter contains three months. Thus, the pro-
cedure of estimating the model with the appropriate monthly data, being careful about
measurement error, yields essentially the same answer as was obtained from quarterly
data.
    The preceding analysis glosses over a ﬁnal problem: The Michigan survey data are
collected on a continous basis throughout a month, rather than all at once on the
ﬁrst day of the month. To see why this is potentially problematic, consider again a
month t in which an SPF survey is conducted. Since inﬂation statistics are reported
in mid-month, roughly half of the households surveyed in month t will have had the
opportunity to read the news articles published upon the release of the statistics at
mid-month, while the other half will not. In this case I have not been able to derive a
‘clean’ equation like (28) for the dynamics of inﬂation expectations.
  18
     The programs, dataset, and econometric derivations that generate this result are included in the
downloadable ﬁles associated with this paper on my website; the econometric theory, and derivation of
the estimated sampling variance of 0.09, are laid out in AppendixA MonthlyExp.pdf, the RATS pro-
gram that estimates the model is AppendiA MonthlyExp.pgm, and the documentation of the program
is in AppendixA MonthlyPgm.pdf.


                                                 39
    To investigate the importance of this problem, I conducted the following simulation
analysis. First, I speciﬁed a daily-frequency stochastic process for the ‘rational’ forecast
of the next year’s inﬂation as a random walk with a daily innovation such that the
quarterly innovations in the inﬂation forecast would match the standard deviation
of the actual quarterly innovations in the SPF forecast. I assumed that households
update to this true forecast using a λ parameter such that (1 − λ)n = 0.75 where n is
the number of days in a quarter. I then picked out the value of the ‘rational’ forecast
at the midpoint of each quarter, and set a variable equal to that forecast. Finally, I
aggregated the daily data to quarterly frequency, and performed a regression of the
form

                                   Mt = λSt + (1 − λ)Mt−1

where Mt now represents the quarterly average of the simulated daily values of the
constructed household forecast and St is the value of the ‘true’ forecast at the midpoint
of the quarter. This exercise produced an estimated λ = 0.234 as compared with the
‘correct’ λ = 0.25. Thus, it appears that the mismatch in timing between the Michigan
and SPF surveys is unlikely to cause much of a problem in estimating the λ parameter.19
 19
      These simulations are conducted by the program AppendixA TimingSims.pgm.




                                              40
      Appendix B: Construction of Index of News Coverage
    The index of news stories on inﬂation was constructed as follows. For each news-
paper i ∈ {New York Times, Washington Post}, for each year t since 1980 (when the
Nexis index of both newspapers begins), a search was performed for stories that be-
gan on the front page of the newspaper and contained words beginning with the root
‘inﬂation’ (so that, for example, ‘inﬂationary’ or ‘inﬂation-ﬁghting’ would be picked
up).
    For each newspaper, the number of stories was converted to an index ranging be-
tween zero and 1 by dividing the number of stories in a given year by the maximumn
number of inﬂation stories in any year. Thus, the fact that the overall index falls to
about 0.25 in the last part of the sample indicates that there were about a quarter
as many front-page stories about inﬂation in this time period as there were at the
maximum.




                                         41
References
Akerlof, George, William Dickens, and George Perry (1996): “The
 Macroeconomics of Low Inﬂation,” Brookings Papers in Economic Activity, 1996:1,
 1–76.

         (2000): “Near-Rational Wage and Price Setting and the Long-Run Phillips
  Curve,” Brookings Papers in Economic Activity, 2000:1, 1–60.

Ball, Laurence (1994): “What Determines the Sacriﬁce Ratio?,” in Monetary Pol-
 icy, ed. by N. Gregory Mankiw, chap. 5. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

        (2000): “Near-Rationality and Inﬂation in Two Monetary Regimes,” NBER
  Working Paper No. W7988.

Barsky, Robert B. (1987): “The Fisher Hypothesis and the Forecastability and
 Persistennce of Inﬂation,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 19, 3–24.

Bryan, Michael F., and William T. Gavin (1986): “Models of Inﬂation Expec-
 tations Formation: A Comparison of Household and Economist Forecasts,” Journal
 of Money, Credit, and Banking, 18, 539–43.

Calvo, Guillermo A. (1983): “Staggered Contracts in a Utility-Maximizing Frame-
 work,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 383–98.

Carroll, Christopher D. (1992): “The Buﬀer-Stock Theory of Saving: Some
 Macroeconomic Evidence,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1992(2), 61–
 156, http://www.econ.jhu.edu/people/ccarroll/BuﬀerStockBPEA.pdf .

Carroll, Christopher D., and Wendy E. Dunn (1997):                         “Unem-
 ployment Expectations, Jumping (S,s) Triggers, and Household Balance
 Sheets,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1997, ed. by Benjamin S.
 Bernanke, and Julio Rotemberg, pp. 165–229. MIT Press, Cambridge,
 MA, http://www.econ.jhu.edu/people/ccarroll/macroann.pdf; Methodological Appendix:
  http://www.econ.jhu.edu/people/ccarroll/methods3.pdf; Empirical Results and Simula-
  tion Programs: http://www.econ.jhu.edu/people/ccarroll/cdﬁles.html; .

Carroll, Christopher D., Jeffrey C. Fuhrer, and David W. Wilcox
 (1994): “Does Consumer Sentiment Forecast Household Spending? If So, Why?,”
 American Economic Review, 84(5), 1397–1408.

Croushore, Dean (1993): “Introducing: The Survey of Professional Forecasters,”
 Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Business Review, pp. pages 3–15.



                                         42
        (1998): “Evaluating Inﬂation Forecasts,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadel-
  phia Working Paper Number 98-14.

Curtin, Richard T. (1996): “Procedure to Estimate Price Expectations,”
 Manuscript, University of Michigan Survey Research Center.

Kermack, W. O., and A. G. McKendrick (1927): “Contributions to the Math-
 ematical Theory of Epidemics,” Proceedings of the Royal Academy of Sciences A,
 115, 700–721.

Keynes, John Maynard (1936): The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and
 Money. Harcourt, Brace.

Kremer, Michael (2000): “An Epidemiological Model of Unions,” Manuscript, Har-
 vard University.

Mankiw, N. Gregory (2001): “The Inexorable and Mysterious Tradeoﬀ Between
 Inﬂation and Unemployment,” Economic Journal, 111(471), C45–C61.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Ricardo Reis (2001): “Sticky Information Versus
 Sticky Prices: A Proposal to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” NBER
 Working Paper Number 8290.

Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West (1987): “A Simple Positive Semi-
 Deﬁnite, Heteroskedasticity and Autorcorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,”
 Econometrica, 55, 703–708.

Roberts, John M. (1995): “New Keynesian Economics and the Phillips Curve,”
 Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 27(4), 975–984.

        (1997): “Is Inﬂation Sticky?,” Journal of Monetary Economics, pp. 173–196.

         (1998): “Inﬂation Expectations and the Transmission of Monetary Policy,”
  Federal Reserve Board FEDS working paper Number 1998-43.

Souleles, Nicholas (2002): “Consumer Sentiment: Its Rationality and Usefulness
  in Forecasting Expenditure? Evidence from the Michigan Micro Data,” Journal of
  Money, Credit, and Banking.

Souleles, Nicholas S. (2000): “Household Securities Purchases, Transactions
  Costs, and Hedging Motives,” Manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.

Staiger, Douglas, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson (2001): “Prices,
  Wages, and the U.S. NAIRU in the 1990s,” NBER Working Paper Number 8320.


                                       43
Thomas Jr., Lloyd B. (1999): “Survey Measures of Expected U.S. Inﬂation,” Jour-
 nal of Economic Perspectives, 13(4), 125–144.

Turnovsky, Stephen J. (1970): “Empirical Evidence on the Formation of Price Ex-
 pectations,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 65(December), 1441–
 54.




                                       44
                  Correcting Monthly Estimates for
                   Errors in Independent Variables
   This document presents the econometric theory for the estimation of the baseline
model on monthly survey data where the sampling error is too large to be ignored be-
cause only about 500 households are contacted each month. The classical econometric
theory tells us that when there are errors in independent variables, OLS estimates are
biased towards zero. The size of this bias depends negatively on the signal–noise ratio.1
   More precisely, consider the following true regression:

                                          y = X ∗ β + ε,

which is feasible to estimate when the regressors in X ∗ are observable. Suppose however
that we only have a noisy signal X of X ∗ , X = X ∗ + U, where the noise U is assumed
to be uncorrelated with X ∗ and ε: E(X ∗  U) = 0, E(U  ε) = 0 and E(X ∗ ε) = 0. This
means that the feasible regression we estimate is:

                                 y = Xβ + ε − Uβ = Xβ + ν,

where ν ≡ ε − Uβ. The OLS estimator of β is:

      β̂OLS = (X  X)−1 X  y = β + (X  X)−1 X  ν = β + (X  X)−1 X  ε − (X  X)−1 X  Uβ.

To see that β̂OLS is biased take expectations,
                                                                  
                E(β̂OLS ) = β + E (X  X)−1 X  ε − E (X  X)−1 X  U β.

Although the second expectation goes to zero as the number of observations increases,
the last one does not disappear which causes the bias. The bias in the OLS estimate
comes from the fact that the noise matrix U is positively correlated with the design
matrix X, so that the last expectation is positive. This bias does not disappear in
large samples, which means that β̂OLS is inconsistent. Suppose (that the assumptions
of the Law of Large Numbers are met and) the following convergence results hold:

                       X ∗X ∗ P ∗          X ∗U P           U U P
                               →Q ,               → 0,             → ΣU ,
                          n                   n                n
where Q∗ is positive deﬁnite and ΣU positive semi-deﬁnite. Then
                                        X X P ∗
                                             → Q + ΣU
                                         n
  1
    See     Greene     pp.     436–440 or Oliver  Linton’s   notes  on    the    web:
http://econ.lse.ac.uk/staff/olinton/ec403/meii99.pdf, pp. 67–69. Most of the text be-
low follows these two sources.


                                                1
and
                                        X U P
                                             → ΣU
                                         n
because X ∗  U/n → 0. Therefore
                  P



                           β̂OLS → β − (Q∗ + ΣU )−1 ΣU = Cβ,
                                 P



where C ≡ (Q∗ + ΣU )−1 Q∗ is the (relative) asymptotic bias of β̂OLS . In the univariate
case C = q/(q + σu2 ). It is useful to think of q as a measure of the strength of the signal
and σU2 as a measure of the noise. If the noise is small relatively to the signal, so is the
bias.
    Typically there is no good way to measure the variance of the noise, so that one
has to ﬁnd an instrument for the noise and then run 2SLS (or some similar method).
In our case however, the variance of the noise is known so we can directly correct the
OLS estimate by multiplying it with C     −1 (we denote this matrix as Correction in the

program), β̂C = C −1 β̂
                        OLS . Since in our case ΣU is known, in the estimator of C
                                                                                      −1
                                                                                          we
              ∗          
just replace Q with X X/n − ΣU . At the same time it is of course necessary to correct
the variance (matrix) of the new estimator β̂C :
                                                              
                              var(β̂C ) = C −1 var(β̂OLS ) C −1 .

This new estimator and its variance is then used to program the standard F test of the
restriction that the sum of the two regressors (in the unrestricted regressions) is equal
to 1.
    In the program we ﬁrst consider the regression

                           πtM ich = λπt−1
                                       SP F
                                            + (1 − λ)πt−1
                                                      M ich
                                                            + ε.

We assume the noise matrix to be
                                                       
                                                0 0
                                     ΣU =
                                                0 σu2

so that the SPF index is observed perfectly and the variance of noise in the Michigan
index is σu2 . The design matrix X consists of the two regressors, X = (π SP F , π M ich ).
    Fortunately, an estimate of σu2 can be constructed from data published in Curtin (1996).
Curtin provides data on the cross-sectional variance of inﬂation expectations in every
month from 1978:01 to 1995:12. If we assume that each of the household-speciﬁc esti-
mates of the inﬂation rate is drawn from a distribution with mean π̄t and variance σt2 ,




                                                2
we know that
                                                         
                                                           N
                                                      1
                                         π̂t =                   [πi,t ]                         (1)
                                                      N    i=1
                                                         2
                                                   1
                                E[var(πt )] =        Nσ 2                                        (2)
                                                  N
                                                 2
                                              = σ /N                                             (3)

so an estimate of the sampling variance of the mean inﬂation expectation will be given
by the cross-section variance Curtin reports divided by the number of observations.
Over the entire sample, the mean value of the cross-section variance is 43.7, which
means that the mean value of the sampling variance is about 43.7/500 ≈ 0.09. Hence
we assume σu2 = 0.09.
    When we plug in σu2 = 0.09 and estimate the equation, it turns out that, as with
the quarterly data, we cannot reject the null of the sum of two (corrected) coeﬃcients
being equal to one. We therefore focus next on the restricted regression. We rewrite
the original restricted regression

                              πtM ich = λπt−1
                                          SP F
                                               + (1 − λ)πt−1
                                                         M ich
                                                               +ε

as
                        πtM ich − πt−1
                                   SP F
                                        = (1 − λ)(πt−1
                                                   M ich
                                                         − πt−1
                                                            SP F
                                                                 ) + ε.
Then we estimate (1 − λ) by OLS and correct the estimate as described above by
multiplying it by (q + σu2 )/q.2


References
Curtin, Richard T. (1996): “Procedure to Estimate Price Expectations,”
 Manuscript, University of Michigan Survey Research Center.




     2
     We could similarly rewrite the restricted regression as ∆πtMich = λ(πt−1
                                                                            SP F
                                                                                 − πt−1
                                                                                    Mich
                                                                                         ) + ε but in
this case we would have to use a diﬀerent correction for β̂OLS since both dependent and independent
variables are measured with errors which are correlated.


                                                 3
