                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       CITIES AND WARFARE: THE IMPACT OF TERRORISM ON URBAN FORM


                                          Edward L. Glaeser
                                           Jesse M. Shapiro


                                         Working Paper 8696
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w8696


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2001




This paper was written for a Journal of Urban Economics Symposium on terrorism and the future of cities.
The NSF provided financial support and Andrei Shleifer provided useful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2001 by Edward L. Glaeser and Jesse M. Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Cities and Warfare: The Impact of Terrorism on Urban Form
Edward L. Glaeser and Jesse M. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 8696
December 2001
JEL No. R



                                               ABSTRACT


        What impact will terrorism have on America’s cities? Historically, large-scale violence has
impacted cities in three ways. First, concentrations of people have an advantage in defending themselves
from attackers, making cities more appealing in times of violence. Second, cities often make attractive
targets for violence, which creates an incentive for people to disperse. Finally, since warfare and terrorism
often specifically target means of transportation, violence can increase the effective cost of transportation,
which will usually increase the demand for density. Evidence on war and cities in the 20th century
suggests that the effect of wars on urban form can be large (for example, Berlin in World War II), but
more commonly neither terrorism nor wars have significantly altered urban form. As such, across
America the effect of terrorism on cities is likely to be small. The only exception to this is downtown
New York which, absent large-scale subsidies, will probably not be fully rebuilt. Furthermore, such
subsidies make little sense to us.




Edward L. Glaeser                                                  Jesse M. Shapiro
Department of Economics                                            Department of Economics
Harvard University                                                 Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138                                                Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@kuznets.harvard.edu
I.      Introduction


On September 11, 2001, two airplanes flew into both towers of the World Trade Center
and the towers subsequently collapsed. Five surrounding buildings were also destroyed
and downtown New York was forever changed. As of this writing, the death toll stands
above 3,500. The real estate losses were also staggering: 13.45 million square feet of
office space were destroyed (Bagli [1]). This loss represents 30 percent of the total class
A real estate in the downtown area (Heschmeyer [14]) and 3.6 percent of total office
space on the island of Manhattan (Enright [11]).


Since September 11, there has been a string of anthrax attacks through the U.S. postal
service. Moreover, warnings and fear of subsequent attacks have been ubiquitous. At
least for the foreseeable short-term future, expectations about the danger of terrorist
attacks on American soil appear to be significantly increased.


What do these attacks mean for the future of New York and the American city? What do
they mean for the future of New York? What do they mean for the future of urban spaces
generally? In this essay, we provide a basic overview of the economic links between
warfare and urban development, and suggest what links may matter in the current crisis.
We then use a variety of data sources to get an idea of the impact of large-scale violence
on urban development in the 20th century. Finally, we discuss the future of downtown
New York.


While economists have generally stressed the role of cities as centers for commerce or
industry, a longer view of the history of cities suggests that historically their primary
purpose may have been protection. In one sense, the advantage that a group of settlers
have in defense relative to a lone homesteader is the “original” agglomeration economy.
Of course, warfare also destroys cities, and times of peril have sometimes strengthened
and sometimes weakened the impulse to urbanize.



                                                                                              2
Broadly speaking, there are three main ways in which physical danger has affected
urbanization. First (and most important historically), cities have often been safe harbors.
The need to crowd together for safety is a primary reason the houses of European farmers
are much closer together than the houses of American farmers. This safe harbor effect is
unlikely to be important within the U.S. The war’s danger may make living inside the
U.S. more attractive than being abroad, but cities are not safe harbors against modern
terrorism.


Second, there is the target effect—cities have historically been rich targets for looting
bandits or terrorists seeking to maximize damage. The impact of an explosion is
increasing in the density of the surrounding area, so higher density areas make for more
attractive targets. If terrorism continues in the U.S., this may be an important force, but
only for a limited number of cities. New York and Washington especially may become
somewhat less attractive to Americans because of their appeal as targets. Locales of
extreme density, such as the World Trade Center, are surely less likely to be built.
However, in most cities, at medium density levels, the target effect is unlikely to be
important.


The third impact of danger is on the costs of transportation. War has always made travel
more precarious and all of the recent terror attacks on the U.S. have specifically used
transportation technologies—passenger airlines and the postal service. Cities are the
absence of space between people and firms; they come about to minimize transportation
costs for goods, for people and for ideas. Therefore when transportation costs rise, the
demand for urban proximity tends to rise as well.1 This force will act to make living in a
remote location and traveling extensively for business less attractive.




1 There is an exception at early levels of development where, as Krugman [15] emphasizes rising transport
costs may keep farmers close to their natural resources.



                                                                                                            3
The target effect and the transportation cost effect therefore pull in opposite directions
and lead to a theoretically ambiguous relationship between danger from terrorism and
urbanization in the U.S. However, since the danger effect is likely to be relevant mainly
in extremely high-density areas (and especially in New York and Washington), theory
seems to predict that big, medium-density metropolitan areas will continue to grow.


In addition to these effects of danger on cities, there is a fourth—more direct—effect of
terrorism: the actual destruction of buildings. This physical destruction may be the most
important impact of warfare on individual cities. In the current crisis, the direct effect of
terror has been the destruction of downtown Manhattan. Davis and Weinstein [8] have
argued that the direct physical damage from World War II did not have a long-term
impact on Japanese cities. They may well be right, but the 50 years after 1945 saw a
massive urban growth in Japan. It is not surprising that the Japanese cities got rebuilt.
The case of the downtown New York is more difficult. While there are clearly important
economic functions to this area, it is less obvious the World Trade Center area either
should or will be rebuilt. After all, WTC was itself built as an attempt to revitalize a
declining area. If the WTC area is not rebuilt, then this change in the shape of New York
City may end up being the most important effect of terror on cities.


After discussing the effects of terrorism in greater detail, we turn to the limited applicable
data that is available. First, we examine the impact of terror on Israel and London.
Within Israel, we compare the relatively safe havens of Tel Aviv and Haifa with the
much less safe area surrounding Jerusalem. This type of comparison is, of course,
difficult, but we find little evidence of a big impact of danger on the growth of Jerusalem.
The impact of IRA terror on London also appears to have been fairly minimal. These
examples suggest that the impact of terror on urban land use may end up being quite
small.


After examining the impact of modern terror on urban growth, we turn to the impact of
warfare on the growth of Berlin, London and Paris during the First and Second World




                                                                                                 4
Wars. The First World War appears to have increased the size of these cities, especially
Berlin. The technology for bombing civilian targets in the First World War was weak
enough so that only Paris was really in danger. As such, the dominant effect of war on
city growth was the rise in war-related industries and government in these capitals. This
effect tended to stimulate city growth. The Second World War was completely different.
Only Paris—which saw little bombing —escaped unscathed. London and particularly
Berlin lost substantial amounts of population during the war. The destruction of housing
was massive and unsurprisingly the populations also fell. It is worth stressing that while
World War II shows how violence can hurt cities through the target effect, the scale of
violence was so great that it is hard to know whether it is remotely comparable to the
dangers of today.


Across countries, the connection between danger and urbanization is somewhat
ambiguous. Countries with high numbers of terrorist actions during the period 1968-
1977 did exhibit higher levels of urbanization, but urbanization does not correlate with
any other measure of internal or external violence. Moreover there is little cross-country
evidence to support a strong connection between the threat of terrorism and the height of
buildings.


Finally, we turn to New York itself. While Paul Krugman has interpreted the work of
Davis and Weinstein [8] on Japanese cities to mean that New York is unlikely to be
affected by the World Trade Center bombing, we are less optimistic. We think that the
impact of the bombing on the structure of New York is likely to be significant, and
indeed that it should be significant.


Our view is that while New York City itself is likely to be quite robust, the future of the
downtown area is much less clear. This area once had a significant comparative
advantage that came out of its proximity to the Port of New York. This advantage is no
longer. Within Manhattan, the only remaining advantage of this area is its proximity to
New Jersey and Staten Island. We think that the downtown is unlikely to be rebuilt in the




                                                                                              5
absence of large-scale government subsidies. We also think that such subsidies are
unlikely to be an efficient use of funds.


II.     Discussion of Warfare and Cities


In this section, we discuss the impact of warfare on cities in a broad historical context.
We use the term warfare to refer to any external physical danger on a country, and it is
meant to include IRA terrorism in Great Britain, and Palestinian terrorism in Israel.
Throughout human history warfare has had a significant impact on the development of
cities, but this development has been different across time and place. We therefore
consider four principle ways in which warfare has historically interacted with urban land
use.




Effect # 1: The Safe Harbor Effect


The first, and probably most important, interaction between warfare and urban
development is that historically cities have provided protection against land-based
attackers. Cities have the dual advantages of large numbers and walls and thus, holding
the size of the attack constant, it is much better to be in a city than alone in the hinterland.
Indeed, the role of cities in protecting their residents against outside attackers is one of
the main reasons why many cities developed over time. As Mumford [19] writes “the
power of massed numbers in itself gave the city a superiority over the thinly populated
widely scattered villages, and served as an incentive to further growth.” Pirenne [21]
sees the origins of European cities in “fortified cities erected by the feudal princes to
provide shelter for their men.” Bloch [4] notes that “the disorders of the early Middle
ages had in many cases induced men to draw nearer to each other.”


The main theoretical reason for this effect is the tremendous value of scale in physical
combat with a fixed opponent. One soldier attacking an army will generally accomplish
little except getting himself killed. Military strategists have always argued that a primary



                                                                                                   6
purpose of military strategy is to have a scale advantage over one’s opponent. In the The
Art of War, Sun Tzu writes “and if we are able thus to attack an inferior force with a
superior one, our opponents will be in dire straits” (Clavell [7]). Clausewitz [26] writes
that “superiority of numbers is the most important factor in the result of a combat.” More
recently, the Powell doctrine emphasizes the use of overwhelming force. In the urban
context, this effect means that individual farmers are likely to be easy prey for marauders,
but once these farmers group into a town, they may be able to defend themselves.


Urban scale economies in defense show up in particular with regard to city walls. While
city walls don’t seem important today they have played a critical role in the history of
cities and in that of warfare. As late as 1871, the Franco-Prussian war came to a
standstill as the Germans laid siege to Paris instead of breaking through the city walls.
In pre-modern societies, walls were the great equalizers where small forces were able to
withstand much more sizable onslaughts.2 Walls also create a natural scale economy. If a
city has a population of N, and each person occupies a fixed area of space (denoted A),

then the size of the wall needed to circle a round city will equal 2 πAN . The size of city
walls scales with the square root of city population, so that the length of wall that must be
built per person declines sharply with the size of the city.


Many traditional cities have existed because of the safety provided by size and city walls.
Constantinople continued as a major city for centuries after the military strength of the
Byzantine Empire had collapsed. The city’s legendary wall structure kept its residents
safe. Likewise Paris, London and Rome all began as fortified places that provided safety
against attack.


We see the impact of the safe harbor effect on the population patterns of the American
and European farmers. Bairoch [2] describes the different settlement patterns of
traditional villages and 19th century American farmers. Traditional farmers group
together in a small village and their land extends out from their homes like pie slices from

2
 Constantinople was perhaps the most important city that continued to exist in large part because of the
protection created by its close to insurmountable walls.


                                                                                                           7
the center of a pie. American farmers, particularly in land developed in the 19th century,
generally put their homes in the center of their land. This development assuredly has
many causes, but a primary reason for the traditional pattern is that these small groupings
of homes provide a certain amount of protection. In the American west, property rights
were much more secure than in medieval Europe, and putting one’s home in the center of
one’s farmland was safer.3


While the safe harbor effect created by urban scale may have been extremely important
historically, it is less likely to be important in the war against terror. Some agglomeration
economies in safety still exist: it is easier to enforce a no fly zone over New York than
over a similarly sized dispersed population.4 But more generally, the essence of terrorist
technologies is that they enable small groups to inflict harm on much larger populations.
The weapons of terrorism thus severely limit the safe harbor advantage enjoyed by cities
in times of traditional warfare.


Effect # 2: The Target Effect


The previous section emphasized that cities can provide better protection against any
given attack. However, attacks are endogenous with respect to the size of the target, and
bigger cities will provide a more attractive target. This is the second major factor that
has created an interaction between urban form and warfare. For Islamic terrorists,
American daylight bombers during WWII, and Attila’s Huns, large urban concentrations
have made attractive targets. As Mumford [19] writes “no doubt the urban surplus
tempted poorer folk, for each city must have seemed a sitting duck to swift-moving
raiders from the highlands or steppes.” Urban density means that it is possible to destroy
(or steal) a large amount in little time. As such, holding defenses constant, attackers will
be drawn to dense urban agglomerations.



3
 Other reasons for the U.S. differences include the generally larger sizes of American farm lots and the
improved transportation available to American farmers. Better transportation made social interaction
possible despite isolated locations.




                                                                                                           8
The tendency of marauders to destroy large urban areas helps us to understand why,
historically, urban life disappears during chaotic periods. For example, the urban world
that grew under the Pax Romana disappeared from much of Europe during the
subsequent middle ages. In no small part, this disappearance occurred because large
cities were regularly being sacked. The most famous example, of course, is Rome itself,
which was sacked regularly for centuries after Alaric first seized the city. A farmer in the
campagna might hope to avoid the attention of the marauding hordes. A shopkeeper in
Rome was pretty sure to have his goods and shop stolen or destroyed. Unsurprisingly,
the Rome in 800 A.D. had less than 10 percent of its 400 A.D. population.


Rome is, of course, far from being the only example of a target city. Indeed, as Pounds
[22] writes “the destruction of urban life was on a far greater scale along the empire’s
northern frontier and in the Balkan peninsula.” Trier in Belgium was sacked three times.


In other times and in other places, wars have also decimated cities. The Thirty Years
War led to a massive de-population of German cities. Wedgwood [27] writes that
between 1620 and 1650, “the population of Marburg, eleven times occupied, dwindled by
half.” Augsburg also lost more than one-half of its population. The great cities of pre-
Columbian America all but disappeared during the Spanish conquest. The urban world of
the Byzantine Empire collapsed along with imperial authority.


When cities end up without the military strength to protect their riches, they are
invariably targets, and destruction tends to follow. The objective of terrorists is
destruction, not plunder, but cities are still ideal targets. The best evidence for this is that
the September 11 attack targeted the single highest density area in the United States. It
seems likely that this attraction of terrorism to density will continue and will create an
added cost to urban agglomeration.




4
  Another example is that dispersed Jewish settlements in Israel’s West Bank are much more vulnerable to
attack than the larger populations in Tel Aviv and Jerusalem.


                                                                                                           9
Effect # 3: The Transportation Effect


The final impact of warfare on cities is indirect and operates through the transport
system. Warfare, including terror, often makes travel relatively unsafe or at least more
costly. Transportation infrastructure is often destroyed in combat. Ongoing threats of
destruction may make it dangerous to be on roads, planes or boats. The sinking of the
Lusitania is among the most famous events of World War I. If homes behind city walls
create a safe harbor, then travel creates exposure to danger. Sometimes, with sufficient
protection, travel can be made reasonably safe even in times of danger. Even then, of
course, these precautions themselves create an added cost of mobility.


There are three main reasons why wars tend to make travel unsafe. First, travelers are
exposed to war-like conditions without urban defenses. The scale economies that make
cities safe mean that solitary travelers are easy prey. The breakdown in transport after the
middle ages is primarily a result of this effect. For example, Bloch [4] describes “How
great was the surprise and relief at the court of Charles the Bald, when in the year 841
that prince witnessed the arrival at Troyes of the messengers bringing him the crown
jewels from Aquitaine: how wonderful that such a small number of men, entrusted with
such precious baggage, should traverse without accident those vast areas invested on all
sides by robbers.” This effect may be important for international travel today where
countries outside of the U.S. may not be taking as many precautions to protect
Americans. However, it is less important for domestic travel, since—as we argued
above—scale economies in defense are less likely to be important in the war against
terror.


The second reason why war reduces transport is that warfare destroys transport
infrastructure, as it destroys everything else, and makes it less likely, in many cases, that
authorities will be able to replace that infrastructure. Lawrence of Arabia busied himself
destroying train tracks in his guerilla war against the Ottomans. Bloch [4] writes “the
collapse of the Carolingian empire had destroyed the last power sufficiently intelligent to
concern itself with public works, sufficiently strong to carry them out.” The destruction



                                                                                                10
of the Path Station in the World Trade Center is a modern example. Even if the threat of
terror were to end today, this loss has already increased the cost of transport into and out
of the New York’s downtown.


The final reason why war increases the cost of transportation is a variant on the target
effect. Large vessels—airplanes, trains and ships— combine the size of small towns with
much more vulnerability. As such, throughout history, thieves, soldiers and terrorists
have particularly focused on these forms of transport as desirable targets. Historically,
the only large transportation devices were ships, but since the dawn of large-scale
shipping, pirates have preyed on these targets because of their combination of wealth and
vulnerability. For example, the British crown used privateers to attack Spain through the
weak chink in Phillip II’s empire—the Manila galleons transporting gold from the New
World to Spain. In the 20th century, submarines have regularly destroyed large ocean-
going vessels. As innumerable movies about the Wild West have depicted, trains were
also targets for robbers. Finally, in the modern era, planes have been a regular target of
hijackers.


Two types of transportation have been particularly affected by the terrorist attacks on the
U.S. The first is air transport. The combination of fear and greater time costs of travel
(because of safety precautions) has caused an approximately 20 percent decrease in the
amount of air travel (Simon [24]). It is unclear whether this slump will persist, but at
least for now, there has been a sizable impact of terror on airborne transportation.


The second, more surprising, effect of terror on transportation costs has come through the
postal service. The anthrax attacks have made the postal service more dangerous and has
certainly increased anxiety about the mail. It is unclear what permanent effect this will
have on the transfer of information through the post, but at least temporarily, the use of
the post has been deterred.


As Krugman [15] shows, increases in transport costs can have two opposite effects on
urban agglomeration. At low levels of development, higher transport costs are often



                                                                                               11
related to decreasing urbanization as proximity to natural resources becomes a dominant
concern. (For example, the destruction of Roman roads led to a decline in cities as
peasants stayed on their land to ensure that they had food.)


In modern societies, higher transport costs are typically associated with more urban
concentration, because proximity is a substitute for travel. Improvements in
transportation technologies have made suburbanization and sprawl a reality. Business
partners can either locate near one another, or travel regularly to meet each other. If it is
harder to maintain long-distance relationships because of the risks and delays of air
travel, and because of problems with the post, then this may act to make urban
concentration more attractive.


If close substitutes are available for air travel and the postal service, then this impact is
likely to be muted. If teleconferencing can easily replace air travel, then the need for co-
location drops. This seems even more relevant in the case of the post office where faxes
and email have already become a primary alternative to the post. It is hard to imagine,
today, that breakdowns in the postal service will serve as more than a minor
inconvenience to most long-distance relationships.


In conclusion, the safe harbor effect has historically been quite important for cities, but is
unlikely to be important today. Cities no longer have walls and if they did, these walls
would make little difference to terrorists anyway. The target effect and the transportation
cost effect will clearly have some impact. Developers have already expressed fears about
building huge towers. Airline travel is down 20 percent since before September 11, but
we don’t know if this is having any sort of an agglomerating effect. Given the degree of
uncertainty about the magnitude of these forces, we’ll now turn towards the limited
available empirical evidence on warfare and urban form.


Effect # 4: The Destruction of Buildings




                                                                                                 12
The final impact of warfare is the most simple. In many cases, war will end up
destroying the existing infrastructure of cities. We separate this effect from the target
effect and consider, here, only past destruction not future risk. Thus, this effect includes
only the impact of the destruction of the World Trade Center itself and not any future
bombing.


The long-term impact of the destruction of buildings depends critically on whether the
demand for physical space in the area is such that the buildings will be rebuilt. In an area
where demand is great enough to pay the costs of new construction, the physical
destruction will not matter. However, in other cases, when the demand is low, the
destruction of physical infrastructure may matter a great deal. In some cases,
agglomeration economies may mean that demand for the space was high before the
bombing but low afterwards. If the price of space after the destruction is not high enough
to cover the costs of new construction, then the direct impact of bombing will be
permanent.


This simple framework makes it clear that the results of Davis and Weinstein [8] may not
be that relevant for downtown New York. The era following World War II saw dramatic
growth in the Japanese economy and massive increase in urban manufacturing. The high
price of physical space in Japan is a major stylized fact of their economy. As such, it is
not at all surprising that the destroyed areas got rebuilt. However, downtown New York
may be somewhat different.


Downtown New York has done extremely well over the past 10 years, but this success
should not hide the long-term weakness of the area. It has many natural disadvantages,
such as being surrounding by water on three sides. Apart from the remarkable
intellectual spillovers in the area, it hard to see why firms would want to locate there.
Moreover, prior to the 1980s, the area was in steep decline for decades. The World Trade
Center itself was a heavily subsidized project meant to prop up a declining region. As
such, the prices in New York after the bombing may very well not justify reconstruction
on a large scale.



                                                                                               13
III.    Empirical Evidence of the Impact of Terror on Urban Form


In this section, we review the empirical evidence that is available on warfare and urban
form. We first present evidence from cross-country data on danger and urbanization. In
that section, our goal is to see whether violence increases or decreases the tendency
towards concentration. We then turn towards extreme episodes of city-specific danger:
Berlin, London and Paris during the two World Wars. In these episodes, the risks were
so high that if there is a connection between urban growth and danger, it is likely to be
quite evident. Finally, we turn to two specific terrorist situations. First, we look at urban
land use in Israel—the country most constantly at risk from terror. Second, we look at
whether the IRA bombings had an impact on the development of London.


Cross-National Evidence on Safety and Cities


While measurement of the true effect of terrorism on urbanization and urban form is
difficult, we make a first pass at the cross-national evidence in Table 1. Here we
examine the relationship between two important measures—the extent of urbanization
and the number of tall buildings—and several measures of the risk of terrorism and other
violence, both internal and external. The first column shows the results using the percent
urban in 1978 as a dependent variable, where we control throughout for log (GDP per
capita) and log (population). We find some evidence that the safe harbor effect
dominates the target effect in the form of a statistically significantly positive coefficient
on a dummy for whether the country experienced terrorism between 1968 and 1977. We
find a similarly significant coefficient using the log of the number of terrorist actions in
the country from 1968 to 1977 as the independent variable.


These results, though statistically significant, are fairly weak. They could easily reflect
reverse causality where urbanism engenders terrorism and not the reverse. Moreover,
there is no significant effect on a wide range of non-terrorism-related measures of



                                                                                                14
internal instability, including the frequency of civil war. We also see no significant
relationship between urbanization and two measures of the extent of participation in
external wars. Nevertheless the data do seem to suggest that the safe harbor effect may
be important in countries prone to terrorism.


Turning to the second column, we find no evidence for any effect of terrorism or other
internal violence on the number of skyscrapers built. In general the coefficients do seem
to be negative as we would expect but none is statistically significant. However, since
the number of skyscrapers may be a highly non-market outcome—depending on urban
planning regulations and politicians’ desires for aggrandizement—it is difficult to
interpret these results.


Three European Cities in Two World Wars


In this section, we review the population patterns of Berlin, Paris and London during the
two World Wars. Figure 1 shows population trends in these cities over the 20th century.
The impact of the World Wars on these three major cities gives us an idea of just how
varying the effect of violence on urban growth can be. We looked at these wars because
they were extremely large-scale conflicts, and if there is a general relationship between
urban land use and violence, we should be able to see it in these three city histories. Of
course, both of these wars also moved large numbers of citizens to the front, so this
would serve to temporarily de-populate cities as well.


World War I was fought on both French and German soil. To the extent that Berlin was
at risk, the risk came from the east. However, after the victory of Tannenberg it seems
unlikely that living in Berlin was seen as creating danger. Indeed, the growth of Berlin in
the 1910s is quite striking. While Berlin had been growing substantially throughout all of
Wilhelmine Germany, the 1910-1920 period is particularly dramatic. The population of
the capital rose substantially from 2.1 million to 3.8 million.5 This growth reflected the


5
 These numbers do not take into account a border change during this period and therefore probably
overestimate the increase in population.


                                                                                                    15
increase in both government administration and military industries in the capital city.
There may also have been some increase in the population because of refugees from East
Prussia who fled before the Russian advances in 1914.


The population effects on London and Paris seem to have been quite small. London was
never at any risk during the conflict. Generally, we might have expected the population
levels to rise slightly in response to the expansion of government during this time period,
but the city grew by only 232,000 people between 1910 and 1920. This is less than
London’s growth in the 20s and less than its growth between 1900 and 1910. If anything,
it seemed like WWI deterred the growth of London slightly, perhaps because of the draft.


Of the three cities, Paris was most at risk during this time period. On August 30, 1914,
the German army was only 30 miles from Versailles. Throughout the war, the chance of
a German breakout from the trenches was always there. However, the population of Paris
was almost exactly the same in 1910 and 1920. Growth in the 1920s and between 1900
and 1910 was small also. Paris’s population was extremely constant between 1900 and
1960, so it is hard to argue that the war directly had a large impact.


World War II had a much larger impact than World War I on civilian life in London and
Berlin. While Paris, of course, was conquered, the speedy French surrender saved the
city from most of the ravages of warfare. This perhaps explains why, of the three cities,
Paris is the only city that grew (albeit only slightly) during the 1940s.


While Paris was relatively unaffected by the War, both Berlin and London were ravaged
by constant bombing. London was attacked during the blitz and through the end of the
war, V-2 rockets were fired at the city. Berlin was subject to even more massive
exposure to bombs. Between August 1940, when the British began to bomb, and April
20, 1945, the city was blasted with more than 76,000 tons of explosives and bombs.


The impact on the population of Berlin was devastating. In 1940, the population of
Berlin hit 4.33 million residents. In 1946, Berlin had 3.18 million residents. While



                                                                                              16
Berlin’s population soared during the First World War, it plummeted during the Second
World War. Massive Allied bombing had the effect of eliminating the population of
Berlin, partially through their deaths (an estimated 52,000 were killed), but also to a large
extent through emigration. It is also worthwhile emphasizing the close (almost one-to-
one) connection between the number of people and the number of buildings in a city (see
Glaeser and Gyourko [13] for more discussion). The allied bombing raids destroyed a
huge amount of the building stock in Berlin, so it would have been shocking if the
population of Berlin had not fallen.


The impact of German air raids on the population of London was also large. The
population of London dropped by about 400,000 during this time period. But in both
absolute and relative terms, this is much less than the impact of the war on Berlin’s
population. The terror of the blitz certainly negatively affected London’s growth (which
had still been substantial before the war), but the city shrank by less than 5 percent during
the time period.


The lesson of the World War is that the target aspect of cities can mean that some cities
decline during periods of warfare and risk. The target effect does matter (especially
when the city is not just at risk, but also physically destroyed). However, we think that
the wars emphasize the resilience of cities more than their vulnerability. It took 76,000
tons of explosives to cause a major reduction in the population of Berlin. The population
of London fell by only 5 percent during the entire Second World War. Terrorist attacks
may shrink New York and Washington slightly, but given how much smaller these
attacks are than the blitz, it seems unlikely that the impact will be all that large.


Jerusalem and Tel Aviv: Terrorism and Israel’s Cities


We now turn to Israel, a modern center of terrorist activity. Historically, Jerusalem has
been less safe than Tel Aviv. If there is an impact of terror on urban growth, it should
show up as disproportionately limiting the growth of Jerusalem relative to Tel Aviv.




                                                                                                17
However, as Table 2 shows, we find little evidence that Jerusalem’s growth has been
sluggish compared to Tel Aviv’s. Indeed, Jerusalem’s share of the total population of
Israel actually increased over Israel’s first fifty years of statehood, perhaps because of
Jerusalem’s increased political role. Jerusalem’s average annual population growth over
this period was 4.2 percent, as compared to Tel Aviv’s more sluggish 2.6 percent. It
would seem that Jerusalem’s advantages—physical beauty, a strong tourist economy, and
historical significance—outweigh the relative dangers of terrorism in that city.


Moreover, there seems to be little evidence that terrorism has impacted the urban
landscape in Israel. While Jerusalem has no buildings more than 500 feet tall and Tel
Aviv has two (with more in the works), it seems that Jerusalem’s lag has more to do with
concerns for the city’s aesthetic than for concerns over safety. As Furstenberg and Susser
[12] report, though Jerusalem’s planning ordinances do not specify a maximum height,
attempts to build high-rises and skyscrapers are typically met with strong opposition from
those dedicated to preserving the city’s character. Despite this ongoing struggle there are
already quite a number of tall buildings in the city and more in the planning stage. Safety
concerns appear to be swamped by the conflict between commercial and aesthetic values
in decisions about Jerusalem’s skyline.


Of course, it is possible that until September 11 tall buildings were not perceived as being
especially attractive to terrorists. Future construction projects may therefore be affected
by safety concerns even if those concerns have not been terribly important in the past.
Since we cannot measure the true change in perceived risk to tall buildings associated
with the September 11 attacks, this must remain an unresolved issue.


London and the IRA


The history of IRA activity in London offers another window on the effects of terrorism
on major cities.6 Table 3 shows the evolution of the population of Inner London since
World War II. We focus on this part of Greater London as the component most affected

6
    Here we draw on Smith [25] for historical evidence.


                                                                                               18
by terrorism. In the initial part of its post-World War II history, the IRA confined its
violence primarily to Northern Ireland itself, attempting to wage a border war with Great
Britain. The complete failure of this approach led to a split between the so-called Official
IRA (OIRA) and Provisional IRA (PIRA). In 1970, the latter organization began an
unprecedented campaign of violence, directed primarily at British soldiers stationed in
Ireland. By this time the population of Inner London was already declining. Then in
1973 the PIRA began to move its efforts into England itself, deploying several car bombs
outside Old Bailey and bombing a London hotel.


The population decline seems not to have sped up noticeably following the beginning in
1975 of a series of personal attacks on the rich and powerful and bombings of high-end
London hotels and restaurants. One might be inclined to conclude that aggregate
population trends were unaffected because the non-rich felt relatively insulated from this
violence. However the population of Inner London grew steadily over the 1980s and
1990s despite several major and far less finely targeted attacks: the bombing of Victoria
Station in 1991, the bombing of London Bridge Station in 1992, and the bombings at the
Baltic Exchange and at Bishopsgate in 1993, to name a few.


One caveat to this discussion is that while permanent residential population does not
seem to react to terrorism, temporary population—i.e. tourism—appears to be much more
responsive. For example, Enders, Sandler and Parise [10] find that Western Europe
suffered considerable losses in revenues from tourism due to terrorism during the period
from 1974 to 1988. Their work suggests that even when terrorism does not make a city
an unpleasant place to live, it can make it a considerably less comfortable place to
vacation.




IV.        The Future of New York’s Downtown 7




7
    Mitchell Moss greatly influenced our thinking in this section.


                                                                                               19
The impact of terrorism on cities throughout America may generally be quite small.
However, the impact on New York City has already been dramatic. The skyline of the
city has been altered considerably and thirteen million square feet of class A office space
has been destroyed. In the short-run, some of the dislocated firms have found other
quarters in Manhattan and some have moved to New Jersey or Connecticut. Will the
longer run impact of this change be smaller than the short run change because downtown
will be rebuilt and firms will return? Alternatively, will the long run impact be bigger
than the short run change because other firms will follow in the exodus from downtown
Manhattan?


The first key element to understanding this change is the business geography of
Manhattan. The island separates into two separate geographic areas: midtown (roughly
between 34th street and 59th street, east of 8th avenue), and downtown (south of Canal
Street). These two areas contain 41 percent of the employment in the island of
Manhattan and 26 percent of the employment in the five boroughs.8 The attack directly
impacted the downtown area. The midtown area also suffered, but no real estate was
directly destroyed.


The two areas are certainly connected, but in many ways they are extremely distant. The
travel time between midtown and downtown by subway is—on average—22 minutes,
roughly the average commute time in the U.S. In principle, taxis can get between the two
areas more readily, but traffic often means that the travel times are similar. There are
certainly positive spillovers between the two areas, but the destruction in downtown
employment is more likely to increase demand for midtown space (because of downtown
employers substituting into midtown) than to decrease the demand for this space (as
might happen because of spillovers).


Moreover, since World War II, the relative dominance of midtown relative to downtown
has been continually rising. Today, midtown has over 3 times as many employees as
downtown. In 1950 it seems likely that downtown had more workers. Midtown is the

8
    Source: Authors’ estimates from Zip Code Business Patterns [29].


                                                                                              20
dominant area and its trajectory has been increasingly positive. It has strong advantages
in its proximity to residential areas in the upper east and west sides. Midtown is also
much more accessible to Manhattan’s consumption advantages (e.g. museums,
restaurants, and nightlife). Indeed, the downtown area’s continued strength comes
primarily from its access to New Jersey (via the path trains) and Staten Island (via the
ferry) and from its historically rooted institutions (such as the New York Stock
Exchange), which could certainly move to midtown.


Indeed, the World Trade Center was itself a government response to the perceived
decline of the downtown area. It was subsidized by Nelson Rockefeller and built as a
means of continuing support for the city. Many of its renters were government
institutions (such as the Metropolitan Transit Authority) that had originally been
pressured into locating at WTC to keep demand up. In the 1980-2000 period, the general
problems of downtown New York were hidden by the vibrant financial sector in which it
specialized. Nevertheless, downtown has continued to lose ground relative to midtown
even in that area of specialization and even without the WTC bombing was likely to
continue to lose further.


Downtown’s loss of key office buildings and their tenants will certainly continue to hurt
the area. The destruction of the Path station at WTC is likely to be just as harmful to the.
In the absence of major government subsidies to the area, it seems reasonable to believe
that downtown New York will continue its slide.


Will this slide pull midtown along? This seems unlikely. The spillovers between the two
areas are probably not that strong to begin with. Many of the businesses will move to
midtown. Many others will move to nearby suburban office parks that are likely to be
close enough to provide agglomeration economies that are probably not that less than
those provided by downtown. Indeed, this trend has already materialized. As
Heschmeyer [14] notes, citing a report by Julien J. Studley, Inc.:




                                                                                               21
         The majority of large displaced tenants signed leases in locations outside of
         Downtown Manhattan. For transactions larger than 50,000 square feet, 65%
         signed in Midtown, 17% in New Jersey, 5% in Westchester County, NY, and
         Connecticut and 9% in Brooklyn and Queens in New York, the Studley report
         noted.


The strongest effect on the midtown economy is likely to come from increased taxes. If
national or state subsidies don’t completely make up for the increased costs and
decreased revenues faced by the city government, then it is likely that midtown
businesses will have to pay more in taxes. This could, of course, hurt the entire area.
However, New York appears to have a great deal of room left in the budget, mostly in the
area of social services. New York is unique among America’s large cities in that it
maintains extremely large local expenditures of health, housing and transfer payments. If
New York funds its budget shortfall by cutting these expenditures, then the impact on the
local economy is likely to be much less.9


In light of this, we remain hopeful in our assessment of New York’s future, but much
more gloomy in our thinking about the downtown area. This view begs the question:
should the federal government step in and rescue downtown? Should large federal and
state assistance be allocated towards rebuilding lower Manhattan, or should assistance be
given to affected firms with the understanding that these firms are free to rebuild
anywhere they want?


The case for subsidies hinges on the view that there are remarkable intellectual spillovers
associated with the downtown area. Indeed, the continuing vitality of the area pre-9/11
gives credence to this view. However, midtown also has dramatic intellectual spillovers.
If the activity moves from the dense downtown to the almost equally dense midtown, it
seems unlikely that there will be a loss in New York’s fertile financial industry. To the
extent that employment moves to medium density areas in New Jersey, there is more of a
concern. Nonetheless, the fact that most displaced firms have moved to midtown and the

9
  Of course, there will be a loss in social welfare spending as a result. It is our view that local safety nets
are almost always a mistake, however, and it is our hope that state and national governments will replace at
least some of any decline in local welfare spending.


                                                                                                             22
absence of strong evidence for a loss of spillovers due to firms leaving Manhattan make
the case for massive subsidies questionable at best.


We think that it is foolish to engage in a large federally subsidized rebuilding program
downtown. It is surely more efficient to let businesses relocate either to midtown, where
there is still plenty of room to build, or to office parks in suburban New Jersey.
Downtown is far from the population centers of New York and is built around a port that
no longer exists. If firms want to rebuild there, then so be it. The private market
shouldn’t be blocked, but the future of New York City doesn’t depend on building in
downtown, and there is no economic reason to explicitly subsidize that activity.


There is a final point worth stressing on rebuilding downtown and space-based transfers
in the wake of 9/11. We think that there is a good case for government provided
assistance to people who were hurt by the attack. Individuals who lost jobs or family
members have every right to look to the government for at least some temporary
assistance. However, there is no comparable case for place-based assistance. Place-
based subsidies will just end up distorting spatial decisions and will not end up helping
the people who were most hurt by the national tragedy. Just as it makes sense to help
poor people, not poor places, it makes sense for the government to provide insurance to
people rather than to locales.




                                                                                            23
V. Conclusion



Historically, the link between cities and mass violence is strong and complex. Cities
originated from the need for protection. Urban walls created safe harbors. Violence
made travel difficult and increases the advantages of proximity. Alternatively, wars have
also destroyed cities and made them unsafe. In some cases, such as Berlin in WWI, cities
have grown tremendously with warfare. In other cases, such as Berlin in WWII, cities
have declined tremendously with warfare. As such, the expected impact of terror on
America’s urban landscape is unclear.


Moreover, while the size of the 9/11 tragedy is appalling, it is still small relative to the
bombing that impacted London and Berlin during the Second World War. Over the past
30 years, terrorism seems to have had at most a small impact on Jerusalem and London.
Across countries, there seems to be a positive link between terrorism and urbanization,
but this link is small, statistically weak, and causally dubious. As such, we tend to think
that the overall impact of terror on America’s cities will be small.


The only exception is downtown New York. Before September 11, New York’s financial
district already seemed like an anachronism. During much of the past 50 years, it was
propped up by government subsidies, most spectacularly in the building of the World
Trade Center itself. In the wake of the massive destruction of 9/11, it seems likely that
the area will not recover, because its natural disadvantages are pretty strong. Only
massive government subsidies seem likely to save the area, and the case for these
subsidies seems to us quite weak.




                                                                                               24
References

   1. C.V. Bagli, For downtown: Vacant offices and lost vigor, New York Times
      (November 19, 2001).
   2. P. Bairoch, “Cities and Economic Development: From the Dawn of History to the
      Present,” University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1988).
   3. R. J. Barro and J. Lee, “Data Set for a Panel of 138 Countries,” NBER,
      Cambridge (1994).
   4. M.L.B. Bloch, “Feudal Society,” University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1961).
   5. Central Bureau of Statistics, “Statistical Abstract of Israel 1954,” CBS, Jerusalem
      (1954).
   6. Central Bureau of Statistics, “Statistical Abstract of Israel 2000,” CBS, Jerusalem
      (2000).
   7. J. Clavell, trans., “The Art of War,” by Sun Tzu, Hodder and Stoughton, London
      (1981).
   8. D.R. Davis and D.E. Weinstein, Bones, bombs and break points: The geography
      of economic activity, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No.
      8517 (2001).
   9. W. Easterly and R. Levine, “Political data,” World Bank,
      http://paradocs.pols.columbia.edu/datavine/MainFrameSet.jsp (2001).
   10. W. Enders, T. Sandler and G.F. Parise, An econometric analysis of the impact of
       terrorism on tourism, Kyklos, 45(4), 531-554 (1992).
   11. P. Enright, NYC has enough space for WTC tenants, The CoStar Group,
       www.costargroup.com (September 21, 2001).
   12. R. Furstenberg and L. Susser, Future shock, The Jerusalem Report (1988).
   13. E. Glaeser and J. Gyourko, Urban decline and durable housing, National Bureau
       of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 8598 (2001).
   14. M. Heschmeyer, Attack magnified existing NYC office trends, The CoStar
       Group, www.costargroup.com (October 16, 2001).
   15. P.R. Krugman, Increasing returns and economic geography, Journal of Political
       Economy, 99(3), 483-499 (1991).
   16. P.R. Krugman, “Geography and Trade,” MIT Press, Cambridge (1991).
   17. E. F. Mickolus, “International Terrorism: Attributes of Terrorist Events, 1968-
       1977,” ICPSR, Ann Arbor (1982).
   18. B.R. Mitchell, “International Historical Statistics: Europe, 1750-1993,”
       Macmillan Reference, London (1998).
   19. L. Mumford, “The Culture of Cities,” Harcourt, Brace, New York (1960).



                                                                                            25
20. Office for National Statistics, “Annual Abstract of Statistics,” HMSO, London
    (2001).
21. H. Pirenne, “Economic and Social History of Medieval Europe,” K. Paul, Trench,
    Trubner & Co., Ltd., London (1936).
22. N.J.G. Pounds, “An Historical Geography of Europe,” Cambridge University
    Press, Cambridge (1990).
23. Office for National Statistics, “Annual Abstract of Statistics 2001,” HMSO,
    London (2001).
24. R. Simon, Congress OKs airline aid package, Los Angeles Times (September 22,
    2001).
25. M.L.R. Smith, “Fighting for Ireland? The Military Strategy of the Irish
    Republican Movement,” Routledge, London (1995).
26. C. von Clausewitz, “Principles of War,” Military Service Publishing Co.,
    Harrisburg (1942).
27. C.V. Wedgwood, “The Thirty Years War,” Doubleday, Garden City (1961).
28. World Bank, “World Development Indicators 2001,” IBRD, Washington, DC
    (2001).
29. Zip Code Business Patterns 1999, U.S. Bureau of the Census, www.census.gov
    (2001).




                                                                                     26
Table 1: The effects of danger on urbanization and urban form, 1968-1977


                                                    Dependent variable:a
                                  Percent population urban,    Log(1+buildings 500+ feet
                                            1978c                  tall built after 1977)f
                                                  *
At least one terrorist action              6.7622                         -0.0617
1968-1977 (dummy)b                        (3.3011)                        (0.2466)
Casualties from terrorism                   0.0047                          0.0009
1968-1977 per million                      (0.0245)                        (0.0018)
population in 1973b
Log(1+number of terrorist                  2.3375*                         -0.0710
actions 1968-1977)b                        (1.0659)                        (0.0796)
Military personnel, % of                    1.0784                          0.0301
total labor force 1985c                    (0.6350)                        (0.0480)
Average number of                           1.3425                         -0.1218
government crises per year,                (1.1053)                        (0.0864)
1968-1977d
Average number of purges                    2.3752                         -0.4245
per year, 1968-1977d                       (4.9165)                        (0.3833)
Average number of coups                    12.5111                         -0.4295
per year, 1968-1977d                       (8.1916)                        (0.6490)
Average number of riots per                 0.4635                         -0.0058
year, 1968-1977d                           (1.0868)                        (0.0853)
Fraction of years in civil                  0.3496                         -0.2349
war, 1968-1977d                            (3.8286)                        (0.2830)
At least one external war,                  3.0516                         -0.0443
1960-1985 (dummy)e                         (3.1364)                        (0.2156)
Fraction of years involved                 2.5362                           0.3128
in an external war, 1960-                 (10.0014)                        (0.6803)
1985 (dummy)e
* - Significant at the 5% level.
a - Regressions include controls for log(GDP per capita) and log(population) in 1973, the
median year of the sample period.
b - Source: Mickolus [17].
c - Source: World Bank [28]
d - Source: Easterly and Levine [9].
e - Source: Barro and Lee [3]
f - Source: Marshall Gerometta’s “Hot 500” database. (Available on request from
marshall@worldstallest.com).




                                                                                            27
Table 2: Jerusalem and Tel Aviv, 1948-1998

                                 Jerusalem                              Tel Aviv
                     c. 1948      c. 1998     Average      c. 1948      c. 1998    Average
                                               annual                               annual
                                              growth                               growth
Population            87.1         717.0       0.042        305.7       1138.7      0.026
(thousands)
Density               159.5       1099.7       0.037        1834.0      6659.3     0.026
(population per
sq. km)
Percent of total      10.2         11.9                      35.7         18.8
population of
Israel
Average annual growth refers to (log(value in 1998) – log(value in 1948))/50
Sources:
Central Bureau of Statistics [5]
Central Bureau of Statistics [6]




                                                                                        28
Table 3: Population of Inner London, 1951-1999

  Year          Population (thou)
  1951                3,679
  1961                3,481
  1971                3,060
  1981                2,550
  1991                2,627
  1999                2,817

Source: Office for National Statistics [23].




                                                 29
Figure 1

                             War and cities: 1890-1990

                10000
                 9000
                 8000
                 7000
   Population




                 6000                                                           Berlin
                 5000                                                           London
                 4000                                                           Paris
                 3000
                 2000
                 1000
                    0
                     90

                     00

                     10

                     20

                     30

                     40

                     50

                     60

                     70

                     80

                     90
                   18

                   19

                   19

                   19

                   19

                   19

                   19

                   19

                   19

                   19

                   19
                                         Year




Source: Mitchell [18]. Note that these figures are based on contemporaneous borders and
therefore may not be properly adjusted for changes in city definitions.




                                                                                          30
