NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DIVIDEND POLICY INSIDE THE FIRM
Mihir A. Desai
C. Fritz Foley
James R. Hines Jr.
Working Paper 8698
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8698
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2002

The statistical analysis of firm-level data on U.S. multinational companies was conducted at the International
Investment Division, Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce under arrangements that
maintain legal confidentiality requirements. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not reflect
official positions of the U.S. Department of Commerce. We thank Ned Howenstine, Ray Mataloni, and Bill
Zeile at BEA for guidance, Bill Simpson for statistical support, and Kevin Hassett, Laurie Hodrick, Stewart
Myers, Richard Ruback, Andrei Shleifer, Richard Zeckhauser, and various seminar participants for helpful
comments on earlier drafts. Financial support from the International Tax Policy Forum, the Lois and Bruce
Zenkel Research Fund at the University of Michigan and the Division of Research at Harvard Business
School is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Mihir A. Desai, C. Fritz Foley and James R. Hines Jr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Dividend Policy inside the Firm
Mihir A. Desai, C. Fritz Foley and James R. Hines Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 8698
January 2002
JEL No. F23, G31, G35, H25, H87

ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes dividend remittances by a large panel of foreign affiliates of U.S.
multinational firms. The dividend policies of foreign affiliates, which convey no signals to public capital
markets, nevertheless resemble those used by publicly held companies in paying dividends to diffuse
common shareholders. Robustness checks verify that dividend policies of foreign affiliates are little
affected by the dividend policies of their parent companies or parent company exposure to public capital
markets. Systematic differences in the payout behavior of affiliates that differ in organizational form, and
those that face differing tax costs of paying dividends, reveal the importance of tax factors; nevertheless,
dividend policies are not solely determined by tax considerations. The absence of capital market
considerations and the incompleteness of tax explanations together suggest that dividend policies are
largely driven by the need to control managers of foreign affiliates. Parent firms are more willing to incur
tax penalties by simultaneously investing funds while receiving dividends when their foreign affiliates
are partially owned, located far from the United States, or in jurisdictions in which property rights are
weak, all of which are implied by control theories of dividends.

Mihir A. Desai
Harvard Business School
Morgan 363
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mdesai@hbs.edu

C. Fritz Foley
Harvard Business School
Morgan 228b
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
cfoley@hbs.edu

James R. Hines Jr.
University of Michigan
Business School
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
jrhines@umich.edu

1.

Introduction
A major impediment to understanding corporate dividend policy is the availability of

multiple plausible explanations for observed behavior. Miller and Modigliani (1961) clarified the
theoretical setting of this problem by showing that, absent informational asymmetries, transaction
costs, or tax considerations, the payout behavior of firms should not affect share valuation by
investors. It follows from these assumptions that the dividend policies of value-maximizing firms
might take almost any form, rendering them apparently random to outside observers. In practice,
corporate dividend policy instead appears to have strongly predictable components, with firms
gradually adjusting dividends to target levels that reflect current earnings. Consequently, much of
the modern literature is devoted to identifying the extent to which informational asymmetries
between owners and managers, transaction costs, or tax considerations account for corporate
payout policies.
What Fischer Black (1976) christened the “dividend puzzle” – the problem of reconciling
observed dividend behavior with economic incentives facing the relevant decision makers – is
typically cast as a result of the relationship between external shareholders and internal corporate
managers. Dividends represent gross flows from corporations to their shareholders, so to the
extent that owners dictate dividend policy, they can use dividends to wrest resources from the
control of managers. Corporate managers with discretion to select dividend levels can also use
dividends to send credible profitability signals to the capital market. Both of these uses of
dividends address needs that stem from imperfect monitoring and information flow between
owners and managers. Since corporate control problems and capital market signaling carry similar

empirical implications for dividend payments, it can be difficult to distinguish between them
empirically.
This paper examines the dividend puzzle in a somewhat novel context: dividend policy
inside the firm. The empirical work considers the determinants of dividend remittances from
foreign affiliates of American multinational corporations to their domestic parent companies. The
objectives of this study are to estimate the process governing dividend remittances from foreign
affiliates, compare it to the policies that firms use in paying dividends to common shareholders,
and to use this comparison to identify common factors in all dividend policies. Dividend policy
inside the firm is subject to many, but not all, of the same pressures as are the dividend policies of
firms with public ownership. The payment of a dividend by an incorporated foreign affiliate to its
U.S. parent company triggers a U.S. tax liability, as does the payment of a corporate dividend to
taxable common shareholders. Both types of dividend policies may reflect the concerns of
shareholders with limited ability to monitor and control the behavior of managers, and who do so
in part with regularized dividend payments. One notable feature of dividend policy inside the firm
is the smaller role of informational problems that lie at the core of signaling explanations of the
dividend policies of firms with more diffuse owners. By studying dividend payments in a setting
in which there is very limited scope for signaling, it is possible to identify the extent to which other
considerations, such as agency problems, are responsible for observed dividend patterns.
The results indicate that dividend remittances from affiliates to parents and dividend
payments from parents to shareholders share a number of common features. Multinational firms
behave as though they select target payout ratios for their foreign affiliates, gradually adjusting
payouts over time in response to changes in earnings. This behavior bears a striking resemblance

2

to the process by which domestic firms pay dividends to common shareholders, a pattern first
described by John Lintner (1956).
The similarity of dividend policy inside firms and between firms and shareholders could
reflect capital market concerns, since corporations paying dividends to common shareholders – in
efforts to signal profitability, for example – might need to draw on funds from foreign affiliates,
thereby triggering repatriations. This possibility is considered by comparing the dividend behavior
of affiliates of publicly and privately held parent firms, by investigating changes in the dividend
behavior of affiliates whose parents undergo ownership conversions through leveraged buyouts or
initial public offerings, and by introducing controls for parental dividend payouts. All of these
comparisons indicate that the capital market settings and dividend policies of parent companies
have insignificant effects on the dividend policies of foreign affiliates.
Tax considerations have obvious potential to influence dividend payments to common
shareholders, since dividends trigger tax obligations that might otherwise be deferred or avoided.
Similarly, tax considerations influence the choice of dividend payouts by foreign affiliates.
Fortunately, it is possible to measure the impact of these tax considerations by comparing the
behavior of foreign affiliates subject to different foreign tax rates, and those with different
organizational forms (subsidiaries and branches) that create differing tax incentives to remit
dividends. The evidence indicates that firms pursue dividend payout policies designed in part to
minimize tax obligations. However, as with dividend payouts between firms and shareholders, tax
minimization cannot explain much of observed dividend policies inside firms.
The need to control corporate managers is often invoked to explain the existence of large
and frequent dividend payments from corporations to common shareholders. Shareholders who

3

lack complete information on the state of firm investments and who are reluctant to trust managers
might insist on regular dividend payments as a method of extracting value from an otherwisereticent management. Recent literature on the conglomerate discount and the process of capital
allocation within firms suggests that similar incentive problems exist within firms as well. A
multinational firm’s central management may use financial flows within the firm to evaluate the
financial prospects and needs of far-flung foreign affiliates and to judge the reliability of foreign
managers. As a result, it may be sensible to use dividend payments to control managers as well as
to extract returns on investments, much as public shareholders may use dividends to monitor and
control their firms.
Evidence of the role of control considerations in dividend policies appears both in the
inability of tax and signaling models to account for observed behavior, and in direct tests of the
implications of control theories. Foreign affiliates are equally likely to increase or reduce dividend
payments, or to initiate or omit dividends, neither of which is characteristic of dividend payments
to common shareholders, nor are they consistent with the implications of signaling models.
Dividends from foreign affiliates adjust to desired levels at faster speeds than do dividends paid by
parent firms to common shareholders, suggesting that the signaling explanations offered for slow
adjustment are less relevant for dividends inside firms. Affiliates in situations in which control is
problematic – those that are partially owned, that are located very far from the United States, or in
countries with weak legal protections – are the most likely to remit dividends while simultaneously
receiving parent transfers, thereby incurring avoidable tax costs as the price of forcing dividend
remittances. All of this evidence is consistent with control motives for dividend policy inside the
firm.

4

While dividend policy inside multinational firms has considerable significance for
managers, the ability to study the practice of dividend policy inside firms has been limited by the
absence of accessible data. This paper investigates the financial behavior of a large panel of
foreign affiliates and their American parent companies for every year between 1982 and 1997.
This evidence sheds light on the dynamics of capital allocation inside firms and the ways in which
incentive problems inside firms influence financial policy. Empirical efforts to understand
incentive problems within firms typically rely on market perceptions of investment distortions –
such as the conglomerate discount – to which it is now possible to add evidence of costly changes
in financial policy that address the same incentive problems. The fact that patterns of behavior
observed in dividend policy with common shareholders also exist in settings not characterized by
diffuse shareholders, and therefore those in which signaling explanations have little scope, suggests
that explanations of the dividend puzzle associated with agency explanations offer the greatest
promise.
Section two of the paper summarizes tax and non-tax motivations for dividend policy with
a particular emphasis on the determinants of dividend policy inside the firm. Section three
describes the data and provides some descriptive statistics. Section four analyzes the dividend
policies of foreign affiliates and their parent companies, including any means by which they may
influence each other. Section five is the conclusion.
2.

Corporate motivation for dividend policies
This section reviews the incentives firms face in selecting their dividend policies, and the

available evidence concerning dividend behavior. The evidence comes in two distinct forms.
The first is evidence of the behavior of domestic companies paying dividends to common

5

shareholders; these studies focus on non-tax factors that influence payout behavior. The second
is evidence of factors that influence repatriations from foreign affiliates, and these studies focus
almost exclusively on tax considerations. Taken together, this evidence covers many of the
factors that are likely to influence dividend policy inside the firm.
2.1.

The design of dividend policies inside and outside the firm
Dividend payments to common shareholders exhibit regular patterns first described by

Lintner (1956). On the basis of interviews with corporate executives, Lintner concluded that
firms select target payout ratios to which they gradually adjust actual dividend payments over
time. His empirical analysis of aggregate U.S. dividend behavior was consistent with this model
of the dividend process, in that both current earnings and lagged dividends positively influence
current dividends. This pattern, together with the considerable attention paid by managers to
dividend policy, is not implied by the Miller and Modigliani (1961) analysis of firm valuation,
and therefore suggests that dividends reflect considerations otherwise ruled out by their
assumptions. Potential explanations for observed patterns of dividend behavior center on
corporate control problems, signaling explanations, and the tax effects of paying dividends.
Each of these explanations has either an analogue inside the firm or carries implications for how
dividend policy inside the firm might be conducted.
When the goals of corporate managers diverge from those of shareholders, financial
policies can be used to reduce agency costs. In particular, Easterbrook (1984) and Jensen (1986)
emphasize that consistent dividend payments can mitigate agency conflicts by distributing
investment returns and thereby reducing the scope for managerial misallocation and

6

appropriation of corporate resources.1 Shleifer and Vishny (1986) and Allen, Bernardo and
Welch (2000) note that institutional investors prefer to own shares of firms making regular
dividend payments, and argue that large institutional investors are more willing and able to
monitor corporate management than are smaller and more diffuse owners. As a result, corporate
dividend policies can be tailored to attract institutional investors who in turn provide important
monitoring services.
Similar control problems appear to exist inside firms and are hypothesized to influence
financial policies and capital budgeting. As formulated by Bagwell and Zechner (1993), such
intrafirm influence activities carry implications for optimal capital structures and financial
policies. Scharfstein and Stein (2000) note that efforts to mitigate rent-seeking by divisional
managers can lead to inefficient capital allocation in a multi-divisional firm. The scope and
magnitude of such intrafirm problems are suggested, in part, by the findings of Lang and Stulz
(1994) and Berger and Ofek (1995) who document that diversified conglomerates trade at a
discount to a comparable portfolio of specialized firms. These problems have analogues inside
multinational firms. Foreign managers might choose to reinvest funds in foreign affiliates
despite expected returns that are objectively below acceptable thresholds; such investments are
made more attractive by the possibility that they enhance managerial mobility and opportunities
within the firm or in the broader labor market. The appetite for more overt perquisites by foreign

1

There is some evidence consistent with this view. Barclay and Smith (1988) note that shareholders prefer
dividends to share repurchases whenever information asymmetries imply that opportunistic managers can exploit
their discretion to choose between distribution methods. They report evidence that share repurchases widen bid-ask
spreads, which is implied by their model. Lang and Litzenberger (1989) find that the market reacts favorably to
dividend announcements by firms with characteristics suggesting that they might otherwise overinvest their funds.
But Howe, He and Kao (1992) report that firm characteristics do not influence market reactions to share repurchases
and special dividends. Laporta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny (2000) offer evidence that laws protecting
the rights of minority shareholders are associated with higher dividend payout ratios, which is consistent with the
use of dividends to control managerial actions. Chirinko and Phillips (1999) also conclude that agency explanations
outperform alternative explanations in their study of the evolution of dividend policy at the Baby Bells.

7

managers may likewise require disciplining mechanisms within the firm. Under such conditions,
consistent dividend policies may serve to monitor foreign managers and encourage valuemaximization on their part.
Models of asymmetric information in financial markets offer alternative explanations of
the regularity of dividend payments.2 These theories imply that consistent dividend payments
that may be tax-disadvantaged serve to signal firm quality in a way that financial reports and
other indicators of profitability cannot. It is difficult for firms without profits to pay dividends,
but given the availability of other signals of firm quality, and the tax costs associated with paying
dividends, there is considerable skepticism about the likelihood that firms pay dividends in order
to signal profitability.3 One of the questions raised by signaling interpretations of dividend
behavior is why firms choose to signal profitability with dividends rather than the tax-favored
alternative of share repurchases.4 Since corporate control problems and capital market signaling
carry similar empirical predictions for the pattern of dividend payments, it can be difficult to
distinguish empirically between these explanations.
Given that the parent-subsidiary relationship is not characterized by diffuse ownership,
signaling theories carry few implications for dividend policy inside the firm. Signaling
explanations typically focus on the way in which dividend announcements impact share
2

See, for example, Ross (1977), Bhattacharya (1979), Hakansson (1982), and Miller and Rock (1985). Allen and
Michaely (1995) provide a very useful survey of this literature.
3
See, for example, Black (1976) and Crockett and Friend (1988). More recently, DeAngelo, DeAngelo and Skinner
(1996) and Benartzi, Michaely and Thaler (1997) study the link between dividend changes and future earnings and
find little evidence of the implications carried by signaling explanations. DeAngelo, DeAngelo and Skinner (2000)
express similar skepticism based on the declining willingness of firms to pay special dividends, which are available
to serve important signaling functions.
4
This issue is considered by John and Williams (1985), Ambarish, John, and Williams (1987), Ofer and Thakor
(1987), Williams (1988), Bernheim (1991), and Bernheim and Wantz (1995). They analyze situations in which
shareholders of profitable firms prefer to incur tax costs associated with dividends rather than take the chance of
tendering their shares at prices below true values (which are known to managers but not to shareholders).

8

valuation in public markets where investors have large numbers of alternative investment
opportunities. These environmental features do not have direct analogues inside the firm. In
addition, in the sample analyzed below, parent companies own at least 50 percent and usually
100 percent of the equity of their affiliates. As a result, a parent company is in a position to learn
a great deal about its affiliate’s operations. This information will be meaningful to the parent
company in part because the parent usually operates domestically in the same industry as the
affiliate. One possibility that must, however, be taken seriously is that a parent company’s need
to pay dividends to common shareholders in order to signal profitability creates pressures to
repatriate dividends from foreign affiliates, and that dividend policy inside the firm simply
reflects these pressures.
Finally, it is important to reconcile observed behavior with the possible tax penalties
associated with paying dividends. Under U.S. law, individual shareholders owe taxes on
dividend receipts, while they are not taxed on unrealized capital gains. If firms reinvest their
profits instead of paying dividends then shareholders receive their returns in the tax-preferred
form of capital gains. There are, however, two important scenarios in which the tax treatment of
dividends need not discourage dividend payments by firms concerned about after-tax returns to
domestic shareholders. The first is that dividends are effectively taxed at the same rate as capital
gains, which happens if shareholders are tax-exempt institutions or traders whose capital gains
are taxed at the same rate as ordinary income.5 The second scenario is one in which corporations

Jagannathan, Stephens and Weisbach (2000) and Guay and Harford (2000) offer recent evidence of the prevalence
of stock repurchases, their transitory nature, and the favorable stock market reaction to repurchase announcements.
5
See Miller and Scholes (1978, 1982). Evidence from ex-dividend day price and volume movements is mixed:
Gordon and Bradford (1980), Miller and Scholes (1982), Michaely (1991), and Eades, Hess and Kim (1994) find
little effect of dividend taxes on share prices, and Richardson, Sefcik and Thompson (1986) report little effect on
trading volume, while Elton and Gruber (1970), Litzenberger and Ramaswamy (1979), Kalay (1982), Poterba and
Summers (1984, 1985), and Barclay (1987) report significant price effects. Miller and Scholes (1978) also argue

9

must eventually pay dividends in order to permit shareholders to receive returns from their
investments.6 Since many practical situations are not covered by either of these two scenarios, it
follows that dividend payments are likely to be discouraged by heavy taxation of dividend
income.7 The falling fraction of American companies paying dividends documented in Fama
and French (2000a) may reflect a growing awareness of this fact.
The tax consequences of paying dividends outside the firm have a direct analogue inside
the multinational firm.8 American corporations owe taxes to the United States on their foreign
incomes, but are entitled to defer U.S. tax liabilities on the unrepatriated portions of the profits of
incorporated foreign affiliates. The United States also permits firms to claim credits against U.S.
taxes for any foreign income taxes paid on income remitted as dividends. Dividend remittances
from foreign subsidiaries to their American parents therefore generate U.S. tax liabilities that are
functions of differences between foreign tax rates and the U.S. corporate tax rate. Generally
speaking, firms owe U.S. taxes based on the difference between the applicable foreign tax rate
and the U.S. rate; if the U.S. tax rate exceeds the foreign tax rate, then the effective repatriation
tax equals the difference between the two. If, instead, the foreign tax rate exceeds the U.S. tax
rate, then dividends trigger no additional U.S. tax liability, and taxpayers can apply any
that dividend income is effectively untaxed if it raises the (binding) limit on individual interest expense deductions,
an empirical claim the significance of which is challenged by Feenberg (1981).
6
See King (1977), Auerbach (1979), and Bradford (1981). In these “new view” or “tax capitalization” models,
dividends are used to dispose of residual funds once profitable investments are exhausted, so dividend taxation at
unchanging rates does not affect dividend payouts. This scenario rules out nondividend methods of transmitting
profits to shareholders, such as share buybacks, which have grown over time (Bagwell and Shoven, 1989; Fama and
French, 2000a).
7
Feldstein (1970), King (1977), and Poterba and Summers (1985) report negative correlations between dividend tax
rates and dividend payouts in aggregate quarterly British time series. Poterba (1987) and Hines (1996) report
similar results in annual aggregate U.S. data. It should be noted, however, that other studies – such as Auerbach
(1982) and Marsh and Merton (1987) – that do not include the tax cost of paying dividends also report reasonably
good fits for aggregate annual U.S. data. Perez-Gonzalez (2000) offers evidence that firms with large individual
shareholders are more likely than others to adjust dividends in response to changes in individual tax rates on
dividend income. Poterba (2001) provides a recent survey of this literature.

10

difference against U.S. tax liabilities on other foreign income. A notable exception to this
treatment is that the dividend flows of unincorporated foreign branch affiliates do not trigger any
particular U.S. tax consequences, as U.S. taxes are due on foreign branch income as earned,
regardless of whether or not dividends are paid.
The desire to avoid U.S. tax liabilities is likely to influence dividend repatriations in
relatively straightforward ways. Given that U.S. tax liabilities are triggered by repatriation, these
tax liabilities can be deferred by reinvesting earnings abroad rather than remitting dividends to
parent companies.9 The incentive to defer repatriation is of course much stronger for affiliates in
low-tax countries, whose dividends trigger significant U.S. tax obligations, than they are for
affiliates in high-tax countries – particularly since taxpayers receive net credits for repatriations
from affiliates in countries with tax rates that exceed the U.S. rate.10
Previous studies of dividend repatriations emphasize these tax factors. For example,
Hines and Hubbard (1990) analyze a cross-section of U.S. multinationals using IRS data from
1984, finding that tax considerations affect the timing of dividend repatriations. Other taxfocused studies of dividend policy inside the firm, such as Altshuler, Newlon, and Randolph
(1995), use repeated cross-sections to distinguish effects associated with transitory and
permanent changes in tax costs. Altshuler and Grubert (forthcoming) note that firms can avoid
8

Appendix I and Desai, Foley and Hines (2001) offer more comprehensive reviews of the details of international tax
rules for U.S. multinationals and their implications for dividend policy.
9
The Subpart F provisions of U.S. tax law treat income from passive investments as though repatriated, thereby
subjecting such income to immediate U.S. taxation. Hence foreign subsidiaries must invest in active foreign
business operations in order to defer U.S. taxation of their profits.
10
Hartman (1985) applies the “tax capitalization” or “new view” logic to the multinational firm in order to suggest
that repatriation taxes need not affect multinational dividend policy if current repatriation tax conditions are not
expected to change. Of course, there is ample evidence (see Altshuler, Newlon and Randolph (1995)) that
conditions do change over time, thereby making it attractive to repatriate dividends first from low-tax foreign
locations. Since excess foreign tax credits cannot be carried forward and back in time without loss of present value,
even firms in unchanging tax situations face incentives to combine dividend repatriations from affiliates in high-tax

11

repatriation tax liabilities by investing foreign profits in other foreign affiliates rather than
repatriating profits to domestic parent companies. Such investment strategies produce triangular
and multiple-tiered ownership structures in which affiliates invest to obtain minority interests in
other foreign affiliates that are typically owned by other members of the controlled group,
including a combination of other foreign affiliates and parent companies. Dividends paid by
these affiliates indirectly owned by other foreign affiliates need not trigger repatriation tax
liabilities, since the dividends are not received by entities residing in the United States.
2.2.

The Lintner dividend model
The Lintner model of dividend payouts is one in which firms reconcile potentially

conflicting goals of choosing dividends that are appropriate for current conditions while
maintaining dividends close to their historic levels. The Lintner model is consistent with the
following specification of firm objectives:

(1)

Ψ = γ 1 (Dit − k it Eit ) + γ 2 (Dit − Dit −1 ) ,
2

2

in which firm i chooses a dividend policy that minimizes Ψ . In equation (1), Dit is firm i’s
dividend in period t, kit is its target dividend payout ratio in period t, and Eit is its after-tax
earnings in period t. γ 1 and γ 2 are parameters that are common to all firms. The first term on
the right side of (1) reflects the cost that firm i incurs when its dividends in period t differ from
target dividends, while the second term reflects the cost of deviating from the previous period’s
dividends. The quadratic specification of (1) imposes that these costs are symmetric around

and low-tax locations. Such strategies are costly and not always available, as a result of which repatriation taxes
discourage dividend remittances from affiliates, particularly those in low-tax countries.

12

desired dividends (in the first case) and the previous year’s dividend (in the second case); the
specification requires that γ 1 > 0 and γ 2 > 0 .
The first term in (1) reflects the impact of tax and other economic conditions on the
desirability of paying dividends out of current earnings. The parameter kit is the payout rate that
maximizes the present discounted value of after-tax dividends in the absence of corporate control
considerations. As a general matter, kit is likely to be a function of contemporaneous tax rates
and other variables. The second term in (1) stems from the difficulty of maintaining appropriate
incentives while permitting dividends to fluctuate with earnings. Strict adherence to target
dividends gives managers strong incentives to generate sufficient cash flows to finance such
dividends, and may thereby enhance profitability over the long run.
The implications of minimizing Ψ can be identified by differentiating (1) with respect to
Dit, and setting the result to equal zero, thereby yielding:
(2)

2γ 1 (Dit − k it Eit ) + 2γ 2 (Dit − Dit −1 ) = 0 .

Equation (2) implies:

(3)

Dit =

γ1
γ2
k it Eit +
D .
(γ 1 + γ 2 )
(γ 1 + γ 2 ) it −1

 γ1 
Equation (3) is the basic Lintner dividend estimating framework in which 
 corresponds
 γ1 + γ 2 
to the adjustment parameter. Since the coefficients that premultiply (kitEit) and Dit-1 are
constrained to sum to one, it is possible to identify the term corresponding to kit simply by
estimating (3) and properly interpreting the results.

13

While the model developed by Lintner (1956) was based on case studies and interviews
with individual executives, the accompanying empirical work analyzed aggregate time-series
data for the U.S. economy. Beginning with Fama and Babiak (1968), several studies have
estimated Lintner models using firm-level data. In particular, Choe (1990) analyzes long-run
trends in adjustment costs and desired payout ratios, as well as the determinants of their crosssectional variation. Dewenter and Warther (1998) interpret differences in adjustment parameters
as evidence of the impact of Japanese financial policies in their comparison of keiretsu and nonkeiretsu firms. Fama and French (2000b) use Lintner-like specifications to test the implications
of the pecking order theory of capital structure. Benartzi, Michaely and Thaler (1997), among
others, conclude that “Lintner’s model of dividends remains the best description of the dividend
setting process available.”
3. Data and Descriptive Statistics
The Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) Annual Survey of U.S. Direct Investment
Abroad from 1982 through 1997 provides a panel of data on the financial and operating
characteristics of U.S. firms operating abroad.11 U.S. direct investment abroad is defined as the
direct or indirect ownership or control by a single U.S. legal entity of at least ten percent of the
voting securities of an incorporated foreign business enterprise or the equivalent interest in an
unincorporated foreign business enterprise. A U.S. multinational entity (MNE) is the
combination of a single U.S. legal entity that has made the direct investment, called the U.S.
parent, and at least one foreign business enterprise, called the foreign affiliate. The International
Investment and Trade in Services Survey Act requires that all firms larger than a certain size file

11

Detailed information on the data collected in this survey appears in Appendix II and in Mataloni (1995).

14

detailed financial and operating items for each affiliate and information on the value of
transactions between U.S. parents and their foreign affiliates.
Table I displays descriptive statistics from 1997 for the affiliates of U.S. parents, the
consolidated activities of their parents, and a broader set of Compustat firms. In 1997, the
10,838 affiliates of U.S. multinationals featured mean assets of $157.5 million, mean net income
of $9.8 million, and a mean dividend payment of $5.3 million. These affiliates are generally
either separately incorporated subsidiaries or unincorporated branches. Incorporated affiliates
can be majority-owned (at least 50 percent directly or indirectly owned by the U.S. parent) or
minority owned. Unincorporated affiliates primarily take the form of branches. Branches are
wholly owned operations in a foreign country that a U.S. person conducts in its own name.
Finally, “other” organizational forms include partnerships and sole proprietorships.12 In 1997,
86% of affiliates were majority owned incorporated subsidiaries, 9% were minority owned
incorporated subsidiaries, and 4% were branches.13 No particular industry dominates these
affiliates although three sectors of ten listed - wholesale trade, chemical manufacturing, and
transportation equipment manufacturing – account for nearly half of all affiliates in 1997.

12

Since data on organizational form are only collected in benchmark years, affiliates must be assigned an
organizational form in non-benchmark years. If an affiliate appears in a benchmark year (1982, 1989 and 1994), the
affiliate is assigned that organizational form in subsequent non-benchmark years. If an affiliate first appears in a
non-benchmark year (1983-1988 and 1990-1993), the affiliate is assigned the organizational form for those years
that it reports in the first following relevant benchmark year (1989 and 1994, respectively). For affiliates appearing
in the data after 1994 or affiliates that appear and disappear from the data between benchmark years, organizational
form is unavailable, resulting in 6.2 percent of affiliate observations remaining unclassified.
If affiliates change organizational form frequently, this procedure would be problematic. Of those affiliates
that respond to more than one benchmark survey, only 5.0 percent report more than one organizational form,
suggesting that the procedure employed provides a reasonable characterization of affiliate organizational form.
13
While not reported here, these shares have shifted over time reflecting the diminished use of branches and
minority ownership over the course of the sample period. This pattern is consistent with the findings of Desai and
Hines (1999) that the “basket” provisions of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 reduced the attractiveness of minority
ownership to American multinational firms.

15

The 10,838 affiliates in the sample in 1997 are associated with 1,347 parents. There is
considerable heterogeneity in the size of parent systems. Thirty-one percent of parent systems
include only a single reporting affiliate, while 21 percent include more than 10 reporting
affiliates. The second column of Table I provides consolidated data for the parent systems of
affiliates in the sample derived from Compustat. In 1997, the mean parent had consolidated
assets of $6,081 million and consolidated net income of $359 million. On average these firms
pay $135 million in dividends to shareholders. Parents of affiliates in the sample are
considerably larger than their affiliates and are considerably larger than the average Compustat
firms as documented by comparisons between column two and column three of Table I.
Dividend payments from affiliates to their parents appear to be common, large, and
persistent. Thirty two percent of affiliates report positive dividend payments and the median
ratio of dividends to net income for payers is 78 percent. Figure 1 plots the percent of affiliates
reporting positive dividends and the median payout ratio among payers for two types of
affiliates—majority owned incorporated affiliates and branches—over the entire sample period.
Foreign subsidiaries and foreign branches are roughly equally likely to remit dividends, doing so
with similar payout ratios.
Dividend payments exhibit strong intertemporal persistence. Seventy-two percent of
affiliates that paid dividends in 1996 paid dividends again in 1997. Figure 2 displays this rate of
persistence for majority owned incorporated affiliates and branches over the 1982-1997 period.
This figure indicates that rates of persistence have remained high over the sample period and that
there is little difference between the behavior of subsidiaries and branches despite differences in
their tax costs of paying dividends. Although the 1997 rate of persistence is high, it is lower than
the rate of persistence in dividend payments from publicly held firms to their common

16

shareholders. Of the Compustat listed firms with foreign affiliates that paid dividends to
common shareholders in 1996, 98 percent paid dividends again in 1997, while of all Compustat
firms that paid dividends in 1996, 93 percent did so again in 1997.
The regression analysis reported in section four exploits the panel nature of the data. As
the bottom of Table 1 illustrates, the panel consists of 109,971 affiliate-year observations for the
23,799 majority-owned affiliates that comprise the sample.14 As the descriptive statistics
indicate, there is considerable heterogeneity in the duration of affiliates in the sample.
Figure 3 compares recent trends in dividend remittances by the sample of foreign
affiliates with dividend payments by the sample of publicly listed companies analyzed by Fama
and French (2000a).15 The declining propensity to pay dividends documented by Fama and
French is paralleled by the behavior of foreign affiliates over the 1982-1994 period. In recent
years only 30 percent of foreign affiliates remitted dividends to their parent companies each year,
a figure comparable to the fraction of publicly listed firms paying dividends to common
shareholders. This aggregate pattern suggests that the puzzles of dividend policy, including the
recent decline in the appetite to pay dividends, appear to be mirrored inside the firm.
Table II offers a more detailed breakdown of aggregate dividend trends. The top panel of
Table II reports data for all affiliates reporting dividends in consecutive years. The bottom panel
of Table II reports data for the publicly held parents of foreign affiliates that appear in the
Compustat database in consecutive years. Several patterns are evident from these data, the first
14

Minority-owned foreign affiliates are not part of the panel, as dividend payments are not recorded for these
affiliates. The sample is selected to omit affiliates with the highest 0.5 percent of net income and lowest 0.5 percent
of net income each year in order to enhance the robustness of the results. Also, calculated country tax rates are
constrained to lie between 0 percent and 100 percent, which entails adjustments to 112 of the 131,358 affiliate-year
observations.

17

being that most affiliates and most parent companies pay zero dividends each year. Affiliates are
equally likely to increase or decrease their dividends; roughly 10 percent of the whole sample of
affiliates increases dividends from a positive payment in the previous period and 10 percent
decrease dividends and continue to pay. By contrast, parent companies are much more likely to
increase dividends than to decrease them; more than 20 percent of the parent sample increases its
dividend payments from a positive payment each year, and about 5 percent reduces dividends
and continues to pay. This difference is consistent with the signaling interpretations of dividends
paid to common shareholders, in which the capital market takes any reduction in dividends to be
a bad signal.16 An equivalent signaling story inside the firm would be inconsistent with the
symmetric dividend change pattern evidenced by affiliates. Affiliates are also much more likely
than parent firms to omit dividends, or to resume paying them, which again suggests that their
dividend policies are considerably less influenced by pressures attributable to capital market
signaling. Even among firms paying dividends to common shareholders, the asymmetry of
observed dividend changes does not necessarily imply that signaling considerations dictate
dividend policy – though it is evidence of at least some signaling effects in the neighborhood of
zero dividend changes.
4.

Estimation results
The first step in identifying the dividend policies of affiliates is to estimate the parameters

of Lintner functions corresponding to their behavior. The essential features of the Lintner model
are that tax and nontax variables determine target payout ratios as well as the rates at which
15

In order to control for changes in BEA sampling criteria in years between 1982 and 1997, the foreign affiliate data
depicted in Figure 3 for all years are drawn from a sample with a common size cutoff (of $15 million in sales, assets,
or net income).

18

actual dividends adjust to desired dividends. It is then possible to use the Lintner framework to
measure the extent to which factors that are liable to affect dividend policy – informational
problems between firms and diffuse shareholders in public capital markets, tax motivations, and
control problems – are in fact associated with dividend policy inside firms.
4.1.

Payout policies of affiliates and parents
Table III displays the results of estimating equation (3) for all majority-owned affiliates,

taking all affiliates to have identical dividend payout equations. By construction, the 87,337
affiliate-year observations exclude those affiliates appearing only once in the sample, and the
initial observations of all affiliates, including all 1982 observations. The Lintner specification
fits the data quite well.17 The estimated 0.27 coefficient on lagged dividends in the regression
reported in column 1 implies that affiliates pay dividends with adjustment parameters equal to (1
– 0.27), or 0.73. The affiliate’s desired steady-state payout ratio is given by the ratio of the
estimated coefficient on net income (0.41) and the estimated adjustment parameter – in the case
of the estimates reported in column one, the implied desired steady-state payout ratio is
(0.41/0.73), or 57 percent.
Columns 2 and 3 repeat this regression, introducing fixed effects for parents and for
affiliates, respectively, in order to control for unobservable characteristics that might influence
dividend policy at the parent or affiliate level. While the results with parent fixed effects are not
16

Dividend reductions are associated almost exclusively with reported annual losses, as noted by DeAngelo,
DeAngelo, and Skinner (1992). Since a significant fraction of firms with losses do not reduce dividends, it is
reasonable for capital markets to be concerned about those that do.
17
The basic Lintner specification in column (1) of Table III omits a constant term. In his original study of
dividends, Lintner included a constant, but he examined the behavior of aggregate dividends, not dividends of
individual firms. Subsequent research presents some evidence in favor of including a constant (see, for example,
Choe (1990)) and some evidence in favor of suppressing it (see, for example, Fama and Babiak(1968)). The results
presented here do not materially change if a constant is included. For an analysis of these data using a Lintner
specification that includes a constant, see Desai, Foley, and Hines (2001).

19

notably different from results in column 1, the inclusion of affiliate fixed effects sharply reduces
the magnitude of the estimated coefficient on lagged dividends, presumably by removing much
of the variation in lagged dividends. Since this is largely an artifact of the shortness of the panel,
the subsequent analysis incorporates parent, rather than affiliate, fixed effects. A Tobit
specification of the basic Lintner regression equation presented in column 4 provides
qualitatively similar results.
How do these results compare to ones obtained from standard specifications of dividend
equations for payouts to common shareholders? Table IV reports results that permit such a
comparison. The regressions reported in Table IV are run on a pooled sample of affiliates and
their parents, so the dependent variable (dividend payouts) combines two different types of
dividends, payments from affiliates to parents, and payments from parents to common
shareholders. The sample for these regressions is limited to observations of affiliates whose
parent company information is reported by Compustat, and observations of those parents.
Column 1 of Table IV reports the results of a pooled regression in which all affiliateparent and parent-shareholder dividend policies are assumed to be identical, and for which the
estimates imply that the desired steady-state dividend payout ratio is 0.47 and adjustment
parameter is 0.26. Column 2 reports results of the same regression including interactions of
income and lagged dividends with parent dummy variables. The estimated 0.52 coefficient on
the interaction of the parent dummy variable and lagged dividends indicates that the payout
adjustment parameter is significantly smaller for parent companies (0.21) than it is for affiliates
(0.72). Differences in the magnitudes of informational asymmetries might explain why the
adjustment parameter for dividend policy inside the firm is higher than the adjustment parameter
for dividend policy between firms and diffuse common shareholders. If corporate parents learn

20

little about the performance of foreign managers from dividend remittances, then they should be
willing to select dividends that are close to target payouts. Managers of affiliates do not face the
criticism of outside shareholders who might be concerned about what a dividend cut could mean.
It is evident from the estimated –0.32 coefficient on net income interacted with the parent
dummy variable, reported in column 2 of Table IV, that the coefficient on net income is
significantly lower for parents than it is for affiliates. It is interesting to note, however, that the
implied desired steady-state payout ratios of parents and affiliates do not differ significantly: the
desired steady-state payout ratio for affiliates is 0.58, and that for parents is 0.49; a Wald test
fails to reject the equality of these ratios.
Columns 3 and 4 of Table IV introduce parent fixed effects but otherwise repeat the
regressions reported in columns 1 and 2. The estimated coefficients are very similar to those
reported in columns 1 and 2, and a Wald test again fails to reject the equality of the implied
desired steady-state payout ratios of affiliates and parents. Columns 5 and 6 repeat the
specification without fixed effects but using a Tobit estimator; the estimated coefficients are
similar to those reported in columns 1–4.18 These results suggest that dividend policies of
foreign affiliates resemble the dividend policies of their parents, although adjustment is
considerably faster inside the firm.
One of the differences between the sample of foreign affiliates and the sample of parent
companies is that parent companies tend to be much larger than foreign affiliates. As a result,
any dividend policy differences might be attributable to size effects. Incorporating a size
18

The Tobit model allows for heteroskedasticity by estimating a variance model as a function of employment. The
analysis uses bootstrap methods to estimate standard errors. The number of bootstrap repetitions was selected using
a procedure recommended by Andrews and Buchinsky (2000). Their procedure yields a number of repetitions such

21

adjustment to the Lintner equations serves the function of addressing heteroskedasticity issues
that might otherwise be present and in reducing the impact of very large affiliates and parents on
the estimated coefficients. Table V reports regressions using the same specification as those
reported in Table IV, with the difference that the dependent and all independent variables are
normalized by the size of the (gross) assets of the entity paying dividends. The sample is limited
to affiliates and parents with at least $5 million in assets. The asset concept used as a
normalization is twice-lagged assets, chosen so that lagged dividend payouts do not
mechanically influence the value of assets used to normalize the equations. As a result of this
variable choice, it is necessary to have three continuous years of data in order to construct each
observation used in the regression. This, together with the $5 million size cutoff, reduces the
sample size from 84,016 in the regressions reported in Table IV to 68,858 in the regressions
reported in Table V.
The asset-normalized regressions reported in Table V imply that affiliate-parent
differences in estimated Lintner coefficients are smaller than those appearing in Table IV,
suggesting that at least some of the apparent differences between affiliates and parents may be
due simply to size differences. In the regression reported in column 2 of Table V, the implied
adjustment parameter for affiliates is 0.67, while that for parents is 0.54; this difference is not
statistically significant. The implied desired steady-state payout ratio for affiliates is 0.40, while
that for parents is 0.21, and a Wald test indicates that this difference is statistically significant.
Very similar results appear in the regressions reported in columns 3 and 4, in which parent fixed
effects are introduced; the implied adjustment parameters are not significantly different, though
Wald tests confirm that desired steady-state payout ratios are significantly different. The Tobit
that the percentage deviation from using an infinite number of bootstraps is less than 10 percent with probability

22

results reported in columns 5 and 6 exhibit somewhat larger differences between the behavior of
affiliates and parents.
The regressions reported in Tables III, IV and V impose the restriction that all affiliates
use the same payout equations, and that all parents do so also. A parent’s payout equation might
differ from those of other parents but be similar to the payout equations of that parent’s foreign
affiliates. Table VI reports the results of estimating separate payout equations for each parentand-its-affiliates system, including a complete set of interactions with dummy variables for
parent status, and testing for differences between the policies of parents and affiliates. The
sample is restricted to affiliates and parents for which there are data available for all 16 years of
the sample. This restriction reduces the sample size of parent- and affiliate-years to 19,151
observations.
The first column of Table VI indicates that, of 194 parent systems for which separate
dividend payout equations were estimated, in only 57 of them were Wald tests capable of
rejecting (at the 5 percent level) the equality of parent and affiliate desired steady-state dividend
payout ratios. This finding is similar to that implied by the coefficient estimates reported in
column 2 of Table IV, the difference being that the estimates summarized in Table VI permit
payout equations to differ for each parent system. Of the 194 parent systems for which it is
possible to estimate separate parent and affiliate adjustment parameters, these parameters differ
significantly between affiliates and parents in 134 instances. This, too, is consistent with the
results reported in Table IV. The third column of Table VI reports that, for 145 of 194 parent
systems, Wald tests reject the joint hypothesis that both payout ratios and adjustment parameters
are identical for parents and affiliates.

0.95.
23

Dividend policy is a component of a firm’s overall financial policy that more broadly
includes decisions regarding net borrowing, capital expenditures, and other sources and uses of
funds. It is possible that foreign affiliates with attractive investment opportunities finance new
capital expenditures largely by reducing or omitting dividends to parent companies. If so, and if
capital expenditures are correlated over time, then the estimated dividend equations displayed in
Table III and elsewhere might reflect the impact of changing investment patterns and not
necessarily patterns of desired dividend repatriations. In such a case, it would be a mistake to
attribute managerial control, signaling, or any other dividend-specific motive to the pattern of
estimated coefficients.
Table VII presents a number of specifications designed to explore this possibility. The
first two columns of Table VII present estimated coefficients for equations that are identical to
those presented in columns 1 and 2 of Table III, with the exception that affiliate capital
expenditure is added as an explanatory variable. This inclusion has very little impact on the
estimated net income and lagged dividend coefficients, which are almost identical to the values
reported in Table III. Furthermore, the estimated effects of affiliate capital expenditures are
positive in the regressions reported in columns 1 and 2, which is inconsistent with a simple
model in which dividend remittances represent any funds not used for foreign capital
expenditures.
It is not necessary for foreign affiliates with attractive investment opportunities to reduce
planned dividend payments to their American parents, since capital expenditures, as well as
dividends, can be financed by net borrowing. Columns 3 through 6 of Table VII report the
results of regressions in which the sample of foreign affiliates is distinguished by the extent of
local indebtedness. Affiliates with greater than median local debt/asset ratios are classified as

24

having “high” local debt and the balance are classified as having “low” local debt.19 Affiliates
with high local debt/asset ratios arguably have the greatest ability to use capital markets to
finance their activities, and therefore might exhibit the least impact of capital expenditures on
dividends.
The results reported in columns 3 and 4 of Table VII indicate that affiliates with
considerable debt have dividend payout ratios that are higher and more sensitive to income than
are the payout ratios of affiliates with little debt. Despite these minor differences, dividend
remittances from affiliates with and without extensive borrowing are functions of net income and
lagged dividends much as in the regressions reported in Table III. Inclusion of capital
expenditure, and its interaction with high local borrowing, in the regressions reported in columns
5 and 6 changes these results very little. The regression reported in column 6 of Table VII
indicates that affiliate capital expenditures has no effect on dividend remittances from affiliates
that borrow heavily, and a (small) positive effect on dividends from affiliates that do little
borrowing. A model in which dividends are determined by the need to fund capital expenditures
would instead imply that affiliates with low local debt/asset ratios exhibit negative effects of
capital spending on dividends. Consequently, this evidence suggests that it is appropriate to
interpret observed dividend policies as reflecting desired dividends.
4.2.

Diffuse Ownership and Public Capital Markets
One straightforward explanation for the presence of Lintner-like results inside the firm is

that the demands of diffuse shareholders in public capital markets are translated into demands for
dividend remittances inside the firm. A comparison of the dividend policies of affiliates whose
19

For the purposes of this classification, firms are grouped by ISI industry categories, as defined in Appendix II, for

25

parents face different degrees of exposure to capital market pressures offers a test of this
hypothesis.
Table VIII reports the results of affiliate payout regressions that take explicit account of
the ownership of parents companies, and, in the case of publicly-held companies, their dividend
policies. The dependent variable in the regressions reported in Table VIII is dividend
remittances from affiliates to their parents. The first column of Table VIII is limited to the
sample of affiliates whose parents do not appear in Compustat in order to capture those affiliates
that do not face the demands of public shareholders.20 The implied desired steady-state payout
ratios (0.44) and adjustment parameters (0.78) of affiliates of these private firms are similar to
the desired payout ratios (0.57) and adjustment parameters (0.72) of affiliates whose parents are
listed in Compustat, as reported in column 2. This simple comparison suggests that capital
market pressures are unlikely to account for estimated affiliate payout equations, since firms that
are not publicly traded presumably face little capital market pressure to pay dividends to their
owners but nevertheless exhibit similar behavioral patterns. The slightly higher adjustment
parameter for private firms presumably reflects a smaller role for dividend signaling. The
similarity of the dividend policies of the foreign affiliates of private and public parents persists
with the inclusion of parent-fixed effects, as reported in columns 4-5 of Table VIII, and in the
Tobit specifications reported in columns 7-8.
Columns 3, 6, and 9 of Table VIII report estimated coefficients from payout equations for
affiliates of Compustat firms, in which a variable intended to capture parental financial pressure
stemming from financial flows to common shareholders is included as an independent variable.
a particular year.

26

The variable “parent dividends to shareholders interacted with relative assets” is the product of
parent dividends and the ratio of affiliate assets to total firm assets. If parents finance dividends
to shareholders with funds drawn from all parts of the firm in proportion to assets, then an
affiliate should be expected to remit a dividend to its parent equal to the value of this variable.
Hence if parental pressures determine affiliate dividends in this manner, the estimated coefficient
on this variable would be close to unity.
The estimated coefficients on “parent dividends to shareholders interacted with relative
assets” in the OLS specifications equal roughly 0.25, differing significantly from one. Parental
financial pressures as measured by dividends to common shareholders explain only a portion of
affiliate dividend payouts. In addition, estimates of desired steady-state payout ratios and
adjustment parameters are not significantly affected by inclusion of the “parent dividends”
variable on the right side. In this context, it is noteworthy that the 0.25 coefficient on “parent
dividends” is consistent with the results reported by Hines (1996), in which $1 of foreign profits
triggers the same dividend payout to common shareholders as does $3 to $4 of domestic profits.
The OLS results, reported in columns 3 and 6 of Table VIII, differ somewhat from the Tobit
results reported in column 9, since the estimated coefficients from the Tobit specification suggest
that affiliate dividends are higher when parent dividends are smaller.
The results in Table VIII indicate that the dividend policies of affiliates of privately
owned parents are quite similar to the dividend policies of affiliates whose parents are publicly
owned. If privately held parents differ in unobserved ways from publicly held parents, such a
comparison may conflate the effect of unobserved characteristics with the effects of diffuse

20

While it is possible that such non-Compustat firms are not privately held but are instead foreign-based and
therefore not listed on an American exchange, manual inspection of the data suggest that this is rarely the case.

27

ownership. Firms that convert ownership status during the sample period – either through
leveraged buyouts (LBOs) or initial public offerings (IPOs) – provide opportunities to investigate
the effect of ownership changes on dividend policies. The advantage of looking at dividend
policy changes of firms that change ownership status is that doing so implicitly holds constant a
number of unobserved firm characteristics – though not all, since ownership changes are not
random events. Nonetheless, ownership changes provide settings for useful tests of the impact of
diffuse ownership in public capital markets. The results of these tests are presented in Table IX.
Unfortunately, this investigation of the impact of diffuse ownership greatly reduces the sample
size. The combined pool of affiliates from both LBO and IPO transactions between 1982 and
1997 allows for 4,172 affiliate-year observations with slightly more than half stemming from
IPOs.21
Column 1 of Table IX presents coefficient estimates from the OLS specification of the
dividend equation with a set of interactions for affiliate years in which parent firms were publicly
held. As in Table VIII, the dependent variable is dividend remittances from affiliates to their
parents. Estimated coefficients on “net income of affiliates” and “lagged dividend payments” in
column 1 correspond to Lintner parameters during years in which parent companies are privately
held; these coefficients imply an adjustment parameter of 0.67 and a desired steady-state payout
ratio of 0.36. The insignificant coefficients on the dummy interactions for public ownership
indicate that affiliate dividend policies during the years in which parent companies were publicly
held – either prior to an LBO or following an IPO – do not differ significantly from those during
21

The sample of firms that experience an LBO is drawn from the Security Data Corporation. These data were
manually checked against lists of LBOs appearing in other research, including Andrade and Kaplan (1999) and
Gilson, Hotchkiss, and Ruback (2000). For firms that go public after completing an LBO, reverse LBO dates are
collected. The sample of firms that experience an IPO are drawn from Jay Ritter’s IPO database and the Security
Data Corporation. Observations appearing in both databases that do not have matching IPO years are dropped. All

28

the years in which parent companies are privately owned. The results of including parent fixed
effects (reported in column 4) similarly indicate little discernable effect of public ownership.
Given the substantial differences between leveraged buyouts and initial public offerings,
it is useful to consider separately the impact of these transactions in order to isolate effects that
might be unique to one of them. Column 2 of Table IX presents results of estimating the OLS
dividend equation for affiliates whose parents undergo LBOs; column 3 presents results of
estimating the dividend equation for affiliates whose parents perform IPOs. In both cases the
dividend policies of affiliates during periods in which their parent companies are publicly held
are indistinguishable from those during periods in which their parents are privately owned.
Similar results appear with the inclusion of parent fixed effects (reported in columns 5 and 6).
The Tobit specifications (reported in columns 8 and 9) generate coefficients on the interaction of
public dummies and net income that are negative and, in the case of affiliates undergoing an
LBO, significant.22
4.3.

Tax Motivations
As with dividend policy between parents and shareholders, tax considerations are likely

to influence the formulation of dividend policy inside the firm. Indeed, the patterns of dividend
policy inside the firm noted above may simply reflect tax considerations and little else. As
developed in section 2 above, the tax incentives facing an affiliate differ by organizational form,
by direct and indirect ownership, and by local tax rates. The regressions reported in Table X
observations of affiliates of parents undergoing an LBO or IPO for the year of the change and the subsequent year
are dropped from the analysis.
22
The Tobit estimates reported in columns 7 - 9 of Table IX imply that foreign affiliates of LBO and IPO firms
reduce dividends (slightly) at higher incomes during years in which their parent companies are publicly held. This
puzzling implication is inconsistent with Tobit results for the larger sample reported in column 6 of Tables IV and

29

include interactions of net income and lagged dividends with dummy variables for branches and
indirectly owned incorporated affiliates in order to examine the extent to which behavior differs
between affiliates with different organizational forms and, consequently, different tax
motivations.
For both branch affiliates and indirectly-owned affiliates, there is good reason to believe
that the taxation of dividends should not motivate dividend policy. Specifically, dividend
remittances by branches do not trigger home country taxes, since the United States taxes foreign
branch income whether or not it is repatriated as dividends. Indirectly owned affiliates are
affiliates that are owned by some combination of other affiliates that are in turn owned by the
parent. This indirect chain of ownership carries important tax implications, since a dividend
payment from one foreign affiliate to another will not trigger a home country tax liability unless
the recipient resides in a jurisdiction that taxes foreign source income. Since many of the foreign
affiliates of American corporations that are conduits for indirect ownership are judiciously
located in countries that do not tax foreign income, it is unlikely that dividend payments from
affiliates to indirect owners generate U.S. tax liabilities.
The results reported in column 1 of Table X suggest that organizational form differences
have only very minor implications for the nature of dividend payout processes.23 The estimated

V, and may simply reflect the small sample sizes together with the weighting implicit in the heteroskedasticityconsistent Tobit procedure.
23
This exercise takes an affiliate’s organizational form to be independent of its repatriation policy. Multinational
firms choose whether to make their affiliates foreign branches or foreign subsidiaries; to the extent that these choices
are dictated by anticipated future repatriation rates, then a comparison of repatriation rates between affiliates with
different organizational forms will overstate the impact of tax rate differences. Other characteristics differ between
branches and subsidiaries that could be correlated with tax rates and repatriation proclivities. Branch affiliates are
concentrated in certain industries, including petroleum, wholesale trade, and services, though not entirely; in the
1997 sample, 26.4 percent of branch affiliates were in non-petroleum manufacturing, compared with 52.1 percent of
incorporated affiliates. While the geographic distributions of branches and subsidiaries was not identical, the
median foreign tax rate paid by branch affiliates in 1997 was 30.4 percent, compared to 31.1 percent for
incorporated affiliates. Based on this information there is no strong reason to suspect that a comparison of the

30

coefficient on the interaction of the branch dummy variable and affiliate net income is positive
but small and insignificant; the same is true of the estimated coefficient on the interaction of the
branch dummy and lagged dividends. The estimated coefficients on variables that interact
dummy variables for indirect ownership are likewise relatively small and insignificant.24 As a
consequence, the corresponding implied desired payout ratios and adjustment parameters for
directly-owned incorporated affiliates, branches, and indirectly owned affiliates are all very close
to each other. This regression implies that affiliates with different forms of parent ownership and
very different tax motivations exhibit very similar dividend payout policies. Columns 3 and 5
repeat these regressions introducing fixed effects for parents and a Tobit specification of the
regression equation in place of OLS; the results are very similar to those reported in column 1, in
that coefficients on organizational form interactions remain insignificant. These results suggest
that tax motivations cannot fully explain the presence of distinctive dividend policy parameters
inside the firm.
Investigating country-level variation in the tax cost of paying dividends provides a finer
measure of the importance of tax motivations for affiliates. The regression reported in column 2
of Table X includes country tax rates interacted with affiliate net income in addition to the
variables used in the regressions reported in column 1. Country tax rates are measured by
calculating ratios of foreign income taxes paid to the sum of foreign income and net income for
each affiliate observation, then using medians of these rates as country-level observations for

repatriation patterns of branches and subsidiaries would encounter difficulties due to spurious correlation with local
tax rates.
24
Indirect ownership as defined in these regressions corresponds to zero direct ownership by the parent company.
Changing the dummy variable to indicate any nonzero indirect ownership does not change the results.

31

each country and year.25 High foreign tax rates reduce the cost of paying dividends from
directly-held foreign subsidiaries to American parent companies, since doing so generates
accompanying foreign tax credits that offset the associated U.S. tax liability.
The results reported in column 2 of Table X confirm that tax costs affect the long-run
payout ratios of incorporated affiliates. The estimated 0.31 coefficient on the interaction of
country tax rates and net income reported in column (2) is both large and statistically significant,
indicating that affiliates set higher payout ratios in countries where paying dividends generates
larger foreign tax credits and therefore lower home country tax liabilities. Looking at the value
of the interaction of country tax rates and net income across organizational forms provides
additional evidence of the impact of home country tax considerations on affiliate dividend
payments. The estimated –0.14 coefficient on the interaction of country tax rates, net income,
and the branch dummy variable implies that tax rates do not influence payout ratios of foreign
branches in a significant way. The sum of this coefficient and the coefficient on the country tax
rate interacted with net income is only 0.16, and it does not differ from zero by a statistically
significant amount. This is consistent with the tax incentives facing foreign branches, and the
way in which they differ from the incentives facing separately incorporated affiliates. The
estimated –0.24 coefficient on the interaction of country tax rates, net income, and the indirect
ownership dummy is likewise large enough in magnitude to eliminate the effect of tax rates on
dividend repatriations. This result is also sensible, given the tax incentives facing indirectly

25

Affiliates with negative net income are excluded for the purposes of calculating country tax rates. Desai, Foley,
and Hines (2001) provide a complete description of the properties of country tax rates and alternative methods of
their calculation.

32

owned affiliates. The inclusion of parent fixed effects in column 4 and a Tobit specification in
column 6 provide similar results.26
The evidence indicates that incorporated affiliates adjust long-run payout ratios to reflect
tax costs. The absence of such effects on the payout ratios of branches and indirectly owned
affiliates is consistent with the importance of tax motivations. Nonetheless, the similarity of the
dividend policies of affiliates with different organizational forms, that thereby face different tax
treatments, indicates that tax motivations cannot fully explain patterns of dividend policies inside
firms.
4.4.

Control Problems inside the Firm
One of the strong implications of the U.S. tax treatment of foreign income is that

American multinational corporations should never simultaneously remit dividends from low-tax
foreign locations and transfer equity funds into the same foreign locations. Doing so generates a
home-country tax liability that could be easily avoided simply by reducing both dividends and
equity transfers. Nevertheless, the data indicate that American multinational firms engage in this
tax-penalized behavior. Indeed, Figure 4 documents that the likelihood of paying a dividend is
the same across the sample period regardless of the contemporaneous change in paid-in-capital.
The regressions reported in Table XI examine the determinants of tax-penalized behavior, in
order to identify the extent to which such policies may be motivated by incomplete
organizational control. Much as the existence of costly dividend behavior between shareholders
and firms has been linked to control problems, this section investigates if control problems
motivate dividend policy inside the firm by examining behavior that is explicitly tax-penalized.

26

Desai, Foley and Hines (2001) note that tax incentives may vary between affiliates located in the same country.

33

Table XI reports regressions run on the sample of affiliate-years for which parent
companies increased their paid-in capital. The table reports estimated coefficients from Probit
specifications in which the dependent variable equals one if the affiliate paid a nonzero dividend
to its parent, and equals zero otherwise. The consistently large, positive, and significant
estimated coefficients on the “country tax rate” variable indicates that affiliates in high tax rate
countries are the most likely to pay dividends while receiving equity transfers from their parents,
which is consistent with their tax incentives. For parents without excess foreign tax credits that
have affiliates located in countries with high tax rates, it can be advantageous to remit dividends
while simultaneously transferring equity funds from the parent. Doing so generates foreign tax
credits that can profitably be used to reduce tax burdens on other income.
Columns 2 and 3 of Table XI add variables intended to reflect the difficulty that
American parents face in monitoring and controlling managers of their affiliates. The “partial
ownership dummy” equals one if the American parent owns less than 100 percent of an
affiliate,27 while the “log of distance to affiliate” variable is the log of distance in miles from
Washington, D.C. to the capital city of the country in which the affiliate is located. The results
reported in columns 2 and 3 indicate that partially-owned affiliates, and those located furthest
from the United States, are the most likely to engage in the potentially tax-disadvantaged
behavior. The estimated coefficients on partial ownership and country tax rates imply that the
effect of partial ownership is roughly equal in magnitude to the impact of a 100 percent tax rate
difference.

Incorporation of this variation, along with instrumenting for the affiliate tax rate with a country tax rate, provides an
additional test of the tax motivations of dividend policy inside the firm – although the results are largely unchanged.
27
All affiliates in the sample are majority-owned, so partial ownership is defined as greater than 51 percent but less
than 100 percent ownership.

34

Column 4 of Table XI adds as an explanatory variable a dummy variable equal to one if
the affiliate employs a U.S. citizen in the most recent survey benchmark year. The predicted
sign on this variable is ambiguous. While the presence of U.S. citizens might be expected to
reduce control problems, their employment may also reflect that locations in which firms expect
to encounter the most control problems are those to which firms choose to deploy their American
workforce. The estimated effect of having a U.S. citizen is positive, meaning that affiliates with
a U.S. citizen are more likely to engage in potentially tax-disadvantaged behavior. This
coefficient suggests, only very tentatively, that the employment of expensive expatriates and
costly monitoring through forced dividend payments both occur where control problems are
significant.
The degree to which countries enforce property rights and have traditions of law and
order may also influence the willingness to incur avoidable tax penalties in order to control
managers. In countries characterized by limited respect for private property rights or weak rule
of law, ex post punishment mechanisms available to parents are restricted and lack credibility.
Since parent firms with affiliates in these countries have limited financial and legal recourse
against foreign managers who mislead them and misappropriate resources, they may insist on
regular dividend payments to verify profitability. In order to test this possibility, columns 5-6 of
Table XI add explanatory variables associated with the efficacy of legal institutions, “property
rights” and “rule of law,” as well as a measure of development, “log of GNP per capita.”28

28

Property rights and legal traditions tend to be stronger in high-income countries, so per capita GNP is included as
an explanatory variable in order to distinguish the impact of legal regimes from effects that are correlated with local
affluence. The property rights index is a measure of the security of property rights in 1996 (on a scale from 1 to 5)
derived from Johnson and Sheehy (1996), in which higher numbers correspond to greater protection for private
property. The score is based, broadly, on the degree of legal protection for private property, the extent to which the
government protects and enforces laws that protect private property, the probability that the government will
expropriate private property, and the country’s legal protection to private property. The rule of law measure is an
assessment of the law and order tradition and is taken from LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanez, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998).

35

Larger values of the property rights and rule of law indices reflect greater abilities credibly to
threaten action against managers, so the negative estimated coefficients on the property rights
index and on the rule of law index both are consistent with the use of dividends to control foreign
managers.
Columns 1-3 of Table XII repeat the specifications of Table XI, doing so on a subsample
of affiliates located in countries with tax rates below 32 percent in order to isolate those cases in
which such behavior is strongly inconsistent with tax arbitrage. Partial ownership continues to
have a very strong and positive effect on such behavior in this subsample, though estimated
coefficients on country tax rates become negative and insignificant, as do estimated coefficients
on distances to affiliates. One of the difficulties of interpreting the country tax rate effects (and
possibly the distance effects) in this subsample stems from the loss of variation among the
observations chosen on the basis of tax rates. In the regressions using the subsample of high tax
rate countries (those whose tax rates exceed 38 percent), reported in columns 4-6, country tax
rate effects are again insignificant though now positive, partial ownership has a large and
significant effect, and distances to affiliates and presence of U.S. citizens have significant and
positive effects. In the low-tax subsample, the estimated impact of property rights is negative
and significant, while the rule of law has a negative and significant estimated effect in the high
tax subsample.
5.

Conclusion
The dividend puzzle persists in the presence of extremely concentrated ownership. The

majority-owned foreign affiliates of American companies have dividend policies that resemble
The measure is scaled between 0 and 10, lower scores corresponding to a less pronounced tradition of law and order.

36

the practices of domestic companies in paying dividends to diffuse common shareholders. The
similarity of dividend policies inside firms and the dividend policies of firms making payments
to external shareholders is apparent from a comparison of their aggregate practices as well as
their desired payout ratios and adjustment parameters. Dividend policies inside firms entail
gradual adjustment of payouts in the direction of targets that depend on current earnings and the
tax costs of repatriating dividends. A comparison of the behavior of affiliates whose parent
companies have distinct ownership types or dividend-paying practices suggests that capital
market concerns do not motivate the payment of dividends inside the firm. While inside-firm
dividend policy is responsive to tax factors, the similarity of dividend policy across entities
facing distinctive tax treatment indicates that tax motivations alone cannot explain the observed
patterns of behavior. Analysis of explicitly tax-penalized behavior suggests that control
concerns contribute to the formulation of dividend policy inside the firm.
This study analyzes dividend remittances from foreign affiliates, but in principle, the
findings are likely to characterize other financial flows inside firms, such as dividend payments
from domestic subsidiaries to their domestic parent companies. The fact that dividend
remittances are structured to alleviate control problems inside firms offers evidence concerning
the magnitude and importance of incentive problems inside the firm and the manner in which
they influence financial policies.
Instead of solving the dividend puzzle, this investigation may appear to broaden it by
identifying patterns of behavior inside the firm that resemble those of firms making payments to
outsiders. However, this study holds the prospect of clarifying some aspects of dividend

The log of GNP per capita is defined as the log of the mean value of GNP per capita in constant 1995 U.S. dollars
over the 1982 to 1997 period, as reported in the World Development Indicators collected by the World Bank.

37

behavior, since policies inside the firm do not stem from informational asymmetries between
corporate managers and diffuse public owners. That such similar policies exist with and without
diffuse public shareholders suggests that at least some of the puzzling features of the dividend
practices of publicly-held firms in paying common dividends may have little to do with capital
market concerns and much to do with aspects of corporate control.

38

Appendix I on the Taxation of U.S. Multinationals29
Almost all countries tax income generated by economic activity that takes place within
their borders. In addition, many countries—including the United States—tax the foreign
incomes of their residents. In order to prevent double taxation of the foreign income of
Americans, U.S. law permits taxpayers to claim foreign tax credits for income taxes (and related
taxes) paid to foreign governments.30 These foreign tax credits are used to offset U.S. tax
liabilities that would otherwise be due on foreign-source income. The U.S. corporate tax rate is
currently 35 percent, so an American corporation that earns $100 in a foreign country with a 10
percent tax rate pays taxes of $10 to the foreign government and $25 to the U.S. government,
since its U.S. corporate tax liability of $35 (35 percent of $100) is reduced to $25 by the foreign
tax credit of $10.
Americans are permitted to defer U.S. tax liabilities on certain unrepatriated foreign
profits until they receive such profits in the form of dividends. This deferral is available only on
the active business profits of American-owned foreign affiliates that are separately incorporated
as subsidiaries in foreign countries. The profits of unincorporated foreign businesses, such as
those of American-owned branches in other countries, are taxed immediately by the United
States. Interest, rent, and royalty income received from foreign countries also represents foreignsource income on which U.S. tax obligations cannot be deferred.
U.S. tax law contains provisions designed to prevent American firms from delaying the
repatriation of lightly-taxed foreign earnings. These tax provisions apply to controlled foreign
corporations, which are foreign corporations owned at least 50 percent by American individuals
or corporations who hold stakes of at least 10 percent each. Under the Subpart F provisions of
U.S. law, the passive income of controlled foreign corporations is “deemed distributed,” and
therefore immediately taxable by the United States, even if not repatriated as dividend payments
to American parent firms.31
Because the foreign tax credit is intended to alleviate international double taxation, and
not to reduce U.S. tax liabilities on profits earned within the United States, the foreign tax credit
is limited to U.S. tax liability on foreign-source income. For example, an American firm with
$200 of foreign income that faces an U.S. tax rate of 35 percent has a foreign tax credit limit of
$70 (35 percent of $200). If the firm pays foreign income taxes of less than $70, then the firm
would be entitled to claim foreign tax credits for all of its foreign taxes paid. If, however, the

29

Portions of this description are excerpted from Hines (1991, 1999).
Under U.S. law, taxpayers may claim foreign tax credits for taxes paid by foreign firms of which they own at least 10
percent, and only those taxes that qualify as income taxes are creditable.
31
Subpart F income consists of income from passive investments (such as interest and dividends received from
investments in securities), foreign base company income (that arises from using a foreign affiliate as a conduit for
certain types of international transactions), income that is invested in United States property, money used offshore to
insure risks in the United States, and money used to pay bribes to foreign government officials. American firms
with foreign subsidiaries that earn profits through most types of active business operations, and that subsequently
reinvest those profits in active lines of business, are not subject to the Subpart F rules, and are therefore able to defer
U.S. tax liability on their foreign profits until they choose to remit dividends at a later date.
30

39

firm pays $90 of foreign taxes, then it would be permitted to claim no more than $70 of foreign
tax credits.
Taxpayers whose foreign tax payments exceed the foreign tax credit limit are said to have
“excess foreign tax credits;” the excess foreign tax credits represent the portion of their foreign
tax payments that exceed the U.S. tax liabilities generated by their foreign incomes. Taxpayers
whose foreign tax payments are smaller than their foreign tax credit limits are said to be in
“excess limit” or to have “deficit foreign tax credits.” American law permits taxpayers to use
excess foreign tax credits in one year to reduce their U.S. tax obligations on foreign source
income in either of the two previous years or in any of the following five years.32
In practice, the calculation of the foreign tax credit limit entails certain additional
complications, notable among which is that total worldwide foreign income is used to calculate
the foreign tax credit limit. This method of calculating the foreign tax credit limit is known as
“worldwide averaging.” A taxpayer has excess foreign tax credits if the sum of worldwide
foreign income tax payments exceeds this limit. The combination of worldwide averaging and
selective repatriation of dividends from subsidiaries located in countries with differing tax rates
implies that the average foreign tax rate used to calculate the foreign tax credit limit need not
equal the average foreign tax rate faced by a firm’s foreign affiliates. The ability of multinational
firms to adjust the amount of foreign income received in non-dividend forms (such as interest
and royalties) contributes to their control over whether or not they have excess foreign tax
credits.

32

Foreign tax credits are not adjusted for inflation, so are generally the most valuable if claimed as soon as possible.
Barring unusual circumstances, firms apply their foreign tax credits against future years only when unable to apply
them against either of the previous two years.

40

Appendix II on BEA Survey of U.S. Multinationals
The Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) Annual Survey of U.S. Direct Investment
Abroad from 1982 through 1997 provides data on the financial and operating characteristics of
U.S. firms operating abroad. These surveys ask reporters to file detailed financial and operating
items for each affiliate and information on the value of transactions between U.S. parents and
their foreign affiliates. The International Investment and Trade in Services Survey Act governs
the collection of the data and the Act ensures that “use of an individual company’s data for tax,
investigative, or regulatory purposes is prohibited.” Willful noncompliance with the Act can
result in penalties of up to $10,000 or a prison term of one year. As a result of these assurances
and penalties, BEA believes that coverage is close to complete and levels of accuracy are high.
U.S. direct investment abroad is defined as the direct or indirect ownership or control by
a single U.S. legal entity of at least ten percent of the voting securities of an incorporated foreign
business enterprise or the equivalent interest in an unincorporated foreign business enterprise. A
U.S. multinational entity (MNE) is the combination of a single U.S. legal entity that has made
the direct investment, called the U.S. parent, and at least one foreign business enterprise, called
the foreign affiliate. In order to be considered as a legitimate foreign affiliate, the foreign
business enterprise should be paying foreign income taxes, have a substantial physical presence
abroad, have separate financial records, and should take title to the goods it sells and receive
revenue from the sale. In order to determine ownership stakes in the presence of indirect
ownership, BEA determines the percentage of parent ownership at each link and then multiplies
these percentages to compute the parent’s total effective ownership.
BEA collects sufficient information to allow one to link affiliate level data through time
to create a panel. By checking the status of all affiliates that filed forms in the previous year and
are expected to fall within reporting requirements, BEA identifies which enterprises leave the
sample. By monitoring news services for information on mergers, acquisitions, and other
activities of U.S. companies, BEA identifies which new enterprises should be included in the
sample. To check the integrity of reported data, BEA accountants confirm that information
satisfies certain integrity checks. For example, BEA checks whether the owners’ equity at time t
is roughly equal to the owners’ equity at time t-1 plus any retained earnings, plus additional paidin-capital, plus unrealized gains and losses, and plus any translation adjustments that account for
changes in the value of foreign currencies that are not picked up in net income calculations.
The foreign affiliate survey forms that US MNEs are required to complete vary
depending on the year, the size of the affiliate, and the U.S. parent’s percentage of ownership of
the affiliate. The most extensive data are available for 1982, 1989, and 1994, when BEA
conducted Benchmark Surveys. In these years, all affiliates with sales, assets, or net income in
excess of $3 million in absolute value and their parents were required to file reports. In nonbenchmark years between 1982 and 1997, exemption levels were higher. From 1983-1988, all
affiliates with an absolute value of sales, assets, or net income less than $10 million were
exempt, and this cutoff increased to $15 million from 1990-1993 and $20 million from 1995-

41

1997. While the BEA does estimate data in order to arrive at universe totals, the following
analysis excludes estimated data.33,34
To classify the industrial activities of parents and affiliates, BEA assigns each domestic
and foreign entity to an international surveys industry (ISI) classification code that is based on
the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) scheme. A typical ISI code roughly covers the same
scope of activities as a three-digit SIC code. The classification of foreign affiliate data tends to
be precise because parents can consolidate foreign-affiliate operations for BEA reporting only if
they are in the same country and the same three-digit ISI industry or if they are integral parts of
the same business operation. Since the internal financial policy of firms primarily engaged in
financial services is likely to differ substantially from that of other firms, all affiliates of
multinationals that have a parent in financial services and all affiliates in such industries are
excluded.35
The analysis presented in the paper uses responses to the following U.S Direct
Investment Abroad annual survey form questions:
Form of organization of foreign affiliate – Mark one of the following: corporation, branch,
partnership, other – specify
Ownership Interest in This Foreign Affiliate by U.S. Reporter – Enter the U.S. Reporter’s
direct and indirect interest based on voting stock if an incorporated foreign affiliate, or an
equivalent interest if an unincorporated foreign affiliate. – Enter to the nearest tenth of one
percent.
Dividends or net income remitted to owners – Incorporated affiliate, enter amount of
dividends declared out of current- and prior-period income on common and preferred stock,
33

BEA uses reported data to estimate universe totals when surveys cover only larger affiliates or when only certain
affiliates provide information on particular survey forms. Estimated data is unlikely to have a significant impact on
the BEA’s published data at the industry or country level as data based on actual reports exceeds 90% of the
estimated totals of assets and sales in each of the years between 1982 and 1997. To avoid working with estimated
data, only affiliates required to provide all the information associated with a particular analysis are considered.
34
The sample of foreign affiliates reporting dividends varies from year to year. In the non-benchmark years before
1994, all surveyed majority-owned incorporated affiliates and branches report dividends. In the non-benchmark
years after 1994, BEA introduced a long and short form for majority owned affiliates, and only those surveyed
affiliates that filed the long form, or those with an absolute value of sales, assets, or net income in excess of $50
million, reported divided information. The details of reporting requirements are more complicated in benchmark
years. In 1982, all surveyed affiliates report total dividend payments. In 1989, all surveyed affiliates report
dividends paid directly to the U.S. parent. This figure is converted to total dividends simply by dividing it by the
fraction of an affiliate owned by its parent – under the realistic assumption that dividends are distributed pro rata to
all owners. In 1994, all surveyed affiliates with an absolute value of sales, assets, or net income greater than $50
million report total dividends and all other surveyed affiliates report dividends paid directly to the U.S. parent. For
these smaller affiliates, total dividends are again calculated by dividing parent dividends by the parent’s ownership
fraction. Some affiliates are owned indirectly by their parent companies through chains of foreign subsidiaries;
since parents receive dividends only indirectly from such foreign affiliates, it is impossible to calculate total
dividends from distributions to parents. The sample excludes observations of such affiliates in 1989, and those
small affiliates for which total dividend information is not available in 1994.
35
Specifically, all affiliates primarily operating in, or with parents that are classified as primarily operating in, ISI
codes 600 through 679 are excluded. This includes affiliates classified as holding companies.

42

excluding stock and liquidating dividends. Unincorporated affiliate, enter amount of currentand prior-period net income remitted to owners.
Sales or gross operating revenues, excluding sales taxes – Gross sales minus returns,
allowances, and discounts, or gross operating revenues, both exclusive of sales or consumption
taxes levied directly on the consumer, net value-added taxes, and excise taxes levied on
manufacturers wholesalers, and retailers.
Foreign income taxes – Provision for foreign income taxes for the fiscal year. Do not include
U.S. income taxes. Exclude production royalty payments.
Net Income is calculated as the difference between total income and total costs and expenses.
Total income includes sales or gross operating revenues, excluding sales taxes, income from
equity investments, certain realized and unrealized gains, and other income. Total costs and
expenses include costs of goods sold or services rendered and selling, general, and administrative
expenses, foreign income taxes, and other costs and expenses.
Assets include the sum of inventories, other current assets, property, plant and equipment, gross
less accumulated depreciation and depletion and other noncurrent assets.
Paid-in-Capital owned by Parent – for incorporated affiliates equals that part of owner’s equity
that is capital stock and additional paid-in capital.

43

References
Allen, Franklin, Antonio Bernardo and Ivo Welch. 2000. “A Theory of Dividends Based
on Tax Clienteles.” Journal of Finance 55, 2499-2536.
Allen, Franklin and Roni Michaely. 1995. “Dividend Policy.” In Robert Jarrow, Vojislav
Maksimovic and William T. Ziemba, eds., Handbooks in Operations Research
and Management Science 9, 793-837.
Altshuler, Rosanne and Harry Grubert. Forthcoming. “Repatriation Taxes, Repatriation
Strategies and Multinational Financial Policy.” Journal of Public Economics.
Altshuler, Rosanne, T. Scott Newlon and William C. Randolph. 1995. “Do Repatriation
Taxes Matter? Evidence from the Tax Returns of U.S. Multinationals.” In Martin
Feldstein, James R. Hines Jr., and R. Glenn Hubbard, eds., The Effects of
Taxation on Multinational Corporations. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ambarish, Ramasastry, Kose John and Joseph Williams. 1987. “Efficient Signaling with
Dividends and Investments.” Journal of Finance 42, 321-343.
Andrade, Gregor and Steven Kaplan. 1998. “How Costly is Financial (Not Economic)
Distress? Evidence from Highly Leveraged Transactions That Became
Distressed.” Journal of Finance 53, 1443-1532.
Andrews, Donald W.K. and Moshe Buchinsky. 2000. “A Three-step Method for
Choosing the Number of Bootstrap Repetitions,” Econometrica 68, 23-51.
Auerbach, Alan J. 1979. “Wealth Maximization and the Cost of Capital.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 93, 433-446.
Auerbach, Alan J. 1982. “Issues in the Measurement and Encouragement of Business
Saving.” In Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Saving and Government Policy.
Boston: FRBB.
Bagwell, Laurie Simon and John B. Shoven. 1989. “Cash Distributions to Shareholders.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 3, 129-140.
Bagwell, Laurie Simon and Josef Zechner. 1993. “Influence Costs and Capital Structure.”
Journal of Finance 48, 975-1008.
Benartzi, Shlomo, Michaely, Roni and Richard Thaler. 1997. “Do Changes in Dividends
Signal the Future or the Past?” Journal of Finance 52, 1007-1034.
Berger, Philip G. and Eli Ofek. 1995. “Diversification’s Effect on Firm Value.” Journal
of Financial Economics 37, 39-65.
Bernheim, B. Douglas. 1991. “Tax Policy and the Dividend Puzzle.” Rand Journal of
Economics 22, 455-476.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Adam Wantz. 1995. “A Tax-Based Test of the Dividend
Signaling Hypothesis.” American Economic Review 85, 532-551.
Bhattacharya, Sudipto. 1979. “Imperfect Information, Dividend Policy, and the ‘Bird in
the Hand’ Fallacy.” Bell Journal of Economics 10, 259-270.
Black, Fischer. 1976. “The Dividend Puzzle.” Journal of Portfolio Management 2, 5-8.
Bradford, David F. 1981. “The Incidence and Allocation Effects of a Tax on Corporate
Distributions.” Journal of Public Economics 15, 1-22.
Chirinko, Robert S. and Andrew D. Phillips. 1999. “Dividend Policy at the 'Baby Bells':
A Study of Septuplets.” Emory University, Working Paper.
Choe, Hyuk. 1990. “Intertemporal and Cross-Sectional Variation of Corporate Dividend
Policy.” Dissertation manuscript, University of Chicago.
Crockett, Jean and Irwin Friend. 1988. “Dividend Policy in Perspective: Can Theory
Explain Behavior?” Review of Economics and Statistics 70, 603-613.
DeAngelo, Harry, Linda DeAngelo and Douglas J. Skinner. 1992. “Dividends and
Losses.” Journal of Finance 47, 1837-1863.
DeAngelo, Harry, Linda DeAngelo and Douglas J. Skinner. 1996. “Reversal of Fortune:
Dividend Signaling and the Disappearance of Sustained Earnings Growth.”
Journal of Financial Economics 40, 341-371.
DeAngelo, Harry, Linda DeAngelo and Douglas J. Skinner. 2000. “Special Dividends
and the Evolution of Signaling.” Journal of Financial Economics 57, 309-354.
Desai, Mihir, C. Fritz Foley and James R. Hines, Jr. 2001. “Repatriation Taxes and
Dividend Distortions.” Working Paper, Harvard University.
Desai, Mihir A. and James R. Hines, Jr. 1999. “’Basket’ Cases: Tax Incentives and
International Joint Venture Participation by American Multinational Firms.”
Journal of Public Economics 71, 379-402.
Dewenter, Kathryn L. and Vincent A. Warther. 1998. “Dividends, Asymmetric
Information, and Agency Conflicts: Evidence from a Comparison of The
Dividend Policies of Japanese and U.S. Firms.” Journal of Finance 53, 879-904.
Eades, Kenneth M., Patrick J. Hess and E. Han Kim. 1994. “Time-Series Variation in
Dividend Pricing.” Journal of Finance 49, 1617-1638.
Easterbrook, Frank H. 1984. “Two Agency-Cost Explanations of Dividends.” American
Economic Review 74, 650-659.
Elton, Edwin and Martin Gruber. 1970. “Marginal Stockholder Tax Rates and the
Clientele Effect.” Review of Economics and Statistics 52, 68-74.

Fama, Eugene F. and Harvey Babiak. 1968. “Dividend Policy: An Empirical Analysis.”
Journal of the American Statistical Association 63, 1132-1161.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French. 2000a. “Disappearing Dividends: Changing
Firm Characteristics or Lower Propensity to Pay?” The Center for Research in
Security Prices, Working Paper No. 509.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French. 2000b. “Testing Tradeoff and Pecking Order
Predictions about Dividends and Debt.” Working Paper.
Feenberg, Daniel. 1981. “Does the Investment Interest Limitation Explain the Existence
of Dividends?” Journal of Financial Economics 9, 265-269.
Feldstein, Martin S. 1970. “Corporate Taxation and Dividend Behavior.” Review of
Economic Studies 37, 57-72.
Gilson, Stewart C., Edie S. Hotchkiss and Richard S. Ruback. 2000. “Valuation of
Bankrupt Firms.” Review of Financial Studies 13, 43-74.
Gordon, Roger H. and David F. Bradford. 1980. “Taxation and the Stock Market
Valuation of Capital Gains and Dividends: Theory and Empirical Results.”
Journal of Public Economics 14, 109-136.
Guay, Wayne and Jarrad Harford. 2000. “The Cash-Flow Permanence and Information
Content of Dividend Increases Versus Repurchases.” Journal of Financial
Economics 57, 385-415.
Hakansson, Nils H. 1982. “To Pay or Not to Pay Dividend.” Journal of Finance 37, 415428.
Hartman, David G. 1985. “Tax Policy and Foreign Direct Investment.” Journal of Public
Economics 26, 107-121.
Hines, James R., Jr. 1991. “The Flight paths of Migratory Corporations.” Journal of
Accounting, Auditing, and Finance 6, 447-479.
Hines, James R., Jr. 1996. “Dividends and Profits: Some Unsubtle Foreign Influences.”
Journal of Finance 51, 661-689.
Hines, James R., Jr. 1999. “Lessons from Behavioral Responses to International
Taxation.” National Tax Journal 52, 385-404.
Hines, James R., Jr. and R. Glenn Hubbard. 1990. “Coming Home to America: Dividend
Repatriations by U.S. Multinationals.” In Assaf Razin and Joel Slemrod, eds.,
Taxation in the Global Economy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Howe, Keith M., Jia He and G. Wenchi Kao. 1992. “One-Time Cash Flow
Announcements and Free Cash-Flow Theory: Share Repurchases and Special

Dividends.” Journal of Finance 47, 1963-1975.
Jagannathan, Murali, Clifford P. Stephens and Michael S. Weisbach. “Financial
Flexibility and the Choice Between Dividends and Stock Repurchases.” Journal
of Financial Economics 57, 355-384.
Jensen, Michael. 1986. “Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow.” American Economic Review
76, 323-329.
John, Kose and Joseph Williams. 1985. “Dividends; Dilutions, and Taxes: A Signaling
Equilibrium.” Journal of Finance 40, 1053-1070.
Johnson, Bryan T. and Thomas P. Sheehy. 1996. 1996 Index of Economic Freedom.
Washington D.C.: The Heritage Foundation.
Kalay, Avner. 1982. “The Ex-Dividend Day Behavior of Stock Prices: A Re-Examination
of the Clientele Effect.” Journal of Finance 37, 1059-1070.
King, Mervyn A. 1977. Public Policy and the Corporation. London: Chapman and Hall.
Lang, Larry H. P. and Robert H. Litzenberger. 1989. “Dividend Announcements: Cash
Flow Signaling Vs. Free Cash Flow Hypothesis?” Journal of Financial
Economics 24, 181-191.
Lang, Larry and Rene Stulz. 1994. “Tobin’s q, Corporate Diversification and Firm
Performance.” Journal of Political Economy 102, 1248-1280.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny.
2000. “Agency Problems and Dividend Policies Around the World.” Journal of
Finance 55, 1-33.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny.
1998. “Law and Finance.” Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.
Lintner, John. 1956. “Distribution of Incomes of Corporations Among Dividends,
Retained Earnings, and Taxes.” American Economic Review 61, 97-113.
Liztenberger, Robert and Krishna Ramaswamy. 1979. “The Effect of Personal Taxes and
Dividends on Capital Asset Prices: Theory and Empirical Evidence.” Journal of
Financial Economics 7, 163-195.
Marsh, Terry A. and Robert C. Merton. 1987. “Dividend Behavior for the Aggregate
Stock Market.” Journal of Business 60, 1-40.
Mataloni, Raymond. 1995. “A Guide to BEA Statistics on U.S. Multinational
Companies.” Survey of Current Business (March), 38-53.
Michaely, Roni. 1991. “Ex-Dividend Day Stock Price Behavior: The Case of the 1986
Tax Reform Act.” Journal of Finance 46, 845-859.

Miller, Merton H. and Franco Modigliani. 1961. “Dividend Policy, Growth, and the
Valuation of Shares.” Journal of Business 34, 411-433.
Miller, Merton H. and Kevin Rock. 1985. “Dividend Policy Under Asymmetric
Information.” Journal of Finance 40, 1031-1051.
Miller, Merton H. and Myron S. Scholes. 1978. “Dividends and Taxes.” Journal of
Financial Economics 6, 333-364.
Miller, Merton H. and Myron S. Scholes. 1982. “Dividends and Taxes: Some Empirical
Evidence.” Journal of Political Economy 90, 1118-1141.
Ofer, Aharon R. and Anjan V. Thakor. 1987. “A Theory of Stock Price Responses to
Alternative Corporate Cash Disbursement Methods: Stock Repurchases and
Dividends.” Journal of Finance 42, 365-394.
Perez-Gonzalez, Francisco. 2000. “Large Shareholders and Dividends: Evidence from
U.S. Tax Reforms.” Harvard University, Working Paper.
Poterba, James M. 1987. “Tax Policy and Corporate Savings.” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 2, 455-503.
Poterba, James M. 2001. “Taxation and Portfolio Structure: Issues and Implications.”
NBER Working Paper No. 8223.
Poterba, James M. and Lawrence H. Summers. 1984. “New Evidence that Taxes Affect
the Valuation of Dividends.” Journal of Finance 39, 1397-1415.
Poterba, James M. and Lawrence H. Summers. 1985. “The Economic Effects of Dividend
Taxation.” In Edward I. Altman and Marti G. Subrahmanyam, eds., Recent
Advances in Corporate Finance (Homewood, IL: Richard D. Irwin).
Richardson, Gordon, Stephan E. Sefcik and Rex Thompson. 1986. “A Test of Dividend
Irrelevance Using Volume Reactions to a Change in Dividend Policy.” Journal of
Financial Economics 17, 313-333.
Ross, Stephen. 1977. “The Determination of Financial Structure: An Incentive-Signaling
Approach.” Bell Journal of Economics 8, 23-40.
Scharfstein, David S. and Jeremy C. Stein. 2000. “The Dark Side of Internal Capital
Markets: Divisional Rent-Seeking and Inefficient Investment.” Journal of
Finance 55, 2537-2564.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny. 1986. “Large Shareholders and Corporate
Control.” Journal of Political Economy 94, 461-488.
Williams, Joseph. 1988. “Efficient Signaling with Dividends, Investment, and Stock
Repurchases.” Journal of Finance 43, 737-747.

Figure 1: Propensity to pay dividends for majority-owned
incorporated affiliates (MOIAs) and branches, 1982-1997
120.0%
100.0%
80.0%
60.0%
40.0%
20.0%
0.0%
1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997
% of MOIAs reporting positive dividends
% of branches reporting positive dividends
Median ratio of dividends to net income for MOIAs reporting positive dividends
Median ratio of dividends to net income for branches reporting positive dividends

Note: Diamonds and squares indicate fractions of entities remitting dividends for MOIAs and branches, respectively. Triangles and
X’s depict median ratios of dividends to net income for MOIAs and branches, respectively.

Figure 2: Persistence of dividend payments, by organizational
form, 1983-1997
95.0%
85.0%
75.0%
65.0%
55.0%
45.0%
35.0%
25.0%
1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997
Share of payers last year that pay again - MOIAs

Share of payers last year that pay again - branches

Note: Diamonds and squares depict the ratio of entities remitting dividends in years t and t-l to the number of entities remitting
dividends in year t-1 and reporting dividends in year t for MOIAs and branches, respectively.

Figure 3: Propensity to pay dividends, publicly held firms and
foreign affiliates, 1982-1994
60.0%
55.0%
50.0%
45.0%
40.0%
35.0%
30.0%
25.0%
20.0%
15.0%
10.0%
1982

1983

1984

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

Fraction of Compustat firms paying dividends - Fama & French

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

Fraction of affiliates remitting dividends

Note: Diamonds correspond to fractions of Compustat firms paying dividends to shareholders as reported in Fama and French
(2000a). Squares correspond to fractions of affiliates remitting dividends to American parents.

Figure 4: Propensity to Pay Dividends, by Changes in Paid-InCapital, 1983-1997
80.0%
70.0%
60.0%
50.0%
40.0%
30.0%
20.0%
10.0%
0.0%
1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997
Share of PIC increasers paying dividends

Share of PIC decreasers paying dividends

Share of PIC nonchangers paying dividends
Note: This figure tracks the share of dividend payers for 3 subsets of majority-owned incorporated affiliates: (i) those experiencing
increases of PIC >5%; (ii) those experiencing decreases of PIC >5%; and (iii) all others.

Table I
Descriptive Statistics for Affiliates and Parents, 1997 and the 1982-1997 Panel
1997

Multinational
Affiliates

Number of Entities
Mean Assets
Mean Net Income
Mean Dividends

$
$
$

% Majority owned incorporated subsidiaries
% Minority owned incorporated subsidiaries
% Branches
% Other Organizational Forms

10,838
157,450
9,785
5,325

Multinational
Parents

Compustat
Firms

535
6,080,755
359,972
134,883

9,150
$ 2,037,720
$
48,385
$
19,331

$
$
$

86%
9%
4%
1%

-

-

1,347
2%
19%
48%
31%

-

-

% reporting positive dividends
Median ratio of dividends to net income for payers

32%
78%

70%
28%

27%
28%

% of parents with more than five affiliates receiving dividends
Median ratio of dividends to net income for receivers

77%
47%

-

-

% of inc. affiliates in wholesale trade
% of inc. affiliates in chemical manufacturing
% of inc. affiliates in transportation equipment manufacturing
% of inc. affiliates in services

23.9%
13.9%
12.6%
9.5%

-

-

% of affiliates with some Indirect Ownership
% of affiliates with all Indirect Ownership

24.4%
18.6%

-

-

72%

98%

93%

12.1%
30.0%
9.3%
34.1%
78.6%
33.3%

-

-

Number of Parents
% with > 50 affiliates
% with >10 & < 50 affiliates
% with > 1 & < 10 affiliates
% with 1 affiliate

% of affiliates that are repeat payers from previous year
% of affiliates reporting an increase in Paid-in-Capital
Share reporting positive dividends
% of affiliates reporting an decrease in Paid-in-Capital
Share reporting positive dividends
% of affiliates reporting no substantive change in Paid-in-Capital
Share reporting positive dividends
1982-1997 Panel

Majority-Owned Affiliates

Total Majority-Owned Affiliates
Total Affiliate-Years
Frequency of Dividend Reporting:
Number of Entities
Median Sales

23,799
109,971

$

1x
8,353
6,092

$

8x
710
30,397

$

16x
1,165
105,705

Note: The top panel provides descriptive statistics from 1997 for affiliates, their Compustat-listed parents, and a broader sample of Compustat
firms. The bottom panel provides descriptive statistics for the panel of mulitnational affiliates and highlights the unbalanced nature of the panel by
providing statistics for those affiliates that appear one time, eight times, and throughout the sample period. All dollar figures are in thousands.

Table II
Comparative Annual Dividend Changes for Affiliates and Parents, 1983-1997
Type of Affiliate Dividend Changes as % of Sample
Year

Increase

Decrease

Resume

Omit

Maintain

Maintain at 0

1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997

10.0%
12.0
13.5
14.3
13.4
13.6
12.5
11.3
9.6
9.7
8.5
8.6
11.1
11.1
9.0

14.1%
12.1
11.2
9.1
8.8
9.4
11.2
9.5
9.5
8.7
9.0
7.4
8.3
9.3
10.7

13.9%
9.9
9.3
8.0
10.0
12.5
11.3
9.0
8.8
9.0
8.5
10.0
9.2
9.5
10.5

11.1%
8.6
8.5
9.9
9.6
8.1
11.3
10.8
9.6
9.3
9.5
9.8
10.9
8.6
7.9

1.3%
1.0
1.1
1.2
0.9
1.0
1.0
0.9
1.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
1.0
1.1
0.8

49.6%
56.5
56.4
57.5
57.1
55.5
52.8
58.6
61.4
62.3
63.6
63.4
59.6
60.4
61.0

Type of Parent Dividend Changes as % of Sample
Year

Increase

Decrease

Resume

Omit

Maintain

Maintain at 0

1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997

29.4%
29.3
26.5
22.7
21.7
22.2
22.8
20.5
17.6
18.3
19.5
22.6
22.7
22.0
21.3

6.8%
5.2
6.0
6.3
5.8
5.8
5.7
7.0
7.1
6.2
4.7
4.0
4.1
4.1
4.1

1.8%
2.0
1.8
2.0
2.5
2.7
2.5
1.8
1.6
2.2
2.3
2.8
3.1
2.4
1.9

3.3%
2.7
2.6
2.6
3.2
2.4
2.4
3.0
3.0
2.3
2.6
2.4
1.9
2.4
2.9

8.3%
7.3
7.5
6.9
5.6
5.7
5.9
6.4
7.7
6.9
5.9
6.0
5.6
5.1
4.7

50.5%
53.5
55.7
59.5
61.2
61.3
60.7
61.3
62.9
64.0
65.0
62.3
62.7
64.0
65.1

Note: The top panel provides annual dividend change data for majority-owned foreign affiliates from 1983 to 1997. The bottom panel provides
annual dividend change data for the public parents of majority-owned foreign affiliates from 1983 to 1997. An "Increase" refers to a change in
the level of dividends that exceeds 2% of the current and previous period dividend. A "Decrease" is defined analogously.

Table III
Lintner Dividend Specifications for Affiliate Payments to Parents
Dependent Variable: Dividend Payments by Affiliates to Parents

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Net Income

0.4132
(0.0197)

0.4122
(0.0209)

0.3567
(0.0233)

0.3377
(0.0235)

Lagged Dividend Payments

0.2747
(0.0276)

0.2588
(0.0277)

0.0822
(0.0240)

0.1366
(0.0391)

Fixed Effects?
OLS or Tobit?
R- Squared

No
OLS
0.3954

Yes-parent
OLS
0.3836

Yes-affiliate
OLS
0.5157

No
Tobit

Log-Likelihood
No. Obs

87,337

87,337

87,337

-91,925
87,337

0.57
0.73

0.56
0.74

0.39
0.92

0.39
0.86

Payout Ratio
Adjustment Parameter

Note: The dependent variable in all specifications is the dollar value of dividend payments by majority-owned affiliates. "Net Income"
is the after-foreign tax net income of the affiliate. "Lagged Dividend Payments" is the dollar value of dividend payments by the affiliate
in the previous year. Column 1 presents an OLS specification without fixed effects. Column 2 presents an OLS specification with parent
fixed effects. Column 3 presents an OLS specification with affiliate fixed effects. In columns 1 through 3, heteroskedasticity-consistent
standard errors are presented in parentheses. Column 4 presents a Tobit specification with heteroskedasticity-consistent bootstrapped
standard errors presented in parentheses.

Table IV
Pooled Lintner Regressions with Affiliate-Parent and Parent-Shareholder Payments
Dependent Variable: Dividend Payments by Affiliates to Parents or Parents to Shareholders

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Net Income

0.1213
(0.0283)

0.4193
(0.0208)

0.1232
(0.0288)

0.4119
(0.0217)

0.2757
(0.0281)

0.3429
(0.0219)

Lagged Dividend Payments

0.7399
(0.0834)

0.2764
(0.0282)

0.7250
(0.0876)

0.2609
(0.0280)

0.3277
(0.0435)

0.2857
(0.0326)

Parent Dummy Interacted with Net
Income

-0.3192
(0.0382)

-0.3097
(0.0405)

-0.1870
(0.0625)

Parent Dummy Interacted with
Lagged Dividends

0.5181
(0.1008)

0.5209
(0.1040)

0.2005
(0.2191)

Parent Fixed Effects?
OLS or Tobit?
R-Squared
Log-Likelihood
No. Obs

No
OLS
0.8080

No
OLS
0.8211

Yes
OLS
0.8059

Yes
OLS
0.8192

84,016

84,016

84,016

84,016

Payout Ratio for Affiliates
Payout Ratio for Parents

0.58
0.49

Adjustment Parameter for Affiliates
Adjustment Parameter for Parents

0.72
0.21

No
Tobit

No
Tobit

-45,011
84,016

-44,802
84,016

Note: The dependent variable in all specifications is the dollar value of dividend payments by majority-owned affiliates to parents or by parents to shareholders. "Net Income" is
the after-foreign tax net income of an affiliate or the after-tax net income of the parent in the same year. "Lagged Dividend Payments" is the dollar value of dividend payments by
the affiliate or the parent in the previous year. "Parent Dummy" takes on a value of one if the entity is a parent firm. The interaction terms interact "Parent Dummy" with "Net
Income" and "Lagged Dividend Payments," respectively. Columns 1 and 2 present OLS specifications without fixed effects. Columns 3 and 4 present OLS specifications with
parent fixed effects. In columns 1 through 4, heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are presented in parentheses. Columns 5 and 6 present Tobit specifications modeling
heteroskedasticity with employment and bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses.

Table V
Pooled Size-Adjusted Lintner Regressions with Affiliate-Parent and Parent-Shareholder Payments
Dependent Variable: Dividend Payments Scaled by Twice-Lagged Assets
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Net Income/Twice-Lagged Assets

0.2625
(0.0073)

0.2711
(0.0076)

0.2290
(0.0071)

0.2340
(0.0073)

0.1693
(0.0092)

0.1783
(0.0096)

Lagged Dividend Payments/Twice-Lagged
Assets

0.3354
(0.0199)

0.3306
(0.0201)

0.2721
(0.0195)

0.2695
(0.0196)

0.3126
(0.0212)

0.3059
(0.0214)

Parent Dummy Interacted with
(Net Income/Twice-Lagged Assets)

-0.1580
(0.0167)

-0.1552
(0.0136)

-0.1657
(0.0270)

Parent Dummy Interacted with (Lagged
Dividend Payments/Twice-Lagged Assets)

0.1261
(0.0943)

-0.0558
(0.0673)

0.2365
(0.1240)

Parent Fixed Effects?
OLS or Tobit?
R-Squared
Log-Likelihood
No. Obs

No
OLS
0.3360
68,858

No
OLS
0.3382
68,858

Yes
OLS
0.2731
68,858

Yes
OLS
0.2755
68,858

No
Tobit

No
Tobit

-21,236
68,858

-21,201
68,858

Note: The dependent variable in all specifications is the dollar value of dividend payments by majority-owned affiliates to parents or by parents to shareholders. "Net Income/TwiceLagged Assets" is the ratio of the after-foreign tax net income of the affiliate or after-tax net income of the parent normalized by twice-lagged assets. "Lagged Dividend
Payments/Twice-Lagged Assets" is the dollar value of dividend payments by the affiliate or parent normalized by twice-lagged assets. "Parent Dummy/Twice-Lagged Assets" takes on
a value of one divided by twice-lagged assets if the entity is a parent. The interaction terms interact a parent dummy variable with "Net Income/Twice-Lagged Assets" and "Lagged
Dividend Payments/Twice-Lagged Assets," respectively. Columns 1 and 2 present OLS specifications without fixed effects. Columns 3 and 4 present OLS specifications with parent
fixed effects. Columns 5 and 6 present Tobit specifications. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are presented in parentheses.

Table VI
Firm-by-Firm Wald Test for Equality of Dividend Policy with a Balanced Panel
Number of Parents

237

Number of Affiliates

1,336

Number of Observations

19,644

Payout Ratio

Adjustment Parameter

Both Parameters

194

194

194

Number of Observations in which Parent and Affiliate
Parameters Differ (10% level)

51

157

161

Number of Observations in which Parent and Affiliate
Parameters Differ (5% level)

39

147

152

Number of Observations

Note: This table summarizes the results of firm-by-firm Wald tests for the equality of dividend policy parameters for parent-shareholder dividend payments and affiliate-parent dividend
payments within controlled groups. The sample is limited to those parents and affiliates that are present throughout the sample period.

Table VII
Dividend Payments, Capital Expenditures, and Local Debt
Dependent Variable: Dividend Payments by Affiliates to Parents
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Net Income

0.4012
(0.0204)

0.4022
(0.0214)

0.3587
(0.0230)

0.3600
(0.0238)

0.3440
(0.0240)

0.3466
(0.0248)

Lagged Dividend Payments

0.2708
(0.0276)

0.2557
(0.0277)

0.2488
(0.0395)

0.2316
(0.0391)

0.2412
(0.0389)

0.2248
(0.0386)

Capital Expenditures

0.0254
(0.0100)

0.0236
(0.0106)

0.0386
(0.0161)

0.0369
(0.0168)

High Local Debt Dummy Interacted with
Net Income

0.1326
(0.0412)

0.1264
(0.0417)

0.1459
(0.0431)

0.1405
(0.0436)

High Local Debt Dummy Interacted with
Lagged Dividend Payments

0.0339
(0.0547)

0.0382
(0.0542)

0.0414
(0.0546)

0.0455
(0.0541)

-0.0365
(0.0202)

-0.0368
(0.0206)

No
0.4024
82,723

Yes
0.3897
82,723

High Local Debt Dummy Interacted with
Capital Expenditures
Parent Fixed Effects?
R-Squared
No. Obs

No
0.3952
86,845

Yes
0.3832
86,845

No
0.4023
83,215

Yes
0.3897
83,215

Note: The dependent variable in all specifications is the dollar value of dividend payments by majority-owned affiliates to parents. "Net Income" is the after-foreign tax
net income of the affiliate. "Lagged Dividend Payments" is the dollar value of dividend payments by the affiliate in the previous year. "Capital Expenditures" is the
dollar value of capital expenditures performed by the affiliate. The "High Local Debt Dummy" is computed by first calculating the ratio of an affiliate's local debt to its
assets. An affiliate that has a ratio higher than the median in its industry in a particular year is assigned a value of one while an affiliate with a ratio below the median is
assigned a value of zero. Columns 1, 3, and 5 present OLS specifications without fixed effects. Columns 2, 4, and 6 present OLS specifications with parent fixed effects.
Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are presented in parentheses.

Table VIII
The Impact of Ownership and Parental Dividend Policy on Affiliate Dividend Policy
Dependent Variable: Dividend Payments by Affiliates to Parents
Affiliates of
nonCompustat
Firms

Affiliates of
Compustat
Firms

Affiliates of
Compustat
Firms

Affiliates of
nonCompustat
Firms

Affiliates of
Compustat
Firms

Affiliates of
Compustat
Firms

Affiliates of
nonCompustat
Firms

Affiliates of
Compustat
Firms

Affiliates of
Compustat
Firms

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Net Income of Affiliates

0.3464
(0.0351)

0.4123
(0.0214)

0.3679
(0.0224)

0.3340
(0.0383)

0.4091
(0.0224)

0.3699
(0.0233)

0.2224
(0.0366)

0.3488
(0.0257)

0.4027
(0.0308)

Lagged Dividend Payments

0.2179
(0.0531)

0.2822
(0.0291)

0.2614
(0.0283)

0.1968
(0.0586)

0.2683
(0.0290)

0.2504
(0.0282)

0.1961
(0.0809)

0.2752
(0.0337)

0.2912
(0.0418)

Parent Dividends to
Shareholders Interacted
with Relative Assets

Parent Fixed Effects?
OLS or Tobit?
R-Squared
Log-Likelihood
No. Obs.

0.2512
(0.0492)

No
OLS
0.2726
21,096

No
OLS
0.4112
66,236

No
OLS
0.4194
65,976

0.2439
(0.0541)

Yes
OLS
0.2759
21,096

Yes
OLS
0.3971
66,236

Yes
OLS
0.4043
65,976

-0.3082
(0.0692)

No
Tobit

No
Tobit

No
Tobit

-21,389
21,096

-84,893
66,236

-64,069
65,976

Note: The dependent variable in all specifications is the dollar value of dividend payments by majority-owned affiliates of non-Compustat firms (columns 1, 4 and 7) and for majority-owned
affiliates of Compustat firms (columns 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, and 9). "Net Income of Affiliate" is the after-foreign tax net income of the affiliate in the same year. "Lagged Dividend Payments" is dollar
value of dividend payments by the affiliate in the previous year. "Parent Dividends to Shareholders Interacted with Relative Assets" is the product of parent dividends to shareholders with the
ratio of affiliate assets to total consolidated assets of the parent. The sample in columns 1, 4 and 7 is restricted to those affiliates without parents listed by Compustat, while the sample in all other
columns is all affiliates with parents listed by Compustat. Columns 1, 2 and 3 present OLS specifications without fixed effects. Columns 4, 5 and 6 present OLS specifications with parent fixed
effects. In columns 1 through 6, heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are presented in parentheses. Columns 7, 8, and 9 present Tobit specifications modeling heteroskedasticy with
employment and bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses.

Table IX
The Impact of Ownership on Affiliate Dividend Policy: The Case of Converters
Dependent Variable: Dividend Payments by Affiliates to Parents

Affiliates of
All Converting
Firms

Affiliates of
LBO firms

Affiliates of
Affiliates of All Converting
IPO firms
Firms

Affiliates of
LBO firms

Affiliates of
Affiliates of All Converting
IPO firms
Firms

Affiliates of
LBO firms

Affiliates of
IPO firms

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Net Income of Affiliates

0.2379
(0.0642)

0.3731
(0.1129)

0.1812
(0.0682)

0.2041
(0.0575)

0.3357
(0.1120)

0.1520
(0.0602)

0.2396
(0.0829)

0.3775
(0.1475)

0.1476
(0.0872)

Lagged Dividend Payments

0.3318
(0.1161)

0.2204
(0.0999)

0.3720
(0.2019)

0.2739
(0.1091)

0.1779
(0.1000)

0.3126
(0.1903)

0.2226
(0.0874)

0.1563
(0.1318)

0.2326
(0.1271)

Interaction of Public Dummy
and Net Income

-0.0096
(0.1024)

-0.1881
(0.1202)

0.0479
(0.1184)

-0.0058
(0.0952)

-0.1743
(0.1192)

0.0461
(0.1081)

-0.2552
(0.1080)

-0.4756
(0.1773)

-0.1536
(0.1148)

Interaction of Public Dummy
and Lagged Dividend

-0.1761
(0.1617)

0.2144
(0.1838)

-0.2436
(0.2283)

-0.2146
(0.1892)

0.1880
(0.1806)

-0.2844
(0.2481)

0.1464
(0.1554)

0.3377
(0.2104)

0.1432
(0.1809)

No
OLS
0.2070

No
OLS
0.3940

No
OLS
0.1512

Yes
OLS
0.2177

Yes
OLS
0.3808

Yes
OLS
0.1730

No
Tobit

No
Tobit

No
Tobit

-4,038
4,172

-1,626
1,775

-2,093
2,397

Parent Fixed Effects?
OLS or Tobit?
R-Squared
Log-Likelihood
No. Obs.

4,172

1,775

2,397

4,172

1,775

2,397

Note: The sample is limited to affiliates of parent firms that are publicly-held at the start of the sample, but are subsequently taken private by a leveraged buyout (LBO), and affiliates of parent firms that are privately-held at the
start of the sample, but subsequently go public via an Initial Public Offering (IPO). The dependent variable in all specifications is the dollar value of dividend payments by majority-owned affiliates for affiliates of all LBO and
IPO firms (columns 1, 4, and 7), for all LBO firms (columns 2, 5, and 8) and for all IPO firms (columns 3, 6, and 9). "Net Income of Affiliate" is the after-foreign tax net income of the affiliate. "Lagged Dividend Payments" is
the dollar value of dividend payments by the affiliate in the previous year. The interaction terms interact a dummy variable that takes a value of one in years in which parent firms are publicly-held (and equals zero otherwise)
with net income and lagged dividends. Columns 1, 2 and 3 present OLS specifications without fixed effects. Columns 4, 5 and 6 present OLS specifications with parent fixed effects. In columns 1 through 6, heteroskedasticityconsistent standard errors are presented in parentheses. Columns 7, 8, and 9 present Tobit specifications modeling heteroskedasticy with employment and bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses.

Table X
Lintner Dividend Specifications for Affiliates, The Impact of Tax Factors
Dependent Variable: Dividend Payments by Majority-Owned Affiliates
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Net Income of Affiliate

0.4257
(0.0246)

0.3351
(0.0477)

0.4244
(0.0260)

0.3391
(0.0496)

0.3577
(0.0330)

0.3505
(0.0613)

Lagged Dividend Payments

0.2788
(0.0329)

0.2731
(0.0324)

0.2627
(0.0328)

0.2577
(0.0323)

0.2394
(0.0416)

0.2393
(0.0386)

Interaction of Branch
Dummy and Net Income

0.0221
(0.0705)

0.0689
(0.0990)

0.0054
(0.0710)

0.0522
(0.1025)

0.0823
(0.1061)

0.0850
(0.1042)

Interaction of Indirect Ownership
Dummy and Net Income

-0.0545
(0.0466)

0.0207
(0.0851)

-0.0519
(0.0475)

0.0346
(0.0889)

0.0007
(0.0718)

0.0456
(0.1158)

Interaction of Branch Dummy
and Lagged Dividend Payments

0.0137
(0.1030)

0.0166
(0.1028)

0.0139
(0.1021)

0.0166
(0.1018)

-0.0456
(0.0643)

0.0477
(0.1105)

Interaction of Indirect Ownership
Dummy and Lagged Dividend
Payments

-0.0382
(0.0680)

-0.0325
(0.0677)

-0.0331
(0.0670)

-0.0278
(0.0668)

0.0818
(0.0679)

0.0788
(0.0717)

Interaction of Country-Tax Rate
and Net Income

0.3054
(0.1395)

0.2873
(0.1453)

0.0175
(0.1672)

Interaction of Country-Tax Rate,
Net Income, and Branch Dummy

-0.1440
(0.2928)

-0.1437
(0.3177)

-0.1748
(0.3359)

Interaction of Country-Tax Rate,
Net Income, and Indirect
Ownership Dummy

-0.2409
(0.2702)

-0.2924
(0.2816)

-0.4086
(0.3577)

Parent Fixed Effects?
OLS or Tobit?
R-Squared
Log-Likelihood
No. Obs

No
OLS
0.3968
84,237

No
OLS
0.3983
84,139

Yes
OLS
0.3840
84,237

Yes
OLS
0.3852
84,139

No
Tobit

No
Tobit

-60,401
84,237

-60,330
84,139

Note: The dependent variable in all specifications is the dollar value of dividend payments by majority-owned affiliates. "Net Income of Affiliate" is the afterforeign tax net income of the affiliate. "Lagged Dividend Payments" is the dollar value of dividend payments by the affiliate in the previous year. "Interaction
of Country Tax Rate and Net Income" is the product of the median tax rate and "Net Income of Affiliate." "Branch Dummy" takes a value of one if the affiliate
is organized as a branch (and zero otherwise). "Indirect Ownership Dummy" takes a value of one if the affiliate is one hundred percent indirectly owned, and
zero otherwise. The interaction terms interact "Branch Dummy" and "Indirect Ownership Dummy" with "Net Income of Affiliate," "Lagged Dividend
Payments," and "Interaction of Country-Tax Rate and Net Income." Columns 1 and 2 present OLS specifications without fixed effects. Columns 3 and 4
present OLS specifications with parent fixed effects. In columns 1 through 4, heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are presented in parentheses.
Columns 5 and 6 present Tobit specifications modeling heteroskedasticity with employment and bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses.

Table XI
Determinants of Tax-Penalized Behavior, Probit
Dependent Variable: Dummy For Payment of Dividend by Affiliates

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Constant

-0.7840
(0.0406)

-0.8422
(0.0410)

-1.2701
(0.1385)

-1.2711
(0.1567)

-0.3330
(0.2857)

-0.9963
(0.2510)

Country Tax Rate

0.5148
(0.1123)

0.4831
(0.1123)

0.5111
(0.1179)

0.4043
(0.1348)

0.6268
(0.1451)

0.7025
(0.1542)

0.4844
(0.0354)

0.4829
(0.0358)

0.5236
(0.0415)

0.4994
(0.0427)

0.4967
(0.0441)

0.0514
(0.0156)

0.0616
(0.0175)

0.0615
(0.0176)

0.0550
(0.0192)

0.1323
(0.0303)

0.1144
(0.0310)

0.1255
(0.0316)

Partial Ownership Dummy

Log of Distance to Affiliate

U.S. Citizen Employed

Property Rights

-0.0776
(0.0278)

Rule of Law

-0.0302
(0.0173)

Log of GNP Per Capita

No. Obs.
Log-Likelihood

11,550
-6,745.67

11,550
-6,653.46

11,439
-6,587.23

8,498
-5,121.54

-0.0941
(0.0233)

-0.0083
(0.0350)

8,353
-5,005.98

8,082
-4,832.91

Note: The sample in this table consists of all those affiliate-years where a parent increases the paid-in-capital of the affiliate. The
dependent variable in all specifications is a dummy that takes the value one if the affiliate pays a dividend in that year, and is zero
otherwise. "Country Tax Rate" is the median tax rate in the country in which an affiliate is located. "Partial ownership dummy" takes
the value of one if the affiliate is not wholly-owned. "Log of Distance to Affiliate" is the natural log of distance in miles to the capital
city of the country of the affiliate from Washington D.C. "Share of U.S. employees" is the fraction of all employees of an affiliate that
are U.S. citizens. "Property Rights" is an index of the level of protection private property receives. "Rule of Law" is an index that
asseses the law and order tradition in a country. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are presented in parentheses.

Table XII
Tax-Penalized Behavior Distinguished by Local Tax Rates, Probit
Dependent Variable: Dummy For Payment of Dividend by Affiliates
Low-Tax Countries

(1)

(2)

High-Tax Countries

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Constant

-0.0855
(0.5391)

0.9730
(0.9171)

-1.4601
(0.7964)

-1.2695
(0.2220)

-0.4711
(0.3943)

-0.9864
(0.3108)

Country Tax Rate

-0.2435
(0.2718)

-0.1573
(0.2918)

-0.0367
(0.3376)

0.4281
(0.4746)

0.8643
(0.5002)

0.4260
(0.5417)

Partial Ownership Dummy

0.4352
(0.0761)

0.2918
(0.0802)

0.4439
(0.0864)

0.5085
(0.0586)

0.4790
(0.0601)

0.4902
(0.0610)

Log of Distance to Affiliate

-0.0617
(0.0634)

-0.1234
(0.0760)

0.1015
(0.0779)

0.0641
(0.0217)

0.0597
(0.0225)

0.0059
(0.0247)

U.S. Citizen Employed

0.1448
(0.0559)

0.1339
(0.0582)

0.1514
(0.0611)

0.1500
(0.0442)

0.1363
(0.0449)

0.1337
(0.0453)

Property Rights

-0.1245
(0.0570)

Rule of Law

0.0184
(0.0322)

Log of GNP Per Capita

No. Obs.
Log-Likelihood

-0.0662
(0.0434)

2,431
-1,454.89

-0.0403
(0.0473)

-0.0223
(0.0682)

2,311
-1,369.49

2,109
-1,241.46

-0.1088
(0.0275)

3,982
-2,464.74

-0.0880
(0.0356)

0.1168
(0.0533)

3,961
-2,442.67

3,915
-2,409.06

Note: The sample in Columns 1 through 3 and 4 through 6 restrict attention to subsamples of affiliates in countries with tax rates lower than
32% or higher than 38%, respectively. The dependent variable in all specifications is a dummy that takes the value one if the affiliate pays a
dividend in that year, and is zero otherwise. "Country Tax Rate" is the median tax rate in the country in which an affiliate is located. "Partial
ownership dummy" takes the value one if the affiliate is not wholly-owned and zero otherwise. "Log of Distance to Affiliate" is the natural log
of distance in miles to the capital city of the country of the affiliate from Washington D.C. "Share of U.S. employees" is the fraction of all
employees of an affiliate that are U.S. citizens. "Property Rights" is an index of the level of protection private property receives. "Rule of
Law" is an index that asseses the law and order tradition in a country. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are presented in
parentheses.

