NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL PROTECTION OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
Gene M. Grossman
Edwin L.-C. Lai
Working Paper 8704
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8704
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2002

The authors thank Elhanan Helpman, Giovanni Maggi, Keith Maskus and Lars Svenssion for useful
discussions and comments. They are grateful to the U.S. National Science Foundation, the Hong Kong
Research Grants Council (Project no. CityU 1145/99H), and the Department of Economics and Finance at
City University of Hong Kong for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Gene M. Grossman and Edwin L.-C. Lai. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

International Protection of Intellectual Property
Gene M. Grossman and Edwin L.-C. Lai
NBER Working Paper No. 8704
January 2002
JEL No. O34, F13

ABSTRACT
We study the incentives that governments have to protect intellectual property in a trading world
economy. We consider a world economy with ongoing innovation in two countries that differ in market
size, in their capacities for innovation, and in their absolute and comparative advantage in manufacturing.
We associate the strength of IPR protection with the duration of a country’s patents that are applied with
national treatment. After describing the determination of national policies in a non-cooperative regime
of patent protection, we ask, Why are patents longer in the North? We also study international patent
agreements by deriving the properties of an efficient global regime of patent protection and asking
whether harmonization of patent policies is necessary or sufficient for global efficiency.

Gene Grossman
International Economics Section
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
grossman@princeton.edu

Edwin L.-C. Lai
City University of Hong Kong

1

Introduction

During the 1980’s and early 1990’s, the United States and several European countries
expressed strong dissatisfaction with what they deemed to be inadequate protection
of intellectual property in many developing countries. The developed countries made
the upgrading of intellectual property rights (IPR) protection one of their highest
priorities for the Uruguay Round of trade talks. Their eﬀorts in those negotiations
bore fruit in the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPs), which was approved as part of the Final Act of the Uruguay Round.
The TRIPs agreement establishes minimum standards of protection for several
categories of intellectual property. For example, in the area of new technology, it
requires countries to grant patents to a broad class of innovations for a minimum
of twenty years and to treat foreign and domestic patent applicants alike. But IPR
protection remains a highly contentious issue in international relations between the
North and the South, because many developing countries believe that the TRIPs
agreement was forced upon them by their economically more powerful trading partners and that this move toward harmonization of patent policies serves the interests
of the North at the expense of those of the South.
In a country that is closed to international trade, the design of a system of IPR
protection poses a clear trade-oﬀ to a welfare-maximizing government. By strengthening the protection of intellectual property, a government provides greater incentives
for innovation and thus the benefits that come from having more and better products.
But, at the same time, it curtails potential competition for firms that have previously
innovated and thus limits the benefits that can be realized from existing products.
As Nordhaus (1969) argued, the optimal patent policy equates the marginal dynamic
benefit with the marginal static eﬃciency loss.
But in an open economy, the trade-oﬀs are not so clear cut. International trade
spreads the benefits of innovation beyond national boundaries. This means that a
country does not reap all of the global benefits that come from protecting intellectual
property within its borders. Moreover, countries diﬀer in their capacities for innovation due to diﬀerences in skill endowments and technical know-how. It is not obvious
1

how a government ought to set its national IPR policy if some of the benefits of its
national innovation accrue to foreigners, if its constituents benefit from innovations
that are encouraged and take place beyond its boundaries, and if domestic and foreign
firms diﬀer in their ability to innovate.
Some previous research has addressed the question of whether a country with a
limited capacity to innovate will benefit from extending IPR protection to foreign
inventors. Chin and Grossman (1990) and Deardorﬀ (1992) investigated the welfare
eﬀects of extending patent protection from the country in which innovation takes
place to another country that only consumes the innovative products. Both of these
papers treat the investment in R&D as a once-oﬀ decision. In contrast, Helpman
(1993) models innovation as an ongoing process and associates the strength of the
IPR regime with the flow probability that a given product protected by a patent in
the North will be imitated in the South. He evaluates the welfare consequences of
marginal changes in the rate of imitation. These papers do not, however, consider the
simultaneous choice of IPR protection by trade partners, nor do they discuss what
international regime of IPR protection would be globally eﬃcient.1
In this paper, we study the incentives that governments have to protect intellectual property in a trading world economy. We consider a world economy with
ongoing innovation in which there are two countries that diﬀer in market sizes, in
their capacities for innovation, and in their absolute and comparative advantages
in manufacturing. Innovators develop the designs for new products, each of which
has a limited economic life. We associate the strength of IPR protection with the
duration of a country’s patents. Patents provide inventors with exclusive rights to
produce, sell and distribute their products within a country. We study a regime with
national treatment, which means that the same protection is provided to all inventors
regardless of their national origin.
We begin in Section 2 with the case of a closed economy. There we re-examine
the trade-oﬀ between static costs and dynamic benefits that was first studied by
1

McCalman (1997) addresses some of these issues in a model of once-oﬀ innovation by a single

firm in a developed economy.

2

Nordhaus. We derive a neat formula that characterizes the optimal patent policy in
a closed economy, and discuss the determinants of the optimal patent length. One
interesting finding is that the optimal duration of patents is independent of the size
of the economy.
In Section 3, we describe the determination of national policies in a non-cooperative
regime of patent protection. We derive best response functions for the “North” and
the “South,” where the North is assumed to have a higher wage than the South, as
well as possibly a larger market for innovative products and a greater capacity for
innovation. The best response is a patent length that maximizes a country’s national
welfare, given the duration of patents in its trading partner. The wage gap between
countries creates a diﬀerence in manufacturing costs, which bears on the country’s
non-cooperative policy choices. In particular, we identify important diﬀerences in the
incentives that the countries have to extend their patent lengths when the high wage
country has the longer patents as compared to when the low wage country has the
longer patents.
In Section 4, we ask, Why are patents longer in the North? We address this
question by considering the comparative statics of the Nash equilibrium. The fact
that the North has greater research capability than the South is not enough to explain
its longer patents. But we are able to show that the Nash equilibrium patents will be
longer in the North than in the South if the North’s market for innovative products
is at least as large as that in the South and if the North’s relative advantage in R&D
is suﬃciently great.
We study international patent agreements in Section 5. First we derive the properties of an eﬃcient global regime of patent protection. If the countries can make
international transfer payments or compensate one another in policy areas other than
IPR protection, then an eﬃcient patent regime is one that provides the optimal aggregate incentives for innovation to inventors throughout the world. These incentives
can be achieved by various combinations of patent policies in the two countries, so
there is no unique pair of patent lengths that is needed for global eﬃciency. Even if
international transfers are not possible, the eﬃcient policies will be ones that provide

3

the optimal aggregate incentive for R&D, at least for a range of distributions of national welfare levels. However, when international transfers do not occur, the welfare
levels of the North and the South will depend on which pair of eﬃcient patent lengths
is selected. Among combinations of policies that give the same overall incentives for
global research, the North fares better, and the South worse, the longer are patents
in the South. An implication of our findings is that harmonization of patent policies is neither necessary nor suﬃcient for global eﬃciency. Moreover, starting from
a non-cooperative equilibrium with longer patents in the North than in the South,
an eﬃcient agreement calling for harmonization of patent lengths typically serves the
interests of the North, quite possibly at the expense of the South.
Readers familiar with the literature on trade policy will recognize a familiar structure in our inquiry. Our examination of a non-cooperative regime of patent protection is analogous to Johnson’s (1953-54) study of non-cooperative tariﬀ setting by
two large countries. Our subsequent identification of the eﬃcient combinations of
patent policies is analogous to Mayer’s (1981) similar examination of the eﬃcient
combinations of trade policies. We, like Mayer, associate the eﬃciency frontier with
the possible outcomes of an international negotiation. Our findings concerning the
non-cooperative and cooperative outcomes are summarized in Section 6.

2

A Simple Model of Innovation

In this section, we construct a simple model of ongoing innovation. We develop the
model for a closed economy and use it to revisit the question of the optimal patent
length that was first addressed by Nordhaus (1969). Our model yields a neat formula
that characterizes the trade-oﬀ between the static costs and dynamic benefits of
extending the period of patent protection. The discussion of a closed economy lays
the groundwork for the more subtle analysis of the international system that we
undertake in the sections that follow.
The economy has two sectors, one that produces a homogeneous good and another that produces a continuum of diﬀerentiated products. The designs for the

4

diﬀerentiated products result from private investments in R&D. Once a good has
been invented, it has a finite economic life of length τ̄ . That is, a new product potentially provides utility to consumers for a period of τ̄ from the time of its creation,
whereupon its value to consumers drops to zero.
There are M consumers with identical preferences. We shall refer to M as the
“size of the market.”2 The representative consumer maximizes a utility function of
the form
U (t) =

Z

∞

u(z)e−ρz dz

(1)

t

where

u (z) = y(z) +

Z

n(z)

h[x(i, z)]di,

(2)

0

y(z) is consumption of the homogeneous good at time z, x(i, z) is consumption of the
ith variety of diﬀerentiated product at time z, and n(z) is the measure of diﬀerentiated
products invented before z that still hold value to consumers at time z. We assume
that h0 (x) > 0, h00 (x) < 0, h0 (0) = ∞, and −xh00 (x)/h0 (x) < 1 for all x. The third
assumption ensures a positive demand for every variety at any finite price. The fourth
ensures that any firm holding a patent for a diﬀerentiated product will charge a finite
price.
A consumer maximizes utility by purchasing some of all varieties that are not yet
obsolete. He chooses x(i, z) so that h0 [x(i, z)] = p(i, z) for all i and z, where p(i, z) is
the price of variety i at time t. After the consumer makes all of his optimal purchases
of diﬀerentiated products at time z, he devotes the remainder of his spending to
the homogeneous good y. Spending is always positive in the equilibria we describe.
This means that the interest rate is constant and equal to ρ, from the condition for
intertemporal optimization.
2

In our model, demand for diﬀerentiated products does not vary with income. Thus, a rich

country need not have a larger market for these goods than a poor country. Nonetheless, we prefer
to think of the market for diﬀerentiated goods as being larger in the North than in the South. This
could be rigorously justified within our model if we were to suppose that diﬀerentiated products
provide utility only after a threshold level of consumption of the homogeneous goods has been
reached. Then, a rich country is likely to have more consumers who surpass the threshold.

5

Manufacturing requires only labor. Any firm can produce good y with b units of
labor per unit of output. All known varieties of the diﬀerentiated product can be
produced with a units of labor per unit of output. But the government grants the
original designer of a diﬀerentiated product the sole rights of production and sale for
a period of length τ . We assume that patents are perfectly enforced.
The design of new varieties requires both labor and human capital. We take
φ(z) = F [H, LR (z)], where φ(z) is the flow of new inventions at time z, H is the
(constant) stock of human capital, and LR (z) is the amount of labor devoted to
R&D. Note that ṅ(z) = φ(z) − φ(z − τ̄ ), because the goods that were invented at
time z − τ̄ become obsolete at time z.

We assume that F (·) is homogeneous of degree one and that γ(L) ≡ − (FL )2 / (F F 00 )

is a non-increasing function of L. We shall see that γ is the elasticity of research
output with respect to the value of a patent and that our restriction that it is nonincreasing ensures that the second-order condition for the optimal patent length is
satisfied. If the research technology is Cobb-Douglas – an example that we shall
use in several places – then γ is constant and equal to the ratio of the cost share
of labor to the cost share of human capital.3 If the research technology has a constant elasticity of substitution, γ is a non-increasing function of L for any elasticity
of substitution less than or equal to one.
We describe now the static and dynamic equilibrium for an economy that has
a patent duration of τ . In equilibrium, firms with live patents for diﬀerentiated
products behave as monopolies. Each such firm faces an inverse demand curve from
each of the M consumers with the form p(x) = h0 (x). The firm sets its price so that
(p − aw)/p = −xh00 /h0 , where w is the wage rate and x is sales per consumer. This is
the usual monopoly-pricing rule whereby the markup over unit cost as a fraction of
the price is equal to the inverse demand elasticity. Optimal pricing yields a typical
patent holder profits of π per consumer, and total profits of M π.
When a patent expires, competitors can imitate the good costlessly. Then the
product sells for the competitive price of p = aw and generates no further profits.
3

In other words, if F (H, LR ) = H 1−β LβR , then γ = β/(1 − β).

6

This pricing of the good continues until the good becomes obsolete. Meanwhile,
the homogeneous good always carries the competitive price of bw, which, because
this good is the numeraire, implies that w = 1/b. In writing this condition, we
implicitly assume that the economy’s labor supply is suﬃciently large that some
labor remains for production of the homogeneous good after all derived demand for
labor for producing diﬀerentiated products and conducting R&D has been satisfied.
Labor engages in manufacturing and R&D. The labor employed in manufacturing
diﬀerentiated goods is just the amount needed to produce the quantities demanded
at the equilibrium prices. The allocation of labor to R&D is such that its marginal
value product in this activity is equal to the wage rate. Thus,
vFL (H, LR ) = w,

(3)

where v is the value of a new patent. Since there is no uncertainty about future
earnings, patents are worth the discounted value of the profits they generate in the
time before they expire, or
v=

¢
Mπ ¡
1 − e−ρτ .
ρ

(4)

We can see from (3) and (4) that an increase in the patent length increases the value
of a new patent, thereby drawing additional resources into R&D.
The final equilibrium condition equates savings with investment. Savings are the
diﬀerence between national income rH + wL + nm M π and aggregate spending E,
where r is the return to human capital, L is the aggregate labor supply, and nm is the
number of diﬀerentiated products that retain their patent protection. All investment
is devoted to R&D. This activity has an aggregate cost of rH + wLR . Thus, we can
write the equilibrium condition as (rH + wL + nm M π) − E = rH + wLR , or
E = w(L − LR ) + nm M π.

(5)

It is useful to calculate an expression for aggregate welfare at date 0, the time at
which a new (optimal) patent policy will be set by the government. By assumption,
this patent protection applies only to goods introduced after time 0; those introduced

7

beforehand are subject to whatever policy was in eﬀect at the time of their invention.4
At each moment in time, each of the M consumers enjoys surplus of Cm = h(xm ) −
pm xm from his consumption of any good under patent. Here, xm is the amount sold
by the typical monopoly to the typical consumer and pm is the monopoly price. We
distinguish between those goods invented before time 0 and those invented afterward.
The former yield some exogenous surplus that is unaﬀected by the new patent policy.
Of the latter, there are sφ at time s, for s between 0 and τ , and a constant number τ φ
thereafter. Each consumer also enjoys surplus of Cc = h(xc )−pc xc from his purchases
of any competitively-priced variety of the diﬀerentiated product, where xc and pc are
the quantity and price of a typical one of these purchases. Again, the competitivelypriced goods that were invented before time 0 yield some exogenous surplus. The
number of such goods invented after time 0 that are still economically viable at time
s is 0 for s ≤ τ , (s − τ ) φ for s between τ and τ̄ , and (τ̄ − τ ) φ, for s ≥ τ̄ . Using (1),
(2) and (5), we calculate that utility at time 0 is
U (0) = Λ0 +

w (L − LR ) M φ
Mφ
+
(Cm + π)T +
Cc (T̄ − T )
ρ
ρ
ρ

(6)

where Λ0 is the discounted present value of the consumer surplus and profits derived from goods invented before time 0, and where T ≡ (1 − e−ρτ ) /ρ and T̄ ≡

(1 − e−ρτ̄ ) /ρ. Note that T is the present discounted value of a flow of one dollar from
time 0 to time τ , and that T̄ has an analogous interpretation.
We are now ready to derive the optimal patent length for a closed economy.
Formally, we maximize U (0) with respect to τ , after recalling that φ = F (H, LR ) and
that LR is a function of τ via (3) and (4).5 It is more intuitive, however, to describe
4

It would never be optimal for the government to extend patent protection on goods that have

already been invented.

This would create deadweight loss without any oﬀsetting social benefit.

The government might wish to eliminate protection for goods that were invented under a diﬀerent
regime, but we assume that such expropriation of intellectual property would not be legal.
5
Equivalentlly, we can maximize ρU(0) over the choice of T . Note that Cm , Cc and π do not
depend on the duration of patents and thus do not depend on T . We can combine (3) and (4) to
write MπT FL (H, LR ) = w, which allows us to solve for the functional relationship betwen the labor
devoted to R&D and the policy variable T ; denote it by LR (T ). Then, substituting this expression

8

the social costs and benefits that derive from extending the patent length marginally
from a given length τ . The cost of lengthening the period of patent protection is
that the economy suﬀers the deadweight loss of M (Cc − Cm − π) on each of the
diﬀerentiated products invented after time 0 for a marginally longer period of time.
If the patent period is lengthened at time 0, the extra deadweight loss kicks in at
time τ , and continues thereafter. The flow of new products is ṅ per unit time. Thus,
the total marginal cost, discounted to time 0, is
φe−ρτ
M (Cc − Cm − π) .
ρ
The benefit to the economy of extending the patent length is that it encourages
R&D, which in turn means a greater variety of diﬀerentiated products. Each differentiated product yields discounted consumer surplus of MCm T over its life as a
patented product and M Cc (T̄ − T ) over its life as a competitively-priced product,
where in each case the discounting is back to the time of invention. Now if we discount
this flow of benefits back to time 0, and multiply by the number of new inventions
induced by a marginal lengthening of the patent period, we have the total marginal
benefit, which is equal to
¤
1 dφ dv £
·
·
· M Cm T + M Cc (T̄ − T ) .
ρ dv dτ

Using (3), we can calculate that

φ
dφ
=γ ;
dv
v
thus, γ is the elasticity of innovation with respect to the value of a patent, as previously claimed. Also, (4) implies
dv
= M πe−ρτ .
dτ
into (6) and rearranging terms, we can write the maximand as
£
¤
ρU (0) = ρΛ0 + w [L − LR (T )] + MF [H, LR (T )] (Cm + π − Cc ) T + Cc T̄ .

The first-order condition for a maximum requires

£
©
¤
ª
(Cc − Cc − π)M F [H, LR (T )] = MFL (Cm + π − Cc ) T + Cc T̄ − w L0R

from which (7) follows.

9

We substitute these terms into the expression for marginal benefit, and equate this
to the marginal cost. This gives an implicit formula for the optimal patent length,
namely

·

Cc − Cm − π = γ Cm + Cc

µ

T̄ − T
T

¶¸

.

(7)

The assumption that γ 0 < 0 ensures that the second-order condition is satisfied.
From (7) we see that the optimal patent is longer, the greater is the useful life
of a product (larger τ̄ ), the more patient are consumers (smaller ρ), and the greater
is the ratio of consumer surplus plus profits under monopoly to consumer surplus
with competition. All of these findings accord well with intuition. One noteworthy
feature of (7) is that the size of the market has no bearing on the optimal patent
length in a closed economy. In a closed economy, the first-best level of R&D – that
which maximizes discounted utility when all goods are competitively priced – is an
increasing function of market size. This is because innovation is a public good, and
the Samuelsonian rule for optimal provision of a public good calls for greater output
when the benefits can be spread across more consumers. But the encouragement of
innovation by patents achieves only a second best. An increase in M enhances both
the marginal benefit of extending patents and the marginal cost of doing so, and
does so in equal proportions. Thus, the optimal patent length in a closed economy is
invariant to market size.

3

Noncooperative Patent Protection

In this section, we study the national incentives for protection of intellectual property
in a world economy with imitation and trade. We derive the Nash equilibria of a game
in which two countries set their patent policies simultaneously and noncooperatively.
The countries are distinguished by their wage rates, their market sizes, and their
stocks of human capital. The last of these proxies for their diﬀerent capacities for
R&D. We shall term the countries “North” and “South,” in keeping with our desire
to understand the tensions that surrounded the tightening of IPR protection in the
developing countries in the last decade. Maskus (2000a, ch.3) has documented an
10

increase in innovative activity in poor and middle-income countries such as Brazil,
Korea, and China, so our model of relations between trading partners with positive
but diﬀerent abilities to conduct R&D may be apt for studying the incentives for IPR
protection in a world of trade between such nations and the developed economies.6
But our model may apply more broadly to relations between any groups of countries
that have diﬀerent wages and diﬀerent capacities for research. Such diﬀerences exist,
albeit to a lesser extent than between North and South, in the comparison of countries in Northern and Southern Europe, or the comparison of the United States and
Canada. We do not mean the labels North and South to rule out the application of
our analysis to these other sorts of relationships.

3.1

The Global IPR Regime

The model is a natural extension of the one presented in Section 2. Consumers in
the two countries share identical preferences. In each country, the representative
consumer maximizes the intertemporal utility function in (1). The instantaneous
utility of a consumer in country j now is given by
Z nS (z)+nN (z)
uj (z) = yj (z) +
h[xj (i, z)]di,

(8)

0

where yj (z) is consumption of the homogeneous good by a typical resident of country
j at time z, xj (i, z) is consumption of the ith diﬀerentiated product by a resident of
country j at time z, and nj (z) is the number of diﬀerentiated varieties previously
invented in country j that remain economically viable at time z. There are MN
consumers in the North and MS consumers in the South. While we do not place any
restrictions on the relative sizes of the two markets at this juncture, we shall be most
interested in the case where MN > MS .7 It does not matter for our analysis whether
consumers can borrow and lend internationally or not.
6

He also shows the extent to which patent applications in countries like Mexico, Brazil, Korea,

Malaysia, Indonesia and Singapore are dominated by foreign firms, a feature of the data that figures
in our analysis.
7
We remind the reader that market size is meant to capture not the population of a country, but
rather the scale of its demand for innovative products.

11

In country j, it takes bj units of labor to produce one unit of the homogeneous
good. We assume that bN < bS , and that, in equilibrium, the numeraire good is
produced in both countries. This implies wN > wS . The technology for producing a
diﬀerentiated product reflects the country in which the good was invented. A variety
that was developed in country j requires aj units of labor per unit of production,
where aN ≤ aS .8 Of course, the rights to produce such goods may be limited by patent
protection. For now, we rule out direct foreign investment, so the proprietary owner of
a technology for producing a diﬀerentiated product must undertake its manufacturing
in the same country in which its R&D was conducted.
New goods are invented in each region according to φj = F (Hj , LRj ), where Hj is
the human capital endowment of country j, and LRj is the labor devoted to R&D in
country j. The natural case to consider is HN > HS , but we do not impose this as a
restriction.
We now describe the IPR regime. In each country, there is national treatment in
the granting of patent rights. Under national treatment, the government of country
j grants a patent of length τ j to all inventors of diﬀerentiated products regardless of
there national origins. In other words, we assume that foreign firms and domestic
firms have equal standing in applying for patents in any country. National treatment
is required by the TRIPs agreement and it characterized the laws that were in place
in most countries even before this agreement.9 In our model, a patent is an exclusive
right to make, sell, use, or import a product for a fixed period of time (see Maskus,
2000a, p.36). This means that, when good i is under patent protection in country
8

We could have specified, alternatively, that the technology for producing a diﬀerentiated product

depends on where the good is produced, not where it was invented. The analysis would not be much
diﬀerent.
9
National treatment is required by the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, to which 127 countries subscribed by the end of 1994 and 162 countries subscribe today (see
http://www.wipo.org/treaties/ip/paris/paris.html).

There were, however, allegations from firms

in the United States and elsewhere that prior to the signing of the TRIPS agreement in 1994,
nondiscriminatory laws did not always mean nondiscriminatory practice. See Scotchmer (2001) for
an analysis of the incentives that countries have to apply national treatment in the absence of an
enforcible agreement.

12

j, no firm other than the patent holder or one designated by it may produce the
good in country j for domestic sale or for export, nor may the good be imported
into country j from an unauthorized producer outside the country. We also rule out
parallel imports – unauthorized imports of good i that were produced by the patent
holder or its designee, but that were sold to a third party outside country j.10 When
parallel imports are prevented, patent holders can practice price discrimination across
national markets.
We solve the Nash game in which the governments set their patent policies onceand-for-all at time 0. These patents apply only to good invented after time 0; goods
invented beforehand continue to receive the protections aﬀorded at their times of
invention. So long as the governments cannot curtail patents that were previously
awarded, the economy has no state variables that bear on the choice of optimal patent
policies at a given moment in time. This means that the Nash equilibrium in onceand-for-all patents is also a sub-game perfect equilibrium in the infinitely repeated
game in which the governments can change their patent policies periodically, or even
continuously. Of course, the repeated game may have other equilibria in which the
governments base their policies at a point in time on the history of policies that were
chosen previously. We do not investigate such equilibria with tacit cooperation here,
but rather postpone our discussion of cooperation until Section 5.
Let us describe, for given patent lengths τ N and τ S , the life cycle of a typical
diﬀerentiated product invented in the North and that of a typical product invented in
the South. For this, we must distinguish a global patent regime with τ N > τ S from a
regime with τ N < τ S . Consider first a product invented in the North. During an initial
phase after the product is developed, the inventor holds a patent in both countries.
10

The treatment of parallel imports under the TRIPs agreement remains a matter of legal contro-

versy. Countries continue to diﬀer in their rules for territorial exhaustion of IPRs. Some countries,
like Australia and Japan, practice international exhaustion, whereby the restrictive rights granted
by a patent end with the first sale of the good anywhere in the world. Other countries or regions,
like the United States and the European Union, practice national or regional exhaustion, whereby
patent rights end only with the first sale within the country or region. Under such rules, patent
holders can prevent parallel trade. See Maskus (2000b) for further discussion.

13

Then the patent holder earns a flow of profits MN π N from sales to consumers in the
North and MS π N from sales to consumers in the South, where π N is earnings per
consumer for a monopoly selling a typical Northern brand. Households in the North
N
realize a flow of consumer surplus of MN Cm
from these purchases, while their those
N
j
, where Cm
is the surplus enjoyed
in the South realize a flow of surplus of MS Cm

by a typical consumer of a monopolistically-priced good produced in country j. If
τ N > τ S , the inventor’s patent will expire first in the South. At that time, the good
will be imitated by competitive firms, which will sell it there for a price of wS aN . The
patent holder ceases to realize any profits from sales in the South, but continues to
earn profits in the North. The flow of consumer surplus in the South rises to MS CcNS ,
where Ccjk denotes the consumer surplus generated per consumer by a product that
was invented in country j and is sold at a competitive price by producers in country
N
k. Consumer surplus in the North continues to be MN Cm
, until the patent expires

there. Then imitation by low-cost Southern producers causes Northern consumer
surplus to rise to MN CcNS , while the Northern inventor loses his remaining source of
income. At a time τ̄ from the moment of invention, the good becomes obsolete and
all flows of consumer surplus cease.
If, instead, τ N < τ S , the Northern patent will expire first. Then the good can
be imitated by firms in the North for sale to Northern consumers, but the ongoing
patent protection in the South prevents both imports and production there. For a
while, the consumers in the North enjoy (in the aggregate) an intermediate flow of
consumer surplus of MN CcN N , because the competitively-priced good is produced by
firms in the high-wage country. The inventor loses all of its earning capacity in the
North as soon as this imitation takes place. When a period τ S has elapsed from the
time of invention, competitive production begins in the South, and these low-cost
producers capture both markets. Then consumer surplus in the North rises (again)
to MN CcNS , consumer surplus in the South rises to MS CcNS , and the inventor loses
his remaining source of profits.
For a good invented in the South, the life cycle is similar, but with one small
S
N
and MN Cm
diﬀerence. If τ N > τ S , the consumer surplus flows are first MS Cm

14

during a period of patent protection in both countries, then MS CcSS for consumers
in the South after the patent protection has expired there, and finally MN CcSS for
consumers in the North, once its longer patent expires. The inventor earns a flow
of profits of (MS + MN )π S during the initial phase with protection in both markets,
MN π S during the second phase with protection only in the North, and nothing during
the final phase with a competitive world market. However, if τ N < τ S , the loss of
patent protection in the North does not spell an end to the inventor’s profits there.
This is because the Southern inventor can produce the good at a cost of wS aS , which
is less than the cost facing a potential imitator in the North. If a Northern firm’s
per unit cost, wN aS , exceeds the price charged by a Southern monopoly while it
holds full patent protection, then the patent holder’s profits and the flow of consumer
surplus in the North continue unabated after the expiration of the patent in the
North. If the Northern unit cost falls short of the Southern monopoly price, then
at the time when its Northern patent expires the Southern firm must shave its price
in the North to a bit below wN aS , suﬀering in consequence a reduction in its profit
flow to MN π̃ S + MS π S , where π̃ S is the profits per consumer of a Southern monopoly
that faces potential competition from Northern imitators. The Northern consumers,
S
S
S
in turn, realize a jump in their surplus flow to MN C̃m
, where C̃m
= max{CcSN , Cm
}

is the per-consumer surplus in the North when a Southern monopolist faces potential
competition from producers in the North. When the Southern patent eventually
expires, the competitive producers in the South take over both markets, and the
surplus per consumer rises everywhere to CcSS . At this point, the inventor ceases to
capture any profits.

3.2

The Best Response Functions

We are now ready to derive the best response function for each country. The best
response function for the South gives the patent length τ S that maximizes aggregate
welfare in the South as a function of a given τ N . Similarly, the best response function
for the North gives the patent length τ N that maximizes Northern welfare, given the
patent policy of the South. Conceptually, we proceed as follows. First, we examine
15

the first-order condition that must be satisfied by τ S if τ S > 0 and we impose the
restriction that τ N > τ S . Then, we examine the first-order condition that must be
satisfied if τ S < τ̄ and we suppose that τ N < τ S . Finally, we consider the South’s
optimal choice of patent length for given τ N without any restrictions.
Given τ N > τ S , the South bears two costs from prolonging its patents slightly.
First, this extends the period during which it suﬀers a static deadweight loss of
S
CcSS − Cm
− π S on goods invented in the South. Second, it prolongs the period during

N
instead of CcNS on goods that were
which its consumers realize surplus of only Cm

invented in the North. Notice that the profits earned by Northern producers in the
South are not an oﬀset to this latter marginal cost, because they accrue to residents of
the North. The marginal benefit to the South that comes from prolonging its patents
reflects the increased incentive that Northern and Southern firms have to undertake
R&D. If the welfare-maximizing τ S is positive and less than τ N , then the marginal
cost of increasing τ S must equal the marginal benefit, which implies
S
N
φS (CcSS − Cm
− π S ) + φN (CcN S − Cm
)

=

£
£
¤ φ
¤
φS
S
N
γ S π S MS Cm
TS + CcSS (T̄ − TS ) + N γ N π N MS Cm
TS + CcNS (T̄ − TS ) ,
vS
vN

where γ j = −(Fj02 )/(Fj00 Fj ), Tj = (1 − e−ρτ j ) /ρ, and vj is the value of a new patent
for a good invented in country j. Noting that vj = (MS TS + MN TN ) π j , this can be
written as
¡

¢
S
N
− π S + ω(CcNS − Cm
)
CcSS − Cm

·
·
¸
¸
S
SS T̄ − TS
N
NS T̄ − TS
= γ S ΩS Cm + Cc (
) + ωγ N ΩS Cm + Cc (
) ,
TS
TS

(9)

where ω = φN /φS and Ωj = Mj Tj / (MS TS + MN TN ). The terms on the left-hand
side of (9) reflect respectively the marginal cost of extending the deadweight loss in
the South on Southern products and the marginal cost of postponing the competitive
pricing of Northern products. The terms on the right-hand side of (9) reflect the
benefit to Southern consumers from the induced spur to innovation in the South and
North, respectively.
16

τΝ

45Î

S1

N1
Ê

τ2
τ~
τ1

N2
S2

N1

N2

S1

S2
τ-

0

τS

Figure 1: Nash Equilibrium with Continuous Best Response in North
Equation (9) is depicted by the curve S1 S1 in Figure 1, including both the boldface
and dotted portions (more on this in a moment). Notice that we have drawn the curve
only for points above the 45◦ line, inasmuch as the stated first-order condition applies
only when τ N > τ S . We illustrate a case in which the curve is downward sloping,
as it must be when the countries have identical Cobb-Douglas research production
functions.11 Intuitively, as τ N increases, labor is drawn into R&D in both countries.
This reduces the responsiveness of global innovation to a given change in τ S . If the
fraction of world innovation that takes place in each country does not change by too
much (as will be the case if γ S is approximately equal to γ N ) then the South’s best
response is to set a shorter patent of its own.
Now suppose that τ S > τ N . In this case, the marginal cost to the South of
prolonging its patents has an additional, negative term. It includes as before terms
reflecting an extended period of deadweight loss on goods invented in the South and
an extended period of diminished consumer surplus on goods invented in the North.
11

With identical Cobb-Douglas research functions, γ S and γ N are identical constants, and ω

is independent of τ S and τ N . Then the marginal benefit declines with τ N and the second-order
condition (which is satisfied) ensures dτ N /dτ S < 0 along S1 S1 .

17

But these costs are diminished by the lengthening of a period during which Southern
firms earn positive profits of π̃ S per consumer in the Northern market. Meanwhile,
the marginal benefit to the South of prolonging its patents is greater than before, for
somewhat the same reason. Since an increase in τ S extends a phase in which Southern
monopolists earn MS π S + MN π̃ S , rather than just MS π S , it has a greater impact on
the rate of Southern innovation than when τ N > τ S . The first-order condition that
applies in place of (9) is
¶
µ
MN
SS
S
N
π̃ S + ω(CcNS − Cm
)
Cc − Cm − π S −
MS
·
·
¸
¸
S
SS T̄ − TS
N
NS T̄ − TS
= γ S Ω̃S Cm + Cc (
) + ωγ N ΩS Cm + Cc (
) ,
TS
TS

(10)

where
Ω̃S =

MS TS π S + MN TS π̃S
(MS TS + MN TN ) π S + MN (TS − TN )π̃ S

and thus Ω̃S > ΩS for π̃ S > 0.
The curve S2 S2 in Figure 1 represents equation (10). It too must be downward
sloping when the countries have identical Cobb-Douglas research technologies.12 Notice that S2 S2 is shifted to the right relative to a continuation of the curve S1 S1 .
This displacement reflects the extra marginal benefit and reduced marginal cost of
extending the patent length τ S in situations where τ S > τ N as compared to when
τS < τN.
Each point on S1 S1 gives a τ S that locally maximizes US for the given value of
τ N .13 Similarly, the points on S2 S2 are locally optimal responses. To identify the best
response to a given τ N , we need to compare the welfare levels achieved at the local
optima, as well as recognize the constraints on patent length. Consider, for example,
the point at the intersection of S1 S1 with the 45◦ line, where τ N = τ 1 . It is not
12

In the figure, we depict a case in which the S2 S2 curve hits the horizontal axis at a value of τ S

less than τ̄. In this case, the constraint on the length of the Southern patent – which can be no
longer than the economic life of a product – never is binding. If the constraint does bind for some
values of τ N , the S2 S2 curve will be situated above the horizontal axis at τ N = 0.
13
This presumes that the second-order condition is satisfied for points on the curve, as in fact it
must be if the countries have identical Cobb-Douglas research production functions.

18

optimal for the South’s government to choose τ 1 in response to τ N = τ 1 , because
the marginal benefit to the South of increasing its patent length is discretely larger
than the marginal cost for τ S slightly larger than τ 1 . The South’s best response to
τ 1 is given by the relevant point on S2 S2 . Now consider the point of intersection of
S2 S2 with the 45◦ line, where τ N = τ 2 . By a similar argument, it is not optimal for
the South to choose τ 2 in response to τ N = τ 2 , because the the marginal cost of
extending the patent length exceeds the marginal benefit of doing so for τ S slightly
less than τ 2 . In this case, the best response is to be found on the S1 S1 curve. The
South’s best response function is represented by a boldface curve in Figure 1 with a
discontinuity at τ N = τ̃ . The discontinuity comes at the value of τ N at which the
two local maxima yield the same level of utility.
We examine now the best responses in the North. Our procedure is the same.
First, we consider the first-order condition for a locally optimal τ N given τ S and
assuming τ N > τ S . Then we consider the first-order condition for a local optimum
when τ N < τ S . Finally, we find the global optimum.
If τ N > τ S , an extension of the patent length in the North prolongs the period
during which this country suﬀers deadweight loss on goods invented in the North
and prolongs the period during which it faces monopoly prices for goods invented in
the South. Meanwhile, the longer patents enhance the discounted profits from new
innovations, and so augment the incentive for R&D in each region. Analogous to
(9), we have the following condition equating the per-consumer marginal cost and
marginal benefit:
¡

¢ 1
N
S
− π N + (CcSS − Cm
)
CcNS − Cm
ω
·
·
¸
¸
1
N
NS T̄ − TN
S
SS T̄ − TN
Cm + Cc (
= γ N ΩN Cm + Cc (
) + γ S ΩN
) .
TN
ω
TN

(11)

This curve is depicted by N1 N1 in Figure 1.
Like S1 S1 , the N1 N1 curve must slope downward when the countries share identical
Cobb-Douglas technologies in the research sector. More generally, we cannot rule out
the possibility that the curve is upward sloping for part or all of its length. If the
19

countries do have identical Cobb-Douglas research technologies and the S1 S1 and
N1 N1 curves happen to intersect in the region in which τ N > τ S , then the absolute
value of the slope of the former curve must exceed the absolute value of the slope
of the latter at the point of intersection, as is required for the “stability” of a Nash
equilibrium.14
When τ S > τ N , the first-order condition for maximizing UN becomes
¡

¢ 1 S
N
S
− π N + (C̃m
− Cm
)
CcNN − Cm
ω
·
µ
¶
µ
¶¸
TS − TN
T̄ − TS
N
NN
NS
= γ N ΩN Cm + Cc
+ Cc
TN
TN
·
µ
¶
µ
¶¸
TS − TN
T̄ − TS
1
S
S
SS
Cm + C̃m
+ Cc
,
+γ S Ω̃N
ω
TN
TN

where Ω̃N ≡ 1 − Ω̃S .

(12)

The first term on the left-hand side of (12) reflects the

extra deadweight loss per Northern consumer that results from extending the period
during which these consumers are served by a Northern monopolist rather than by
competitive Northern producers. The second term reflects the loss per Northern
consumer of surplus due to a marginally longer period of unconstrained monopoly
pricing by Southern inventors instead of their being forced (perhaps) to engage in limit
pricing. The first-term on the right-hand side of (12) represents the gain to a typical
Northern consumer from the extra innovation that occurs thanks to the extended
duration of monopoly profits for Northern inventors. The final term is the gain to a
Northern consumer from the extra innovation that results when Southern firms are
able to earn π S instead of π̃ S for a slightly longer period of time. If competition from
the high-cost Northern producers does not induce any change in the pricing behavior
14

By stability, we mean the usual tâtonnement adjustment process whereby τ N adjusts to any

local opportunities for welfare gain in the North and τ S adjusts to such opportunities in the South.
The claim about the relative slopes follows from the fact that, when the countries have identical
Cobb-Douglas research technologies, γ N and γ S are identical constants and ω is independent of τ S
and τ N . Then it is easy to see from (9) and (11) that the absolute value of the slope of S1 S1 must
be greater than eρ(τ N −τ S ) MS /MN , while the absolute value of the slope of N1 N1 must be less than
eρ(τ N −τ S ) MS /MN .

20

of Southern innovators (i.e., if pS ≤ wN aS ), then the second terms on the left and
right-hand sides of (12) both vanish.
Comparing (11) and (12), we see two diﬀerences. On the one hand, the marginal
cost of extending the patent length is smaller (all else equal) when τ S > τ N than
S
< CcSS . By extending a patent when
when τ N > τ S , because CcNN < CcNS and C̃m

τ N < τ S , the North forestalls a gain in consumer surplus that is somewhat limited by
the high cost of production in the North or by the continued proprietary position of
a Southern inventor among potential producers in the South. On the other hand, the
marginal benefit to the North of extending its patent also is smaller when τ S > τ N ,
because the lengthening of the patent protection matters somewhat less to a Southern
innovator, who can earn the profit π̃ S from each consumer in the North even without
the benefit of a live patent there. Either the drop in the marginal cost or the drop in
the marginal benefit might be larger at τ N = τ S . If the former is true, then the graph
of (12) will look like that depicted in Figure 1; i.e., the intersection of the N2 N2 curve
with the 45◦ line will lie above and to the right of the intersection of the N1 N1 curve
with that line. If the drop in marginal benefit is bigger, the graph will look like the
one shown in Figure 2. There, the intersection of the N2 N2 curve with the 45◦ line
lies below and to the left of the intersection of the N1 N1 curve with that line.
In each figure, the North’s best response function is depicted by a bold-faced
curve. In Figure 1, the best response curve has three sections; it includes the entirety
of N1 N1 , a segment of the 45◦ line, and the entirety of N2 N2 .15 Consider, for example,
the point where the N1 N1 curve intersects the 45◦ line. If τ N were approximately
equal to τ S but slightly larger than it, the first-order condition for local maximization
of UN would not quite be satisfied. The Northern government has a tiny incentive
to reduce τ N to the point where it equals τ S . If it were to reduce τ N a bit more,
so that it became slightly smaller than τ S , the marginal cost and marginal benefit
of extending the patent length both would fall discretely; but, by the assumption
15

If the intersection of the N1 N1 curve with the vertical axis were to come at an ordinate greater

than τ̄ , then the North’s best response function would have a fourth, horizontal segment along which
the limit on the maximum patent length of τ̄ would be binding. Also, if the N2 N2 curve were to hit
the horizontal axis before τ S = τ̄ , the best response function would include a segment with τ N = 0.

21

that underlies the figure, the former would fall by more. It would then pay for the
Northern government to increase the duration of its patents back to the point where
the countries’ IPR protections are the same. For points along the bold portion of
the 45◦ line, the Northern government has a strict incentive to reduce τ N to equality
with τ S from all points above the line. But the Northern government does not
have an incentive to cut τ N to a length shorter than τ S , because the sharp drop in
marginal cost at the point where τ S becomes larger than τ N is enough to make the
government want to increase τ N back to equality with τ S at points just below the 45◦
line. Finally, at the intersection of N2 N2 with the 45◦ line, the first-order condition
for local maximization of UN is satisfied as the Northern government increases τ N to
equal τ S from below. At points above the line, the marginal cost of an increase in τ N
exceeds the marginal benefit, so the government has incentive to reduce the patent
duration back to the point of equality.
In Figure 2, the best response function for the North has two sections – a segment
of the N1 N1 curve and a segment of the N2 N2 curve – and a discontinuity. Here the
situation facing the Northern government is analogous to that facing the Southern
government. At the intersection of N1 N1 with the 45◦ line, the Northern government
has a strict incentive to lower τ N , because the marginal cost of extending the patent
length exceeds by a discrete amount the marginal benefit of doing so for τ N slightly
smaller than this value of τ S . At the intersection of N2 N2 with the 45◦ line, the
Northern government has an incentive to raise τ N , because the marginal benefit of
increasing the patent length rises sharply as we cross into region with τ N > τ S . The
discontinuity comes at a value of τ S where the two local maxima – on the N1 N1
curve and on the N2 N2 curve – yield the same level of aggregate welfare to residents
of the North.
In each figure we depict a situation in which there exists a single Nash equilibrium
characterized by longer patents in the North than in the South. It is not diﬃcult to
see that the situations illustrated in the figures are not the only possibilities. In each
case, if the South’s best response function were located somewhat further to the right,
there might be two Nash equilibria, one with τ N > τ S and another with τ S > τ N . A

22

τΝ

45Î

S1
N1
Ê

N
S2 2

N1

S1
N2
S2

0

τS

Figure 2: Nash Equilibrium with Discontinous Best Response in North
location of the South’s best response function even further to the right might imply
the existence of unique Nash equilibrium with τ S > τ N or even τ S = τ̄ . Moreover,
for general production functions in the research sector, the various segments of the
best response functions need not be everywhere downward sloping, nor must S1 S1 for
example be steeper than N1 N1 at every point of intersection. Thus, in principle, there
could be any number of Nash equilibria, some stable and others not. In a situation
similar to that depicted in Figure 1, it seems there is still another possibility. If the
S1 S1 curve were to lie everywhere above the N1 N1 curve for τ N > τ S and the S2 S2
curve were to lie everywhere below the N2 N2 curve for τ N < τ S , then there would
not exist any pure-strategy Nash equilibrium in the patent policy game.
There is not much that can be said in complete generality about the Nash equilibria of the policy game. One notable feature of any such equilibrium is that it does
not involve the harmonization of patent policies. This observation follows immediately from the fact that the best response function of the low-wage country never
touches the 45◦ line. For any patent policy that the North might choose, the South
will either prefer that its patent lengths be strictly shorter than those in the North

23

or that its patents be strictly longer than those in the North. This is because the
South perceives a strictly higher marginal benefit from extending the duration of its
patent when τ S is slightly above τ N than it does when τ S is slightly below τ N . When
τ S < τ N , an increase in τ S extends the period of positive profits for Southern producers only in the Southern market. But when τ S > τ N , an increase in τ S extends
a period of positive profits for these producers in both markets. Since the adverse
eﬀect on Southern consumers is the same in either case (if τ S ≈ τ N ), the Southern
government never finds it optimal to mimic the patent policy of the North.
In reality, governments in the North typically grant longer patents and provide
greater protection of intellectual property more generally than their counterparts in
the South. In the next section, we will investigate how relative market size, relative
endowments of human capital, and comparative advantages in manufacturing aﬀect
the pure-strategy Nash equilibria of the policy game, when such equilibria exist. Our
goal is to understand why the North may have a greater incentive to grant long
patents than the South, and to identify conditions under which there is a unique
equilibrium with τ N > τ S .

4

Why are Patents Longer in the North?

In this section, we explore the determinants of the national patent policies in a noncooperative Nash equilibrium. We do so by examining the comparative statics of our
model, focusing especially on the case in which F (Hj , LRj ) = Hj1−β LβRj in country j,
for j = N, S.
We begin with the sizes of the two markets. If MS and MN both grow at equal
percentage rates, then there is no change in ΩS , ΩN , Ω̃S , or Ω̃N . By (9) and (10)
there is then no eﬀect on the S1 S1 curve or the S2 S2 curve. Similarly, by (11) and
(12), the N1 N1 and N2 N2 curves remain in place. Also, there is no eﬀect on the
governments’ preferred choices among the various local optima. It follows that an
equi-proportionate expansion of the two markets leaves the Nash equilibrium patent
policies unchanged. This extends our earlier finding for the closed economy: Balanced

24

growth in the world market enhances the marginal cost and the marginal benefit of
extending patents to similar extents and leaves the incentives facing the national
governments in choosing their patent policies unaﬀected.
But changes in the relative size of the two markets do aﬀect the national incentives
for patent protection. Consider an increase in MN /MS . This decreases ΩS and Ω̃S ,
while increasing ΩN and Ω̃N . If the countries have Cobb-Douglas research technologies
with similar exponents, then ω, γ S and γ N will be unaﬀected by a change in relative
market size. In this case, the S1 S1 curves shifts down and to the left, while the N1 N1
and N2 N2 curves shift up and to the right. As for the S2 S2 curve, it may shift in either
direction. For example, if π̃ S is suﬃciently small (but positive) or ω is suﬃciently
large, the curve will shift to the left with increases in the relative size of the North
if MN /MS initially is small, but will shift to the right with further increases in the
relative size of the North if MN /MS already is large.
We organize our discussion of the implications for the equilibrium policies around
the following proposition:
Proposition 1 Let the countries share identical Cobb-Douglas research technologies.
(i) Suppose that for MN /MS = m0 there exists a unique Nash equilibrium with τ 0N >
τ 0S and for MN /MS = m00 > m0 there exists a unique Nash equilibrium with τ 00N > τ 00S .
Then τ 00N > τ 0N and τ 00S < τ 0S .
(ii) In the limit, as MN /MS → ∞, there is a unique Nash equilibrium with τ S = τ̄ .
The first part of the proposition says that an increase in the relative size of the
Northern market increases equilibrium patent protection in the North and decreases
it in the South, provided that the equilibrium is unique before and after the change
and that Northern patents are longer in each case. This result follows directly from
the fact that the N1 N1 curve shifts up and the S1 S1 curve shifts to the left, as MN /MS
grows. The second part of the proposition says that, when the Southern market is
negligibly small compared to that in the North, the Southern government always sets
a maximal patent length equal to the economic life of a diﬀerentiated product. This
follows from the fact that the marginal cost of extending the patent becomes negative
25

and large as MN /MS approaches infinity. We will say more about this in a moment.
Why does a change in the relative size of the markets change the relative incentives
that the governments face in choosing their patent policies? The answer has to do with
the eﬀects of such a change on the marginal cost and marginal benefit of extending
the length of patents in each country. Suppose, for example, that there is a unique
equilibrium with τ N > τ S and that MN rises. This has no eﬀect on the marginal cost
of longer patent protection in the South (provided that we remain in a regime with
τ N > τ S ). But since monopolists in both countries now realize a smaller share of their
total profits from sales in the South, the responsiveness of innovation in each country
to changes in τ S falls.16 It follows that the marginal benefit of extending the Southern
patent falls, and the South has less incentive to grant lengthy patents, for any given
patent duration in the North. In the North, the expansion of market size causes
a directly proportional increase in the marginal cost and marginal benefit of longer
patents, since both the deadweight loss from monopoly and the consumer gains from
greater innovation are realized by more households. But the marginal benefit gets an
added boost, because innovation in both countries becomes more responsive to the
Northern patent policy.17 Thus, the Northern government has reason to lengthen its
patents, for any given patent policy in the South.
However, for MN /MS large enough, it becomes a dominant strategy for the government of the South to choose a patent length equal to the full economic life of a
product. The explanation for this is clear. For large MN /MS , the profit opportu16

Take, for example, the case in which τ N > τ S . In this case,
ρe−ρτ S
1 dvj
.
=
N
−ρτ N )
vj dτ S
(1 − e−ρτ S ) + M
MS (1 − e

Then an increase in MN /MS reduces both (1/vN ) (dvN /dτ S ) and (1/vS ) (dvS /dτ S ). But these
semi-elasticities determine the elasticity of research with respect to patent length in each country.
17
For example, with τ N > τ S ,
MN
−ρτ S
1 dvj
MS ρe
=
,
N
−ρτ N )
vj dτ N
(1 − e−ρτ S ) + M
MS (1 − e

which is an increasing function of MN /MS . It follows that (1/ṅN ) (dṅN /dτ N ) and (1/ṅS ) (dṅS /dτ N )
also are increasing functions of MN /MS .

26

nities for Southern firms in the North dwarf considerations of consumer surplus in
the South. The welfare of the South then is maximized by whatever policy gives
Southern inventors the greatest discounted profits in the Northern market. But the
profit-maximizing patent policy is one that grants proprietary rights to an innovator
for the entire economic life of his product. A patent length shorter than τ̄ means
that a Southern inventor will face competition at the expiration of the patent from
compatriot producers. But such competition would spell a terms of trade loss for
the South with only a negligible gain in consumer surplus to compensate. Thus, a
relatively small market in the South tends to favor short-lived patents there, but only
up to a point!
Next we consider the relative endowments of human capital, our proxy for the
relative capacities for research in the two countries. We assume for this purpose that
the demand for innovative products has a constant elasticity, as is the case when
h(x) = xα for α ∈ (0, 1). First note that with Cobb-Douglas research technologies
(and many others), an increase in HN /HS must increase ω, the relative research
output of the North.18 So we investigate the comparative statics of the system of (9)
and (11) and the system of (10) and (12) with respect to changes in ω.
An increase in ω shifts the S1 S1 curve to the left, because the marginal cost of
extending patents in the South rises relative to the marginal benefit from doing so.19
Intuitively, the marginal cost of increasing τ S is sensitive to changes in ω, because
there is no profit oﬀset to the loss of Southern surplus on Northern inventions as
there is for Southern inventions. Meanwhile, an increase in ω shifts the N1 N1 curve
18

With φj = Hj1−β LβRj in country j, for j = N, S,
ω=

HN
HS

µ

bN vN
bS vS

β
¶ 1−β

.

Since vN /vS is independent of HN /HS for τ N > τ S , ω is an increasing, linear function of HN /HS .
19
N
S
With constant elasticity demands, CcNS /Cm
> CcSS /Cm
. This is enough to ensure that
N
N
Cm
TS + CcNS (T̄ − TS )
CcNS − Cm
,
>
S −π
S T + C SS (T̄ − T )
CcSS − Cm
Cm
S
S
S
c

which in turn implies that the left-hand side of (9) increases with ω by more than the right-hand
side.

27

upward if wN is close to wS , but downward if wN is much larger than wS . In the
former case, the marginal cost of extending patents falls relative to the marginal
benefit, because the profits earned by Northern producers are an oﬀset to the surplus
loss from patents when goods originate in the North. In the latter case, the Northern
profits are small, and the diﬀerence between marginal benefit and marginal cost
falls with ω, because Northern inventions generate a smaller discounted surplus for
consumers over their economic lives. It follows that if the initial equilibrium has
τ N > τ S and wN close to wS , then an increase in the relative skill endowment in the
North must lengthen patents in the North and shorten those in the South. Whereas,
if the initial equilibrium has τ N > τ S and wN much larger than wS , then an increase
in the relative skill endowment of the North may induce an increase in τ S or a fall in
τ N . Still, if MN ≥ MS , an intersection of the S1 S1 curve and the N1 N1 in the region
with τ N > τ S is guaranteed for HN /HS (and thus ω) large enough.
For cases in which the initial equilibrium has τ S > τ N , we must look at the shifts
in S2 S2 and N2 N2 that are induced by an increase in ω. We show in the appendix that
with identical Cobb-Douglas research technologies and constant elasticity demands,
the S2 S2 curve must shift to the left and the N2 N2 curve must shift upward (or remain
in place) when ω increases. It follows that τ S must fall and τ N must rise in response
to a rise in HN /HS when the initial equilibrium has longer patents in the South.
This suggests that an equilibrium with longer patents in the South may not exist
at all if the relative research capacity of the North is suﬃciently large. In fact, we
can prove
Proposition 2 If MN ≥ MS > 0 and HN /HS is suﬃciently large, then τ N > τ S in
any Nash equilibrium.
The proof involves our showing that (10) and (12) cannot simultaneously hold
when MN ≥ MS , TS ≥ TN and ω approaches infinity. As ω → ∞, the dominant

N
. The dominant term in the
term in the South’s marginal cost becomes CcNS − Cm
N
− π N , which is smaller, since CcNN < CcN S
North’s marginal cost becomes CcNN − Cm

and π N > 0. Meanwhile, the dominant term in the South’s marginal benefit becomes
28

N
γ N ΩS [Cm
+ CcNS (T̄ − TS )/TS ], while that in the North’s marginal benefit becomes

N
+ CcNN (TS − TN )/TN + CcNS (T̄ − TS )/TN ]. It is straightforward to check
γ N ΩN [Cm

that when MN ≥ MS , the latter term must be the larger of the two when TS ≥ TN .
Thus, the two first-order conditions cannot both be satisfied for any τ S ≥ τ N .
We have thus identified conditions under which an equilibrium must be characterized by longer patents in the North than in the South. These conditions describe a
market for innovative products that is at least as large in the North as in the South,
and an inventive capacity in the North that is much greater than that in the South.
More generally, the greater is the research capacity in the North relative to that in
the South, the more likely it is that there will be a unique equilibrium with τ N > τ S .
An increase in HN /HS increases aggregate profit income in the North relative to that
in the South. Since the monopoly profits are an oﬀset to the consumer cost of patent
protection, the North’s relative incentive to provide proprietary rights grows as its
firms’ relative share of world profits increases.
Finally, we consider the countries’ comparative advantages. Recall that the production of the homogeneous good requires bj units of labor per unit of output in
country j, while diﬀerentiated products invented in country j require aj units of labor per unit of output. We use κj ≡ bj (aj )−α as a measure of country j’s comparative
advantage in diﬀerentiated products, where α is the exponent in the consumers’ utility function; i.e., h(x) = xα . With Cobb-Douglas research technologies and constant
elasticity demands, an increase in κN /κS induces an increase in ω, the relative research output of the North.20 But we have already seen that an increase in ω reduces
the likelihood that there exists an equilibrium with τ S ≥ τ N . Thus, comparative advantage in diﬀerentiated products is yet another factor that works in favor of longer
patents in the North.
20

See the expression for ω in footnote 18. A larger value of bN /bS implies a smaller relative wage

in the North. This reduces the relative cost of R&D there, thus raising its relative profitability. A
lower value of aN /aS spells higher relative profits for a Northern monopoly, and thus a relatively
greater value for Northern inventions. We find that vj is proportional to (bj /aj )α/(1−α) , and thus ω
is an increasing function of κN /κS .

29

5

International Patent Agreements

In this section, we will study international patent agreements. We begin by characterizing the combinations of patent policies that are jointly eﬃcient for the two
countries.21 For the most part, we shall assume that the countries can oﬀer and receive direct compensation – corresponding either to financial payments or to welfare
transfers that are eﬀected by concessions in policy areas other than IPR. Then the
eﬃcient patent regimes are those combinations of τ S and τ N that maximize the sum
of the countries’ welfare levels gross of any transfers. Arguably, an international negotiation can be used to achieve some such outcome, if the countries are discussing
several issues simultaneously as part of a comprehensive trade negotiation and if there
are no frictions in the bargaining process.
After we have identified the eﬃcient policy combinations, we examine the ineﬃciencies that are present in a noncooperative equilibrium with τ N > τ S . By comparing
the Nash equilibrium outcomes with the eﬃcient policies, we can point to the changes
in the patent regime that ought to be eﬀected by an international treaty.
The final part of this section deals with the question of policy harmonization.
By that point, we will have shown that harmonization is not necessary for global
eﬃciency. We will proceed to investigate the distributional properties of an agreement
calling for harmonized patent policies and ask whether both countries would benefit
from such an agreement in the absence of some form of direct compensation.

5.1

Eﬃcient Patent Regimes

We begin with the assumption that countries can eﬀect international transfers or provide compensation in other policy areas, so that the eﬃcient patent lengths are ones
that maximize the joint welfare of the two countries. We focus here on regimes with
τ N ≥ τ S . A regime with τ S > τ N typically will not be eﬃcient in our setting, because
21

Ours is a constrained eﬃciency, becuase we assme that innovation must be done privately, and

that patents are the only policies available to encourage R&D. We do not, for example, allow the
governments to introduce R&D subsidies, which if feasible, might allow them to achieve a given rate
of innovation with shorter patents and less deadweight loss.

30

such a regime involves one and probably two extra distortions. First, when τ S > τ N ,
there is a period between the expiration of the two patents when a good invented
in the North is produced competitively in that country. Since the original inventor
earns no profits during this period of local production, there is no encouragement of
R&D relative to the situation that would exist if these goods instead were produced
in the South. But the Northern consumers enjoy less surplus with production in the
North than they would if production were done in the South, which reveals an excess
burden of the patent regime with τ S > τ N . Second, a regime with τ S > τ N has
relatively more R&D taking place in the South than does a regime with τ N ≥ τ S .
But, as we will see below, in an eﬃcient regime with τ N ≥ τ S the social marginal
product of labor in the North’s research sector typically exceeds that in the South’s
research sector. If it does, it would be costly to have an international patent regime
with τ S > τ N that gives still greater relative incentive for innovation in the South.
Consider the eﬃcient choice of patent policies τ N and τ S that will take eﬀect at
time 0 and apply to goods invented thereafter. The expressions for the countries’
gross welfare levels at time 0 are analogous to that for a closed economy, as recorded
in equation (6). If τ N ≥ τ S , aggregate welfare in the South is given by
US (0) = ΛS0 +
+

¤
wS (LS − LSR ) MS φS £
S
+
TS Cm
+ (T̄ − TS )CcSS
ρ
ρ

¤ φ
MS φN £
N
+ (T̄ − TS )CcNS + S π S (MS TS + MN TN ) ,
TS Cm
ρ
ρ

(13)

where ΛS0 is the fixed amount of discounted surplus that consumers in the South
derive from goods that were invented before time 0. For the North,
UN (0) = ΛN0 +
+

¤
M N φS £
wN (LN − LN
R)
S
+
TN Cm
+ (T̄ − TN )CcSS
ρ
ρ

¤ φ
MN φN £
N
TN Cm
+ (T̄ − TN )CcNS + N π N (MS TS + MN TN ) ,
ρ
ρ

(14)

where ΛN0 is defined analogously to ΛS0 . In both (13) and (14), the second term is
the income from home production of homogeneous goods, the third and fourth terms
are the discounted surplus generated by goods invented in the South and the North,
respectively, and the last term is the country’s discounted sum of profit income.
31

Summing (13) and (14), we find that
ρ [US (0) + UN (0)] = ρ (ΛS0 + ΛN0 )
¡
¢
SS
NS
+wS (LS − LSR ) + wN (LN − LN
R ) + (MS + MN ) T̄ φS Cc + φN Cc

¢
¡
¢¤
£ ¡
S
N
(15)
− π S + φN CcNS − Cm
− πN
− (MS TS + MN TN ) φS CcSS − Cm

Also, vj = π j (MS TS + MN TN ). It follows that changes in τ S and τ N that leave
MS TS + MN TN unaﬀected leave vS and vN unaﬀected, and therefore also leave LSR ,
LN
R , φS and φN unaﬀected. Such changes have no eﬀect on the allocation of labor in
either country and no eﬀect on aggregate world welfare.22
The variable Q = MS TS +MN TN measures the total protection aﬀorded to creators
of intellectual property by the international patent system. It weights the discounted
value of a one dollar flow extending for the duration of a patent in each country
by the size of the country’s market. The same global reward for innovation can
be achieved with diﬀerent combinations of the two patent lengths. Evidently, the
combinations also generate the same aggregate levels of world income and consumer
surplus. However, the distribution of world surplus is not invariant to the specific
national policies. The longer are patents in the North, the shorter and more delayed
is the period during which the Northern consumers enjoy the benefits of competitive
pricing for a good. Similarly, the shorter are patents in the South, the sooner and
longer will consumers enjoy a high level of surplus there. For a given value of Q,
the South fares better and the North worse (absent any compensating transfers) the
greater is τ N and the smaller is τ S .
A globally eﬃcient patent regime has MS TS + MN TN = Q∗ , where Q∗ is the
value of Q that maximizes the right-hand side of (15).23 Notice that a range of
22

This result is anticipated by a similar one in McCalman (1997), who studied eﬃcient patent

agreements in a partial equilibrium model of cost-reducing innovation by a single, global monopolist.
23
The first-order condition for maximizing ρ[US (0) + UN (0)] implies
¢
¡
S
N
CcSS − Cm
− πS + ω CcNS − Cm
− πN
·
¸
¢
(MS + MN )T̄ − Q∗ ¡
S
N
γ S CcSS + ωγ N CcNS + γ S Cm
+ ωγ N Cm
.
=
∗
Q

32

eﬃcient outcomes can be achieved without the need for international transfers. By
appropriate choice of τ N and τ S with τ N ≥ τ S and MS TS + MN TN = Q∗ , the
countries can be given any welfare levels on the eﬃciency frontier between that which
they would achieve if TS = 0 and TN = Q∗ /MN and that which they would achieve
if TS = TN = Q∗ /(MS + MN ). For distributions of world welfare in this range, the
eﬃcient patent regime is the same whether international transfers are feasible or not.
Only if it were desirable to give still more welfare to the North than this country
enjoys when the patent lengths are such that TS = TN = Q∗ /(MS + MN ) would the
feasibility of international transfers make any diﬀerence to the eﬃcient allocations.

5.2

Pareto-Improving Patent Agreements

How do the eﬃcient combinations of patent lengths compare to the policies that
emerge in a noncooperative equilibrium? The answer to this question – which informs us about the likely features of a negotiated patent agreement – is illustrated
in Figure 3. The figure depicts the best response functions and the eﬃcient policy
combinations in the space of TS and TN . The eﬃcient combinations are those for
which MS TS + MN TN = Q∗ , as represented by the points on the line labelled QQ.
The South’s best response function for TN ≥ TS is given by (9). In the Cobb-Douglas
case, this too is a line, as represented by SS in the figure. Similarly, the North’s best
response function is described by (11), which is represented by NN in the figure.
We show the QQ line being situated to the right of the SS curve and above the
N N curve. This is a general feature of our model, not dependent on any assumptions
about the countries’ research technologies. The reasons are clear. Starting from a
point on the South’s best response function, a marginal increase in the length of
patents in the South must increase world welfare. Such a lengthening of Southern
We can also calculate from (15) the social marginal product of labor in research in each country
compared to its social marginal product in producing homogeneous goods. We find this ratio to
j
− πj )/πj in country j. For constant elasticity and many other demand functions,
be (CcjS − Cm

this ratio is higher for the North than it is for the South. This validates our claim that it would
often be beneficial to world welfare if the composition of world research could be changed in favor
of relatively more innovation in the North.

33

ΤΝ
Q
45Î
S

H

N

Ê

E

Q

Ê

N
S

ΤS

0

Figure 3: Eﬃcient Harmonization versus Nash Equilibrium
patents has only a second-order eﬀect on welfare in the South, but it conveys two
positive externalities to the North. First, a lengthening of Southern patents provides
extra monopoly profits to Northern innovators, which contributes to aggregate income
there. Second, an increase in τ S enhances the incentives for R&D, inducing an increase
in both φS and φN . The extra product diversity that results from this R&D creates
additional surplus for Northern consumers.
By the same token, a marginal increase in the length of Northern patents from
a point along N N increases world welfare. Such a change in policy enhances profit
income for Southern firms, and encourages additional innovation in both countries.
It follows, of course, that the QQ curve must lie outside any Nash equilibrium with
TN ≥ TS . We record our finding in
Proposition 3 Let (τ S , τ N ) be any Nash equilibrium in the policy game with τ N ≥ τ S

and let (τ ∗S , τ ∗N ) be an eﬃcient combination of patent policies. Then
∗

∗

MS (1 − e−ρτ S ) + MN (1 − e−ρτ N ) > MS (1 − e−ρτ S ) + MN (1 − e−ρτ N ).
The proposition implies that, starting from a Nash equilibrium in which patents are
longer in the North than in the South, an eﬃcient patent treaty must lengthen patents
34

in at least one country. It also implies that the treaty will strengthen global incentives
for R&D and induce more rapid innovation in both countries.

5.3

Harmonization

Commentators often claim that it would be desirable to have universal standards
for intellectual property protection and for many other national policies that aﬀect
international competition. The arguments for harmonization are not always clear, but
they seem to be based on a desire for global eﬃciency. Yet it is hardly obvious why
eﬃciency should require identical policies in countries at diﬀerent stages of economic
development. In this section, we examine the aggregate and distributional eﬀects of
international harmonization of patent policies.
As should be apparent from the preceding discussion, harmonization of patent
policies is neither necessary nor suﬃcient for global eﬃciency, regardless of whether
international transfer payments are feasible or not. A regime of harmonized policies
will only be eﬃcient if the common duration of patents in the two countries is such
that Q = Q∗ . And any combination of patent policies that provides the eﬃcient
global incentives for R&D will be eﬃcient, no matter whether the patent lengths in
the two countries are the same or not.
If patents are longer in the North than in the South in an initial Nash equilibrium, then harmonization might be achieved either by a unilateral lengthening of
patents in the South or by a combination of policy changes in the two countries.
A unilateral lengthening of Southern patents is bound to harm the South (absent
any side payments), because the equilibrium τ S is a best response function for the
South and any unilateral deviation from a country’s best response is, by definition,
damaging to its interests.24 As for harmonization that might be achieved through a
combination of policy changes, we focus on a treaty that would achieve global eﬃ24

See also Lai and Qiu (2000), who consider the welfare eﬀects of harmonizing IPR protection

at the standard that would be chosen by the North in a non-cooperative equilibrium. In a model
of once-oﬀ investment in R&D, they show that such a change in the South’s policy from the Nash
equilibrium level would benefit the North by more than it would harm the South.

35

ciency. Such a treaty is represented by point H in Figure 3. Eﬃcient harmonization
surely requires an increase in patent duration in the South (since τ N > τ S at E
and QQ lies outside this point), but in general it might entail either an increase or
a decrease of patent duration in the North. In the case of identical Cobb-Douglas
research technologies, however, point H lies above the intersection of the NN curve
with the vertical axis, as drawn. This can be seen by substituting TN = TS in the
first-order condition for maximizing ρ [US (0) + UN (0)] and comparing the resulting
expression for TN = Q∗ /(MN + MS ) with the expression for TN that comes from (11)
when TS = 0. Since the N N curve is downward sloping in the Cobb-Douglas case,
the fact that it starts below point H implies that the eﬃcient harmonized patents are
longer in both countries than the patents chosen in a Nash equilibrium.
Among all policy combinations that achieve global eﬃciency, the harmonized policies are the ones that provide the greatest benefit to the North and the least benefit
to the South. Moreover, the South may be worse oﬀ at point H than in the Nash
equilibrium at point E, unless some form of compensation is provided by the North.
The South certainly would be harmed by eﬃcient harmonization if the research technologies were other than Cobb-Douglas and the initial Nash equilibrium happened
to be at a point above and to the left of H. Then both the increase in the length
of Southern patents and the decrease in the length of Northern patents would work
to the detriment of the South. In this case, the North definitely gains from eﬃcient
harmonization.25 In general, the larger are MN /MS and ω, the more likely it is that
the North would gain and the South would lose from eﬃcient harmonization. We
conclude that harmonization has more to do with distribution than with eﬃciency,
and that incorporation of such provisions in a treaty like the TRIPs agreement might
well benefit the North at the expense of the South.26
25

It is theoretically possible that the South would gain and the North would lose from a patent

agreement calling for eﬃcient harmonization.

However, it can be shown that if MN ≥ MS and

ω ≥ πS /πN , the North is sure to benefit from a move from the non-cooperative equilibrium to the

point of eﬃcient harmonization.
26
McCalman (2000) estimate the income transfers implicit in the TRIPs agreements and finds
that international patent harmonization benefits the United States at the expense of the developing

36

6

Conclusions

We have developed a simple model of endogenous innovation and have used it to
study the incentives facing national governments in choosing their patent policies.
Our model features a familiar trade-oﬀ between the static benefits of competitive
pricing and the dynamic benefits of increased innovation. For a closed economy, we
derived a simple formula for the optimal patent length relating the deadweight loss
induced by a marginal lengthening of the period of patent protection to the surplus
that results from the extra innovation.
In an open economy, countries face diﬀerent incentives in setting their national
policies due to diﬀerences in factor prices, market sizes, and capacities for doing
research. We focused on policies that are applied with national treatment; that
is, regimes that require equal protection for foreign and domestic applicants. A
country’s optimal patent policy is found by equating the sum of extra deadweight
loss that results from extending patents for domestic firms and the extra surplus loss
that results from extending monopoly pricing by foreign firms with the benefits that
flow from providing greater incentives for innovation for firms in both countries. A
country’s optimal patent length depends on the policies chosen by its trading partner,
because the foreign policy aﬀects the global incentives for innovation and the relative
numbers of patent-holders in each country.
Our analysis revealed a subtlety that arises whenever factor prices diﬀer across
countries. When patents are longer in the high-wage North, a lengthening of patents
in the South postpones a period of competitive pricing by low cost producers. But
when patents are longer in the low-wage South, a lengthening of patents in the North
postpones a period of limit pricing by Southern innovators and a period of competitive
pricing of goods invented in the North by high cost producers in that country. Due
to this asymmetry between a patent regime with longer patents in the North and
one with longer patents in the South, it is possible to have multiple equilibria in the
policy game, or for there not to exist any pure-strategy equilibrium at all.
countries and of Canada, the United Kingdom and Japan.

37

We find that having a larger market for innovative products typically enhances
a government’s incentive to grant longer patents. Also, a government’s relative incentive to provide protection typically increases as its relative capacity for research
grows. In a noncooperative equilibrium, patents must be longer in a country whose
relative capacity for research is suﬃciently great, provided that its market size is no
smaller than that of its trade partner. Thus, the large markets in the North and the
relatively greater capacity for research there can explain why these countries often
have stronger protection of intellectual property than their Southern trading partners.
Starting from a Nash equilibrium, the two governments will have an incentive to
negotiate an international patent agreement. An agreement can ensure that national
policies will reflect the positive externalities that flow to foreign residents when a
country extends the length of its patents. To achieve (constrained) eﬃciency, an
international agreement must call for a lengthening of patents in at least one country. The harmonization of patent policies is neither necessary nor suﬃcient for the
eﬃciency of the global patent regime. If patent policies are harmonized at an eﬃcient level, the move from the non-cooperative equilibrium typically would benefit
the North quite possibly at the expense of the South.
Our analysis can be extended to more general environments. Two extensions come
readily to mind. First, we have assumed that firms in the North must produce their
innovative products locally, despite the lower wages that prevail in the South. We
could easily modify the model to allow for direct foreign investment, and examine how
such investment aﬀects the national incentives for patent protection. Direct foreign
investment (DFI) by Northern firms – when it occurs – increases the profits π N
N
that flow to a Northern inventor, and (in most cases) the surplus Cm
that accrues

while a Northern firm holds a live patent. When τ N > τ S , the eﬀect is to raise the
marginal benefit of extending patents and reduce the marginal cost of doing so in
both countries.
Second, we have assumed that the countries have similar demands for innovative
products, except perhaps for diﬀerences in market size. If demand functions were to
diﬀer in the two countries, the deadweight loss that results from patent protection

38

also would diﬀer. Diﬀerences in demand would also be reflected in the characteristics
of globally eﬃcient patent regime. An eﬃcient patent regime would equalize the
marginal deadweight loss in the two countries associated with providing a given push
to global innovation.

39

References
[1] Chin, Judith and Grossman, Gene M. (1990), “Intellectual Property Rights and
North-South Trade,” in R.W. Jones and A.O. Krueger, eds., The Political Economy of International Trade, Cambridge MA: Basil Blackwell Publishers.
[2] Deardorﬀ, Alan V. (1992), “Welfare Eﬀects of Global Patent Protection,” Economica 59, 35-51.
[3] Johnson, Harry G. (1953-54), “Optimal Tariﬀs and Retaliation,” Review of Economic Studies 21, 142-153.
[4] Lai, Edwin L.-C. and Qiu, Larry D. (2000), The North’s Intellectual Property
Rights Standard for the South?” City University of Hong Kong, manuscript.
[5] Maskus, Keith E. (2000a), Intellectual Property Rights in the Global Economy,
Washington D.C.: The Institute for International Economics.
[6] Maskus, Keith E. (2000b), “Parallel Imports,” The World Economy 23, 12691284
[7] Mayer, Wolfgang (1981), “Theoretical Considerations on Negotiated Tariﬀ Adjustments,” Oxford Economic Papers 33, 135-153.
[8] McCalman, Phillip (1997), “National Patents, Innovation and International
Agreements,” University of California at Santa Cruz, mimeo.
[9] McCalman, Phillip (2001), “Reaping What you Sow: An Empirical Analysis of
International Patent Harmonization,” Journal of International Economics 55,
161-185.
[10] Nordhaus., William D. (1969), Invention, Growth and Welfare: A Theoretical
Treatment of Technological Change, Cambridge MA: The M.I.T. Press.
[11] Scotchmer, Suzanne (2001), “The Political Economy of Intellectual Property
Treaties,” Institute of Business and Economic Research, Working Paper No.
E01-305, University of California at Berkeley.
40

7

Appendix

In this appendix we examine how changes in ω shift the S2 S2 and N2 N2 curves. We
focus on the case in which the North and the South share identical Cobb-Douglas
research technologies and the demands for the diﬀerentiated products have constant
elasticities.

7.1

Shifts in S2S2

We will prove that the S2 S2 curve shifts to the left when ω increases. To this end,
note that the right-hand side of (10) is a decreasing function of τ S . We will show
that, starting from a point on the S2 S2 curve, where the left-hand and right-hand
sides of (10) are of course equal, an increase in ω increases the left-hand side by more
than it increases the right-hand side. Then a reduction in τ S will be needed (at given
τ N ) to restore equality between the two sides of the equation.
Let RS (ω; τ S , τ N ) be the ratio of the right-hand side of (10) to the left-hand side
of (10). With γ S = γ N , a necessary and suﬃcient condition for ∂RS /∂ω < 0 is
"
#
S
N
Cm
Cm
TS + CcSS (T̄ − TS )
TS + CcNS (T̄ − TS )
Ω̃S
.
(A1)
>
N
S − π − MN π̃
ΩS CcSS − Cm
CcNS − Cm
S
MS S
But Ω̃S > ΩS and π S + (MN /MS )π̃ S > 0, so (A1) will be satisfied if
S
N
Cm
Cm
TS + CcSS (T̄ − TS )
TS + CcNS (T̄ − TS )
≥
S
N
CcSS − Cm
CcNS − Cm

or
¢£ S
¢£ N
¤ ¡
¤
¡ NS
N
S
Cm TS + CcSS (T̄ − TS ) − CcSS − Cm
Cm TS + CcNS (T̄ − TS ) ≥ 0 .
Cc − Cm

(A2)

S NS
N SS
Cc − Cm
Cc ). With constant
The left-hand side of (A2) can be written as T̄ (Cm
S
N
N
/CcSS = Cm
/CcNN > Cm
/CcNS .
elasticity demands, this must be positive, because Cm

It follows that an increase in ω shifts the S2 S2 curve to the left.

41

7.2

Shifts in N2 N2

To see how an increase in the relative innovation rate in the North aﬀects the N2 N2
curve, we focus on the case of a moderate gap between the wages in the North and in
the South. In such circumstances, a Southern innovator will be forced to reduce its
price in the North at the time that its patent expires there in order to deter potential
competition from Northern imitators.27 With a constant elasticity of demand for
diﬀerentiated products, h(x) = xα for α ∈ (0, 1). Then a price cut occurs after the
expiration of a patent in the North whenever wN /wS < 1/α.
We aim to show that the N2 N2 curve shifts up with increases in ω. At an initial
value of ω, the left and right-hand sides of (12) are equal for any point on N2 N2 .
We need to establish that, starting from such a point, an increase in ω decreases the
left-hand side of (12) by more than it decreases the right-hand side. Then an increase
of τ N – which reduces the right-hand side without changing the left-hand side –
will be needed to restore the equality between perceived marginal cost and marginal
benefit of lengthening patents in the North.
Let RN (ω; τ S , τ N ) denote the ratio of the right-hand side of (12) to the left-hand
side of (12). With γ S = γ N , a necessary and suﬃcient condition for ∂RN /∂ω > 0 is
"
#
S
S
S
S
Cm
C̃m
Ω̃N
TN + C̃m
(TS − TN ) + CcSS (T̄ − TS )
− Cm
<
N −π
N T + C NN (T − T ) + C NS (T̄ − T )
ΩN Cm
CcNN − Cm
N
N
S
N
S
c
c
or
Ω̃N CcSS
ΩN CcNS

´
³ S S´
³

S
m
m
TS − C̃mC−C
TN
S
S
T̄ − 1 − CC̃SS
SS
− Cm
C̃m
c
c

<
´
´
³
³
.
NN
N N −C N
N −π
CcNN − Cm
m
N
TN
T̄ − 1 − CCcNS TS − Cc C NS


c

(A3)

c

S
= CcSN . Also, with constant elasticity demand, CcSN /CcSS = CcNN /CcN S
Note that C̃m
S
N
and Cm
/CcSS = Cm
/CcNN . These equalities, plus CcNN < CcNS imply that the left-

hand side of (A3) is an increasing function of both TN and TS . Therefore, we can
27

If the Southern innovators charge the same price in the North before and after the expiration

S
S
= C̃m
and πS = π̃S . But the latter equality implies that Ω̃N = 0.
of their patents there, then Cm

Therefore, ω does not appear in the equation for the N2 N2 curve. Clearly, a change in ω has no
eﬀect on the North’s choice of patent policy (for τ N < τ S ) in this case.

42

replace TN and TS in this term by the larger number T̄ to obtain a suﬃcient condition
for ∂RN /∂ω > 0. We can also replace Ω̃N /ΩN by (π S − π̃ S )/π S , because Ω̃N /ΩN <
(π S − π̃ S )/π S . After making these substitutions, the resulting suﬃcient condition is
µ

πS − π̃ S
πS

¶

S
S
S
Cm
C̃m
− Cm
< NN
N
N −π
Cm
Cc − Cm
N

or
π̃ S

¡

S NN
Cc
Cm

−

N S
Cm
Cm

¢

− πS

³

S NN
Cc
Cm

−

N S
Cm
C̃m

´

S
>0.
+ (π S − π̃ S ) π N Cm

(A4)

The third term on the left-hand side of (A4) clearly is positive, so we focus on
the diﬀerence between the first term and the second term. This diﬀerence is positive
if and only if

N S
π̃ S
C S C NN − Cm
Cm
> m c
.
S
NN
N
S
πS
Cm Cc − Cm C̃m

With constant elasticity demand,
π̃ S
α
=
πS
1−α

µ

wN
−1
wS

¶µ

and

αwN
wS

³

wN
wS

1
¶− 1−α

α
´− 1−α

S NN
N S
1−
Cm
Cc − Cm
Cm
=
¡ ¢− α
S C NN − C N C̃ S
Cm
1 − α1 1−α
c
m m

.

It is straightforward to verify that
α
1−α

µ

wN
−1
wS

¶µ

αwN
wS

1
¶− 1−α

>

1−

³

1−

wN
wS

α
´− 1−α

α
¡ 1 ¢− 1−α

α

for all wN /wS ∈ (1, 1/α). Therefore, inequality (A4) is satisfied, which is suﬃcient to
ensure that (A3) is satisfied. This establishes that an increase in ω shifts the N2 N2
upward when wN /wS < 1/α.

43

