NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW MIGRATION RESTRICTIONS LIMIT
AGGLOMERATION AND PRODUCTIVITY IN CHINA
Chun-Chung Au
Vernon Henderson
Working Paper 8707
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8707
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2002

We gratefully acknowledge support for this work from a grant from the Research Committee of the World
Bank and by a Mellon Foundation grant to the Population Studies and Training Center at Brown University.
The opinions expressed in the paper do not necessarily represent those of these organizations. Remy
Prud’homme provided early inspiration and insight in formulating some of the issues in the paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2002 by Chun-Chung Au and Vernon Henderson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

How Migration Restrictions Limit Agglomeration and Productivity in China
Chun-Chung Au and Vernon Henderson
NBER Working Paper No. 8707
January 2002
JEL No. J600, O100, O400, P200, R100, R200, R300

ABSTRACT
China strongly restricts rural-rural, urban-urban, and rural-urban migration. The result which this
paper documents is a surplus of labor in agriculture. However, the paper argues that these restrictions also
lead to insufficient agglomeration of economic activity within both rural industrial and urban areas, with
resulting first order losses in GDP. For urban areas the paper estimates a city productivity relationship,
based on city GDP numbers for 1990-97. The effects of access, educational attainment, FDI, and public
infrastructure on productivity are estimated. Worker productivity is shown to be an inverted U-shape
function of city employment level, with the peak point shifting out as industrial composition moves from
manufacturing to services. As far as we know this is the first paper to actually estimate the relationship
between output per worker and city scale, as it varies with industrial composition. The majority of
Chinese cities are shown to be potentially undersized - below the lower bound on the 95% confidence
interval about the size where their output per worker peaks. The paper calculates the large gains from
increased agglomeration in both the rural industrial and urban sectors. It also examines the effect of
capital reallocations, where the rural sector is grossly undercapitalized.

Chun-Chung Au
Brown University

Vernon Henderson
Department of Economics
Box B
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
j_henderson@brown.edu

