                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE MEDIUM RUN EFFECTS OF EDUCATIONAL EXPANSION:
  EVIDENCE FROM A LARGE SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION PROGRAM IN INDONESIA


                                               Esther Duflo


                                          Working Paper 8710
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8710


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2002




I thank participants at the conference “New Research on Education in Developing Countries” at the Center
for Research on Economic Development and Policy Reform of Stanford University for comments, and
particular to Hanan Jacoby for his discussion of the paper. I also thank two referees and the editor for very
useful comments. I thank Lucia Breierova for excellent research assistance, Daron Acemoglu, Joshua
Angrist, Abhijit Banerjee, Robert Barro, Ricardo Caballero, David Card, Michael Kremer, Emmanuel Saez,
and Jaume Ventura for very helpful discussions, and Guido Lorenzoni for his insights about transitional
dynamics. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Esther Duflo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Medium Run Effects of Educational Expansion: Evidence from a
Large School Construction Program in Indonesia
Esther Duflo
NBER Working Paper No. 8710
January 2002
JEL No. O1, O4, I2



                                              ABSTRACT


        This paper studies the medium run consequences of an increase in the rate of accumulation of
human capital in a developing country. From 1974 to 1978, the Indonesian government built over 61,000
primary schools. The school construction program led to an increase in education among individuals who
were young enough to attend primary school after 1974, but not among the older cohorts. 2SLS estimates
suggest that an increase of 10 percentage points in the proportion of primary school graduates in the labor
force reduced the wages of the older cohorts by 3.8% to 10% and increased their formal labor force
participation by 4% to 7%. I propose a two-sector model as a framework to interpret these findings. The
results suggest that physical capital did not adjust to the faster increase in human capital.




Esther Duflo
Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
E52-252G
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
eduflo@mit.edu
1    Introduction

Evaluations of social programs in developing economies tend to focus on the short run and

“partial equilibrium” eﬀects of these programs, and do not try to assess their macroeconomic

consequences. Empirical studies of the determinants of economic growth form a largely inde-

pendent subﬁeld that uses predominantly cross-country data sets. This division is unfortunate.

While aggregate cross-country data is readily available and simple to use, it can lead to mislead-

ing conclusions, either because aggregate data is of poor quality (Krueger and Lindahl (1999)

Atkinson and Brandolini (1999)) or because regressions are mis-speciﬁed (Banerjee and Duﬂo

(2000)). Conversely, policy recommendations based on “partial equilibrium” analysis can be

misleading, if the “general equilibrium” eﬀects undo the direct eﬀects of the policy (Heckman,

Lochner and Taber (1998)).

    Moreover, the aggregate response to large programs is of independent interest, and can be

a fruitful source of identiﬁcation of macroeconomic relationships. In particular, large programs

are well identiﬁed shocks. Studying the economy’s aggregate response to these shocks is an

occasion to understand the process of adjustment. The adjustment of an economy to shocks

is the objective of macroeconomic studies of the “medium run” (Solow (2000)). In particular,

macroeconomists and labor economists have long been interested in labor supply shocks, such

as changes in cohort sizes (Welch (1979)), the level of education of the labor force (Katz and

Murphy (1992)), changes in level of education by cohorts (Card and Lemieux (2001)), or adverse

labor supply shocks in Europe (Blanchard (1997)). The speed and eﬃciency of adjustment are

important dimensions of the eﬀects of a range of economic policies. Trade policy analysis,

for example, often assumes immediate adjustment of the production decisions, which could be

extremely misleading. The long term eﬀects of economic crises, as well as the appropriate policy

response, are closely linked to whether they lead to eﬃcient or ineﬃcient restructuring, which

is linked to the ability of the economy to allocate factors eﬃciently (Caballero and Hammour

(2000)). Thus, studying the aggregate consequences of large programs can inform economic

policy beyond the speciﬁc program considered.


                                                1
       Most studies of the medium run consequences of labor supply shocks focus on the U.S. or on

Europe. Yet, the response of the economy to a shock is closely related to its market institutions.1

In developing countries, because market institutions (credit market, contractual enforcement,

labor market regulations) are less eﬀective, one might expect the adjustment process to be par-

ticularly sluggish. Caballero and Hammour (2000) argue that institutional failures, because they

lead to mis-allocation of resources and ineﬃciently slow restructuring, is at the root of under-

development. The evidence on medium term adjustment in developing countries is, however,

extremely limited.

       This paper studies the eﬀects of a dramatic policy change that diﬀerentially aﬀected diﬀerent

cohorts and diﬀerent regions of Indonesia on the allocation of the labor force across sectors and

on wages. In 1973, the Indonesian government launched a major school construction program,

the Sekolah Dasar INPRES program. Between 1973-74 and 1978-79, more than 61,000 primary

schools were built. In earlier work (Duﬂo (2000)), I showed that the program had an impact

on the education and wages of the cohorts exposed to it. This paper studies the behavior of

wage rates and formal labor force participation of those who were not directly exposed to the

program, from 1986, 12 years after the school construction program was initiated (and when

the ﬁrst generation exposed to the program just entered the labor force) to 1999. This is

therefore a study of the “medium” run aggregate eﬀects of the program. Until 1997, this was

a period of rapid growth for the Indonesian economy: between 1986 and 1999, the economy

grew by over 50%, and the share of the labor force in manufacturing doubled (from 6% to 13%).

Industrialization occurred throughout Java, and in concentrated pockets in the other Islands

Miguel, Gertler and Levine (2001).

       I ﬁrst show that the program led to faster increases in the fraction of primary school graduates

in the regions where it was more important, between 1986 and 1999. This increase is strikingly

similar to that which would have been predicted in the absence of any migration. I then proceed
   1
       See Blanchard and Wolfers (1999) for a comparison of the reaction to the labor supply shocks in the 1970s

across European countries with diﬀerent labor market institutions.




                                                        2
to look at the eﬀect of the program on the wages and the formal labor force participation of

the cohorts that did not directly beneﬁt from it, because they were already out of school when

the program started. This allows us to look at the impact of the increase in education on factor

returns, for a population whose skill level is not aﬀected. It turns out that wages increased

less rapidly from year to year in regions that received more schools. This holds even after

controlling for the factors that determined the initial allocation, and may have caused diﬀerent

growth trajectories across these regions.

   Using interactions between the survey year and the number of INPRES schools per 1,000

children as instruments for the fraction of educated workers in the region therefore suggests a

negative eﬀect of the proportion of primary school graduates on individual wages, keeping the

individuals’ own skill level constant. On the other hand, an increase in the fraction of educated

workers seems to cause an increase in the participation of both educated and uneducated workers

in the formal labor market. The negative impact of average education on individual wages does

not seem to be explained by selection bias caused either by selective migration or by selective

entry into the formal labor market.

   I propose a simple two sector model as a framework to interpret these eﬀects and their

magnitude. Individuals can work either in the informal or in the formal sector. In the informal

sector, they are self employed and labor (skilled and unskilled) is combined with land, a ﬁxed

factor. In the formal sector, labor (skilled an unskilled) is combined with capital, and individuals

earn a wage. The production function in the formal sector exhibits constant returns to physical

and human capital combined. The fact that the increase in the share of educated workers led

to a movement of workers from the informal to the formal sector indicates that the elasticity

of substitution between labor and land in the informal sector is smaller than the elasticity of

substitution between labor and capital in the formal sector. The elasticity of the supply of capital

with respect to the share of educated labor determines the predicted eﬀect of the program on

wages in the model. I compare two polar versions of the model. The benchmark version assumes

costless adjustment of the capital stock. In this case, in the period we study (1986 to 1999, 12 to



                                                 3
25 years after the program was initiated), physical and human capital should grow at the same

rate and there should be no relative fall in wages in regions where human capital grows faster.

This holds in a closed economy model as well as in an open economy model where capital is

accumulated nationally and eﬃciently allocated across regions. The second version, in contrast,

compares the empirical estimates I obtain to the parameters predicted by the model in the

absence of any adjustment of capital to the increase in education. These empirical estimates

are close to what this version of the model would predict. This suggests that physical capital

did not adjust to the regional diﬀerences in the rate of accumulation of human capital induced

by the program.

    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In section 2, I describe the INPRES

program and its eﬀects on average education. In section 3, I discuss the identiﬁcation of the

eﬀects of average education on individual wages and derive the empirical speciﬁcations. Section

4 presents the results. Section 5 presents the model that organizes and explains the ﬁndings,

and compares the estimates to what the two polar versions (costless adjustment of capital or no

adjustment of capital) of the model would predict.



2     The program and its eﬀects on average education

2.1   The Sekolah Dasar INPRES program

In 1974, the Indonesian government initiated a large primary school construction program, the

Sekolah Dasar INPRES program. Between 1974 and 1978, 61,807 new buildings were con-

structed, doubling the number of available schools per capita. More schools were put in regions

where initial enrollment rates were low, which caused important regional variations in the inten-

sity of the program. Using a large household survey conducted in 1995 (the SUPAS 1995) linked

to data on the number of schools constructed in each individual’s region of birth, Duﬂo (2001)

showed that the growth in education between cohorts unexposed to the program and cohorts

exposed to the program was faster in regions that received more INPRES schools. This diﬀer-



                                               4
ence can be attributed to the program with a reasonable level of conﬁdence, because no similar

pattern is present if we compare cohorts that were not exposed to the program. In addition,

the program aﬀected mostly primary school completion, whereas omitted factors would have

aﬀected other levels of schooling as well. This pattern is summarized in ﬁgure 1, reproduced

from Duﬂo (2001). Each point on the solid line summarizes the eﬀect one more school built

per 1,000 children had on the average education of children born in each cohort.2 Children

in Indonesia normally go to primary school until age 12 (although delay at school entry and

repetition are not uncommon), therefore one would expect the eﬀect of the program to be 0 for

children who reached 12 before 1974, when the ﬁrst schools were built, and to be progressively

increasing. This is exactly what the picture shows.

       If migration ﬂows were either small or not aﬀected by the program, one would expect to see a

similar pattern when comparing the evolution of average education among adults over the years

in the diﬀerent regions. As the generations exposed to the program enter the labor market, one

should see the average education (and in particular the fraction of primary school graduates)

increase faster in the regions that received more schools.


2.2       Data and empirical speciﬁcation

The data for this paper comes primarily from the annual Indonesian Labor Force Survey (SAK-

ERNAS), from 1986 to 1999. These surveys are repeated cross sections, of approximately 60,000

households. The surveys contain information on province and district of residence (but not of

birth), education level achieved, labor force participation, type of employment, number of hours

worked in the last week, and wages for individuals who work for a wage in their primary occu-

pation. Using this data, I construct the average hourly wage as weekly wage divided by hours

worked on this occupation. An individual is considered as part of the formal sector if he works

for a wage in his primary occupation. The survey questions and deﬁnitions are homogenous
   2
       These are the coeﬃcients obtained by regressing years of education on the the interactions between the number

of schools built per capita in the individual’s region of birth and year of birth dummies, after controlling for year

and region of birth ﬁxed eﬀects.


                                                          5
between 1986 and 1999. I restrict the sample to males aged 20 to 60, and I exclude Jakarta.

Descriptive statistics are presented in table 1. The fraction of individuals born after 1962, and

therefore theoretically exposed to the program, in the age groups 20-40 and 20-60, increases

progressively over the years. I consider the proportion of primary school graduates in each re-

gion in each year. There is a total of 3,826 district-year cells, with an average of 287 individual

observations in each cell in the full sample.3 All regressions are performed on this aggregate

data set, and each cell is weighted by the number of observations used to construct it.

      Consider comparing two regions in 1986 and 1999, one of which received a large number

of INPRES schools per capita, while the other one received a small number of schools. The

fraction of people who were young enough to be exposed to the INPRES program is bigger

in 1999 than in 1986. We know that the gains in years of education of these younger cohorts,

relative to the older ones, were bigger in the regions that received more schools. If the eﬀect of the

program was not undone by migration, one would expect the average education (in particular,

the proportion of primary school graduates) to have grown faster between 1986 and 1999 in

the region that received more schools. This suggests comparing the diﬀerence in educational

attainments between 1999 and 1986 in these two regions. More generally, this suggests that, if

one runs a regression of the diﬀerence between average educational attainment in 1999 and 1986

on the number of schools per capita built in each region, one should see a positive coeﬃcient.

Clearly, this reasoning also applies to any year-to-year diﬀerence.

      In summary, this suggests the following speciﬁcation:


                                           1999
                                                                     1999
                                                                      
                       Sjt = µt + νj +             (λl ∗ Pj )γ1l +            (λl ∗ Cj )δ1l + jt             (1)
                                          l=1987                     l=1987

where Sjt is the proportion of primary school graduates among adults in year t in region j,

µt is a survey year ﬁxed eﬀect and νj is a region ﬁxed eﬀect, Pj is the number of INPRES

schools built between 1974 and 1978 in district j, and λl is a survey year dummy (λl = 1 if

t = l, and 0 otherwise). Cj is a vector of initial conditions that are introduced as control
  3
      There are on average 185 observations per cell of individuals born before 1962, including 61 with wage data.



                                                          6
variables. In particular, it may be important to control for the enrollment rate in 1971, since it

was a determinant of the placement of the program. Note that the ﬁrst-order eﬀect of a higher

enrollment rate in 1971 is a diﬀerence in level of education, which should aﬀect all cohorts, and

all survey years identically, and therefore be absorbed by the region ﬁxed eﬀect. Only a change

in the rates at which children attend school in a region will lead to a change in the rate at which

average education increases from year to year. Therefore, controlling for the enrollment rate in

1971, interacted with year dummies, is important only to the extent that we think changes in

enrollment rates are correlated with levels. I also control for the number of children in 1971.


2.3      Results

Since the generations exposed to the program have already started entering the sample in 1986,

one would expect all the coeﬃcients of the interactions between program intensity and survey

year dummies to be positive and increasing. Columns 1, 2, 4 and 5 in table 2 show these

coeﬃcients for the speciﬁcation that includes enrollment rates as a control, for adults aged

20 to 40 and for adults aged 20 to 60, in the whole sample and in a sample that excludes

urban districts.4 The fraction of “young” (or exposed) people among individuals aged 20 to 40

increases faster than among those aged 20 to 60, and one would expect the coeﬃcients to be

larger and more signiﬁcant in the former group. The group of individuals aged 20 to 60, however,

corresponds better to “the labor market”, and will therefore be important in the second stage

of this analysis. The coeﬃcients are increasing for both groups, they are jointly signiﬁcant, and,

as expected, they are larger in the group aged 20 to 40. They become individually signiﬁcant

from 1991 in the 20-40 group and from 1996 in the 20-60 group.

      This pattern could have been caused by other factors than the increase in education due to

INPRES, for example by migration of educated workers into districts that received more IN-

PRES schools. If we had data from earlier years, it would be possible to use “pre-program” data

to test the identiﬁcation assumption that the increase in education levels over time would not
  4
      The speciﬁcation without enrollment rates as a control is very similar, and is therefore omitted.




                                                          7
have been systematically diﬀerent in regions where a diﬀerent number of schools was built, even

in the absence of the program. No comparable survey was realized before 1986. If the pattern

was due to something other than the eﬀect of the program on education, however, one would

see a faster (or slower) increase in the education over the years, even in the subsample of those

who were not exposed to the program (individuals born in 1962 or before). To check this, I esti-

mated a speciﬁcation similar to equation 1, with the fraction of primary school graduates among

individuals born in 1962 or before as the dependent variable. The coeﬃcients are presented in

columns 3 and 6 in table 2. Figure 2 gives a graphical summary of these estimates: It shows

the coeﬃcients (and their conﬁdence intervals) for the entire group aged 20 to 40, and for the

group of individuals born before 1962. There is no systematic increase among the group born

before 1962. The coeﬃcients in the two equations are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from each other.

This indicates that the increase in average education is likely due to the program, rather than

to other factors.


2.4   Does migration undo the eﬀect of local infrastructure development?

Although migration ﬂows were not very important in Indonesia over the period, they are far from

negligible. In 1995, if one excludes Jakarta, 12% of individuals in the SUPAS sample did not

live in their province of birth, and 24% did not live in their district of birth (17% if one excludes

the urban districts). Among individual born in 1962, 13% did not live in their province of birth,

and 25% did not live in their district of birth. It is therefore interesting to study whether out

migration of educated workers dampened the eﬀect of the program on average education in the

labor market.

   The results in the previous section already suggest a partial answer to this question. The

program aﬀected the average education of adults, which indicates that its eﬀects were not totally

undone by migration. We can, however, make this result more precise by comparing the eﬀect

the program should have had, in the absence of any oﬀ-setting eﬀect of migration, with the eﬀect

it had in reality. The results from this exercise are important in the context of an increasing focus



                                                 8
on decentralization, notably in Indonesia. If local governments consider that their communities

are not getting any beneﬁts from investment in education because educated people migrate

(with their human capital), decentralization of school ﬁnance may lead the public ﬁnancing of

education to decline.5

      To get at this question, I ﬁrst estimated the eﬀect of the number of INPRES schools con-

structed per capita in an individual’s district of birth on the probability that an individual

completed primary school, for each cohort. To this end, I used the SUPAS 1995 data. The

SUPAS (Intercensal survey of Indonesia) is a sample of over 200,000 household. It is represen-

tative at the district level. It is conducted every 10 years by the Central Bureau of Statistics of

Indonesia. The survey collects the same information as the SAKERNAS (which it replaces in

1995), as well as more information about household members, in particular their province and

district of birth. The sample for this analysis is men born between 1950 and 1972 (there are

152,989 individuals in the sample).

      Using this data, I regressed a dummy indicating whether an individual completed primary

school on a set of district of birth ﬁxed eﬀects, cohort of birth ﬁxed eﬀects, and interactions

between the number of schools constructed in one’s district of birth and year of birth dummies.

The equation estimated is identical to equation (11) in Duﬂo (2001), except that it used the

primary school completion as the dependent variable. Denote the estimated eﬀect of the program

on the cohort born in year k as πˆk . I used the 1995 data to compute the proportion of primary

school graduates among those aged 20 to 40 in each year (from 1986 to 1999) born in each
                                             
district before 1962. Denote this average by Soj . For each survey year t and year of birth k,

denote by φkt the share of those aged 20 to 40 who were born in year k.6 We can then compute

the proportion of primary school graduates predicted by the program in each district and each

year as:
  5
      Bound, Kzedi and Turner (2000) ask the same question for college education in the U.S.
  6
      All the individuals who are born in 1962 or before are in the same cohort k.




                                                        9
                                                             t−20                
                                                               
                                          Sjt = S
                                                 oj + Pj               πˆk φkt                                (2)
                                                               k=1962

        Note that this predicted value does not contain any information speciﬁc both to the district

and the year considered. There is therefore no source of mechanical relationship between Sjt and

Sjt . The ﬁrst observation is that Sjt and Sjt are strongly correlated. The regression of the actual

share of primary school graduates on the predicted share leads to a coeﬃcient of 0.84, with a

t-statistic of 77). This, however, is not very informative, because a large part of this correlation

is driven by those born before 1962, and would therefore still exist even if all the educated young

had migrated out of the high program districts. The following experiment is more informative.

I run the same speciﬁcation as in equation 1, but I use as the dependent variable the predicted

education, Sjt . These coeﬃcients indicate how the average education of adults would have been

aﬀected in each region in the absence of any oﬀsetting eﬀect of migration. The coeﬃcients

γ1l obtained in this speciﬁcation are plotted in ﬁgure 3, along with the coeﬃcients obtained

when estimating equation 1 with the actual average as the dependent variable. The two sets

of coeﬃcients are surprisingly close to each other. In particular, there is no evidence that the

predicted eﬀect is bigger than the actual eﬀect.



3        Identifying the eﬀect of a change in average education

3.1        Conceptual framework

Consider an economy with two sectors. Assume that there are only two types of workers,

educated (with a primary education or more) and uneducated (no primary education). Assume

that the formal sector employs educated labor, uneducated labor, and capital, and the informal

sector employs educated and uneducated labor and land.7 Individuals are self-employed in the

informal sector, and receive a wage in the formal sector. Consistent with Harris and Todaro
    7
        We could allow land and capital to present in both sectors, but we would have to model migration of capital

and land between sector, for which we have little data.




                                                          10
(1970) and other dual economy models of development, we view the potential of growth of the

informal sector limited while the economic growth happens as the formal sector expands. This

is reﬂected in the assumption that land is a ﬁxed factor. The share of the labor force employed

in the formal sector and their wages are the two variables of interest.

      The production functions in the formal and informal sectors are given by f (AF , EF , UF , K)

and g(AI , EI , UI , T ) respectively, where K and T are the stock of capital and land respectively,

EF and UF denote educated and uneducated labor employed in the formal sector, respectively,

EI and UI denote educated and uneducated labor employed in the informal sector, and AF and

AI are“productivity” parameters. We will treat the total population as a constant (nothing is

aﬀected by allowing steady population growth). The wages, as well as the fraction of educated

and uneducated workers who are working in each sector, are determined jointly in equilibrium

as a function of the number of educated and uneducated workers (in the economy as a whole),

the stock of capital, the stock of land, and the parameters AF and AE .

      Normalizing the entire labor force to 1, and denoting S the share of educated workers, we can

therefore write the wage and formal employment functions as:8 ln(wE ) = φE (AF , AI , K(S), S, T ),

ln(wu ) = φU (AF , AI , K(S), S, T ), EF = ψE (AF , AI , K(S), S, T ), and UF = ψU (AF , AI , K(S), S, T ).

      K is explicitly written as a function of S, to reﬂect the fact that a change in the proportion

of educated workers has a direct eﬀect (the eﬀect of the share of educated workers on the wage),

and an indirect eﬀect due to the accumulation of physical capital in response to this increase.

The elasticity of physical capital with respect to the share of educated labor is an empirical

question: In the long run, one might expect the physical capital to adjust to a change in the

fraction of educated workers, while in the very short run, adjustment will be much more limited.

In the “medium run”, the speed of adjustment of the capital stock will depend on the ﬂexibility

of the production function and the availability of ﬁnance for the installation of new capital.

      Consider a Taylor expansion of the wage function around S = 0.

                                                                                               ∂φs      ∂K ∂φs
      φs (AF t , AIt , Kt (St ), St , Tt )  φs (AF t , AIt , Kt (St = 0), St = 0, Tt ) + St       + St        .
                                                                                               ∂S       ∂S ∂K
  8
      Writing the wage function directly in logarithm, for convenience.


                                                          11
   Denoting Kt (St = 0) by K̃t , this can be rewritten:

                                        ∂φs ∂K ∂φs                         t , Tt )
                         ln(wst ) = (      +       )St + φ1s (AF t , AIt , K
                                        ∂S   ∂S ∂K

   We, therefore, seek to estimate the coeﬃcient αs in the expression:

                                                                      t , Tt )
                                 ln(wst )  αs St + φ1s (AF t , AIt , K                                     (3)

   In this expression, αs reﬂects the direct eﬀect of S on the wage, as well as any indirect eﬀect

due to the response of the stock of physical capital to the stock of human capital. The sign of

αs is not determined a priori. If capital adjusts slowly, or if there are diminishing returns to

capital and labor combined, αs will tend to be negative, reﬂecting the fact that the increase

in the share of educated workers increase the quantity of labor (measured in eﬃciency units).

If capital adjusts rapidly and there is no ﬁxed factor, αs would be zero and even positive in

the presence of an external eﬀect of education (as in Lucas (1988)) or if an increase in the

share of educated workers led to a more than oﬀsetting increase in the stock of physical capital

(Acemoglu (1996)).

   Consider running a regression of the wage of the uneducated workers on the share of educated

workers in the economy, without controlling for the stock of capital. Clearly, if there is any

correlation between the level of capital (and the productivity of the formal and informal sector)

and the share of educated people, this relationship will be biased. Since this is likely to be the

case, coeﬃcients obtained in such a regression cannot really be interpreted.

   Since there are many districts and years, we could instead compare wage growth across

districts. Using equation 3, the growth of the log wage between two periods is given by:

                                                             t , Tt ) − φ1s (AF t−1 , AIt−1 , K
 ln(wst ) − ln(wst−1 )  αs (St − St−1 ) + φ1s (AF t , AIt , K                                 t−1 , Tt−1 ) (4)


                                                                                                 t , Tt )−
If we estimate this relationship using an OLS regression, and we omit the term φ1s (AF t , AIt , K

φ1s (AF t−1 , AIt−1 , K
                       t−1 , Tt−1 ), the coeﬃcient αs will be biased if there is a correlation between

physical capital accumulation and human capital accumulation. In almost any model of human

and physical capital accumulation based upon individual maximization, the increase in the share

                                                      12
of educated workers and the rate of physical capital accumulation will be related: in particular,

both are determined by the discount rate in the economy. In order to estimate the parameter

αs consistently, we therefore need an instrument, correlated with the increase in the share of

educated workers, but not with the evolution in the other factors in the economy.9

       A potential instrument for (St − St−1 ) in our setting is the number of primary schools con-

structed by the INPRES program. To understand how the instrument works and its limitations,

suppose ﬁrst that the government allocated the schools randomly. Each school reduces the ef-

fective cost of schooling, and therefore increases the enrollment rate among all the future young

generations (but not that of the older generations). The increase in the number of schools com-

bined with the fact that the young generations progressively enter the labor market starting

in the late 1980’s changes the rate of growth of S over time. The modiﬁcation in the rate of

growth is a function of the number of schools built, which suggests that if the schools had been

allocated randomly, the number of INPRES schools would form an ideal instrument.

       In practice, however, the government allocated more schools in regions where enrollment

rates at the primary school level were lower. The evidence presented in this paper and in Duﬂo

(2001) suggests that the rate of growth of human capital was not systematically correlated with

the program before it was initiated. Nevertheless, the level of the program will not be a valid

instrument for (St − St−1 ) if it is correlated with the rate of capital accumulation. This would

happen if educational attainments in 1971 were correlated with capital accumulation between

1986 and 1999. Regions with a lower level of educational attainment tend to be poorer, and

could therefore have been growing faster, if there had been a tendency for Indonesian regions to

converge. In practice, Indonesian provinces exhibited very little convergence in gross provincial

product per capita until 1996 (Hill (1996)). Nevertheless, to control for possible convergence,

we will control for enrollment rate in 1971. We will also present the results in the rural sample
   9
       For example, Moretti (1999), proposed to instrument for (St − St−1 ) with the share of young people in the

base year, on the ground that education will grow faster in regions which have more young people. The problem

remains, however, that the share of young people in the base year is very likely to inﬂuence physical capital

accumulation as well.



                                                        13
separately, and omit the years 1998 and 1999 to allow for the fact that the Indonesian crisis

hit wages in richer regions, and in particular cities, much more than in poorer regions and in

rural areas (Frankenberg, Thomas and Beegle (1999)), causing some convergence of wage rates

between regions.


3.2    Empirical speciﬁcations

The wage of individual i observed in district j in year t is given by:



                       ln(wijt ) = Si (ln(wEjt ) − ln(wU jt )) + ln(wU jt ) + υijt ,                 (5)

where Si is a dummy indicating whether the individual has graduated from primary school. The

error term υijt reﬂects all the other factors that determine wage, besides individual and average

education.

   Substituting the expression for ln(wEjt ) from equation 3 and including all the variables

which we do not measure in the error term, we obtain a relationship between individual wage,

individual education level, and regional human capital in the district at date t.



                           ln(wijt ) = Si bjt + αU Sjt + jt + µt + νj + υijt ,                      (6)

                                                                                              jt , Tj ))
where bjt = (ln(wEjt )−ln(wU jt )) (the skill premium), and µt +νj +jt = φ1U (AF jt , AIjt , K

   As we have seen, estimating this equation by OLS (treating bjt as a random coeﬃcient)

could be very misleading, because of the correlation between jt ,µt or νj and Sjt . In addition,

Acemoglu and Angrist (1999) show that, even if there is no omitted district level variable, the

OLS estimate of αU will be a biased estimate of the eﬀect of Sjt on ln(wijt ) if the estimate

of bjt is biased for any reason (such as measurement error in the education variable, or the

endogeneity of education). They propose to instrument for both Si and Sjt . Alternatively, one

could instrument Sjt with a variable that does not aﬀect Si , the individual education, which is

the approach we take here.



                                                    14
   The nature of the INPRES program suggests the following instrumental variable strategy. All

individuals who were born in 1962 or before were not aﬀected by the program (we have veriﬁed

in the previous section that the average education in this group did not grow faster from year

to year in the districts that received more INPRES schools). On the other hand, the program

aﬀected the average education by aﬀecting the education of those born after 1962. Therefore,

the intensity of the INPRES program is a potential instrument for the average education which

does not aﬀect individual education, if we restrict the sample to those born before 1962.

   To derive the empirical speciﬁcation, take the average of equation 6 for all individuals born

before 1962:



                            ln(wijt ) = Sjto bjt + Sjt αU + µt + µj + υijt ,                      (7)

where Sjto is the proportion of primary school graduates among the old (born before 1962) in

year t in district j. If we take the ﬁrst diﬀerence of this equation and rearrange the terms, we

obtain:


ln(wijt )−ln(wijt−1 ) = (Sjto −Sjt−1o )bjt−1 +Sjt−1o (bjt −bjt−1 )+(Sjt −Sjt−1 )αU +µt +νj +jt +υijt


   The evolution of the skill premium (bjt − bjt−1 ) is itself a function of the evolution in the

number of educated workers in the region, so that the eﬀect of the evolution of primary school

graduates on the average wages of the individual born before 1962 is ﬁnally given by the expres-

sion:



                   ln(wijt ) − ln(wijt−1 ) = (Sjt − Sjt−1 )α + µt + νj + jt + υijt ,          (8)

   Subject to the caveats discussed in the previous sub-section, we can use the number of

INPRES schools (Pj ) as an instrument for Sjt − Sjt−1 in equation 8, possibly after controlling

for variables such as the enrollment rate and the wage in 1986 (a vector Cj ). We have veriﬁed

that Pj is uncorrelated with (Sjto − Sjt−1o ), which is now included in the error term.




                                                    15
   A joint test of the validity of the strategy and the seriousness of the problem suggested by

Acemoglu and Angrist (1999) is to use as dependent variable the average of the residual of a

regression of individual wages on individual education. If this equation is correctly speciﬁed, it

should lead to the similar, but more precise estimate (since (Sjto − Sjt−1o ) will not be part of

the error term any more).

   Thus the reduced form with two years of data would be written:


                          ln(wjt ) − ln(wjt−1 ) = µt + γ2 Pj + δ2 Cj + ξjt


   This equation can be generalized to incorporate all available years, leading to a reduced form

equation similar to equation 1:


                                       1999
                                                                 1999
                                                                  
                 ln wjt = µt + νj +            (λl ∗ Pj )γ2l +            (λl ∗ Cj )δ2l + jt ,   (9)
                                      l=1987                     l=1987

where µt and γj are year and district ﬁxed eﬀects, respectively.

   Equations 1 and 9 form respectively the ﬁrst stage and the reduced form of an instrumental

variables strategy to estimate equation 7.

   The same reasoning applies to formal labor force participation, and the same speciﬁcation can

be estimated with formal labor force participation instead of wages. Finally we can also estimate

equations similar to equation 7, using the average skill premium as dependent variable. The

variables we consider here (wages, education, skill premium, formal labor force participation) are

likely to be auto-correlated over time. Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001) show that it can result

in large understatement of the standard errors in these types of setting. I thus correct standard

errors in all equations using a generalization of the White variance formula which allows for a

ﬂexible auto-correlation process within any states.

   Since the sample of individuals not aﬀected by the program that we include in the analysis is

diﬀerent every year, this speciﬁcation may suﬀer from sample selection. First, the program may

have induced selective migration by the old people, potentially correlated with their productivity,

and therefore with their wages. Second, we will show that the program aﬀected the proportion


                                                     16
of old people who work for a wage: it also opens some room for selection bias, since it is possible

that workers with the lowest productivity switched to the wage sector. Section 4.5 will present

additional evidence (using two other data sets) on whether these two possibilities for sample

selection aﬀected the results.



4     Results

Summary statistics for the sample of people born before 1962, and aged 60 or less in the survey

year, are presented in table 3. The proportion of primary school graduates among them increased

from 59% to 74% between 1986 and 1989 (this reﬂects the fact that individuals present in the

sample belong to later cohorts in later years). We use as an indicator of formal employment the

fact that someone receives a wage. This fraction is a little over 30%. The average wage, in real

terms, increased by about 50% between 1986 and 1997, and declined by 22% between 1997 and

1999.


4.1     Reduced form results

The reduced form results (the estimates of the coeﬃcients γ2l in equation 9) are presented in table

4 and in ﬁgures 4A and 4B. These two ﬁgures summarize the reduced form eﬀects on wages and

on formal employment. Although none of these coeﬃcients is individually signiﬁcantly diﬀerent

from zero, the reduced form coeﬃcients in the wage equation are declining (in contrast to the

coeﬃcients of average education, which are increasing). The reduced form coeﬃcients on the

probability of working for a wage are increasing. In the sample that includes both urban and

rural areas, the coeﬃcients increase from 1997 to 1999, which probably reﬂects the diﬀerential

impact of the crisis. In the rural sample, they are monotonically declining.




                                                17
4.2       The eﬀects of average education on wage rates

The main sample for the analysis is all the individuals aged 20 to 60 who were born before 1962.10

I will consider two independent variables. First, the fraction of primary school graduates in the

sample aged 20 to 60 (a reasonable approximation of the average education in the labor market);

second, the fraction of primary school graduates among the 20-40 sample. The INPRES program

directly aﬀected the latter (since the older aﬀected people were 37 in 1999). The former was

aﬀected as a consequence: Focusing on the 20-40 variable puts more accent on the source of

identiﬁcation.11 The results presented here focus on the share of primary school graduates

among males. Using instead the share of primary school graduates among males and females

combined leads to almost identical results.

       Table 5 presents OLS estimates for equation 7, where the dependent variable is the average

wage and the average of the residual wage (after controlling for individual education and age).

The ﬁrst panel does not include district ﬁxed eﬀects, while the second one does. As expected,

results obtained from speciﬁcations that do not control for individual education are bigger.

They lump together the “social” and the “private” returns. We should, therefore, focus on the

coeﬃcients of average education in the wage residual equation. The diﬀerence between the ﬁrst

and the second panel illustrates the remark we made in the previous section: the OLS estimates

are much bigger than the corresponding ﬁxed eﬀects estimates, which suggests that they are

very strongly upward biased: educational attainments are higher in regions where wages are

higher, but this is as likely to come from a relationship running from income to education as

from the opposite relationship.12 The OLS results are all positive and signiﬁcant, while the
  10
       It means that when we change year, there is both a cohort eﬀect and an age eﬀect. I have run all the

speciﬁcations in a sample which maintains a constant cohort composition, and the results were very similar.
  11
     In addition, the ﬁrst stage is stronger for this variable, which minimizes the problems that can arise from

using weakly correlated instruments. One would expect the results with the 20-60 average to be a scaled up

version of the results obtained with the 20-40 average.
  12
     There are many reasons, besides those emphasized here, which would lead OLS coeﬃcient to be biased

upwards. First, there may be a wealth eﬀect in education: Glewwe and Jacoby (2000) ﬁnd an important wealth

eﬀect in Vietnam. Second, with economic growth, expected returns to education improve, and this may lead to a


                                                      18
OLS results with ﬁxed eﬀect are positive, but signiﬁcant only in the speciﬁcation that has the

proportion of primary school graduates among those aged 20 to 60 as the dependent variable.

These point estimates suggest small positive eﬀects: an increase of 10 percentage points in the

share of primary school graduates among those aged 20 to 60 is associated with an increase of

0.8% in the wages, after controlling for individual education. These coeﬃcients are less than

one tenth of those estimated by Moretti (1999) for the impact of the share of college graduates

in the US.

    Table 6 presents the instrumental variables results. The results are presented for the entire

sample, and for a sample that excludes the years 1998 and 1999, since the crisis hit diﬀerent

regions diﬀerently. The ﬁrst line of each panel presents the results on wages. In the full sample,

the estimates become more negative when the crisis years are taken, while the estimates in rural

aﬀect the estimates in the rural areas. The second line presents the results using the residual

wages as the dependent variable. None of the estimates is signiﬁcant. The estimates obtained

using the residual wage or the actual wages as the dependent variable are very similar, which

is reassuring: Since the INPRES instruments aﬀects only average education, and not individual

education, controlling for individual education should not aﬀect the estimate, which is what we

ﬁnd here. The estimates using the residual wage are somewhat more precise. They suggest that

an increase of 10 percentage points in the share of primary school graduates among the 20 to 60

year old led to a decrease of 3.8% in wages in the full sample, and to a decrease of 9.9 % in the

sample of rural areas. Without using the last two years of data, the coeﬃcients are respectively

-4.4% and -9%. The negative coeﬃcients are signiﬁcant (at the 10% level) in the rural sample

only.

    If we focus on the share of primary school graduates among the 20 to 40 year old (for which

the ﬁrst stage has more power), the story is the same: an increase of 10 percentage points in

the share of primary school graduates leads to a decrease of 2.9 % in the wage of the old in the
higher demand for education (see Foster and Rosenzweig (1996) for micro-economic evidence of the Indian green

revolution, and Bils and Klenow (1998) for a re-interpretation of the cross-country evidence along these lines.




                                                       19
full sample, and to a decrease of 6.3% in the rural sample.


4.3   Skill premium

The third line in panel A and B of table 5 presents the results of estimating by OLS (with and

without district dummies) an equation similar to equation 7, but where the dependent variable is

the diﬀerence between the average wages of educated and uneducated workers. Without district

dummies, the estimate is negative, large (around -0.45), and signiﬁcant. With district dummies,

the estimates are negative, but much smaller (around -0.09) and insigniﬁcant. OLS seems again

to be biased upwards (in absolute value).

   The third line in panels A and B of table 6 presents the instrumental variables estimates

of the same equation. The IV estimates of the eﬀect of the share of primary school graduates

on the primary education premium are either negative or positive, and always insigniﬁcant.

The education premium does not seem to have been aﬀected by the increase in the number of

primary school graduates. It suggests that, in at least one sector of the economy, educated and

uneducated workers are close substitutes.


4.4   Formal labor force participation

The fourth line in panels A and B of table 6 presents the instrumental variables results for formal

labor force participation (corresponding OLS results are presented in table 5). The dependent

variable is the fraction of people who work for a wage. The 2SLS estimates suggest that there

is a strong positive eﬀect of the fraction of primary school graduates on the probability that

someone works for a wage. In the rural and urban sample combined, a 10% increase in the

proportion of primary school graduates among the 20 to 40 year old leads to a 4.5% increase

in the probability of working for a wage. A 10% increase in the proportion of primary school

graduates among the 20 to 60 year old leads to a 6.6% to 7.5% increase. The coeﬃcients are

signiﬁcant in all of the speciﬁcations, and are very similar across speciﬁcations.




                                                20
4.5   Sample selection



   There are two possible sources of sample selection. First, there might be selective migration.

Second, since the program aﬀected the proportion of people for whom we observe wages, the

probability of selection in the sample is aﬀected by the instruments. In particular, one can

imagine a situation where the program pushed the “marginal” self-employed into the formal

labor force, and these marginal employees receive a lower wage. Moreover, new entrants into

the labor force have less experience, which should lower their wages.

   Figure 2 (and columns 3 and 6 in table 4) suggest that the average education of individuals

born before 1962 in the sample was not aﬀected by the program: along this observable dimension,

the sample remains comparable over time. Likewise, when I regress in the education level of

the individuals born before 1962 and who earn a wage on the interactions between the program

intensity and the survey year dummies, there is no distinct pattern in this regression (the F

statistic of the interactions is 1.03), which indicates that, along observable characteristics at

least, the composition of the formal labor force did not change as a result of the program.

   However, there may have been selective migration along unobserved dimensions (if low pro-

ductivity old people are attracted by the program regions for example, or if high productivity

old people leave the region), which will cause a downward bias in the eﬀect of the program on

wages. The SAKERNAS data does not indicate whether an individual is a migrant, and we do

not have any income measure for individuals who are not working for a wage. We thus need

other sources of information to shed light on this issue.

   First, the SUPAS data set (the 1995 intercensal survey of Indonesia which we described

earlier) has the individual’s region of birth as well as his region of residence. To investigate

whether there are diﬀerences in productivity between migrants and non-migrants that are cor-

related with the INPRES program, I form for each district the diﬀerence between the logarithm

of the hourly wage of the migrants and that of the non-migrants (among those born before 1962

currently residing in the district). Column 1 of table 7 presents a regression of this variable on


                                               21
the number of INPRES schools built per capita in the region. The coeﬃcient of the number of

schools is actually positive (but insigniﬁcant), which suggest that there is no downward sample

selection bias. In column 2, I construct the diﬀerence between the wage of those who migrated

out of their region of birth and those who staid. This diﬀerence is unrelated to the level of

the program. There is thus no evidence that selective migration was likely to bias the results

downward.

   Second, we use the SUSENAS data (a nationally representative survey of about 50,000

households, which has an income and a consumption supplements once every 5 years). I used

the incomes modules from the SUSENAS from 1987 and 1993 and computed the ratio of the

household income of self employed to household of wage earners the income of wage earners.

The ratio is very stable between 1987 and 1993: self-employed earn 17.85% less than employed

in 1987, and 18.5% less in 1993. I then regressed the diﬀerence in the log of this ratio (table

7, column (3)) on the level of the program, and found no relationship (the coeﬃcient of the

INPRES program is 0.0021, with an absolute t statistic of 0.130).

   On balance, it therefore appears that the relative wage loss of the old generation in regions

where the program increased the supply of primary school graduates cannot be attributed to a

composition eﬀect.

   We can summarize the results from this section as follows. An increase in the share of the

educated workers leads to:

   • A decline in the wage of older workers, whose level of education did not change. The

     point estimate is large (as large as the skill premium itself, or even larger in rural areas),

     although it is signiﬁcant only in some speciﬁcations.

   • No change in the skill premium among older workers.

   • An increase in the share of the labor force employed in the formal sector, among the old.

     The point estimates are large (a 10% increase in the share of educated workers leads to

     an increase of at least 4% in the share of old workers employed in the formal sector) and


                                               22
      signiﬁcant.

    • No change in the diﬀerence between formal and informal sector earnings.

    In the next section, we build a model which can explain these eﬀects, and serve as a framework

to interpret their magnitude.



5    Model and interpretation

What do these results tell us about the the response of the economy to an increase in the

education of the labor force? In this section, I use a simple two-sector model as a framework

to interpret these eﬀects and their magnitude. In the ﬁrst subsection, I set up the model and

study the eﬀect of education on wage and the allocation of labor across sectors, taking capital as

given. In the second subsection, I use this model to compare its prediction to the data. I specify

two polar cases for the accumulation of capital. In the ﬁrst case, there is no adjustment cost.

In the second case, physical capital accumulation does not adjust at all to the modiﬁcation in

the rate of human capital accumulation. In this simple model, both assumptions have the same

implication for formal labor force participation, but very diﬀerent implications for wage rates.

    Below, I provide some justiﬁcation for the speciﬁc assumptions of the model.

    The fact that the skill premium was not aﬀected suggests that, at least in one sector, educated

and uneducated workers are very strong substitutes. Since in the formal sector, workers are

combined, while they are self employed in the informal sector (we can think about this sector as

small scale agriculture), we will take as a starting point that educated and uneducated workers

are perfect substitutes in the informal sector. Suppose that the informal sector combines land

and human capital, and the formal sector combines physical and human capital. The informal

sector is characterized by a downward sloping demand for eﬀective units of labor, even in the

long run (because land is a ﬁxed factor). In the formal sector, the slope of the labor demand

depends on how capital adjusts to changes in the composition of the labor force. If capital does

not adjust to an increase in eﬀective labor supply, labor demand will be downward sloping. It


                                                23
would be ﬂat if this increase led to an oﬀsetting increase in the supply of capital, or even slope

up if there were technological externalities, or if faster capital accumulation more than oﬀset

human capital accumulation (as in Acemoglu (1996)).

   Consider a simple competitive model, where wages are equalized in the formal and informal

sector (for a given level of skill). Figure 5 illustrates the eﬀect of the increase in educated workers

induced by the INPRES reform on uneducated old workers. The total number of old uneducated

workers and their allocation between the formal and the informal sector are depicted on the X

axis. The left Y axis presents the wage in the formal sector, and the right Y axis presents the

wage in the informal sector. The increase in the number of educated workers leads to a shift in

the labor supply expressed in eﬃciency unit, which is akin to a shift to the right of the labor

demand expressed in number of bodies in the informal sector, and a shift to the left in the formal

sector. If the labor demand in the formal sector is downward slopping, the eﬀect on wages is

unambiguously negative. The eﬀect of an increase in the number of educated workers on the

allocation of labor between formal and informal sector depends on the ratio of the elasticity of

substitution between capital and labor in the formal sector and that between land and labor

in the informal sector. The observation that the increase in the proportion of educated worker

led to a shift from the informal to the formal sector indicates that the elasticity of substitution

between labor and capital is bigger than the elasticity of substitution between labor and land.

We will capture this with the simplifying assumption that the informal sector uses a Leontieﬀ

technology.


5.1   Model

This section builds a speciﬁc model along the lines described above. We start by describing

the allocation of labor and the determination of wages, taking capital as given. In the second

subsection, we will compare the predictions of this model to the data, using two polar cases for

the adjustment of capital to the increase of the share of educated workers: no adjustment cost,

or no adjustment whatsoever.



                                                  24
   There is a mass 1 of workers in the economy, out of which a fraction S are educated. There

are two sectors, an informal (small scale agriculture) and a formal sector (industry).

   Suppose that the informal sector is characterized by a Leontieﬀ production function in terms

of eﬃciency units:

                                         YI = Min(T, HI ),

where HI is the number of eﬃciency units employed in the informal sector, and T is the (nor-

malized) amount of available land.

   In addition, assume that educated and uneducated workers are perfect substitutes in the

informal sector:

                                          HI = UI + hEI ,

where h is the relative eﬃciency of educated workers. Land is distributed optimally between

educated and uneducated workers, and both earn their marginal productivity, so that the ratio

of the educated to the uneducated wage is h.

   The production function in the formal sector is Cobb-Douglas in human and physical capital,

with constant returns to scale:

                                         YF = AF K α HF1−α

Human capital is a Cobb-Douglas aggregate of educated and uneducated workers:


                                          HF = EFβ UF1−β


   Wages in the formal sector are given by the marginal productivity of each factor:


                            wEF = (1 − α)AF K α HF−α βEFβ−1 UF1−β ,


and

                           wU F = (1 − α)AF K α HF−α (1 − β)EFβ UF−β .

                               wEF
   In equilibrium, the ratio   wU F   must be equal to h. Therefore the ratio of uneducated to

educated labor in the formal sector must satisfy the relationship:


                                                25
                                         UF    1−β
                                            =h                                            (10)
                                         EF     β

   Together with the relationships EF + EI = S, UF + UI = 1 − S and hEI + UI = T , this

determines the employment of each category of workers in each sector:

                                      β
                           EF    =      [1 + S(h − 1) − T ]                               (11)
                                      h
                                      β                     h
                            EI   =      [T − 1 − S(h − 1) + S]                            (12)
                                      h                     β
                           UF    = (1 − β)[1 + S(h − 1) − T ]                             (13)
                                                                  h
                            UI   = T − β[T − 1 − S(h − 1) +         S]                    (14)
                                                                  β

   Production in the formal sector can be expressed as a function of EF :
                                               1−β 1−α
                                           1−β
                            YF = AF      h                   K α EF1−α
                                            β

   The wage of an educated worker is therefore given by:



                              ln(wE ) = C + α ln(K) − α ln(EF ) ,                         (15)



                      ln(wE ) = C  + α ln(K) − α ln(1 + S(h − 1) − T ) ,                 (16)

   where C and C  are functions of α, β, AF and h.

   The same equations (with diﬀerent C and C  ) describe the wage of an uneducated worker.


5.2     Calibration

5.2.1    Eﬀect of education on formal employment

The ratio of educated to uneducated workers in the formal sector, divided by the skill premium,

should be constant, according to our model, should and allow us to calculate β. In fact, the

ratio of the number of uneducated workers to the number of educated workers is decreasing

over time (table 1, column 5), while the skill premium is stable (table 1, column 6). The value


                                              26
of β obtained from equation 10 is therefore increasing. This may reﬂect factors not taken into

account, such as the adoption of more skill-complementary technologies. The average value of

β is 0.62.

   Equations 11 and 13 indicate how the employment of educated and uneducated workers in

the formal sector responds to a change in S. Suppose that all the newly educated workers are

“born” into the informal sector, and that young and old workers shift from the informal to the

formal sector to restore the correct proportion between EF and UF . When S increases by 1%,

the probability that an educated worker born before 1962 will be employed in the formal sector
               β (h−1)
increases by   h So ,    and the probability that an uneducated worker born before 1962 will be

employed in the informal sector increases by (1 − β) (h−1)
                                                     1−So , where So is the share of educated

workers among the old.

   Values of the parameters β, h and So are shown in tables 1 and 3. The average value of h − 1

(the skill premium) is close to 0.40. The average value of So is around 0.65. The model would

therefore predict that an increase in S of one percentage point would make the educated and

uneducated born before 1962, respectively, 0.29 percent and 0.41 percent more likely to work in

the formal sector.

   The coeﬃcients we have estimated suggest that an increase in S of one percentage point leads

to an increase in the probability of working for a wage of 0.43 (in the combined sample) and

0.71 (in the rural sample) for the educated workers. For the uneducated workers, the estimated

eﬀects are respectively 0.51 (in the combined sample) and 0.31 (in the rural sample). Therefore,

the model does a reasonable job in predicting the shift from the informal to the formal sector

for the uneducated, and under-predicts the shift of the educated from the formal to the informal

sector, especially in the rural sample.


5.2.2   Eﬀect of an increase in average education on wage rates

The eﬀect of the increase in average education on the wages (at a given level of human capital)

depends on the extent to which physical capital adjusts to the increase in human capital. We



                                                27
contrast the implications of two polar cases. In the ﬁrst case, capital adjusts costlessly to

the modiﬁcation induced by INPRES: we ﬁrst consider the situation where each district is a

closed economy with local accumulation, and then a situation where capital is freely mobile

across regions. Both models deliver the results that wage growth across regions should not be

diﬀerentially aﬀected. In the second case, there is no adjustment at all of the physical capital

stock in response to the INPRES program, over the period we consider.

       • Costless capital stock adjustment, local capital accumulation

       To study the consequences of the INPRES model in the case of costless adjustment, we

need to specify how human capital and physical capital are accumulated. Following Barro and

Sala-I-Martin (1995) (chapter 5), consider a one-sector endogenous growth model, with human

and physical capital. Output is divided between consumption and investment in the two forms

of capital.

                                                 (1−α)
                                  Y = AF K α HF          + T = C + IK + IH ,

       where IK and IH are the gross investment in physical and human capital, respectively.

       The changes in the capital stocks are given by:

                                                K̇ = IK − δK,

and

                                          H˙F = ηIH (t − L) − δHF .

There are two diﬀerences from the set up in Barro and Sala-I-Martin (1995). First, there is a

lag of duration L between investment in human capital and the date at which it will become

active: this reﬂects the fact that children who go to school today will enter the job market only

after a lag. Second, η represents the ratio at which each unit of investment is transformed into

a unit of human capital.13 Note that H could not accumulate indeﬁnitely if the only way to

increase H were to increase the proportion of primary school graduates. We should think of H
  13
       In the dual economy model, η reﬂects both the cost of producing educated workers, and the rate at which

the educated workers are participating in the formal labor market.


                                                         28
as a Cobb-Douglas aggregate of all levels of education: we model the beginning of the process

of development, where only two levels of education have been achieved.

       The solution to this problem is obtained by setting up the Hamiltonian expression for the

household choice between consumption and investment in human or physical capital, taking ﬁrst

order conditions with respect to C, IH , IK , K and HF . The steady state growth rate is equal

to:
                                                                 α−1
                                             1      K
                                          γ=   AF α                       −δ−ρ
                                             θ      HF

                                     K
       The steady state value of     HF    is pinned down by the condition of equality between net returns

to investment in physical and human capital. It is the solution to the following implicit equation:

                                                          α−1
                                        L δ−αAF      K                  α
                                                     HF             K              α
                                    ηe                                        =       ,                          (17)
                                                                    HF            1−α
                                   K
       Denote k ∗ the value of     HF    given by this equation. The steady state growth rate is given by:


                                                  1                      
                                          γ∗ =       AF αk ∗(α−1) − δ − ρ                                        (18)
                                                  θ

       We can model the eﬀect of the INPRES program as an increase in η, the rate at which

investment is transformed into human capital accumulation: each new school makes it cheaper

to accumulate human capital. Suppose that the INPRES program will last long enough that we

can think about it as a permanent program (a permanent increase in η).14 In the new steady

state, the ratio k ∗ will be lower than in the old steady state, to maintain the equality between

net returns to investment in human capital and physical capital (see equation 17). The program

should therefore cause a drop in the levels of wages (keeping constant human capital). After

the transition, consumption, human capital and physical capital will grow at the same new

steady state rate (given by equation 18). In the new steady state, growth in human capital

will be exactly compensated by growth in physical capital, and wage growth will therefore be
  14
       For our purpose, it would not be easy to distinguish it from a temporary program, since the the rate of capital

accumulation was more rapid in the regions that received more schools for the entire period we consider.



                                                              29
unaﬀected by growth in human capital. To see this, diﬀerentiate equation 15 with respect to
                           K̇       ḢF
time, and note that        K    =   HF    , so that the two terms cancel.
                                                                                              K
       The transition to the new steady state involves indeed a decline of                    HF   , and therefore a
                                                                                            K
decline in wages. In this model, however, the adjustment in the ratio                       HF   should have taken

place right after the program was initiated, and well before the rate of growth of H actually

starts to accelerate. To see this, imagine that the economy was initially at a steady state, and

consider the household decision the ﬁrst day the schools are built: human capital investment has

suddenly become cheaper, while physical capital investment has the same price and the same

returns as before (since the human capital available today keeps growing at the old steady state

growth rate). Net returns to investing in human capital are therefore higher, all the investment
                                                              K
takes the form of human capital, and the ratio                HF   declines rapidly until it is low enough that

investing in physical capital become proﬁtable again. Simulations of the transitional dynamics
                                              K
of this model show that the ratio             HF   reaches its steady state value very fast after the program is

initiated (in one year if there if household are allowed to transform physical capital into human

capital, and in less than 3 years otherwise).15 After reaching its new steady state value, the
         K
ratio    HF   stay almost constant.16

       This very fast adjustment rate may seem unrealistic, but this is because the assumption

we have made (costless capital adjustment) is not realistic either, even though it underlies,

implicitly or explicitly, the eﬀort to identify a human capital externality (in which case the

share of educated worker could have a positive eﬀect on wages. The important point is to note

that in this model, the share of educated workers should not aﬀect wages from 1986 to 1999. A
  15                                                                                   K
       For example, if γ1 was initially 3.5% a year, assuming a value of 0.05 for δ,   HF
                                                                                            would have declined by 8%

every year. With reasonable parameters values for α, δ, ρ, and θ (α = 0.3, δ = 0.05, ρ = 0.02, θ = 3) , and

assuming that the eﬀect of each school on the rate of growth of S we observe in the data is the steady state eﬀect
                                                                       K
(i.e. each school causes an increase of 0.5% in the growth rate),      HF
                                                                            should fall by about 10% for each school

built (per 1000 children), which would have been achieved in 1.25 years. On average, 2 schools were built, so in

2.5 years, HKF should have fallen enough in the average region to reach the new steady state value.
  16
     In the simulations, there are small oscillations around the steady state values, and they are progressively

dampening.



                                                            30
full adjustment model similar to this one underlies, The data does not seem to support this full

adjustment model for Indonesia, however: during the entire period, wages grow more slowly in

regions were human capital grows faster (see ﬁgure 4B).

       • Costless capital stock adjustment, national capital accumulation and capital is freely mobile

across regions.

       If capital is freely mobile across regions and there are no adjustment costs, the capital stock

simply adjusts to the increase in human capital to equalize the returns to physical capital across

regions. This determines the physical capital/human capital ratio k, which in turns determines

the wage: thus (absent positive externalities), the evolution of wages should not be diﬀerent in

regions that received more schools (the level of wages may of course be related to the program).

Once again, the data does not seem to support this model.

       There were more than 10 years between the start of the program and the entry into the labor

force of the generations that were exposed to it. Thus, even if capital accumulates with a gap

(there is “time to build”), the conclusions of such a model would be unchanged.

       Thus, it seems that, to account for the pattern present of the data, it is necessary to introduce

frictions in the adjustment of the capital stock. We consider this an extreme case of frictions.

       • No adjustment of the capital stock in response to the increase in education

       The other extreme is a case where there is absolutely no response of physical capital accu-

mulation to the increase in the stock of educated workers. The stock of capital is thus evolving

exogenously. In this case, if the INPRES program is a valid instrument (that is, if it is not

correlated with the exogenous rate of capital accumulation), the stock of capital enters the error

term in equation 15 and is uncorrelated with the level of the program. The best way to check

whether our model ﬁts the facts is to use ln(EF ) or ln(1+S(h−1)−T ) as the dependent variable

instead of S.17 Figure 6 shows that these variables are also inﬂuenced by the program. The
  17
       ln(EF ) is the proportion of the labor force that is educated and works in the formal sector. ln(1+S(h−1)−T )

is calculated using the district and year-speciﬁc skill premium. T is calculated using its deﬁnition: T = HI =

UI + h ∗ EI .




                                                          31
ﬁrst stage coeﬃcients for these variables look similar to each other, which is reassuring.18 The

ﬁgure also looks similar to ﬁgure 2. In table 8, I present the results of estimating equation 15,

using the same strategy outlined for estimating the eﬀect of S on wages. In practice, I estimate

equation 7, with ln(EF ) or ln(1 + S(h − 1) − T ) as the endogenous regressor of interest.

       The coeﬃcients of a subset of the speciﬁcations estimated in table 6 are presented in table 8.

For ln(EF ) (columns (1) and (2) ), the pattern is similar to what we found for S: the coeﬃcients

are negative, but insigniﬁcant. The point estimate is -0.07 in the urban sample, and -0.22 in the

rural sample. The latter estimate of -0.22 is close to -0.3, the conventional guess for α.

       The results using ln(1 + S(h − 1) − T ) as the independent variable are more clear cut. The

point estimates are similar in the combined sample and in the rural sample. The estimates range

between -0.34 and -0.40, and are all signiﬁcant at the 10% level of conﬁdence (after correcting the

standard errors for auto-correlation over time within regions). These estimates (especially those

obtained in the combined sample) are higher than what I obtained using ln(EF ) (they should

in principle be the same). They are very close to (and not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from) -0.3.

These estimates are fairly precise and their order of magnitude is reasonable. They reinforce the

conﬁdence in the ability of the model to describe the response of the economy to the education

expansion.

       Note that the model predicts that the eﬀect of the program on wages should be the same

in the formal and in the informal sector. As we already noted, the SAKERNAS does not have

data on income for those who do not work for a wage. However, the regression in column 3 of

table 7, which we commented on in section 4.5, suggests that the ratio of the income of the wage

earners to that of non-wage earners was not aﬀected by the program: the diﬀerence between the

value of this ratio in 1993 and in 1987 is not correlated at all with the intensity of the program.

       This set of estimates therefore suggests that the accumulation of physical capital happens

essentially independently from the accumulation of human capital. Even 25 years after the
  18
       I estimate the same speciﬁcation as in equation 1, but I use ln EF and ln(1 + S(h − 1) − T ), respectively, as

the dependent variables. Full results are presented in table A1.




                                                          32
program was initiated, physical capital does not seem to have been accumulated to employ the

new eﬃciency units of labor created by the program. This conclusion seems consistent with

other evidence on the pattern of industrialization in Indonesia during the period. After 1984,

the Indonesian Government cut all previously existing tax incentives to geographical dispersion

and small businesses Hill (1996). Miguel et al. (2001) show that there was divergence in in-

dustrialization across regions between 1985 and 1995: industrialization was faster during this

period in regions where its level was higher in 1985. Change in the rate of industrialization seem

uncorrelated with school construction (not only INPRES schools, but all primary and junior

high schools) in the previous decade, as well as with other infrastructure variables (roads or

electricity).



6    Conclusion

This paper argued that the INPRES program, a large school construction program undertaken

by the Indonesian government in the 1970’s, constitutes a good case study to empirically examine

the impact of average primary schooling on the wages of older cohorts. This program modiﬁed

the enrollment rates of the young generations, thus inducing a long-lasting change in the rate

of human capital accumulation in the regions it aﬀected most. The impact of this shock on the

supply of educated workers can be studied on an “old” generation that did not directly beneﬁt

from it. It provides a natural solution to the identiﬁcation problems inherent to any attempt to

identify the eﬀect of the average of a regressor while trying at the same time to control for it.

    The instrumental variables estimates presented in this paper suggest that the eﬀect of average

education on individual wages (keeping the skill level constant) is negative: in places where

average educational attainments grew faster because of the program, wages grew more slowly.

This does not seem to be due to sample selection bias due to migration or increases in labor

force participation. This is in sharp contrast to the OLS estimates, which are strongly positive,

and to the ﬁxed eﬀect estimates, which are closer to zero but still positive. Such a strong bias in

the OLS estimates suggests that the cross-country relationship between output per capita and

                                                33
education is likely to be aﬀected by the same upward bias. The eﬀects of average education on

the participation in the formal labor market is, however, positive.

   Both sets of estimates are shown to be consistent with a simple dual-economy model, where

the number of eﬃciency units that can be productively employed in the informal sector is limited

by the availability of a ﬁxed factor (land, for example). The increase in the productivity of the

labor force is entirely absorbed by the formal sector, which explains the increase in participation.

Wages decrease to the extent that physical capital does not fully adjust to the increase in human

capital. I contrast three versions of this model. In a closed economy endogenous growth version

with costless adjustment of the capital stock, the faster increase in human capital after 1986

should be matched with a corresponding increase in the stock of physical capital, and wages

should be unaﬀected. In an open economy model where capital moves freely, the capital-labor

ratio adjusts to maintain equal returns to physical capital across regions, and the program should

have no eﬀect on wages. If capital accumulation is unresponsive to the increase in human capital,

the model makes a prediction of what the coeﬃcient on the human capital variable should be.

   The extent to which wages fall in response to the increase in human capital available in the

formal sector suggests that there was little or no reaction of the physical capital to the increase

in educational opportunities in the regions where INPRES built more schools. The estimates I

obtain are reasonable if this is the right model of the world.

   What is absent in this paper (and left for future work) is an explanation of why the capital

stock did not adjust. The program was publicly announced, and the increase in the stock of

primary school graduates occurred gradually over 10 years after the program started. It is

a puzzle that 25 years after the program was initiated, the labor demand looks like a “short

run” labor demand curve. Future work (and, probably, more data) is needed to determine to

what extent this is due to “myopic” behavior of investors, who fail to recognize the increase in

the education level of the labor force, to very large adjustment costs of the capital stock, to a

ﬁnancing constraint, or to a combination of the three.

   The results in this paper are important because, contrary to what is often assumed (on the



                                                34
basis of the experience of South-East Asian countries), acceleration in the rate of accumulation of

human capital is not necessarily accompanied by economic growth. Several countries (in Africa,

in particular) had very rapid expansion in education, but dismal economic growth (Kremer and

Thomson (1998)). It is important to understand why this can be the case.

   Models of credit constraints (Banerjee and Newman (1993), Galor and Zeira (1993), Aghion

and Bolton (1997)) could be combined with models of costly adjustment of technology to study

the eﬀects of education on economic growth given the actual constraints faced by developing

economies. The work of Caballero and Hammour (1998, 2000) comes closest to doing this. Their

model combines costly adjustment with credit constraints but does not model growth. It cannot

therefore be directly applied to the question of what happens when the growth rate of human

capital increases. Once built, such a model could then be compared to actual evolutions, in

exercises similar to Blanchard (1997) analysis of the “medium run”.



References

Acemoglu, Daron (1996) ‘A microfoundation for social increasing returns in human cpital accu-

     mulation.’ Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(3), 779–804

Acemoglu, Daron, and Joshua Angrist (1999) ‘How large are the social returns to education?

     Evidence from compulsory schooling laws.’ Mimeo, MIT

Aghion, Philippe, and Patrick Bolton (1997) ‘A trickle-down theory of growth and development

     with debt overhang.’ Review of Economic Studies 64(2), 151–72

Atkinson, A.B., and A. Brandolini (1999) ‘Promise and pitfalls in the use of “secondary” data-

     sets: Income inequality in OECD countries.’ Mimeo, Nuﬃeld College, Oxford

Banerjee, Abhijit, and Andrew Newman (1993) ‘Occupational choice and the process of devel-

     opment.’ Journal of Political Economy 101(2), 274–298




                                                35
Banerjee, Abhijit, and Esther Duﬂo (2000) ‘Inequality and growth: What can the data say?’

    Working Paper 7793, National Bureau of Economic Research, July

Barro, Robert, and Xavier Sala-I-Martin (1995) Economic Growth (Mc Graw Hill)

Bertrand, Marianne Esther Duﬂo, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2001) ‘How much should we trust

    diﬀerences in diﬀerences estimates.’ Mimeo, MIT

Bils, Mark, and Peter Klenow (1998) ‘Does schooling cause growth or the other way around?’

    Working Paper 6393, National Bureau of Economic Research

Blanchard, Olivier (1997) ‘The medium run.’ Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 89–158

Blanchard, Olivier, and Justin Wolfers (1999) ‘The role of shocks and institutions in the rise of

    european unemployment: The aggregate evidence.’ Working Paper 7282, National Bureau

    of Economic Research

Bound, John, Gabor Kzedi, and Sarah Turner (2000) ‘Trade in university training: Cross state

    variation in the production and use of college educated labor.’ MIMEO, University of

    Michigan

Caballero, Ricardo, and Mohamad Hammour (1998) ‘The macroeconomics of speciﬁcity.’ Journal

    of Political Economy 106(4), 724–767

    (2000) ‘Creative destruction and development: Institutions, crises, and restructuring.’

    Working Paper 7849, National Bureau of Economic Research, August

Card, David, and Thomas Lemieux (2001) ‘Can falling supply explain the rising return to college

    for younger men? A cohort-based analysis.’ Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(2), 705–

    746

Duﬂo, Esther (2000) ‘Schooling and labor market consequences of school construction in Indone-

    sia: Evidence from an unusual policy experiment.’ Working Paper 7860, National Bureau

    of Economic Research, August

                                               36
    (2001) ‘Schooling and labor market consequences of school construction in Indonesia: Evi-

    dence from an unusual policy experiment.’ American Economic Review 91(4), 795–813

Foster, Andrew D., and Mark R. Rosenzweig (1996) ‘Technical change and human-capital re-

    turns and investments: Evidence from the green revolution.’ American Economic Review

    86(4), 931–953

Frankenberg, Elizabeth, Duncan Thomas, and Kathleen Beegle (1999) ‘The real costs of Indone-

    sia’s economic crisis: Preliminary ﬁndings from the Indonesia family life surveys.’ Working

    Paper 99-04, RAND Labor and Population Program

Galor, Oded, and Joseph Zeira (1993) ‘Income distribution and macroeconomics.’ Review of

    Macroeconomic Studies 60, 35–52

Glewwe, Paul, and Hanan Jacoby (2000) ‘Economic growth and the demand for education: Is

    there a wealth eﬀect?’ MIMEO, World Bank

Harris, J., and M. Todaro (1970) ‘Migration, unemployment and development: A two-sector

    analysis.’ American Economic Review 40, 126–142

Heckman, James J., Lance Lochner, and Christopher Taber (1998) ‘General equilibrium treat-

    ment eﬀects: A study of tuition policy.’ Working Paper 6426, National Bureau of Economic

    Research

Hill, Hal (1996) The Indonesian Economy Since 1966: Southeast Asia’s Emerging Giant (Cam-

    bridge: Cambridge University Press)

Katz, Lawrence F., and Kevin M. Murphy (1992) ‘Changes in relative wages, 1963-1987: Supply

    and demand factors.’ Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(1), 35–78

Kremer, Michael, and James Thomson (1998) ‘Why isn’t convergence instantaneous? young

    workers, old workers, and gradual adjustment.’ Journal of Economic Growth 3, 5–28

Krueger, Alan, and Mikael Lindahl (1999) ‘Education for growth: Why and for whom?’ Mimeo

                                             37
Lucas, Robert (1988) ‘On the mechanics of economic development.’ Journal of Monetary Eco-

    nomics 22, 3–42

Miguel, Edward, Paul Gertler, and David Levine (2001) ‘Did industrialization destroy social

    capital in Indonesia.’ Mimeo, U.C. Berkeley

Moretti, Enrico (1999) ‘Estimating the social return to education: Evidence from repeated

    cross-sectional and longitudinal data.’ Working Paper 22, UC Berkeley

Solow, Robert M. (2000) ‘Toward a macroeconomics of the medium run.’ Journal of Economic

    Perspectives 14(1), 151–158

Welch, Finis (1979) ‘Eﬀects of cohort size on earnings: The baby boom babies’ ﬁnancial bust.’

    Journal of Political Economy 87(5), S65–S97. part 2




                                             38
                                                                  Table 1: Descriptive statistics


                Fraction born after 1962       Percentage of primary school graduates             ratio of             Skill   Implied
                 20-40           20-60              20-40                20-60              uneducated/educated      premium     beta
                                                                                          in formal sector (20-60)
                  (1)             (2)                  (3)                 (4)                       (5)               (6)       (7)
      1986       0.22            0.15                 0.69                 0.61                     0.36              0.40      0.53
      1987       0.25            0.16                 0.71                 0.63                     0.33              0.41      0.55
      1988       0.32            0.21                 0.73                 0.64                     0.29              0.33      0.53
      1989       0.36            0.23                 0.74                 0.65                     0.29              0.39      0.57
      1990       0.42            0.28                 0.76                 0.68                     0.29              0.35      0.55
      1991       0.46            0.31                 0.79                 0.71                     0.22              0.31      0.58
      1992       0.49            0.32                 0.79                 0.71                     0.23              0.35      0.60
      1993       0.55            0.36                  0.8                 0.72                     0.19              0.41      0.68
      1994       0.58            0.38                 0.81                 0.74                     0.21              0.36      0.63
      1995       0.62            0.42                 0.79                 0.72                     0.21              0.43      0.67
      1996       0.67            0.44                 0.85                 0.79                     0.23              0.37      0.62
      1997       0.71            0.46                 0.84                 0.78                     0.17              0.41      0.71
      1998       0.77            0.51                 0.87                 0.81                     0.17              0.38      0.69
      1999       0.82            0.53                 0.88                 0.82                     0.13              0.35      0.73

Notes: 1. Average wage is average of the log of monthly wage
2-Means are weighted by the number of observations ineach district-year cell
3. See text for the definition of Beta
                                         Table 2: First stage regressions
           Effect of the program on the proportion of individuals completing primary school or more.
             Coefficients of interactions of the intensity of the program and survey year dummies.

                     Sample: Urban and rural areas                Sample: rural areas only
  Sample:                                     Born                                       Born
                    20-40       20-60     before 1962        20-40         20-60      before 1962
                     (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)
    1986           omitted        omitted      omitted         omitted      omitted       omitted

    1987             0.0028       -0.0004      -0.0026          0.0009      -0.0015       -0.0023
                       (.008)     (.0075)      (.0077)         (.0099)        (.009)      (.0091)
    1988             0.0015       -0.0028      -0.0050         -0.0032      -0.0079       -0.0088
                     (.0064)      (.0058)      (.0059)         (.0078)      (.0069)       (.0069)
    1989             0.0014       -0.0012      -0.0048         -0.0010      -0.0043       -0.0068
                     (.0053)      (.0047)        (.005)        (.0066)      (.0056)       (.0061)
    1990             0.0027       -0.0042      -0.0106         -0.0002      -0.0071       -0.0126
                     (.0061)      (.0056)      (.0059)         (.0072)      (.0065)         (.007)
    1991             0.0151        0.0074      -0.0002          0.0110       0.0032       -0.0034
                     (.0058)      (.0055)      (.0055)         (.0067)      (.0062)       (.0065)
    1992             0.0124        0.0006      -0.0074          0.0082      -0.0058       -0.0126
                     (.0065)      (.0061)      (.0061)         (.0076)      (.0068)         (.007)
    1993             0.0205        0.0088      -0.0017          0.0143       0.0012       -0.0082
                     (.0065)      (.0062)      (.0059)         (.0072)      (.0067)       (.0067)
    1994             0.0195        0.0076      -0.0044          0.0145       0.0005       -0.0103
                     (.0068)      (.0068)      (.0069)         (.0074)      (.0072)       (.0078)
    1995             0.0202        0.0074      -0.0064          0.0161       0.0003       -0.0127
                     (.0064)      (.0063)      (.0061)         (.0072)      (.0068)         (.007)
    1996             0.0260        0.0112      -0.0027          0.0207       0.0016       -0.0122
                     (.0064)      (.0066)      (.0069)           (.007)     (.0066)       (.0075)
    1997             0.0252        0.0149       0.0039          0.0190       0.0070       -0.0010
                     (.0071)      (.0072)      (.0076)         (.0077)      (.0076)       (.0086)
    1998             0.0340        0.0190       0.0044          0.0300       0.0110       -0.0040
                     (.0077)      (.0074)      (.0072)         (.0073)      (.0066)       (.0076)
    1999             0.0290        0.0154       0.0045          0.0253       0.0076       -0.0029
                     (.0082)      (.0082)      (.0083)         (.0078)      (.0073)       (.0086)
Number of
cells                  3826         3826          3826           3140          3140         3140

F. statistic            7.23         3.40         1.29            5.02         1.68          0.95

Notes:
1. The program intensity is the number of INPRES schools built between 1974 and 1978, divided by the
number of children in 1971.
2. Survey year dummies, region dummies, interactions between survey year dummies and the enrollment
rate in 1971, and interactions between suvey year dummies and the number of children are included
in the regressions.
3. Regression run using kabupaten-year averages, weighted by the number of observations in each
kabupaten-year cell.
4. The F statistic is for the hypothesis that the set of interactions is jointly insignificant.
5. The standard errors are corrected for auto-correlation within kabupaten.
                        Table 3: Descriptive Statistics
         Sample: individuals aged less than 60 and born before 1962


                          Individuals born before 1962, aged less than 60
Survey year    % primary school % working         average      S.D. of      skill
                  graduates         for wage        wage        wage      premium
                     (1)               (2)           (3)          (4)        (5)

        1986               0.59           0.31        6.56        0.71        0.44
        1987               0.60           0.32        6.58        0.66        0.48
        1988               0.60           0.31        6.55        0.65        0.40
        1989               0.61           0.33        6.61        0.66        0.46
        1990               0.62           0.33        6.66        0.67        0.46
        1991               0.65           0.34        6.70        0.66        0.44
        1992               0.64           0.33        6.77        0.67        0.47
        1993               0.65           0.34        6.81        0.73        0.51
        1994               0.66           0.36        6.88        0.71        0.47
        1995               0.64           0.36        6.93        0.72        0.57
        1996               0.71           0.35        6.98        0.68        0.50
        1997               0.69           0.36        7.08        0.72        0.54
        1998               0.72           0.33        6.82        0.69        0.54
        1999               0.74           0.33        6.86        0.70        0.57
                                         Table 4: Reduced form regressions
 Effect of the program on wages, residual wages, and formal employment among individuals born before 1962.
               Coefficients of interactions of the intensity of the program and survey year dummies

                       Sample: Urban and rural areas                  Sample: Rural areas only
                      20-60 years old, born before 1962          20-60 years old, born before 1962
                      Wages       Residual       Formal          Wages       Residual       Formal
                                    wage      employment                       wage       employment
                       (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)
            1986     omitted       omitted      omitted         omitted       omitted      omitted
            1987         0.0025      -0.0064       -0.0087          0.0209       0.0094       -0.0059
                        (.0187)        (.014)      (.0056)           (.018)     (.0139)       (.0056)
            1988        -0.0041      -0.0051       -0.0040          0.0108       0.0103       -0.0047
                        (.0152)      (.0141)         (.004)        (.0139)      (.0136)       (.0042)
            1989         0.0022      -0.0011       -0.0074          0.0155       0.0095       -0.0081
                        (.0161)      (.0139)       (.0047)         (.0159)      (.0141)       (.0044)
            1990        -0.0140      -0.0111       -0.0027          0.0047       0.0056       -0.0030
                        (.0155)      (.0133)       (.0054)         (.0165)      (.0143)       (.0054)
            1991        -0.0061      -0.0079        0.0035          0.0082       0.0047        0.0039
                        (.0187)      (.0146)       (.0051)         (.0185)      (.0149)       (.0049)
            1992        -0.0173      -0.0116        0.0019         -0.0055       0.0021       -0.0002
                        (.0163)      (.0141)       (.0055)         (.0186)      (.0145)       (.0055)
            1993        -0.0166      -0.0132        0.0069         -0.0097      -0.0038        0.0074
                        (.0156)      (.0137)       (.0055)         (.0203)        (.017)      (.0054)
            1994        -0.0222      -0.0189        0.0103         -0.0149      -0.0170        0.0068
                        (.0165)      (.0136)         (.007)        (.0224)      (.0175)       (.0069)
            1995         0.0031      -0.0010        0.0071          0.0044       0.0079        0.0058
                        (.0145)      (.0134)       (.0056)         (.0188)        (.015)      (.0051)
            1996        -0.0190      -0.0173       -0.0035         -0.0158      -0.0116       -0.0051
                        (.0176)      (.0143)       (.0071)         (.0251)      (.0178)       (.0062)
            1997        -0.0192      -0.0155        0.0061         -0.0119      -0.0166        0.0042
                        (.0174)      (.0169)       (.0068)         (.0232)      (.0183)       (.0066)
            1998        -0.0079      -0.0141        0.0083         -0.0190      -0.0072        0.0105
                        (.0189)      (.0157)       (.0074)         (.0219)      (.0164)       (.0072)
            1999         0.0034      -0.0104        0.0078         -0.0188      -0.0189        0.0074
                          (.019)     (.0159)       (.0071)         (.0238)      (.0185)       (.0076)
Number of
cells                     3804          3804         3804            3119          3119         3119

Notes:
1. The program intensity is the number of INPRES schools built between 1974 and 1978, divided by the
number of children in 1971.
2. Survey year dummies, region dummies, interactions between survey year dummies and the enrollment
rate in 1971, and interactions between suvey year dummies and the number of children are included
in the regressions.
3. Regression run using kabupaten-year averages, weighted by the number of observations in each
kabupaten-year cell.
4. The standard errors are corrected for auto-correlation within kabupaten.
                       Table 5: OLS estimates of the impact of average education on individual wages.
                                          Men aged 20-60 and born before 1962.


                                                           Independent variable: % of primary          Independent variable: % of primary
                                                          school graduates in the 20-40 sample        school graduates in the 20-60 sample
                                                          Sample: Rural        Sample: Rural          Sample: Rural        Sample: Rural
                                                          and urban areas        areas only           and urban areas        areas only
                                                                (1)                  (2)                    (3)                  (4)
PANEL A: OLS, without region fixed effects (1986-1999)
Log(wage)                                                            0.852                   0.754               0.881               0.875
                                                                   (0.035)                 (0.041)             (0.030)             (0.037)
Log(wage) residual                                                   0.195                   0.226               0.228               0.312
                                                                   (0.024)                 (0.028)             (0.021)             (0.027)
Skill premium                                                       -0.458                  -0.531              -0.423              -0.533
                                                                   (0.041)                 (0.047)             (0.038)             (0.045)
Formal employment                                                    0.431                   0.162               0.459               0.170
                                                                   (0.016)                 (0.015)             (0.015)             (0.015)
Formal employment among educated workers                             0.095                  -0.036               0.108              -0.035
                                                                   (0.015)                 (0.015)             (0.013)             (0.015)
Formal employment among uneducated workers                           0.035                 0.0046                0.045             0.0088
                                                                   (0.011)                 (0.011)             (0.011)             (0.011)

PANEL B: OLS, with region fixed effects (1986-1999)
Log(wage)                                                            0.409                   0.436               0.537               0.594
                                                                   (0.041)                 (0.046)             (0.041)             (0.047)
Log(wage) residual                                                   0.040                   0.060               0.086               0.121
                                                                   (0.032)                 (0.035)             (0.032)             (0.037)
Skill premium                                                       -0.082                  -0.092              -0.094              -0.106
                                                                   (0.073)                 (0.080)             (0.077)             (0.085)

Formal employment                                                    0.160                   0.134               0.228               0.201
                                                                   (0.016)                 (0.017)             (0.016)             (0.018)
Formal employment among educated workers                           -0.0019                 0.0079                0.017               0.031
                                                                   (0.020)                 (0.022)             (0.021)             (0.022)
Formal employment among uneducated workers                           0.012                   0.015               0.031               0.033
                                                                   (0.016)                 (0.017)             (0.018)             (0.018)

Notes:
1. Survey year dummies, region dummies, interactions between survey year dummies and the enrollment rate in 1971,
 and interactions between suvey year dummies and the number of children are included in the regressions.
2. Regression run using kabupaten-year averages, weighted by the number of observations in each kabupaten-year cell.
                     Table 6: 2SLS estimates of the impact of average education on individual wages.
                                        Men aged 20-60 and born before 1962.

                                                         Independent variable: % of primary         Independent variable: % of primary
                                                         school graduates in the 20-40 sample       school graduates in the 20-60 sample
                                                          Sample: Rural        Sample: Rural         Sample: Rural        Sample: Rural
                                                          and urban areas        areas only         and urban areas         areas only
                                                                (1)                 (2)                   (3)                   (4)
PANEL A: YEARS 1986-1999

Log(wage)                                                           -0.204                -0.834                -0.208            -0.871
                                                                    (.443)                (.701)                (.615)            (.837)
Log(wage) residual                                                  -0.292                -0.633                -0.379            -0.994
                                                                    (.355)                (.431)                (.512)            (.556)
Skill premium                                                       -0.434                -0.982                -0.596            -0.636
                                                                    (.916)               (1.408)               (1.197)           (1.645)
Formal employment                                                    0.441                 0.454                 0.661             0.745
                                                                    (.159)                (.203)                (.238)            (.352)
Formal employment among educated workers                             0.432                 0.501                 0.543             0.713
                                                                    (.197)                (.259)                (.264)            (.406)
Formal employment among uneducated workers                           0.379                 0.409                 0.510             0.318
                                                                    (.203)                (.232)                (.354)            (.318)


PANEL B: YEARS 1986-1997

Log(wage)                                                           -0.358                -0.710                -0.451            -0.480
                                                                    (.493)                (.821)                (.716)            (.801)
Log(wage) residual                                                  -0.330                -0.588                -0.437            -0.902
                                                                    (.412)                (.529)                (.618)            (.602)
Skill premium                                                       -0.225                -0.635                -0.291             0.536
                                                                   (1.033)               (1.461)               (1.488)           (1.576)
Formal employment                                                    0.463                 0.442                 0.716             0.694
                                                                    (.183)                (.233)                (.282)            (.379)
Formal employment among educated workers                             0.428                 0.473                 0.530             0.622
                                                                    (.229)                (.301)                (.317)            (.479)
Formal employment among uneducated workers                           0.478                 0.449                 0.624             0.263
                                                                    (.249)                (.277)                (.415)            (.319)


Notes:
1. Survey year dummies, region dummies, interactions between survey year dummies and the enrollment rate in 1971,
 and interactions between suvey year dummies and the number of children are included in the regressions.
2. Regression run using kabupaten-year averages, weighted by the number of observations in each kabupaten-year cell.
3. The instruments are interactions between survey year dummies and the program intensity
4. The standard errors are corrected for auto-correlation within kabupaten.
                                           Table 7: Additional evidence on sample selection



                                  Log(wage migrant in) Log(wage migrant out)                  Formal sector premium 1993
                                  -log(wage stayer)    -log(wage stayer)                      -Formal sector premium 1987
                                           (1)                   (2)                                       (3)

Program intensity                                    0.0229                           0.011                      -0.00207
                                                   (0.0159)                        (0.0164)                      (0.0160)
Number of cells                                         285                             288                           272
Note:

1. The program intensity is the number of INPRES schools built between 1974 and 1978, divided by the
number of children in 1971.
2. The formal sector premium is defined as : log(income of wage earner/income of non wage earners)
3. The enrollment rate and the number of children in 1971 are introduced as controls in the regressions
4. The data for columns (1) and (2) is the SUPAS 1995
5. The data for column (3) is the SAKERNAS, 1987 and 1993.
                     Table 8: 2SLS estimates of the impact of human capital on wages.
                        log(Ef) and log(1+S(h-1)-T) as measures of human capital


                                   Dependent variable: Log(wage) for men 20- 60, born before 1962
                                     Independent variable: log(EF)      Independent variable: log(1+s(h-1)-T)
                                       among sample aged 20-60                among sample aged 20-60
                                   Sample: Rural    Sample: Rural      Sample: Rural           Sample: Rural
                                   and urban areas    areas only      and urban areas           areas only
                                         (1)              (2)                (3)                    (4)
PANEL A: YEARS 1986-1999
                                             -0.073             -0.219                  -0.365                    -0.341
                                             (.164)             (.205)                  (.217)                      (.22)

PANEL B: YEARS 1986-1997
                                             -0.092             -0.165                  -0.396                    -0.360
                                             (.165)             (.208)                  (.213)                    (.275)

Notes:
1. Survey year dummies, region dummies, interactions between survey year dummies and the enrollment rate in 1971,
 and interactions between suvey year dummies and the number of children are included in the regressions.
2. Regression run using kabupaten-year averages, weighted by the number of observations in each kabupaten-year cell.
3. The instruments are interactions between survey year dummies and program intensity
4. The standard errors are corrected for auto-correlation within kabupaten.
           Figure 1 -- COEFFICIENTS OF THE INTERACTIONS OF AGE IN 1974*
          PROGRAM INTENSITY IN THE REGION OF BIRTH IN THE EDUCATION
                                     EQUATION
                                                                                                      0.3



                                                                                                      0.2



                                                                                                      0.1



                                                                                                      0
23   22   21   20   19   18   17   16   15   14   13   12   11   10   9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2


                                                                                                      -0.1



                                                                                                      -0.2


                                             Age in 1974
                        Figure 2: Coefficients of the interactions of program intensity and survey year dummies.
                                          Dependent variable: % of primary school graduates.



0.05



0.04



0.03



0.02



0.01



   0
   1986   1987   1988    1989     1990      1991     1992     1993     1994      1995     1996     1997     1998   1999


-0.01



-0.02



-0.03
                                                 20-40
                                                 Born before 1962, aged less than 60
             Figure 3: Actual and predicted coefficients of the interactions of program intensity and survey year dummies.
                                         Dependent variable: % of primary school graduates.


 0.04



0.035



 0.03



0.025



 0.02



0.015



 0.01



0.005



   0
   1986   1987     1988      1989       1990       1991       1992      1993       1994       1995          1996   1997      1998   1999

                                          20-40, actual coefficients        20-40, predicted coefficients
                       Figure 4A: Coefficients of the interactions of program intensity and survey year dummies.
           Dependent variables: log(wage) and formal sector employment (individuals born before 1962 and aged less than 60)
                                                    Sample: urban and rural regions.

0.015




 0.01




0.005




    0
    1986   1987    1988      1989      1990      1991     1992      1993      1994      1995      1996     1997      1998     1999


-0.005




 -0.01




-0.015




 -0.02




-0.025


                                                  Log(wages)
                                                  formal employment
                            Figure 4B: Coefficients of the interactions of program intensity and survey year dummies.
    Dependent variables: average log(wage) and average formal sector employment among individuals born before 1962 and aged less than 60.

                                                             Sample: rural regions.
0.025



 0.02



0.015



 0.01



0.005



    0
    1986      1987     1988      1989     1990      1991       1992      1993         1994   1995   1996      1997     1998      1999

-0.005



 -0.01



-0.015



 -0.02



-0.025

                                                           Log(wages)
                                                           Formal employment
                                   Figure 5
            Effect of an Increase in the Share of Educated Workers on
                          Wages and Formal Employment



 WUF                                                                         WUI
                    labor demand in the informal sector



              labor demand in the formal sector




WUF1
WUF2
       --                                                               --   WUI1
                                                                             WUI2




                                              UF2 = 1 - UI2
                              UF1 = 1 - UI1
                               Figure 6: Coefficient of the interaction between program
                                         intensity and survey year dummies.
                                   Dependent variable: log(Ef) and log(1+s(h-1)-T)
 0.1




0.08




0.06




0.04




0.02




   0
   1986   1987   1988   1989   1990       1991      1992     1993      1994      1995     1996   1997   1998   1999


-0.02




-0.04




-0.06

                                      log(1+s(h-1)-T)            log(Ef)
               Table A1: Alternative first stage: Effect of the program on log(Ef) and log(1+s(h-1)-T).
                                               Sample: Men aged 20-60


                      Independent variable: log(Ef)         Independent variable: log(1+s(h-1)-T)
                    Sample: Urban      Sample: Rural         Sample: Urban        Sample: Rural
                    and rural areas      areas only          and rural areas        areas only
                          (1)                (2)                   (1)                  (2)
       1986            omitted             omitted              omitted             omitted
       1987                 -0.0242            -0.0344               -0.0244              -0.0320
                            (.0429)            (.0521)               (.0546)              (.0663)
       1988                 -0.0279            -0.0502               -0.0131              -0.0248
                              (.022)           (.0259)               (.0304)              (.0361)
       1989                 -0.0109            -0.0331               -0.0409              -0.0697
                            (.0285)            (.0349)               (.0319)              (.0373)
       1990                  0.0185             0.0033               -0.0057              -0.0135
                            (.0313)            (.0345)               (.0324)              (.0387)
       1991                  0.0540             0.0436                0.0153               0.0058
                            (.0292)            (.0313)                  (.03)             (.0321)
       1992                  0.0320             0.0109                0.0102              -0.0176
                            (.0307)            (.0325)               (.0306)              (.0338)
       1993                  0.0518             0.0339                0.0250               0.0008
                            (.0308)            (.0332)               (.0335)              (.0373)
       1994                  0.0534             0.0238                0.0548               0.0220
                            (.0345)            (.0392)               (.0354)              (.0404)
       1995                  0.0681             0.0515                0.0266               0.0198
                            (.0307)            (.0328)               (.0352)              (.0363)
       1996                  0.0459             0.0231                0.0313               0.0060
                            (.0344)            (.0343)               (.0363)              (.0401)
       1997                  0.0703             0.0510                0.0522               0.0327
                            (.0375)            (.0414)               (.0404)              (.0477)
       1998                  0.0807             0.0708                0.0417               0.0137
                            (.0351)            (.0371)               (.0517)              (.0615)
       1999                  0.0691             0.0598                0.0918               0.1131
                            (.0357)            (.0383)               (.0476)                (.063)
Number of
cells                            3808                3122                 3336                2762

F. statistic                     3.28                2.49                 1.69                1.30

Notes:
1. The program intensity is the number of INPRES schools built between 1974 and 1978, divided by the
number of children in 1971.
2. Survey year dummies, region dummies, interactions between survey year dummies and the enrollment
rate in 1971, and interactions between suvey year dummies and the number of children are included
in the regressions.
3. Regression run using kabupaten-year averages, weighted by the number of observations in each
kabupaten-year cell.
4. The F statistic is for the hypothesis that the set of interactions is jointly insignificant.
5. See text for variables definition
6. The standard errors are corrected for auto-correlation within kabupaten.
