                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         CRISES NOW AND THEN:
       WHAT LESSONS FROM THE LAST ERA OF FINANCIAL GLOBALIZATION?


                                         Barry Eichengreen
                                         Michael D. Bordo


                                        Working Paper 8716
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w8716


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2002




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.


© 2002 by Barry Eichengreen and Michael D. Bordo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Crises Now and Then: What Lessons from the Last Era of Financial Globalization?
Barry Eichengreen and Michael D. Bordo
NBER Working Paper No. 8716
January 2002
JEL No. F33, N20



                                             ABSTRACT


        We consider the operation of international capital markets in two periods of globalization, before
1914 and after 1971, with a focus on the crisis problem. We explore the idea that the incidence of crises
in these two periods reflects how capital flows were embedded in the larger economic system. Other
authors have made similar connections, suggesting that the international monetary framework was
responsible for the relatively short-lived and mild nature of pre-World War I financial crises. However,
we show that currency crises in fact were of longer duration before 1914. Only for banking and twin
crises is there evidence that recovery was faster then than now. This leads us to a somewhat different
view of the role of the monetary regime in the propagation of financial crises. A key difference between
then and now, we suggest, is that prior to 1914 banking crises were less prone to undermine confidence
in the currency, and to thereby compound financial problems, in the countries that were at the core of the
international monetary system.




Barry Eichengreen                                                Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics                                          Department of Economics
University of California                                         Rutgers University
549 Evans Hall 3880                                              New Jersey Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                                          New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER                                                         and NBER
eichengr@econ.berkeley.edu                                       bordo@econ.rutgers.edu
                                  Crises Now and Then:
                 What Lessons from the Last Era of Financial Globalization?1

                             Barry Eichengreen and Michael Bordo
                                       November 2001


1. Introduction

       For more than a third of a century, Charles Goodhart has sought to employ financial

history to shed light on current developments in the world economy. The New York Money

Market and the Finance of Trade (1969) was an effort to link the development of financial

markets to the growth of trade, a topic of clear relevance to those contemplating the connections

between the euro and the Single Market. The Business of Banking (1972) sketched the links

between banking and economic performance, a subject that is again timely as banking worldwide

experiences a wave of consolidation. The Evolution of Central Banks (1988) developed an

interpretation of the emergence of the lender of last resort that is directly relevant to the

controversy over the role of the International Monetary Fund in a world of globalized finance.

       If a single paper can be said to epitomize this approach, it is, for us, Goodhart’s 1999

comparison of the Asian financial crisis with late-19th and early-20th century banking and

currency crises.2 The Asian crisis, he argues, was not the singular event portrayed in recent

accounts. Rather, it bore a striking resemblance to financial crises a century before because it

erupted in circumstances that, in important respects, recreated the economic and financial


       1
       Prepared for the conference in honor of Charles Goodhart, held at the Bank of England,
15-16 November. We thank Forrest Capie for helpful comments and the National Science
Foundation for financial support.
       2
        See Goodhart and Delargy (1998). We also draw on the longer version of this paper
(Delargy and Goodhart 1999) for documentation and citations below.

                                                   1
environment of that earlier era. The capital flows of the 1990s, like those of the 1890s, were

directed toward the private sector, Goodhart argues, in contrast to the period centered on the

1970s, when the public sector was on the borrowing end. Hence, late-19th century crises, like

their late-20th century counterparts, were not typically preceded by chronic government budget

deficits. Rather, problems originated in the private sector, generally in poorly-managed, poorly-

regulated banking systems and in the boom- and bust-prone real estate and property markets.

Fuel was poured on the fire by foreign lending encouraged by open capital markets and buoyant

export growth. When something — typically a shock to capital markets or a shock to exports —

disrupted these processes, the entire financial house of cards could come tumbling down. The

subsequent crises were strikingly similar in the overseas regions of recent European settlement at

the end of the 19th century and in East Asia at the end of the 20th.

       Progress in the study of history occurs by quibbling over details. In this paper we quibble

over aspects of Goodhart’s characterization of late-19th century financial crises.3 In a sense we

attempt to do both more and less than our predecessor. We present a quantitative analysis for a

larger number of pre-1914 banking and currency crises, 32 in all, and some comparisons with the

interwar and post-World War II periods.4 At the same time, we limit our qualitative discussion

to one crisis: the Argentina-Baring crisis of 1890-1, an episode that has some particularly




       3
         This paper draws heavily on our previous work on this subject, some of which was done
in collaboration with Douglas Irwin, Daniela Klingebiel and Soledad Maria Martinez-Peria.
       4
         In contrast, Delargy and Goodhart analyze nine pre-1914 crises: Austria and the United
States in 1873, Argentina and the U.S. in 1890-1, Australia, Italy and the U.S. in 1893, and Italy
and the U.S. in 1907.

                                                  2
revealing parallels with the 1990s.5



2. The Earlier Period of Globalization

       Goodhart dates the first age of globalization to the laying of the transatlantic telegraph

cable, which by providing a real-time communications link between England and North America

transformed the information environment. Financial markets are markets in information; by

speeding transatlantic communication, the advent of the cable in the 1860s thus transformed their

operation.6 While there was a lag before the consequences were felt owing to the U.S. Civil War,

which disrupted the country’s export trade and access to foreign finance, by the late 1860s the

process of large-scale capital transfer had resumed, reaching levels never seen before. The first

age of globalization spanned the next 40 years until World War I brought it to a close.

       This, however, is only part of the story. However appealing to modern readers may be

the notion that changes in information and communications technologies drove the expansion of

global financial markets, there were other, perhaps equally important, factors at work. One was

the growth of trade, stimulated by the Cobden-Chevalier Treaty of 1860 which was generalized



       5
         In particular, there are parallels with the Mexican crisis of 1994-5 as well as with the
Asian crisis of 1997-8, as one of us has emphasized previously (Eichengreen 1999). In contrast,
Delargy and Goodhart provide qualitative accounts (in the appendix to their paper) of each of
their nine crisis cases.
       6
         Garbade and Silber (1978) report that the time required to transmit information between
London and New York, which had previously been as long as three weeks, dropped to one day
with the inauguration of the cable; by 1914 the time required for cable transmission had fallen to
less than a minute. Comparing data on the prices of U.S. bonds in New York and London four
months before and after the cable, the authors find a significant decline in the mean absolute
difference. There is good reason to think that there were comparable changes when the cable
reached Buenos Aires in 1878 and Tokyo in 1900.

                                                 3
to other countries through the operation of most-favored-nation clauses. In the four decades

leading up to World War I, as transport costs fell and governments adopted trade-friendlier

commercial policies, there was nearly a doubling of the share of exports in GDP in Angus

Maddison’s sample of countries.7 Certainly the enthusiasm of British investors for Argentine

railway bonds would have been less in the absence not just of cable traffic and refrigerated

steamships but also of an open British market for chilled beef. Without access to foreign goods

markets, debtors could not have earned the foreign exchange needed to service and repay their

loans, and in the absence of expanding export markets their incentive to stay on good terms with

their creditors, who were also their customers, would have been less. For all these reasons, the

connections between trade liberalization and the expansion of lending were prominent prior to

World War I, just as in the 1990s.8

       The monetary regime was another important factor in the expansion of global capital

markets in the late 19th century. The international gold standard was a post-1870 affair.

Adherence to the gold standard signaled a government’s commitment to sound and stable

policies. Credibly subordinating other goals of policy to the maintenance of a fixed domestic

gold price and limiting exchange-rate movements against the currencies of the creditor countries

(which meant, above all, against Britain and the pound sterling) made it easier to accumulate and

service foreign-currency-denominated debts. For countries borrowing in foreign exchange



       7
           Maddison (1995), Table 2-4.
       8
         While this is not a paper on the 1920s and 1930s, this is the obvious period to point to in
order to highlight the difficulties that arise for cultivating and sustaining a high level of
international financial transactions when trade is depressed by tariffs, quantitative restrictions,
and macroeconomic problems. A recent treatment of these themes is James (2001).

                                                 4
(which meant most countries, in practice), this limited balance-sheet problems caused by sharp

exchange-rate changes. Limiting balance-sheet risk ex post in turn enhanced the ability of

overseas regions to borrow in foreign exchange ex ante.9

         The destinations of British capital tended to be abundant in natural and human resources.

This is clear from the fact that more than ten per cent of British overseas lending in the first age

of globalization was for enterprises engaged in natural-resource extraction, while much of the

rest was for resource-based or resource-intensive industries, as in the case of the railways

providing transport services to the wheat farmers of Canada, Argentina and the United States.10

(See Table 1.) Harnessing this resource base in an export-relevant way entailed the immigration

of European workers who brought with them knowledge of the industrial and agricultural

techniques of the “first industrial revolution,” not to mention labor power.11 Like high levels of

trade, these high levels of immigration would not have been possible in the absence of

technological advances in ocean- and land-going transportation (O’Rourke and Williamson

1999).



         9
         This is the argument for dollarization made today by, inter alia, Hausmann et al. (1999),
namely, that only by adopting the currency of a creditor country can emerging markets eliminate
the currency mismatches that allow exchange-rate changes to become a transmission belt for
financial fragility and thus limit access to international capital markets. Evidence that adherence
to the gold standard enhanced terms of financial market access can be found in Bordo and
Rockoff (1996).
         10
        See Stone (1999). The role of natural resources as a magnet for British investment is a
theme of Clemens and Williamson (2000).
         11
         Which was equally essential given the decimation of native populations by the
immigrants’ guns and germs. European immigration was importantly supplemented, of course,
by involuntary immigration from Africa, especially to tropical areas where climate was
inhospitable and work in plantation agriculture was unattractive to European labor.

                                                  5
       The point is that the first age of financial globalization resulted from technological,

institutional and policy changes extending well beyond the realm of information and

communication. It presupposed a technological revolution that vastly increased the productivity

of resource-based traded-goods industries.12 It depended on tariff reductions and a transport

revolution to facilitate the growth of trade. And it would not have thrived without a

technological and political environment that encouraged cross-border labor flows.



3. Information, Institutions and Markets

       The bulk of the overseas finance in question went to economies whose financial markets

and institutions were well developed by the standards of the time.13 (See Table 2.) It went to

countries with bank branch networks capable of gathering information on local market conditions

and with well-developed interbank and commercial paper markets capable of redeploying

liquidity. It went to countries that welcomed the independent subsidiaries of European

investment banks.14 It went to countries where the issuers of listed securities disclosed


       12
         Industry, in this context, should be understood to include late-19th century agriculture,
which was increasingly mechanized and utilized the hybrid seeds churned out by manufacturing
concerns and government agencies. On the natural-resource basis of American industry in this
period, see Wright (1990) and Irwin (2000).
       13
          Clemens and Williamson (2000) refer to this tendency for capital to flow to relatively
advanced high-income countries as “the Lucas Paradox.” Twomby (1998) similarly shows that,
after controlling for other determinants of its volume and direction, per capita income in 1913
has a positive, large and statistically-significant effect on the level of capital inflows. This is a
different pattern than today, when large amounts of foreign investment go to relatively low-
income countries.
       14
         Each of the seven leading London merchant banking houses established a North
American counterpart -- Davis and Gallman (2000) refer to them as “junior partners” -- to gather
market intelligence and arrange local transactions. The senior partners provided short-term credit

                                                  6
information on their financial affairs. It went to countries where contracts were enforced and

insolvency procedures operated reliably.

       In our enthusiasm for the sophistication of late-19th century international capital markets,

we should not lose sight of the other side of this coin, namely, the persistence of information

problems rooted in the still-early development of financial institutions and markets. Foreign

capital flowed into U.S. securities despite the chronic failure of the New York Stock Exchange to

require the disclosure of financial information by companies listing shares.15 It flowed to the

U.S. despite the absence of uniform auditing and accounting standards prior to the establishment

of the Interstate Commerce Commission in 1887 and its imposition in the 1890s of a uniform

accounting standard on the railways for which it set rates. Foreign capital financed Argentina’s

provincial banks despite their well-known tendency to issue false balance sheets and report

nonexistent dividends.16

       These examples remind us that, the advent of the transoceanic cable and radio-telephone

notwithstanding, the information environment was highly imperfect by today’s standards. There

was no Worldwide Web on which to gather information on stocks, bonds and debentures; The

Investor’s Monthly Manual, Burdett’s Stock Exchange Official Intelligence, Poor’s Manual of

Railroads, and Herapath’s Railway Journal, while serviceable, were imperfect substitutes.

There was no IMF Data Dissemination System to provide information on public finances,

although the annual reports of the Corporation of Foreign Bondholders aspired to some of the


to the underwriters and marketed the securities to British investors.
       15
            See Sylla and Smith (1995).
       16
            Williams (1920), p.58.

                                                 7
same functions. There were no sovereign rating agencies or credit departments prior to the

establishment of such functions within the Credit Lyonnais at the end of the 19th century.17 Even

the geographical correlation of capital and labor flows reminds us of the limits of the information

environment: many investors relied on the information about foreign market conditions sent back

to their native country by recent immigrants.18

       From the imperfect nature of the information environment flow the distinctive aspects of

late-19th century lending that differentiate it from international lending today. First, the vast

majority of overseas and foreign investment in the half century before 1914 was in debt securities

and interbank deposits; only a small fraction took the form of equity. Debt has priority; those

who hold it sacrifice a share of extraordinary profits in return for the security that seniority

provides. There is an incentive to do so when the information environment is impacted and

serious principal-agent problems result from the separation of ownership from control. Thus, we

regularly see firms graduate from bank finance to equity finance as information about their

economic and financial prospects becomes standardized and assimilated.19 We similarly observe

economies graduating from debt to equity finance as the information environment improves.20 In



       17
            See Flandreau (1998).
       18
          Clemens and Williamson (2000) refer to this as the “venerable capital-chased-after-
labor explanation.” The extent to which it reflected the derived demand for population-sensitive
investment or the reverse flow of information, both of which could have attracted foreign capital,
is a topic for future research.
       19
        This is the so-called “pecking order” theory of finance, as applied to history by Baskin
and Miranti (1997).
       20
        Rajan and Zingales (1999) describe the pattern but also a number of instances where it
was overridden by government intervention.

                                                   8
the late 19th century, however, this graduation ceremony for the most part remained a distant

prospect, and debt securities dominated international financial flows.

       Second, the operation of decentralized financial markets was importantly supplemented

by the operation of financial institutions. Financial intermediaries — banks in particular — are

in the business of information. They develop monitoring technologies in order to assemble and

process information at lower cost than is possible for individuals. That overseas investors

appreciated the efficiency of these monitoring technologies is evident in the willingness of

Scottish savers to make deposits with British branches of Australian banks, and in the

willingness of British investors, institutional and individual, to place deposits with Argentine

banks. It is evident in the underwriting role of the great investment banks, which staked their

reputations on the success of overseas bond flotations.21 Unfortunately, we know little about the

volume of foreign lending directly carried out by banks; quantitative analysis has focused on

bond flotations since this segment of the international capital market is amply documented.22

       A third reflection of the prevalence of information asymmetries is the sectors into which

foreign finance flowed. The data on bond flotations suggest (subject to the preceding caveats)

that some 40 per cent of British overseas investments in quoted securities was in railways, while


       21
        It is even evident within countries, as in the case of the U.S. commercial paper market,
which was limited to those parts of the United States where the banking system was sufficiently
developed to provide an adequate supply of reputable one-name paper (Davis 1965).
       22
          Then as now, a substantial fraction of these flows were short term, which compounds
the difficulty of estimating the volume of short-term capital flows and comparing it with today.
Bloomfield’s (1968) discussion suggests that short-term flows were significantly smaller than
long-term flows, in contrast to today: Bank for International Settlements data on turnover in
foreign exchange markets suggest that gross flows are in the range of $1.25 trillion a day, or
more than $250 trillion a year, much larger than corresponding figures for long-term capital
flows.

                                                 9
30 per cent was in the issues of national, state and municipal governments, 10 per cent was in

resource-extracting industries (mainly mining), and 5 per cent was in public utilities.

Commercial, industrial and financial activities that are so prominent today are notably absent

from this list. That the Feldstein-Horioka puzzle (the high correlation of national savings and

investment rates) was less evident before 1913 has been widely touted as proof of the exceptional

integration of late-19th century capital markets.23 But while 19th century current account deficits

reached high levels and the emerging markets of the day financed substantial shares of their

investment from foreign sources, what is striking is that wide swathes of their economies

remained virtually untouched by foreign finance.

       Asymmetric information can explain this sectoral composition of investment portfolios.24

Consider the dominance of railway bonds. Investors could verify how much track had been laid,

where it had been laid, and how much traffic it carried more easily than they could evaluate the

investment decisions of the managers of manufacturing, financial and service-sector concerns,

many of whose assets were intangible. These considerations explain the preference of British

investors for “coal roads,” that is, railways whose traffic was disproportionately comprised of

coal haulage, for which it was relatively straightforward to forecast operating revenues. The

information environment similarly helps to explain the disproportionate importance of


       23
            Including by Delargy and Goodhart themselves.
       24
         So too can other factors, although this takes us away from our story. America’s
transcontinental railways were built only once, in this period. Private as well as social returns on
railway investment were attractive. The dominance of infrastructure investment and railway
investment in particular in the capital flows of this period cannot be overstated. Twomby (1998)
finds that “railroadization” (kilometers of railroads in operation divided by GDP) was a
significant determinant of both total and portfolio capital inflows in this period and even
stimulated complementary FDI.

                                                 10
investment in resource extraction and public utilities. Mining companies had tangible assets; it

was relatively straightforward to monitor the number of mines dug or tons of coal raised to the

surface. Utility companies laid gas lines, strung electrical cables, and built power plants.

Notwithstanding scandals like the Buenos Aires Water Supply and Drainage Loan of 1888, such

investments were relatively straightforward to monitor. A similar argument can be made about

governments and their ability to tax. It is thus not surprising that six out of every seven pounds

sterling of portfolio investment were in securities of debtors with tangible, transparent assets (the

ability to tax in the case of governments, track and rolling stock with a well-defined revenue-

raising capacity in the case of railways, mineral reserves in the case of mining companies).25

       Information asymmetries can also explain the limited role of foreign direct investment in

this earlier age of financial globalization. A considerable majority of foreign investment prior to

1914 was portfolio investment, whereas today direct investment is the more important

component. Direct investment was discouraged by the difficulty of controlling branch plants and

foreign subsidiaries and of preventing management from pursuing private agendas in an age

when information and communications technologies were more rudimentary. When European

producers established operations in the New World, they created them as free standing

companies. Free standing companies were those incorporated in Britain, France, Belgium and


       25
           Davis and Gallman (2000), focusing on the “19th century emerging markets”
(Argentina, Australia, Canada and U.S.), find that nine of every ten pounds of British investment
in between 1865 and 1890 went into railroads and government bonds. According to their
estimates, the fraction ranges from 86 per cent in Australia to 92 per cent in Canada. Davis and
Huttenback (1986) provide comparisons with domestic investment in quoted securities. Their
Chart 2.8 confirms the picture of a pattern of overseas portfolio investment concentrated in
agricultural and extractive activities (especially in the Empire), in transportation, and in public
utilities. Domestic portfolio investment, in contrast, was disproportionately concentrated in
manufacturing and in the commercial and financial sectors.

                                                 11
other European countries for the sole purpose of investing and doing business in an overseas

market. Their partners made special investments in information about foreign markets, and by

bundling management and control they limited agency problems.26

       The dominance of infrastructure investment, which flowed in part from the nature of the

information environment, had implications for the transfer problem. It meant that much of the

relevant infrastructure network had to be put in place before the returns began to accrue; this

created an incentive to invest when other investment was taking place so that returns were not

unduly delayed.27 Foreign investment tended to cluster in time, in other words. But the nature of

this investment made debt service difficult because of the long gestation period. In the case of a

railroad, the funds had to be raised, the track had to be laid, and only then might settlement,

cultivation and finally traffic respond to the availability of transportation services. Receipts to

service the loan could be few initially, making it hard to keep current in the absence of additional

debt finance.

       This brings us finally to the crisis problem. It can be argued incomplete information

created an environment conducive to herding and volatility (Kindleberger 1978). Investors had


       26
          Free standing companies, in the words of Wilkins (1998, p.13), “were structured to
solve the problem posed earlier; business abroad was risky; it was hard to obtain adequate and
reliable information about firms in distant lands; returns were unpredictable; but there were
clearly opportunities abroad; a company organized within the source-of-capital country, with a
responsible board of directors, under source-of-capital country law, to mobilize capital(and other
assets) and to conduct the business in foreign countries could take advantage of the opportunities,
while reducing the transaction costs by providing a familiar conduit.”
       27
          While there were incentives not to build ahead of demand, it was also important not to
allow potential competitors to preempt the market. Thus, railroads attempted to collude, holding
off from building in advance of settlement and cultivation, but to jump in and preempt the most
attractive markets as soon as there were signs of the collusive agreement breaking down. Hence,
railroad construction tended to cluster in time, as did the external finance needed to underwrite it.

                                                 12
an incentive to mimic other investors on the chance that the latter were better informed.

Working in the other direction was the fact that foreign investment was more geographically

concentrated in the late 19th century than today. It was heavily directed toward the United States

in the 1870s, Australia and Argentina in the 1880s, and Canada and Brazil in the first decade of

the 20th century.28 (See Table 3.) By implication, the phenomenon pointed to by Calvo and

Mendoza (2000) -- that the more diversified are portfolios, the less is the incentive for investors

to engage in the costly acquisition and processing of information about each market in which

they invest, and hence the greater is the tendency toward herding -- may have been less prevalent

a century ago.29

       Delargy and Goodhart suggest that pre-1914 crises resembled the Asian crisis in that they

originated in the private sector. Nineteenth century capital transfer, they argue, was private-to-

private lending: funds flowed from private investors to private-sector recipients. It follows that

the typical 19th century crisis was not preceded by ballooning public-sector deficits leading to

unsustainable current account balances. Rather, it occurred when private investment went awry -


       28
         Argentina again become important in the period 1901-1913, investment there having
been forestalled by the financial crisis that set in after 1889.
       29
          This suggests that contagion due to herding may have been less of a problem a century
ago. Historical evidence on this question is scant. The two studies of which we are aware,
Bordo and Murshid (2000) and Mauro, Sussman and Yafeh (2000), reaching opposing
conclusions. Bordo and Murshid observe that the correlation of asset returns across markets
(both advanced and emerging) rises in turbulent periods and ask whether this tendency has been
growing stronger in recent years (compared to the earlier period 1880-1914). They find scant
evidence of this; to the contrary, their findings point in the other direction, to a declining
tendency for cross-market correlations to rise in turbulent periods. Mauro, Sussman and Yafeh
study the co-movement of emerging market spreads in the two periods of financial globalization,
1870-1913 and the 1990s. They find that country-specific events played a larger role in the
determination of spreads in the earlier period, while global conditions play a larger role today.
This is suggestive of a growing role for common shocks, common policies, or contagion.

                                                 13
- when, owing to misjudgment, malfeasance or unexpected shocks, a project did not pay.

       This characterization is too simple, in our view. Some 40 per cent of the overseas

investment intermediated by the bond market in the period 1865-1913 went into government and

government-guaranteed loans (Table 4). Authors like Feis (1930) and Fishlow (1985) emphasize

the problematic nature of much of this lending. Governments borrowed for military adventures,

pork-barrel projects, and public consumption.30 These “revenue borrowers” had chronic fiscal

problems, almost by definition. As The Bankers’ Magazine wrote on the eve of the Baring

Crisis, “The Government...has recklessly squandered the public funds. State grants have been

made to every kind of undertaking; and although all the latter cannot be said to be useful, a good

many were not required at present. Concessions have been lavishly given for new railways with

heavy State subsidies, all of which are to be paid in gold, often where lines already exist, or

where there is no demand for them. Grants have been furnished to canals, the utility of which

may be greatly questioned and gold shot into ports which will not be require for a long time to

come.”31

       The problem, in other words, was not limited to the private sector. Debt-servicing

difficulties were prevalent (and default rates were high) where borrowing took the form of

“revenue finance” (to supplement normal sources of public-sector revenue) rather than

“development finance” (to finance economic development and the development of export

capacity, in particular). These observations suggest that focusing on the private-sector sources of



       30
        Fishlow cites Munhall’s reference to the large equalizing sum on the Egyptian public
accounts for “ballet dancers, etc.”
       31
            The Bankers’ Magazine (May 1890), p.776.

                                                 14
crises loses sight of important aspects of the problem.32



4. 19th Century Financial Crises: How Do They Compare to Today’s?

       Pegged exchange rates, high capital mobility, asymmetric information, and weak

institutions clearly comprised a fertile environment for crises. In these respects if not others, the

crises of the pre-1914 era bear no little resemblance to the Asian crisis of 1997-8 and other recent

crises. But how extensive are the parallels? To answer this question, we have attempted to apply

a consistent set of criteria to date and measure crises. We follow 21 countries, classified as

industrial or emerging (although changes in their economic development lead us to reclassify

several emerging markets as industrial economies as we move between periods). Since the

number of candidate countries has increased considerably since the independence movements of

the 1960s, we also conduct the same exercise for a larger sample of 56 countries starting in 1973.



       We distinguish banking crises, currency crises and twin crises. For an episode to qualify

as a currency crisis, we must observe a forced change in parity, abandonment of a pegged

exchange rate, or an international rescue.33 For an episode to qualify as a banking crisis, we must

observe either bank runs, widespread bank failures and the suspension of convertibility of



       32
            Two partial correctives are Flandreau (2000) and Bordo and Flandreau (2001).
       33
          In addition, we construct an index of exchange market pressure, calculated as a
weighted average of the percentage change in the exchange rate, the change in the short-term
interest rate, and the percentage change in reserves, all relative to the same variables in the center
country. A crisis is said to occur when this index exceeds one and a half standard deviations
above its mean. We count an episode as a currency crisis when it shows up according to either or
both of these indicators.

                                                 15
deposits into currency such that the latter circulates at a premium relative to deposits (a banking

panic), or significant banking sector problems (including but not limited to bank failures)

resulting in the erosion of most or all of banking system collateral that are resolved by a fiscally-

underwritten bank restructuring.34 For an episode to classify as a twin crisis, we must observe

both a currency crisis and a banking crisis in the same or immediately adjacent years. In

tabulating the results, we distinguish the pre-1914 period, the interwar years, the Bretton Woods

period (from the close of World War II through 1971), and the post Bretton Wood era (1973-

1998). Here we concentrate on the comparison between the two eras of globalization, 1880-1913

and 1973-1998.35

       The number of crises is shown in Table 5, the corresponding frequencies in Table 6.

Evidently, a randomly-selected country had a five percent probability of experiencing a crisis in a

randomly-selected pre-1914 year. Since 1973, in contrast, the corresponding probability has

been twice as high (10 per cent for the same sample of countries, 12 per cent for the expanded

sample, the latter reflecting the even greater incidence of crises in low-income developing

countries). While the frequency of banking crises was roughly the same before 1914 and after

1972, currency crises were much more frequent in the final quarter of the 20th century (and, as a




       34
          This allows us to distinguish between pre-1914 crises in which lender of last resort
intervention was either absent or unsuccessful, and subsequent crises in which a lender of last
resort or deposit insurance was in place, and the main problem was bank insolvency as opposed
to illiquidity. This generalization is not to deny that a number of banking crises occurring in
Europe in earlier years did not involve panics and in this respect were not dissimilar from
episodes occurring more recently..
       35
        The complete comparison is in our earlier article (Bordo, Eichengreen, Klingebiel and
Martinez-Peria 2001).

                                                 16
result, there was a growing frequency of twin crises).36 Evidently, the credibility of the

commitment to peg the exchange rate under the gold standard was part of the explanation for the

stability of the pre-1914 financial environment.37 Note also that the distinction between gold-

standard core and periphery, which features prominently in the historical literature, is evident in

the disproportionate concentration of prewar currency crises in late-19th century emerging

markets.

       Delargy and Goodhart argue that these 19th century crises were preceded by credit booms

that fueled unsustainable rates of growth.38 Foreign capital flooded into emerging markets via

the banking system and the bond market and was deployed to domestic uses, some productive,

some less so. The construction and real-estate sectors boomed. The current account deficit

widened, reflecting rising spending on imported consumption and investment goods. In

Argentina, a classic instance of a foreign-capital-led consumption boom, the level of domestic

savings fell by some 20 per cent in the decade of the 1880s.39 The problem was poor governance


       36
         While the frequency of banking crises was strikingly similar in 1880-1913 and 1973-
1998, the interwar and Bretton Woods periods are strikingly different, the former for the absence
of banking crises (there was in fact one episode of banking instability in the sample, in Brazil in
1964, which is recorded as a twin crisis), the latter for the exceptional frequency of banking-
sector problems (primarily in the Great Depression of the 1930s).
       37
          Others (e.g. McKinnon 1997) would also point to the absence of large swings in the
bilateral exchange rates of the creditor countries, analogous to today’s dollar-euro and dollar-yen
swings, as an aspect of this international financial system that was conducive to currency stability
in the developing world.
       38
        “Growth in our pre-1914 crisis countries was generally high on average in the five years
preceding the crises, and it fell fairly sharply in the five years following the crises” (Delargy and
Goodhart 1999, p.16).
       39
        Eichengreen (1999), p.261. Saving is calculated as the current account balance minus
investment. The comparison is between 1884-86 and 1887-89.

                                                 17
of domestic financial institutions together with the naivete of foreign investors. The result, all

too often, was a sharp shock which curtailed capital inflows and required a shift in the current

account from deficit to surplus, something that could only be accomplished through a significant

compression of domestic spending.

       To this picture must be added several additional aspects of the financial setting without

which analysis of the prewar crisis problem is incomplete. First, in the late 19th century, as in the

late 20th, crises were more likely when loose credit conditions in the lending countries first

pushed investors, searching for yield, toward emerging markets, and when those loose credit

conditions were then suddenly tightened.40 For much of the decade preceding the Argentina-

Baring crisis, for example, interest rates were low in the money centers, reflecting the weak state

of international demand. London and Edinburgh were soon “honeycombed with agencies”

collecting money for banks in South America and the Antipodes.41 Goschen’s 1888 debt

conversion, which locked in lower interest rates for the British government, ignited a rise in the

price of French 3 per cent rentes and allowed the Prussian government to issue 3 per cent

consols. As Max Wirth described the situation, “German investors, at this time, preferred to

purchase foreign securities with high rates of interest; and were so imprudent as to be caught by



       40
          The stage was set for the debt crisis of the 1980s, for example, by lax monetary policies
in the industrial core followed by the sharp interest-rate increases of the “Volcker shock.” Calvo,
Leiderman and Reinhart (1993) similarly showed that the resumption of capital flows to
emerging markets in the early 1990s was stimulated by the decline in interest rates in Japan,
Europe and the United States, and famously predicted that financial difficulties would develop
when this trend was reversed. Eichengreen and Rose (2000) show that rising interest rates and
declining growth rates in the industrial core were, in this same period, significant predictors of
the probability of banking crises.
       41
            Bailey (1959), p.252.

                                                 18
the radiant descriptions of rising wealth in Argentina, and to buy stocks and bonds from this ill-

governed republic.”42

       This process had within it an equilibrating mechanism but not one that operated

smoothly. As lending boomed and bank reserves declined, private financial institutions

borrowed from central banks. The latter, following what later came to be called the rules of the

game, raised interest rates. The Bank of England, for example, raised its discount rate from 4 to

6 per cent in the second half of 1889. It is no coincidence that the Argentina-Baring crisis

erupted in the wake of this policy action.

       The speculative boom that developed along with the influx of foreign capital typically

reflected more than the inadequate internal controls of local banks. Repeatedly, governments

distorted the incentives of bankers so as to become implicated in their actions. In Australia,

problem banks secured government accounts through “backstairs influence”; those which

succeeded in doing so entered into an agreement to support one another in the event of distress.43

In Argentina, the provincial banks that aggressively chased foreign funding in the 1880s were

little more than the borrowing arms of provincial governments; they were “banks in name only”

(Williams, 1920, p.58). Some made advances not just to provincial governments but to the




       42
         Wirth (1893), p.227. The tendency for low interest rates to inflate a financial bubble is
also clear in this episode. In the words of The Economist (2 August 1890, p.984), “Reckless
borrowing and lavish expenditure have been the order of the day both within the Governments
and with the people, and the readiness with which European investors have responded to the
never-ending appeals for new loans has done little to credit their intelligence. But the speculative
bubble has now been pricked...”
       43
            Bankers’ Magazine (1893), cited in Delargy and Goodhart (1999), pp.2-3.

                                                 19
politicians personally.44 “Persons with influence in ‘high quarters’ were favoured by the banks,”

The Bankers’ Magazine complained, “often in preference to old well-known firms.”45 National

and provincial mortgage banks extended loans to large landowners on the security of their real

estate. Many of these loans reflected “encroaching nepotism” (to again quote Max Wirth).

“Loans were allowed less by reason of gold security than as a matter of personal favor.”46 “It has

long been notorious that the [National] Bank was grievously mismanaged,” The Statist observed

(with benefit of hindsight in 1890), “and it is almost universally believed that the

mismanagement has been accompanied by gross corruption...People in the Republic believe, in

short, that the Bank has been made a convenience of by those in high places...”47 The influence

of these politicians and of large landowners (frequently one and the same) gave grounds for

thinking that the banks financing them would not be allowed to fail. Thus, as early as 1889 the

Argentine Government surreptitiously authorized the issue of additional paper money by the

National Bank and the Provincial Bank of Buenos Aires to deal with mounting banking-sector

problems. It is not surprising, given this backdrop of implicit guarantees, that European investors




       44
         The Economist (9 August 1890, p.1018) writes of lending under the presidency of
Dr.Juarez Celman that “Dr. Celman had been President all through the great boom in Argentine
finance, and was credited generally in Buenos Ayres with having played into his own hands and
those of his friends after the most bare-faced fashion. Indeed, he was openly classed amongst the
‘robbers’ of his country.”
       45
            Bankers’ Magazine (May 1890), p.777.
       46
            Wirth (1893), p.219.
       47
            The Statist 26 (5 July 1890), pp.15-16.

                                                  20
were inadequately critical of the value of the banks’ mortgage-backed securities.48

       When capital flows reversed direction, the result was a downturn in “both economies and

national industries often exceeding 10% or 20%,” as Goodhart and Delargy put it. The authors

base this estimate on statistics of industrial production, railroad freight haulage and imports for

their nine crisis episodes. Historical time series on GDP for the present sample of 21 countries

yield smaller estimates, because GDP is less volatile than imports and industrial production and

because many of Delargy and Goodhart’s nine cases are exceptionally severe crises.49 Table 7

reports estimates of output losses analogous to those in the modern literature on financial crises.50


       48
       Here, clearly, is an important parallel with the Asian crisis that cannot be
overemphasized.
       49
          The present sample of 32, we believe, is more representative. By these measures, the
fall in output in the recent Asian crises was especially steep: Korea’s growth rate declined 7
percentage points below its pre-crisis five-year-average growth rate, 8 percentage points below
its three year pre-crisis average and 7 percentage points from the year preceding the crisis.
Indonesia’s performance was similar, while Thailand’s was the worst (at minus 13, 13, 11
percentage points respectively). The severity of these countries’ crises in 1997-87 is well known;
the point here is that their recessions were dramatic relative to the typical crisis in emerging
markets prior to 1914. Turning from typical to exceptional, how does recent Asian experience
compare with the worst of the pre-1914 era? The two most infamous pre-World War I crises in
emerging markets, the U.S. in 1893 and Argentina in 1890, were even worse than Asia in recent
years. For the U.S., growth during the crisis years declined by 9 percentage points relative to its
previous five-year trend, 12 percentage points below its three-year pre-crisis trend, and 14
percentage points from the pre-crisis year. For Argentina the numbers are even more dramatic if
the conventional statistics are to be believed: minus 17%, 20%, 24%, with recovery in growth not
complete after 5 years. The exceptional severity of these episodes should serve as a warning that
generalizations about the pre-1914 period must be drawn cautiously, since that period appears to
have featured a small number of extraordinarily severe crises along with numerous milder
episodes.
       50
         The output loss is calculated as the sum of the differences between actual GDP growth
and the five year average preceding the crisis until growth returns to trend. Obviously, there is
no single or, for that matter, best way of measuring output losses. In previous work (e.g. Bordo
and Eichengreen 1999; Bordo, Eichengreen, and Irwin 1999), we have used somewhat different
measures, obtaining rather different results. While this underscores our point about the

                                                 21
The output loss from crises appears to have been slightly larger before 1913 than after 1973

(some 10 percentage points of cumulative growth lost versus 8).51 Output losses were larger then

than now for both currency crises and banking crises. Both then and now, output losses were

larger in emerging markets than industrial countries. The notable exception is twin crises.

These, clearly, have grown more severe. Recall from the preceding that they have also grown

more prevalent. This points to what is new and disturbing about the final quarter of the 20th

century.



sensitivity of these calculations to method, we would also argue that the estimates presented here
are more reliable than those we have published previously, for many of the reasons argued in
IMF (1998). (That successive revisions produce changes is disconcerting, but this is how
progress occurs in the social sciences.) Mulder and Rocha (2000) argue that the approach used
here will overstate the output loss because pre-crisis growth tends to be unsustainably high,
rendering it an inappropriate basis for comparison. They also observe that truncating the
calculation at the point where the growth rate returns to trend will understate the loss because the
level of output, as distinct from the growth rate, remains depressed for several subsequent years.
Using a Hodrick-Prescott filter to estimate the trend, they obtain output losses for the 1973-98
period that are a multiple of ours. However, some of their other estimates yield smaller losses for
emerging markets than those reported here. It will be evident that these alternatives are no less
problematic than the present method. Adjustments to the pre-crisis growth rate are arbitrary.
And truncating the calculation at, say, the point where growth returns to the level extrapolated
from some pre-crisis trend rather than at the point where the growth rate recovers to its pre-crisis
rate implies the equally arbitrary assumption that the level of output is invariant with respect to
the crisis, even over short periods. Fortunately, there is no reason to think that these biases are
more severe in one period than another. Since we are primarily concerned with intertemporal
comparisons, in other words, such biases are likely to be of less moment here than in other
applications. Note that sample averages are accompanied by their standard deviations. These
again underscore the difficulty of making valid generalizations about the severity of crises.
Previous authors have emphasized heterogeneity of business cycles. The same, evidently, is true
of crises.
       51
          In addition to the large standard deviations surrounding these estimates, it is worth
recalling the problem of spurious volatility that may infect retrospective estimates of GDP for
earlier historical periods (Romer 1989). Insofar as estimates for these earlier periods are
spuriously volatile and the most volatile cycles are those accompanied by crises, there may be a
tendency to exaggerate prewar output losses.

                                                22
       These findings are robust to limiting consideration to only those crises with output losses,

as in Table 8. And it does not appear that the unusual severity of recessions accompanied by

crises simply reflects causality running from the recession to the crisis. The additional severity

of downturns that occur in the wake of crises is robust to the inclusion of other explanatory

variables that help to account for the unusual amplitude of some business cycles and for

instrumentation of the crisis indicator.52

       The lending-boom interpretation of these episodes is supported by the behavior of the

current account. Typically, the current account deficit widened by an additional two per cent of

GDP in the run-up to a crisis.53 But sharp shifts from deficit to surplus in the wake of the event

are not uniformly evident: on average, all that occurs is the elimination of the preceding two-

percent-of-GDP widening of the deficit, while larger movements which shift the current account

into substantial surplus are only evident in the wake of twin crises. Delargy and Goodhart also

note that sharp current-account reversals are not uniformly evident; they did not occur in U.S. in

1907 or in Italy in 1893 and 1907 (a third of the authors’ nine cases).54 In our larger sample,

sharp current account reversals are observed on average only in response to twin crises -- events

that produce particularly dramatic falls in domestic absorption.

       Monetary variables (the money stock and interest rates) display the same striking

behavior in our larger sample as in the Delargy-Goodhart cases. While interest rates shoot up



       52
            See Bordo, Eichengreen, Klingebiel and Martinez-Peria (2001), Table 1.
       53
            Bordo and Eichengreen (1999), Figure 1.
       54
         Interestingly, we would classify two of these three cases (Italy in 1893 and 1907) as
twin crises.

                                                 23
with the outbreak of a crisis, they fall back rapidly. By the second post-crisis year, the real

interest rate is back at pre-crisis levels; the same is not true in the post-1972 period, when interest

rates remain persistently higher for a period of years.55 While the rate of growth of the money

stock accelerates sharply following the typical post-1972 emerging-market crisis, the same is not

true of the pre-1914 years, when there is little movement in the rate of growth of the money

stock.56



5. The Role of the Monetary Regime

           The relatively rapid stabilization of money supplies and interest rates following these pre-

1914 crises plausibly reflects what economists refer to as the resumption rule.57 If a crisis forced

a government to allow the currency to depreciate, the argument goes, such depreciation was

expected to be temporary. If the depletion of its reserves left the authorities no alternative but to

suspend the convertibility of the currency into gold, they were expected to restore convertibility

at the pre-crisis gold price once they had put their immediate difficulties behind them. Aware

that the authorities were committed to the early elimination of the gold premium, investors had

no grounds to fear a loss of monetary and fiscal control. They had no reason to continue to flee



           55
         The contrast between pre- and post-crisis interest rates is particularly evident in the case
of currency crises.
           56
          The data are for M2. The pattern for all crises is, of course, a weighted average of that
foreign banking and currency crises. There is some evidence of an acceleration in M2 growth
following currency crises, as if countries freed of the constraints of the gold standard followed
less stringent monetary policies, while M2 growth decelerates following banking crises,
presumably reflecting a shift out of deposits.
           57
                See for example Bordo and Kydland (1995).

                                                    24
domestic financial assets and markets. To the contrary, to the extent that the authorities were

expected to reverse the previous depreciation (as had England in the paper-pound period that

ended in 1821, and again following other crises like those of 1825, 1847 and 1857), capital losses

today increased the likelihood of capital gains subsequently. Capital flows might not just

stabilize but gradually reverse direction.

       From the rapid stabilization of interest rates and money supplies and the behavior of

industrial production and imports in their selection of cases, Delargy and Goodhart conclude that

recovery from financial crises was relatively rapid before 1914 because of the credibility of this

resumption rule. McKinnon (1997) makes a similar argument; in his variant, currency crises

were less acute before 1914 because of the operation of what he calls “the restoration rule.”58

“What gave the pre-1914 gold standard its long-run resilience,” he asks? “After any short-run

crisis that forced the partial or complete suspension of gold parities, the unwritten ‘restoration’

rule...was that the country in question return to its traditional gold parity as soon as practicable.

Even during a liquidity squeeze or other short-run trauma, longer-term exchange rate

expectations remained regressive with respect to these traditional parities.”

       Compared to these pre-1914 cases, Asian countries in the 1990s fared less well because

of the absence of an analogous rule.59 There, as Delargy and Goodhart put it, “the combination

of a downwardly flexible exchange rate (raising the domestic burden of dollar debt) combined

with efforts to keep the Asian countries from imposing moratoria on outward debt payments, plus


       58
            McKinnon (1997), pp.518-519.
       59
         Or so it is argued. This notion is implicit in the advice of authors like Hanke that crisis
countries suffering currency depreciation like Indonesia in 1998 should push their currencies
back up to pre-crisis levels. See, inter alia, Hanke (1998).

                                                  25
high (often sky-high) interest rates has led to a cocktail of external/internal financial conditions

far less conducive to rapid recovery than pre-1914.”60

       Our quantitative analysis suggests that these arguments need to be carefully nuanced.

Our estimates do not suggest, contra McKinnon, that currency crises were shorter before 1914 --

the opposite, if anything, was true. Table 9 documents this fact. Recovery time is calculated

there as the number of years before the rate of GDP growth returns to its pre-crisis average

(where that average is defined in terms of the five years preceding the event).61 Clearly, these

calculations do not support the notion that recovery from currency crises, so measured, was faster

before 1913.62 For the emerging markets in our 21 country sample, it took on average 2 1/2 years

for growth to resume before 1914 but only 2 years after 1972. For the industrial countries it took

three years before 1914 but only 2 years after 1972.

       For banking and twin crises, there is some evidence that recovery was faster before 1914.



       60
            Delargy and Goodhart (1999), pp.8-9.
       61
          It may be that this conclusion is sensitive to how recovery time is measured. For
example, if the credit booms that preceded currency crises were more pronounced in the pre-
1914 period, so too could have been the unsustainable acceleration of pre-crisis economic
growth, making the re-achievement of that pre-crisis rate of growth a more demanding standard.
In fact, however, the estimates in Table 9 differ from those of other studies (viz. IMF 1998) by
calculating the pre-crisis trend over a longer period (five years versus three years in the IMF
study), which will tend to moderate the impact of any transitory pre-crisis domestic boom. On
the other hand, it could be that the depressing effect on the macroeconomy of the persistent
deflation needed to push the currency back up to pre-crisis levels could have swamped any
beneficial effects of the early stabilization and reversal of capital flight. This would likely be the
interpretation favored by the critics of Britain’s post-World War I return to gold.
       62
          Note that all of our pre-1913 currency crises were in countries on the gold standard, so
the statistic in Table 9 is the relevant one. Not only was recovery in fact slower to commence
than after 1972, but it was also slower to commence than in the two other periods considered in
Table 9 (1919-39 and 1945-71).

                                                   26
The contrast is most notable for twin crises: before 1914, it took two years following the

occurrence of one of these events before growth resumed, while the same took nearly four years

in the post-1972 period. But this result is heavily driven by the single industrial country case in

the pre-1914 sample, France in 1888-9, which was a relatively mild episode. The background to

this event was a scheme to corner the copper market in 1888.63 The Comptoir d’Escompte

discounted copper warrants in conjunction with this scheme. When copper prices suddenly fell,

the Comptoir suffered heavy losses, and its director committed suicide, prompting a run. Its

assets not being sufficiently liquid to satisfy the demands of depositors, the Comptoir then

appealed to the Bank of France for assistance, the latter advanced it some 200 million francs on

the guarantee of several Paris banks, and the currency came under pressure as a result. But while

the banking system came under pressure, widespread bank failures did not occur, and while there

was speculation against the franc, it was successfully resisted. This relatively mild crisis drives

the contrast in Table 9. Putting it aside, the same conclusion follows for twin crises as for

currency crises: there is no evidence of faster recovery before 1914.

       Why was the resumption of growth following currency crises, in particular, no faster

before 1914? The answer is not hard to find: it lies in the fact that rapid resumption at the old

parity was actually the exception, not the rule. Argentina after the Baring crisis took nine years

to restore convertibility, hardly a case of quick resumption. Even then the paper pesos that had

been circulating since 1885 at a large discount to gold were frozen at 2.3 per gold peso, which

represented a large effective devaluation. Brazil took 17 years to resume following its 1889

suspension. Greece suspended in 1885 and only resumed in 1910. Italy suspended in 1894 (in


       63
            See Bordo and Eichengreen (1999).

                                                 27
this case silver rather than gold had been the circulating medium) and only resumed in 1927.

Portugal suspended in 1891 and only resumed in 1931. It is no surprise that rapid resumption did

little to shorten the length of currency crises in the emerging markets of the period, since rapid

resumption was not the practice.64

       The major difference between then and now, we would argue, lay not in currency crises

per se but in banking crises and their tendency to spill over to the currency market. Banking

crises, although as frequent then as now, were less prone to undermine confidence in the currency

in the countries that were at the core of the gold-standard system. Today, the outbreak of a

banking crisis typically leads investors to anticipate that the authorities will engage in large-scale

credit creation to bail out the banks. Banking crises undermine currency stability, creating the

notorious twin crisis problem (Kaminsky and Reinhart 2000). This was not the case a century

ago at the center of the gold standard system. Then, banks suspended the convertibility of

deposits into currency, currency went to a premium (relative to deposits), and foreign capital --

undeterred by exchange risk -- flowed in to arbitrage the difference, so long as countries

remained on gold (Gorton 1987). Perhaps the currency went to a discount, but if it did it was

expected to recover subsequently; more arbitrage capital flowed in, in anticipation. Banking

crises were still a problem -- indeed, Table 7 suggests that the associated output losses were even

larger before 1914 than today -- but the frequency of twin crises was less. When twin crises

nonetheless occurred as a result of banking-sector distress spilling over to the currency market

(mainly in emerging markets, where the credibility of the commitment to gold convertibility was

least -- viz. Argentina), the time to recovery was roughly the same then as now. It was almost


       64
            Bordo and Schwartz (1996) provide more detail on these cases

                                                  28
exactly the same for the emerging markets in our 21 country sample; the difference in the 21

country averages between the two periods is entirely accounted for by the relatively minor twin

crisis in France, as discussed above.

           What mattered in the high-gold-standard period, then, was not so much the readiness of

the core countries to resume, since they never had an opportunity to display that readiness. With

few noteworthy exceptions, they remained on the gold standard throughout. There are a few

industrial-country currency crises in the first column of Table 9, but these were episodes like

1893 and 1907 where currencies came under pressure but that pressure was successfully

resisted.65 For them, it was the hardness of the peg, not their readiness to suspend and resume,

that made the difference, and it made that difference most dramatically when other parts of the

financial sector (the banking system in particular) were at risk.66 Where suspensions did take

place and the resumption rule could have been practiced -- at the periphery -- it was not. It is not

surprising, then, that the image of short currency crises under the gold standard is more fable than

reality.




           65
         Resisting these pressures was not costless; post-currency-crisis recessions in the
industrial countries prior to 1914 were large, although here there may be special reason to worry
that what we are picking up is the tendency for recessions to cause crises rather than for crises to
cause recessions. We discuss (and attempt to correct) for this simultaneity problem in Bordo,
Eichengreen, Klingebiel and Martinez-Peria (2001).
           66
         It is not surprising that countries grew increasingly reluctant, as the century progressed,
to suspend and resume when their currencies came under pressure. Willingness to suspend
implied the existence of an exchange-rate escape clause. But when the authorities priorities are
uncertain (it is not clear when and whether they will suspend), the existence of an escape clause
becomes potentially destabilizing (Obstfeld 1997). Hence, their gold standard commitment grew
increasingly rigid, rendering temporary suspensions rare to nonexistent in the industrial world.

                                                  29
6. Conclusion

       This paper extends a line of research prompted by a question posed to one of the authors

by then Deputy Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers at the height of the Asian crisis. “You

study history. Can you tell us, then, whether the crisis problem is growing more severe?”

       The answer, so far as we can determine, is that crises are growing more frequent but not

more severe. Relative to the pre-1914 era of financial globalization, crises are twice as prevalent

today. This increase in frequency can be traced to the growing incidence of currency crises,

which in turn points to the role of the monetary regime. A theme of recent research has been the

fragility of soft currency pegs in a world of high capital mobility and democratic politics.67

Central banks should evacuate this unstable middle ground, it follows, in favor of hard pegs

(dollar- or euroization) or more flexible rates. It will not surprise readers familiar with our earlier

writings that we have considerable sympathy for this view. Nor does it surprise us that the

frequency of currency crises is greater today than under the gold standard of a century ago.

       But there is less evidence that the output losses from crises are growing or that the time

required for recovery is lengthening. The output losses associated with crises, as we measure

them, were roughly the same before 1914 as today. And taking all crises together, there is little

evidence of an increase between then and now in the time to recovery.

       This last finding is troubling in light of the predictions that flow from the resumption

rule. Those who emphasize the tendency for central banks and governments, when forced to

suspend gold convertibility, to restore it subsequently at the pre-crisis level predict a rapid end to

capital flight, the early initiation of stabilizing capital flows, and early economic recovery. There


       67
            See inter alia Eichengreen (1996).

                                                  30
is little evidence of this in the data on the duration of currency crises. Recovery from such crises

was not faster before 1914. The explanation is straightforward. In emerging markets, where

suspensions were not uncommon, the resumption rule was not practiced. And in the industrial

world, countries clung tight to the gold standard rather than suspending and resuming

subsequently. They only suspended in a national emergency such as a major war. Establishing

their commitment to the peg in times of financial difficulty had non-negligible costs, which

showed up as recessions. But that commitment at least prevented financial-sector problems from

spilling over to the currency market and producing twin crises.

       Thus, where “the pre-1914 system appears to have worked better” (quoting Delargy and

Goodhart, 1999, p.11) was in limiting the tendency for banking problems to destabilize the

currency market. Twin crises being a particularly virulent strain, the importance of this

achievement should not be underestimated. A very hard currency peg, like that practiced in the

countries at the core of the European gold standard in the late 19th century, could thus prevent

financial problems arising elsewhere in the economy from also undermining the currency and

then feeding back to the rest of the economy in destabilizing ways. Of course, even a very firm

commitment to the peg was no guarantee against other financial problems, serious banking-sector

problems in particular. This is an important lesson of history for emerging markets today.




                                                 31
                                          References

Bailey, J.D. (1959), “Australian Borrowing in Scotland in the Nineteenth Century,” Economic
History Review 12, pp.268-279.

Baskin, Jonathan and Paul Miranti, Jr. (1997), A History of Corporate Finance, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Bloomfield, Arthur I. (1968), Patterns of Fluctuation in International Finance Before 1914,
Princeton Studies in International Finance no. 21, International Finance Section, Department of
Economics, Princeton University.

Bordo, Michael and Barry Eichengreen (1999), “Is Our Current International Economic
Environment Unusually Crisis Prone?” in David Gruen and Luke Gower (eds), Capital Flows
and the International Financial System, Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia, pp.18-75.

Bordo, Michael, Barry Eichengreen and Douglas Irwin (1999), “Is Globalization Today Really
Different from Globalization a Hundred Years Ago?” Brookings Trade Policy Forum 1999, pp.1-
73.

Bordo, Michael, Barry Eichengreen, Daniela Klingebiel and Soledad Maria Martinez Peria
(2001), “Is the Crisis Problem Growing More Severe?” Economic Policy 24, pp.51-82.

Bordo, Michael and Marc Flandreau (2001), “Core, Periphery, Exchange Rate Regimes and
Globalization,” NBER Working Paper (November).

Bordo, Michael and Finn Kydland (1995), “The Gold Standard as a Contingent Rule,”
Explorations in Economic History 32, pp.423-464.

Bordo, Michael and Antu Murshid (2001), “Are Financial Crises Becoming More Contagious:
What is the Historical Evidence on Contagion?” in Stijn Claessens and Kristin J. Forbes (eds),
International Financial Contagion, Boston: Kluwer, pp.367-403.

Bordo, Michael and Hugh Rockoff (1996), “The Gold Standard as a Good-Housekeeping Seal of
Approval,” Journal of Economic History 56, pp.389-428.

Bordo, Michael and Anna Schwartz (1996), “The Operation of the Specie Standard: Evidence for
Core and Peripheral Countries,” in Jorge Braga de Macedo, Barry Eichengreen and Jaime Reis
(eds), Currency Convertibility: The Gold Standard and Beyond, London: Routledge, pp.11-86.

Calvo, Guillermo and Enrique Mendoza (2000), “Rational Herding and the Globalization of
Financial Markets,” Journal of International Economics 51, pp.79-114.


                                               32
Calvo, Guillermo, Leo Leiderman and Carmen Reinhart (1993), “Capital Inflows and Real
Exchange Rate Appreciation in Latin America,” Staff Papers 30, pp.108-131.

Clemens, Michael and Jeffrey Williamson (2000), “Where Did British Foreign Capital Go?
Fundamentals, Failures and the Lucas Paradox, 1870-1913,” NBER Working Paper no. 8028
(December).

Davis, Lance (1965), “The Investment Market, 1870-1914: The Evolution of a National Market,”
Journal of Economic History 25, pp.355-393.

Davis, Lance and Robert Gallman (2000), Waves, Tides and Sandcastles: the Impact of Capital
Flows on Evolving Financial Markets in the New World, 1865-1914, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Delargy, P.J.R. and Charles Goodhart (1999), “Financial Crises: Plus ca change, plus c’est la
meme chose,” Special Paper no. 108, LSE Financial Markets Group (January).

Eichengreen, Barry (1992), Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919-
1939, New York: Oxford University Press.

Eichengreen, Barry (1996), Globalizing Capital: A History of the International Monetary System,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Eichengreen, Barry (1999), “The Baring Crisis in a Mexican Mirror,” International Political
Science Review 20, pp.249-270.

Eichengreen, Barry and Andrew Rose (2000), “Staying Afloat When the Wind Shifts: External
Factors and Emerging-Market Banking Crises,” in Guillermo Calvo, Rudiger Dornbusch and
Maurice Obstfeld (eds), Money, Capital Mobility and Trade: Essays in Honor of Robert
Mundell, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp.171-206.

Feis, Herbert (1930), Europe, the World’s Banker, New Haven: Yale University Press.

Fishlow, Albert (1986), “Lessons from the Past: Capital Markets During the 19th Century and the
Interwar Period,” in Miles Kahler (ed.), The Politics of International Debt, Ithaca: Cornell
University Press, pp.37-94.

Flandreau, Marc (1998), “Caveat Emptor: Coping with Sovereign Risk, 1870-1914,” CEPR
Discussion Paper no. 2004.

Flandreau, Marc (2000), “Crime and Punishment: Moral Hazard and the Pre-1914 International
Financial Architecture,” unpublished manuscript, OFCE.

Garbade, Kenneth D. and William L. Silber (1978), “Technology, Communication, and the
Performance of Financial Markets, 1840-1975,” Journal of Finance 33, pp.819-832.


                                               33
Goodhart, Charles (1969), The New York Money Market and the Finance of Trade 1900-1913,
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Goodhart, Charles (1972), The Business of Banking, 1891-1914, London: Weidenfeld and
Nicolson.

Goodhart, Charles (1988), The Evolution of Central Banks, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Goodhart, Charles and P.J.R. Delargy (1998), “Financial Crises: Plus ca change, plus c’est la
meme chose,” International Finance 1, pp.261-287.

Gorton, Gary (1987), “Bank Suspension of Convertibility,” Journal of Monetary Economics 15,
pp.177-193.

Hanke, Steve (1998), “How to Establish Monetary Stability in Asia,” Cato Journal 17, pp.295-
301.

Hausmann, Ricardo, M. Gavin, C. Pages-Serra and E. Stein (1999), “Financial Turmoil and the
Choice of Exchange Rate Regime,” unpublished manuscript, Inter-American Development Bank.

International Monetary Fund (1998), World Economic Outlook, Washington, D.C.: IMF (May).

Irwin, Douglas (2000), “How Did the United States Become a Net Exporter of Manufactured
Goods?” NBER Working Paper no. 7638 (April).

James, Harold (2001), The End of Globalization, Cambridge: Mass: Harvard University Press.

Kaminsky, Graciela and Carmen Reinhart (1998), “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and
Balance-of-Payments Problems,” American Economic Review 89, pp.473-500.

Kindleberger, Charles P. (1978), Manias, Panics and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises,
New York: Basic Books.

Maddison, Angus (1995), Monitoring the World Economy 1820-1992, Paris: OECD.

Mauro, Paolo, Nathan Sussman and Yishay Yafeh (2000), “Emerging Market Spreads: Then
Versus Now,” IMF Working Paper WP/00/190 (November).

McKinnon, Ronald (1997), The Rules of the Game, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Mercer, Lloyd (1974), “Building Ahead of Demand: Some Evidence for the Land Grant
Railroads,” Journal of Economic History 34, pp.492-500.

Mulder, Christian and Manuel Rocha (2000), “The Soundness of Estimates of Output Losses in
Currency Crises,” unpublished manuscript, IMF.



                                               34
Obstfeld, Maurice (1977), “Destabilizing Effects of Exchange Rate Escape Clauses,” Journal of
International Economics 43, pp.61-77.

O’Rourke, Kevin and Jeffrey Williamson (1999), Globalization and History, Cambridge: MIT
Press.

Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales (1999), “The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial
Development in the 20th Century,” unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago.

Romer, Christina (1989), “Prewar Business Cycles Reconsidered: New Estimates of Gross
National Product 1869-1918,” Journal of Political Economy 97, pp.1-37.

Stone, Irving (1999), The Global Export of Capital from Great Britain, 1865-1914, London:
Macmillan.

Sylla, Richard and George David Smith (1995), “Information and Capital Market Regulation in
Anglo-American Finance,” in Michael Bordo and Richard Sylla (eds), Anglo-American Financial
Systems, New York: Irwin, pp.170-206.

Twomby, Michael J. (1998), “Patterns of Foreign Investment in the Third World in the Twentieth
Century,” unpublished manuscript, University of Michigan at Dearborn.

Wilkins, Mira (1998), “Conduits for Long-Term Investment in the Gold Standard Era,”
unpublished manuscript, Florida International University.

Williams, John H. (1920), Argentine International Trade Under Inconvertible Paper Money,
1880-1900, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Wirth, Max (1893), “The Crisis of 1890,” Journal of Political Economy 1, pp.214-235.

World Bank (2000), Global Development Finance 2000, Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.

Wright, Gavin (1990), “The Origins of American Industrial Success, 1879-1940,” American
Economic Review 80, pp.651-668.




                                              35
Table 1. Industrial composition of British capital exports to the ten major recipients, 1865-1914
        (percentage of capital called in each country)
     Broad Industrial     United    Canada Argentina       Australia    India       South     Brazil    Russia (2)      New    Mexico All countries &
              group       States                                                Africa (1)                           Zealand                 colonies
        Government           5.8        33.9       22.4        65.8      45.8        50.9      45.9           50.3      64.3     19.7            36.3


            Railways         61.6       40.3       57.5          0.0     40.5         1.9      31.6           24.8       2.0     36.6            31.7


      Public Utilities        9.5        5.6         8.9         3.5      3.1         2.4      10.2            3.0       5.1     12.1             6.4


            Financial         6.3        6.2         5.4       11.6       1.5         6.4       2.1            5.9      17.8      9.0             7.3


       Raw Materials          5.5        3.7         0.5       13.4       5.9        33.7       2.9           12.0       6.4     15.5            10.0


               Mines          4.6        3.5         0.5       12.9       3.2        33.5       1.3            3.9       6.1      8.9             7.6
   Industrial & Misc.        10.8       10.1         4.6         3.5      2.0         4.1       6.5            3.9       2.7      5.8             7.2


                 mfg.         5.7        3.1         1.5         0.6      0.7         0.6       1.3            2.3       0.6      2.2             2.9
            Shipping          0.5        0.2         0.8         1.2      1.1         0.4       0.9            0.2       1.6      1.2             1.3


     Total Private (3)       94.2       66.1       77.6        34.2      54.2        49.1      54.1           49.7      35.7     80.3            63.7


      Grand Total (4)      100.0      100.0       100.0       100.0     100.0       100.0     100.0          100.0     100.0    100.0          100.0


(1) Includes South Africa, Cape of Good Hope, Natal, Orange River Colony, Transvaal, and Orang Free State.
(2) Includes European and Asian Russia.
(3) All broad industrial groups with exception of Government.
(4) Details may not add to totals due to rounding.

Source: Stone (1999).


                                                                           36
Table 2 Income per capita in creditor and debtor countries, selected years
(U.S. dollars)
                                                         1913                      1929                     1980                    1997

 Major creditorsa                                        4,779                     6,025                    10,976                  28,474

 Top 10 borrowersb                                       1,698                     2,200                    2,485                   3,756

 Low-income borrowersc                                                                                      492                     808

 Memo item

 Share of low-income borrowers in total private flows                                                         14                     29
 to emerging markets
 a. For 1913 and 1929, France, Germany, United Kingdom, and United States; for 1980 and 1997, the same countries plus Japan; average reflects GDP
 weights.
 b. Top 10 recipients of net long-term private flows. Average weighted by GDP in 1913 and 1929, and by net long-term flows in 1980 and 1997.
 c. Top 10 low-income recipients of long-term private flows. Average weighted by net long-term flows.
 Source: World Bank (2000).




                                                                             37
Table 3. Major recipients of British capital exports, 1865-1914


                                   Percentage of Total     Cumulative
  Rank                               Capital called        Percentage      Amount (£000)
          1 United States                           20.5                           836,371
          2 Canada                                  10.1                           412,283
          3 Argentina                                8.6                           349,243
          4 Australia                                8.3                           339,001
          5 India                                    7.8            55.3           317,174
          6 South Africa                             6.4                           262,233
          7 Brazil                                   4.2                           172,742
          8 Russia                                   3.4                           139,348
          9 New Zealand                              2.1                            84,495
         10 Mexico                                   2.0            73.4            81,532
         11 Japan                                    1.9                            78,285
         12 China                                    1.8                            73,747
         13 Egypt                                    1.6                            66,193
         14 Chile                                    1.5                            61,818
         15 France                                   1.4            81.7            57,920
         16 Rhodesia                                 1.1                            46,232
         17 Turkey                                   1.0                            42,268
         18 Italy                                    1.0                            41,427
         19 Austria-Hungary                          1.0                            39,954
         20 Peru                                     0.9            86.8            37,173
         21 Spain                                    0.8                            33,912
         22 Uruguay                                  0.8                            30,678
         23 Cuba                                     0.6                            26,314
         24 Germany                                  0.6                            24,493
         25 Greece                                   0.5            90.1            19,300
            Total Capital Called                   100.0                         4,079,254

Source: Stone (1999).




                                              38
Table 4. Share of private-source debt flows, by recipient sector
(percent)
                                                      1921-1931

 Sector                1865-1913b            London                New York   1980   1997

 Public sectora             40                  62                    80       80     33

 Private sector             60                  38             20              20     67
 a. Includes government-guaranteed borrowing where data are available.
 b. Refers to British overseas investments only.
 Source: World Bank (2000).




                                                          39
 Table 5. Crisis Frequency

Year                         Banking Crises   Currency Crises   Twin Crises   All Crises
1880-1913                    2.30                  1.23            1.38          4.90
1919-1939                    4.84                  4.30            4.03         13.17
1945-1971                    0.00                  6.85            0.19          7.04
1973-1997 (21 countries)     2.03                  5.18            2.48          9.68
1973-1997 (56 countries)     2.29                  7.48            2.38         12.15
Source: See text.




                                              40
Table 6. Number of crises-- distribution by market

Market                          Year           Banking     Currency   Twin Crises   All Crises
                                                Crises      Crises

    Industrial Countries     1880-1913               4        2            1           7
                             1919-1939               11       13           12          36
                             1945-1971               0        21           0           21
                             1973-1997               9        29           6           44
    Emerging Markets         1880-1913               11        6            8          25
                             1919-1939               7         3           3           13
                             1945-1971               0        16           1           17
                             1973-1997               17       57           21          95
Source: See text.




                                                      41
 Table 7. Output loss

                                1880-1913      1919-1939      1945-1971      1973-1997      1973-1997
                                21 countries   21 countries   21 countries   21 countries   56 countries
 Currency Crises
 All countries                       8.31          14.21           5.25           3.81          5.91
                                    (8.35)        (19.05)         (7.96)         (6.34)        (7.53)
 Industrial Countries                3.73          11.36           2.36           2.86          3.66
                                    (4.10)        (17.85)         (3.56)         (4.23)        (5.60)
 Emerging Markets                    9.84          26.53           9.03           8.54          7.00
                                    (9.12)        (22.98)        (10.40)        (12.38)        (8.23)
 Banking Crises
 All countries                       8.35          10.49            -            7.04           6.21
                                    (6.29)        (10.52)                       (7.94)         (7.36)
 Industrial Countries               11.58          11.51            -            7.92           7.04
                                    (6.01)        (11.20)                       (7.94)         (7.89)
 Emerging Markets                    7.18           8.89            -            0.00           5.78
                                    (6.23)         (9.99)                          -           (7.27)
 Twin Crises
 All countries                      14.50          15.84          1.65           15.67          18.61
                                   (21.54)        (14.66)                       (10.05)        (12.53)
 Industrial Countries                0.00          13.79            -            17.54          15.64
                                       -          (14.08)                       (14.38)        (13.68)
 Emerging Markets                   16.31          24.03          1.65           14.10          19.46
                                   (22.29)        (16.96)                        (5.48)        (12.41)
 All Crises
 All countries                        9.76         13.42           5.24          7.77            8.29
                                    (12.79)       (14.99)         (7.96)        (9.06)         (10.10)
 Industrial Countries                 7.68         12.29           2.39          6.69            6.25
                                     (6.78)       (14.65)         (3.65)        (8.97)          (8.49)
 Emerging Markets                    10.37         16.46           8.60         10.80            9.21
                                    (14.13)       (16.09)        (10.23)        (9.01)         (10.65)
Note: Standard deviation in parentheses.
Source: See text.




                                                      42
 Table 8. Output loss, for crises with output losses only

                                 1880-1913 1919-1939         1945-1971 1973-1997 1973-1997
                                 21 countries 21 countries   21 countries 21 countries 56 countries
 Currency Crises
 All countries                     11.09           25.26         7.19         5.08          7.56
                                   (7.80)         (19.14)       (8.56)       (6.78)        (7.90)
 Industrial Countries               3.73           21.10         4.13         3.57          4.61
                                   (4.10)         (19.94)       (3.89)       (4.39)        (5.87)
 Emerging Markets                  14.77           39.79         9.63        17.08          8.84
                                   (5.43)          (0.19)      (10.48)      (12.97)        (8.47)
 Banking Crises
 All countries                      9.63           15.61          -          10.56          8.50
                                   (5.72)          (9.66)                    (7.41)        (7.39)
 Industrial Countries              11.58           15.82          -          10.56         10.56
                                   (6.01)         (10.05)                    (7.41)        (7.41)
 Emerging Markets                   8.77           12.45          -             -           7.55
                                   (5.73)          (9.71)                                  (7.48)
 Twin Crises
 All countries                     18.64           16.59         1.65        15.67         18.61
                                  (22.99)         (14.23)                   (10.05)       (12.53)
 Industrial Countries                -             16.54          -          17.54         15.64
                                                  (13.84)                   (14.38)       (13.68)
 Emerging Markets                  18.64           24.03         1.65        14.10         19.46
                                  (22.99)         (16.96)                    (5.48)       (12.41)
 All Crises
 All countries                      12.11          18.95         7.19         9.60         10.64
                                   (13.23)        (14.57)       (8.56)       (9.16)       (10.29)
 Industrial Countries                8.96          17.93         4.35         7.98          7.72
                                    (6.44)        (14.55)       (4.00)       (9.27)        (8.82)
 Emerging Markets                   13.10          21.39         9.14        14.85         12.02
                                   (14.74)        (15.09)      (10.32)       (6.88)       (10.70)
Note: Standard deviation in parentheses.
Source: See text.




                                                       43
Table 9. Recovery time

                              1880-1913      1919-1939      1945-1971      1973-1997      1973-1997
                              21 countries   21 countries   21 countries   21 countries   56 countries
Currency Crises
All countries                     2.63           1.94           1.84           1.87           2.07
                                 (1.85)         (1.65)         (1.17)         (1.29)         (1.63)
Industrial Countries              3.00           1.92           1.67           1.84           2.04
                                 (1.41)         (1.80)         (1.20)         (1.30)         (1.91)
Emerging Markets                  2.50           2.00           2.06           2.00           2.09
                                 (2.07)         (1.00)         (1.12)         (1.41)         (1.49)
Banking Crises

All countries                     2.27           2.39            -             3.11           2.62
                                 (1.03)         (1.46)                        (2.45)         (1.86)
Industrial Countries              3.00           2.55            -             3.38           3.11
                                 (1.15)         (1.75)                        (2.45)         (2.42)
Emerging Markets                  2.00           2.14            -             1.00           2.35
                                 (0.89)         (0.90)                           -           (1.50)
Twin Crises

All countries                     2.22           2.73          1.00            3.73           3.78
                                 (2.22)         (1.87)                        (2.83)         (2.93)
Industrial Countries              1.00           2.33            -             5.40           5.00
                                    -           (1.37)                        (3.51)         (3.29)
Emerging Markets                  2.38           4.33          1.00            2.33           3.43
                                 (2.33)         (3.06)                        (1.03)         (2.80)
All Crises

All countries                     2.35           2.35           1.78           2.64           2.53
                                 (1.62)         (1.67)         (1.16)         (2.15)         (2.09)
Industrial Countries              2.71           2.26           1.60           2.84           2.71
                                 (1.25)         (1.65)         (1.19)         (2.40)         (2.43)
Emerging Markets                  2.25           2.62           2.00           2.09           2.45
                                 (1.73)         (1.76)         (1.12)         (1.14)         (1.92)
Standard.deviation in
parentheses.
Source: See text.




                        Appendix A: Crises Dates and Business Cycle Turning Points.

                                                     44
                                                         A.1880-1913

 D     A     A     B    B     C     C     D    F     F      G        G   I     J      N     N    P     S   S    S   U     U
 a     r     u     e    r     a     h     e    i     r      e        r   t     a      e     o    o     p   w    w   K     S
 t     g     s     l    a     n     i     n    n     a      r        e   a     p      t     r    r     a   e    i         A
 e           t     g    z     a     l     m    l     n      m        e   l     a      h     w    t     i   d    t
       e
             r     i    i     d     e     a    a     c      a        c   y     n      e     a    u     n   e    z
       n     a     u    l     a           r    n     e      n        e                r     y    g         n    e
       t     l     m                      k    d            y                         l          a              r
       i     i                                                                        a          l              l
       n     a                                                                        n                         a
       a                                                                              d                         n
                                                                                      s                         d



1883

1884                    T                      P                                      T                                  BC

1885 CC      T                            BC   T            P     CC                                       P        P     T

1886                                                                     P                  T          P        P

1887   T                      T    CC     T          T      T                         P          P

1888                    P           T               CC      P            T                                 T

1889   P     P         BC,C                    P    P,BC                       T                       T            T
                        C

1890 BC,C              BC     P           P                                           T     P              P        BC   CC
      C

1891 BC                       CC    P                                    BC           P         BC,C                     P,CC
                                                                                                 C

1892   T                                                    T            P     P      T          T                  P     T

1893        T,BC              CC          T    T     T     CC            BC                            P   T    T        P,BC
                                                                                                                         ,CC

1894   P                                                    P            CC                 T          T

1895                                                        T                         P                P                  T

1896                                T          P                               T      T          P         P

1897                   BC     T                                                      P,BC                  BC   P

1898   T               T,CC        BC,C              P      P            T            T                             T
                                    C

1899         P                            P                                                      T     T

1900   P               BC           P          BC                             P,CC                                  P

1901                   BC     P                      T     T,BC          P    BC            P    P                        P

1902   T                P                 T                                    T                       P

1903         T                                 T                                      P                    T    T

1904                          T                      P                   T    P,CC                                        T


                                                                45
1905                                T           P          P                      T     T     T          P

1906                          P           P           T                                             T          P

1907                               BC    BC          BC   CC         P,BC T,BC                      P    BC              P,BC

1908 CC                  T    CC         BC           P               CC    CC          P     P

1909                           T                      T                      P    P                            T              T

1910                                      T     T          T           T                T           T     T

1911         P                P                       P                      T    T                            P              P

1912   P                 P          P     P                P                                             P           T

1913                                                  T                                       T           T

Note: BC represents banking crises, CC represents currency crises, P represents business cycle peaks, T represents business
cycle troughs. No entries are shown for Belgium and Greece because of missing data.




                                                               47
                                                         B.1919-1939




D      A    A    B     B     C     C     D    F      F     G        G   I     J     N     N      P    S      S     S   U    U
a      r    u    e     r     a     h     e    i      r     e        r   t     a     e     o      o    p      w     w   K    S
t      g    s    l     a     n     i     n    n      a     r        e   a     p     t     r      r    a      e     i        A
e      e    t    g     z     a     l     m    l      n     m        e   l     a     h     w      t    i      d     t
       n    r    i     i     d     e     a    a      c     a        c   y     n     e     a      u    n      e     z
       t    a    u     l     a           r    n      e     n        e               r     y      g           n     e
       i    l    m                       k    d            y                        l            a                 r
       n    i                                                                       a            l                 l
       a    a                                                                       n                              a
                                                                                    d                              n
                                                                                    s                              d




1913                                                 T                                           T           T

1914                                     T                                    P                                    T

1915                         T     T          P                                     P     P      P    P      P              T

1916   T               T                                                P                                          P

1917                                                                          T           T                            P

1918                         P     P          T                                     T                                       P

1919        T          P                                                T                             T      T

1920   P                     T                                                                  T,BC BC      P

1921   T               T    CC     T    T,BC P,BC                       BC P,CC P,BC P,BC                              T    T
                                        ,CC ,CC                                 ,CC

1922             T                      CC           T                                   T,BC         P

1923                   BC   BC           P    T     CC                              CC   BC     BC           T

1924   P        P,CC   P     P     P          P      P                  P                 P      P   BC            T   P    P

1925            BC           T     BC         T                                     T            T   T,BC

1926   T        BC     T           T     T          CC     T            T                                              T    T

1927        P    T                                   T                       T,BC         T

1928                   P                      P                         P                             P

1929 P,CC                   P,CC   P                 P     P                        P     P                  P     P   P    P

1930 CC          P     CC                P          BC                  BC    P                  P                          BC

1931 BC,C   T   BC     CC   CC     CC BC,C T,BC BC BC,C T,BC BC              CC          BC,C BC,C BC,C BC,C BC        CC   BC
      C                                C ,CC        C ,CC                                 C    C    C    C

1932 T,CC CC           T           T    CC          T,BC   T    CC      T    CC                 BC    T     BC,C   T   T    BC



                                                               48
                                                                                                            C

1933         CC                T           T                                     T        T                 T    BC         T,BC
                                                                                                                            ,CC

1934 BC           T,BC CC                                   CC                       T                P

1935    P          CC                P     P           P     P            BC,C       CC                           P
                                                                           C

1936          P          P     P           T         T,CC    T            CC                    T               T,CC    P        P

1937               P    CC                       P    CC              P                   P           T

1938    T          CC                      P                                                                P           T

1939          T    BC          T                BC                               P   BC   T                     P,CC             T

Note: BC represents banking crises, CC represents currency crises, P represents business cycle peaks, T represents business
cycle troughs. Missing entries for business cycle turning points during and after World War I reflect the absence of GDP data.




                                                                 49
                                                 C. 1940-1971

 D     A    A    B     B    C     C     D   F    F    G        G   I   J   N   N     P   S    S    S   U    U
 a     r    u    e     r    a     h     e   i    r    e        r   t   a   e   o     o   p    w    w   K    S
 t     g    s    l     a    n     i     n   n    a    r        e   a   p   t   r     r   a    e    i        A
 e     e    t    g     z    a     l     m   l    n    m        e   l   a   h   w     t   i    d    t
       n    r    i     i    d     e     a   a    c    a        c   y   n   e   a     u   n    e    z
       t    a    u     l    a           r   n    e    n        e           r   y     g        n    e
       i    l    m                      k   d         y                    l         a             r
       n    i                                                              a         l             l
       a    a                                                              n                       a
                                                                           d                       n
                                                                           s                       d



1940   P         T                                                                       P


1941                                        T                          T   P         P


1942        P                           T                          P                                   P


1943                   T    P     T                                    P                 T    T    T        P


1944   T                          P         P                          T   T             P


1945        T                                                      T                 T


1946             T                                                             T                       T


1947                   P    T           P                      T                              P    P   CC


1948   P         P                          T    CC                P       P                                T


1949       P,CC T,CC   T          T         CC   P    CC       P           CC P,CC   P   T    CC       CC


1950 CC                P    CC                             CC      T                               T   P


1951             P          P                         P                T       T


1952   T               T                                                                 P                  P


1953        T          P         P,CC                 T        T   P       T         T   T    T        T


1954        P    T          T                    T                     P                 P                  T


1955                   T          T                   P        P               P     P   T    P    P   P    P


1956   P         P     P                    P    P                         P             P


1957                        P     P     T        CC                                  T


1958                                        T         T            T                     CC   T        T


1959 CC          T     CC                                      T       T       T                   T        T


1960                              T              T             P                         T                  CC



                                                          50
1961         T                 T                P          P                            P                          P,CC


1962 CC                T,CC CC P,CC                                 T   P         T                 P


1963   T                BC,                                T                 P                P     T          P     T

                       CC

1964         P                      T                 P    P            CC              T                           CC


1965               P   P,CC                                         P             P           T     P    P         P,CC


1966   P                                  P                                                   P     T               CC


1967 CC      T     T          P     P     T     T     T    T            T         T     P         P,CC    T        T,CC       P


1968   T                           CC     P          CC             T        T                                 T


1969         P                      T                                                                                P


1970 CC                        T                                                              T                      T        T


1971       T,CC CC       T               CC    CC               CC           P    CC   CC    CC T,CC CC       CC          CC




Note: BC represents banking crises, CC represents currency crises, P represents business cycle peaks, T represents business
cycle troughs.
  Missing entries for business cycle turning points during and after World War II reflects the absence of GDP data.




                                                               51
                                                           D. 1972-1998


 D     A   A    A   B    B    B    C    C    C    C    C    D    E    E    F    F   G    G    H    I    I   I    I    I   I   J
 a     r   u    u   a    e    r    a    h    h    o    o    e    c    g    i    r   e    r    o    c    n   n    r    s   t   a
 t     g   s    s   n    l    a    n    i    i    l    s    n    u    y    n    a   r    e    n    e    d   d    e    r   a   m
 e     e   t    t   g    g    z    a    l    n    u    t    m    a    p    l    n   m    e    g    l    i   o    l    a   l   a
       n   r    r   l    i    i    d    e    a    m    a    a    d    t    a    c   a    c    K    a    a   n    a    e   y   i
       t   a    i   a    u    l    a              b    R    r    o         n    e   n    e    o    n        e    n    l       c
       i   l    a   d    m                        i    i    k    r         d        y         n    d        s    d            a
       n   i        e                             a    c                                      g             i
       a   a        s                                  a                                                    a
                    h




1972 P                   P              P                                       P   P    P                                P


1973                               P                        T


1974       P                                                P              P


1975 C              P,        P         CC                            CC                           CC       CC
     C              CC

1976       T,                      T    T,        T    T    T,                  T   T    T    T    T        T    T,       C   CC
           CC                           BC                  CC                                                   CC       C

1977 T          T   T         T         CC   T                        P    T        BC                  P             BC, T
                                                                                                                      CC

1978            P                                           P                   P                  CC       CC        T       CC

1979 P              P              P         P         P              CC            P    P                       P

1980 B     P        CC        P         P    CC   P                                           P    P    T   P         P   P
     C

1981                T,             CC BC               CC        BC T,     P                       CC                         T,
                    CC                                              BC                                                        CC

1982 C                   CC             CC   T    BC        T    CC                           BC        P
     C

1983 T     T,                 T    T                   T         T                       T, BC              CC            T   P.5
           CC                                                                            CC

1984 C                                  T,        T              P,                           T    T,                 T       T
     C                                  CC                       CC                                CC

1985 B     CC       P    T                             P         T,                      CC
     C                                                           CC

1986                               CC        CC             P    P         T,   T                       T   CC CC
                                                                           CC

1987 P,         T   BC        P,             P         T, BC                                                T    T    P
     C                        CC                       BC
     C
                                                                  T                                                           P,
1988                                    P         P    P         CC                 T         P    P                          CC



                                                                 52
1989 B P,B          T             P       CC             T         P,C P
     C, C                                                           C
     C
     C

1990 T         P        P   BC,       T             T    P   P     BC         P         P           P          P   T   P,   T
                            CC                                                                                         BC

1991 C              P                 P    T                 T,C        BC,         P       T       CC   P                  CC
     C                                                        C         CC

1992      T                  T    T   T   CC    T       CC                    CC                         BC CC         C
                                                                                                                       C

1993 P              T                 P                 T,C P           T,C                         T,C T      T            CC
                                                         C               C                           C

1994                        BC                      P              T          T,B       T   P   T   BC                      P
                                                                               C

1995 B    P             T    P        T    P   P                                    T                                  C
     C,                                                                                                                C
     C
     C

1996                                                     P                                          P    P         P

1997 T    T    T                      P             T                                       T            BC, P
                                                                                                         CC

1998 P              P       CC                  T                                           P   P        BC,           T    T
                                                                                                         CC

 Note: BC represents banking crises, CC represents currency crises, P represents business cycle peaks, T represents business
                                                       cycle troughs.




                                                             53
                                                     D. 1972-1998 Continued


           K   M   M    N   N    N    N    P    P    P    P    P    S    S   S   S    S   S    T   T   T    U    U    U   V    Z
 D     J   o   a   e    e   e    i    o    a    a    e    h    o    i    o   p   r    w   w    a   h   u    K    r    s   e    i
 a     a   r   l   x    t   w    g    r    k    r    r    i    r    n    u   a   i    e   i    i   a   r         u        n    m
       p   e   a   i    h   Z    e    w    i    a    u    l    t    g    t   i   L    d   t    w   i   k         g        e    b
 t     a   a   y   c    e   e    r    a    s    g         i    u    a    h   n   a    e   z    a   l   e         u        z    a
 e     n       s   o    r   a    i    y    t    u         p    g    p    A       n    n   e    n   a   y         a        u    b
               i        l   l    a         a    a         p    a    o    f       k        r        n             y        e    w
               a        a   a              n    y         i    l    r    r       a        l        d                      l    e
                        n   n                             n         e    i                a                               a
                        d   d                             e              c                n
                        s                                 s              a                d




1972                    P                                           P                     P

1973                                                                                                        P         P

1974                                                                         P

1975           C            P, P      T    P    T    P, P               P,            P            T             CC            CC
               C            CC                       CC                 CC

1976 T         T CC T                                     T    T, T          CC T              T            T,        T
                                                               CC                                           CC

1977                                       T         CC                 BC BC CC T        T,           P,
                                                                                          CC           CC

1978       P       T        CC                       T         CC       T,                                  P             P    T
                                                                        CC

1979 CC                 P   T    T         CC                                                  P   P CC          CC P

1980 P CC                   CC        P         P                                     P   P                      P        BC

1981       T       P,            P,        P         P BC P             P,                             T         BC            P,
                   BC            CC                                     CC                                                     BC

1982               CC                                     P,        BC CC CC          T                BC T, CC T              CC
                                                          CC                                              CC

1983           P CC T                 T              BC CC CC P                           T BC BC                CC
                                                     ,C
                                                     C

1984                        CC                  CC T                    CC                     T       CC        T BC          CC

1985 T         BC CC P           T         T    T              T        BC T              P                           CC T

1986                        P CC P,             CC        T,            CC       P                 T   P         CC       CC T,
                                 CC                       CC                                                                 CC

1987           T        T BC          BC             P              T    T                T                               P

1988               T        CC CC          CC        CC                 CC                     P                 P    P        CC

1989       P                                    P,        P         P    P       T,                         P             T,
                                                CC                               BC                                       CC

1990 P         P CC P            P    T CC           CC CC                   P        P   P            T         T             P,



                                                                    54
                                                                                                                      CC

1991                            BC               T        P                    BC              BC
                                ,C                                                             ,C
                                C                                                              C

1992 BC            P CC T                       CC            T CC CC          CC              P    T,       T   P CC
                                                                                                    CC

1993       T   T                CC       P,          T             T           T                         P       BC
                                         CC

1994               BC T         CC                                     T   P                   BC                CC T
                   ,C                                                                          ,C
                   C                                                                           C

1995               CC       P            CC BC P          T   P CC CC                   BC P   T,                CC
                                                                                               CC

1996       P   P   T            T                    P             P           P                    P            T

1997      BC C                           CC T        CC                    T        T     BC P           T            CC
          ,C C                                                                            ,C
          C                                                                               C

1998      BC BC P       P   T        P   T       T BC         CC               T          BC             P   P        P
          ,C ,C                                                                           ,C
          C C                                                                             C

Note: BC represents banking crises, CC represents currency crises, P represents business cycle peaks, T represents business
cycle troughs.




                                                              55
