NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SUGGESTED SUBSIDIES ARE SUB-OPTIMAL
UNLESS COMBINED WITH AN OUTPUT TAX
Don Fullerton
Robert D. Mohr
Working Paper 8723
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8723
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2002

For funding this research, we thank the University of Texas and the National Science Foundation (grant
#SBR9811324). Helpful suggestions were provided by Robert Deacon, Art O’Sullivan (formerly Sullivan),
John Stranlund, Sarah West, and Roberton Williams III. This paper is part of the NBER's research program
in Public Economics. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research or the National Science Foundation.
© 2002 by Don Fullerton and Robert D. Mohr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Suggested Subsidies are Sub-optimal Unless Combined with an Output Tax
Don Fullerton and Robert D. Mohr
NBER Working Paper No. 8723
January 2002
JEL No. H23, H25, Q24, Q28

ABSTRACT
Because of difficulties measuring pollution, many prior papers suggest a subsidy to some
observable method of reducing pollution. We take three papers from the Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management as examples, and we extend them to make an additional important point.
In each case, we show that welfare under the suggested subsidy can be increased by the addition of an
output tax. While the suggested subsidy reduces damage per unit of output, it also decreases the firm's
cost of production and the equilibrium break-even price. It might therefore increase output -- unless
combined with an output tax. Using one example, we show that a properly-constructed subsidy-tax
combination is equivalent to a Pigovian tax. Another example is a computational model, used to show
that the subsidy-tax combination can yield a welfare gain that is more than three times the gain from using
the subsidy alone. The third example is a theoretical model, used to show that the subsidy alone increases
production and thus could increase total pollution. An additional output tax offsets this increase in
production.

Don Fullerton
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
dfullert@eco.utexas.edu

Robert D. Mohr
Department of Economics
University of New Hampshire
Durham, NH 03824
rmohr@cisunix.unh.edu

Many existing papers point out that a direct tax on a socially-damaging activity may be
costly or impossible to monitor and enforce, and many proceed to suggest and analyze a policy
that would instead just subsidize an alternative to the damaging activity. Three examples have
appeared in the Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, and they provide very
different models of different environmental problems. In the first of these examples, Deacon [2]
develops a general equilibrium model of deforestation and points out that “the use of Pigovian
taxes or marketable permits can be expected to encounter the same monitoring and enforcement
problems that keep the market from providing forest services efficiently” (p. 17). He analyzes a
subsidy to non-forest inputs. Second, Sullivan [9] develops a partial equilibrium model of toxic
waste disposal and points out that “attempts to impose marginal-cost pricing on illegal disposers
would generate substantial monitoring costs” (p.58). He analyzes a subsidy for legal disposal,
which decreases illegal disposal but “also causes the underpricing of toxic disposal, generating
efficiency cost in the form of an excessive volume of toxic waste” (p.59). Third, Stranlund [8]
develops an enforcement model of air pollution and notes that “when monitoring is difficult
because the sources of pollution are widely dispersed or because emissions are not measured
easily as in nonpoint pollution problems, regulators should be motivated to consider substituting
technological aid for direct enforcement” (p. 229). In other words, a subsidy for control
technology can substitute for other policy tools in overall efforts to reduce pollution.
All of these papers provide correct and useful analyses of these subsidies. Deacon
demonstrates the effects of the subsidy policy on deforestation; Sullivan computes the potential
benefit offered by a subsidy to proper waste disposal; and Stranlund shows that a subsidy might
serve as a substitute for costly monitoring. Each paper achieves its objective. Here, we simply
extend those models to make an additional important point: welfare under each of those
suggested subsidies can be further increased by the addition of an output tax.

1

This general point has appeared in prior literature. Both Eskeland and Devarajan [4] and
Walls and Palmer [15] discuss combinations of instruments that can substitute for a Pigovian tax.
Fullerton [5] shows that the effects of a tax on a dirty input can be matched by the combination
of a subsidy to clean inputs and a tax on output (a combination he calls a “two-part instrument”).
Fullerton and Wolverton [7] provide closed-form solutions for the first-best two-part instrument.
The general presumption in these papers is that a tax can readily be imposed upon any market
transaction such as the sale of a final good or service, because the invoice can be verified by the
other party to the transaction. Similarly, eligibility for a subsidy can be verified for clean market
inputs such as the use of labor, capital, or legal disposal, or the purchase of forest-conserving
technologies or abatement technologies. Problems arise with Pigovian taxes because the
producer makes no market transaction for deforestation, dumping, or emissions. Trees can be cut
without any record that they ever existed. Illegal waste can be dumped at midnight. Emissions
are self-reported. Without expensive audits, they are relatively easy to hide.
The contribution of the current paper, then, is to demonstrate the usefulness of this twopart instrument by applying it to these three specific contexts. Because these examples are so
diverse, we hope to demonstrate how the concept could be applied in many other contexts as
well. To show that it is not limited to the cases considered by Fullerton and Wolverton, we
demonstrate the two-part instrument within each of the three pre-existing models, using the same
equations and notation as in each prior paper. In each case we analyze the same suggested
subsidy policy, and we add a tax on output. In two cases, this step requires that we extend the
prior model to consider the output market. In each of these three diverse examples, we show that
this policy combination raises welfare.
The intuition can be simply stated. In each case, the unavailable Pigovian tax would raise
the relative price of the damaging input and induce firms to substitute into the other input,
reducing damage per unit of output (the “substitution effect”). It would also raise the price of
2

output and thus reduce the number of units (the “output effect”). The suggested subsidy in each
case would make a similar change to relative input prices and can thus reduce damage per unit of
output, but it decreases the firm's cost of production and therefore decreases the equilibrium
break-even price. Thus the subsidy alone might increase output and could increase total
pollution. The two-part instrument uses the same subsidy to achieve the desired substitution
effect, and it uses the output tax to fix the output effect.
The point is that many prior papers have unnecessarily limited the menu of policy
options. They correctly point out that measurement of emissions (to implement a Pigovian tax or
emissions standard) may be difficult or impossible, and that a subsidy to the clean alternative is
feasible because it applies to a market transaction. However, an output tax is equally feasible
because it also applies to a market transaction. The combination of the proposed subsidy with
this equally-feasible output tax is shown here to attain a higher level of welfare.
The remainder of this paper consists of four sections: one for each of the prior models
and one to conclude. We start with Deacon’s [2] model of deforestation because we can use it to
provide a simple introduction of our theory. The following section uses Sullivan’s [9]
computational model of toxic waste, and the third section uses Stranlund’s [8] model of
technological adoption.

1.

A Model of Deforestation
Deacon [2] develops a general equilibrium model of deforestation and derives a Pigovian

tax. He then considers the possibility that such a tax is unenforceable, and he studies the effects
of several alternatives. We briefly outline the key features of Deacon’s model, and we then show
that if one of his alternatives, “employment opportunity enhancement” (Deacon, p.1), is
combined with a general tax on output, then agents respond as if they faced a Pigovian tax.

3

Deacon’s model depicts a small open economy populated by identical individuals. The
representative agent gets utility from three sources:

W = W(xc, yc, Q)

(1.1)

where xc denotes the consumption of a forest-using good, yc denotes the consumption of a
numeraire that does not require any forest inputs to produce, and Q is the service flow from
undestroyed forest.
The amount of land is normalized to one unit per individual. Land can be left as forest or
it can be used in production of X. The proportion used in production is denoted by P, so:
(1.2)

Q+P=1

The production functions for X, Y, and P are:
(1.3)

X = X(LX, P)

(1.4)

Y = αLY

(1.5)

P = (α/β)LP

where X is produced using labor (LX) and cleared land (P), Y is produced using only labor
(LY) times a constant (α), and the clearing of land (P) uses labor (LP) times another constant
(α/β).1 Each agent’s endowment of labor is normalized to one:
(1.6)

1 = LP + LX + LY

The economy trades internationally, and the value of exports must equal the value of imports:

1

This formulation implies that α and β are the effective prices of the two inputs in the
production of X (labor and cleared land, respectively).
4

(1.7)

νxe = ym

where xe denotes exports of good X , ym denotes the imports of good Y, and ν is the relative
world price of X. Good Y is the numeraire. All production must be consumed or traded, so:
(1.8)

ym ≡ yc - Y

(1.9)

xe ≡ X - xc
To represent the social planner’s problem, Deacon inserts the information contained in

the preceding eight equations (1.2) – (1.9) into the utility function (1.1) and maximizes.
Rearranging the optimal first-order conditions yields:

(1.10a)

XL
α
=
X P (WQ W y ) + β

(1.10b)

Wx
=ν
Wy

(1.10c)

ν XP =

WQ
Wy

+β

where subscripts denote partial derivatives (e.g. XL = ∂X/∂LX and Wx = ∂W/∂xc). Equation
(1.10a) shows that inputs into X are selected so that the ratio of marginal products equals the
ratio of their marginal social costs, where the latter includes the marginal value of forgone forest
services (WQ /Wy). Equation (1.10b) shows that consumers match the ratio of marginal utilities
to the ratio of prices (ν/1). Finally, (1.10c) shows that deforestation optimally stops at the point
where the value of the marginal product of deforestation equals the marginal social cost.
Combined, these three conditions fully describe the efficient equilibrium.

5

To see how this social planner’s solution compares to a market equilibrium, Deacon lets
each agent regard the flow of forest services (Q) as fixed. Furthermore, he allows government
three policy instruments. In his model, τ is a tax on exports (xe), λ is a tax on labor (LX), and

π is a Pigovian tax on deforestation (P). He shows that the Pigovian tax achieves all the optimal
conditions (1.10a – 1.10c), but neither τ nor λ can do the job. The export tax τ may reduce
the production of X, but it provides no incentive to substitute away from P. A labor subsidy (λ
< 0) can induce substitution away from P, but might encourage production.
Thus, Deacon accomplishes his goal of showing economic effects of each instrument. He
does not try to find second-best rates (which do not have closed-form solutions anyway), but he
does show that an increase in λ (from λ = 0) might raise or lower welfare. Thus, we infer that
the second-best employment tax λ might be positive (to discourage production of the forestusing good X) or negative (to encourage substitution in production towards LX and away from
P). In this extension, we change the model in only one respect: instead of saying that τ applies

only to exports, we let the tax apply to all production of X. With this single change, we provide
closed-form solutions for λ and τ that have unambiguous signs, a combination that induces
agents to act as if they faced a Pigovian tax – even when π is unavailable.
The first-order conditions for the market equilibrium are derived from the separate
maximization problems of the consumer and the producer. 2 We place all three possible tax rates
into the producer’s problem. Thus, every unit of X generates revenue of (ν - τ) for the
producer, while every unit of xc costs the consumer ν. The individual consumer (who regards
Q as fixed) chooses consumption goods to maximize W(xc, yc, Q) subject to the budget

constraint. Therefore:

6

(1.11)

Wx
=ν
Wy

This market condition always matches the second social planner’s condition (1.10b).
To maximize profits under a fixed set of world prices, producers allocate labor among its
three possible uses. These producers also ignore the damage imposed by deforestation, but they
do account for the cost of taxes (π, τ, λ). The production problem is to maximize:

(1.12)

ℒ = (ν –τ)X(LX, (α/β)LP) + αLY – π[(α/β)LP] – λLX + µ[1 – LX – LY – LP]

with respect to the choices, LX, LY, and LP. The first-order conditions are:
(1.13a)

(ν – τ)XL = λ + µ

(1.13b)

(ν – τ) ( ) X P = π ( ) + µ

(1.13c)

α=µ

α
β

α
β

Combining these conditions produces:

(1.14)

X L (α + λ )
=
X P (β + π )

If all taxes were zero (λ = π = τ = 0), then producers set XL/XP = α/β, which violates (1.10a).
Thus, the unregulated equilibrium is inefficient. As Deacon shows, if government adds a tax on
deforestation at the rate π = WQ/Wy (keeping λ = τ = 0), then (1.14) matches (1.10a). Also,

2

The approach used here differs slightly from the one employed by Deacon. He first derives the
cost function for X and then plugs that cost function into the consumer’s budget constraint. The
two approaches are equivalent.

7

substitution of (1.13c) into (1.13b) shows that (1.13b) matches (1.10c). Thus, the use of a single
Pigovian tax ensures that all three of the social planner’s conditions are met.
As Deacon points out, a tax on deforestation might be difficult to implement and enforce.
Farmers use their own labor and cut their own trees, so that neither LP nor P are used in
conjunction with a market transaction. Neither has an invoice that can be used to enforce a tax.
If the sale of output is a market transaction, however, then X is observed and the output tax (τ)
may be more easily enforced.
If π = 0, our point is that government can set:

(1.15)

λ=

(1.16)

τ=

− α (WQ / W y )

β + (WQ / W y )
(WQ / W y )
XP

<0

>0

These provide closed-form solutions for first-best tax rates with unambiguous signs: the
government must subsidize the non-forest input, LX, and tax output X. The choice of λ in
(1.15) can be inserted into the firm’s condition (1.14) to match the social planner’s condition
(1.10a). With this subsidy to labor by itself, however, the total amount of deforestation by
producers would exceed the amount of the social planner in (1.10c). The tax on output in (1.16)
ensures that this additional condition is met. By subsidizing labor and taxing output, we have
shown that government can induce agents to act as if they faced a Pigovian tax.
A few caveats might be in order. First, in some cases, the output tax itself might be
difficult to enforce. Subsistence farmers in developing nations may eat their own output or trade
informally. Perhaps only exports can be taxed, as in Deacon’s original paper. Still, however, the
use of two instruments together must perform better than the use of each one alone. Second, if

8

production uses several non-polluting inputs, then each must be subsidized. The solution may
then involve more than the “two-part instrument” in equations (1.15) and (1.16). Third,
heterogeneity matters. If parameters α or β in production functions (1.4) and (1.5) differ
among firms, then the optimal subsidy rate in (1.15) may differ. Perfect implementation could
be complicated. Again, however, even a uniform subsidy and output tax must perform better
than the uniform subsidy alone.
Therefore, this use of Deacon’s model offers additional insight for policymaking.
Because the single policy instrument (λ) has ambiguous effects on deforestation, public policy
is difficult to construct and evaluate. Here, in contrast, the combination of two instruments
produces unambiguous effects. The subsidy to LX has the desired substitution effect away from
P, but it reduces the cost of production. This would increase output, unless government offsets

this effect with a separate output tax. The model now provides a clear directive to policymakers.
Environmental policy can indeed subsidize the non-polluting input to production. That subsidy
is only optimal, however, if combined with a tax on output.

2.

A Model of Toxic Waste Disposal
Sullivan [9] builds a computational model and uses it to show how a subsidy to legal

disposal can significantly reduce social costs associated with illegal dumping of toxic waste.
However, this subsidy to legal disposal does have an important drawback. Even proper disposal
of waste encumbers the environment and imposes costs on society, and this subsidy increases the
amount of such waste. We show that the use of an output tax alleviates this problem. The output
tax induces firms to produce less waste overall, and it generates revenue to help finance the
subsidy program.
To show how a tax-subsidy combination could improve welfare within Sullivan’s
framework, we review his model, replicate his computational results, and then add an output tax.
9

In order to model the effects of an output tax, we must modify Sullivan’s framework. Most
notably, we add consumers and their final output demand. We show that these modifications
yield a factor demand curve and a measure of welfare that are perfectly consistent with
Sullivan’s assumptions. We replicate the welfare gain from Sullivan’s subsidy to legal disposal,
and we show that adding an output tax provides a welfare gain three times as large.
Sullivan’s model consists of a set of nearly-identical firms that differ only with respect to
how effectively they avoid detection when dumping waste illegally. Firms that can avoid
detection most effectively choose to dispose of all their waste illegally, while other firms use
legal disposal. The marginal firm is indifferent between legal and illegal disposal.
Each firm makes two decisions: how to dispose of waste (legally or illegally) and how
much waste to produce. Each uses the disposal method that generates the smallest expected cost.
The relative costs of illegal and legal disposal depend on the size of the subsidy to legal disposal,
the government's resources devoted to detecting illegal disposal, and the heterogeneous trait of
the firm. The firm decides how much waste to produce based on a downward-sloping factor
demand curve for waste. The factor price is the firm’s expected disposal cost. Thus, a subsidy
changes all firms' relative factor prices and shifts some firms at the margin from illegal to legal
disposal. But because the subsidy reduces the cost of disposal for all firms using legal disposal,
it increases the chosen waste generated.
Sullivan’s m firms are ordered according to the likelihood of detection when dumping
waste illegally. The first firm (j = 1) is the least likely to be observed, and the last firm (j = m)
is the most likely to be observed. Using Sullivan's notation, the probability of detection is a
linear function (Φ + τj), where Φ and τ are constants (for any given level of enforcement).3

3

Sullivan models Φ as a function of resources (R) devoted to detection, and he calculates the
effects on waste and welfare in his model from changes in the government’s monitoring effort.
Since we are concerned only with other policies (subsidies and taxes), we fix R and thus Φ.
10

Thus, firm j faces an expected cost or “price” per barrel of illegal dumping given by:
(2.1)

PI(j) = f·(Φ + τj) = 765·(.014 + .000018j)

where f is the fine for illegal dumping, and where the right hand side shows Sullivan’s
parameter values.4 All firms face the same fixed private marginal cost of legal disposal (CL)
and the same rate of subsidy (s). Thus, all firms face a private price for legal disposal given by:
(2.2)

PL = CL ·(1 – s) = 30·(1 – s)

Each firm chooses to dispose of waste in the least-cost manner, and so each faces a price of
waste disposal given by Pw(j) = min [PL , PI(j)]. To see how many firms dispose of waste
illegally, note that the indifferent firm, j′, faces the same cost for legal or illegal disposal. Set
(2.1) equal to (2.2) and solve for j :

(2.3)

j′ =

C L (1 − s ) − Φ f
τf

The first j′ firms dispose of waste illegally, while the remainder use legal disposal. Every firm
j has a downward-sloping demand for waste:

(2.4)

w(j) =

k
30
=
Pw ( j )
Pw ( j )

where k is a constant.5

4

To choose parameter values, Sullivan uses direct evidence from disposal facilities in California
and other prior empirical literature. For example, parameters in the firm’s cost of illegal
dumping are based on prior results from Ehrlich [3].

5

When we extend the model to account for the output market, we will specify k as a function of
income and of parameters from a utility function and a production function.
11

Before turning to measurement of the costs and benefits of a policy, it is worth noting
that equations (2.3) and (2.4) will drive our results. Equation (2.3) shows that a subsidy has the
desirable effect of inducing more firms to dispose of waste legally: higher s means lower j′.
The subsidy also has the undesirable effect of decreasing the price of waste, Pw(j), and therefore,
increasing the quantity of waste demanded (in 2.4). We can offset the second effect, however,
by adding a tax on output.
Sullivan models the social marginal cost of illegal disposal, CI, to be constant. Using
his notation and parameter values, the total social cost of illegal disposal is:
(2.5)

TCI = I ⋅ C I = I ⋅ψ ⋅ C L = I (8.5)(30)

where I is the volume of illegal waste, and ψ is a constant greater than one (so that CI > CL).
In contrast, the social marginal cost of legal disposal, mc(L), increases linearly with legal waste,
L, so mc(L) = .003(L). Therefore, the total cost of legal waste is triangular:

(2.6)

TCL = .5L· mc(L) = .5L(.003L)

The benefit to firm j of generating waste w(j) is the area below its factor demand curve
(inverting equation 2.4):6
w( j )

(2.7)

b(j) =

∫
0

k

ω

dω

The total benefit of waste is the sum across m = 10,000 firms of all their individual benefits:

6

Since the integral is not defined at the lower limit of integration, we follow Sullivan by using a
lower limit of 0.001 in computations.
12

m

TB(W) =

(2.8)

∫ b( j )dj
1

Taking the benefit of pollution (equation 2.8) and subtracting the costs (equations 2.5 and 2.6)
yields the value of the waste market.
Net welfare is this value of waste minus the social cost of administering a policy. For
Sullivan, this social cost includes a direct cost of enforcement (R) and the excess burden of
raising money for enforcement and for subsidies. Our own programs can replicate his results
using his formulas, but in this paper, we omit his excess burden calculations for simplicity.7
We now modify Sullivan’s model to allow for an output tax. We model consumer
demand (and therefore output) in the simplest way that yields results consistent with Sullivan’s
model. We assume that each firm behaves competitively, earns zero profits, and receives a
market price Px for its output x (with index j suppressed).8 For each output x, a
representative price-taking consumer has a Cobb-Douglas demand function based on exogenous
income, y, while facing ad valorem tax, t. Therefore:

(2.9)

x=

γy
Px (1 + t )

where γ is a preference parameter. We assume that x is produced using toxic waste and some
other input via Cobb-Douglas production, so the firm’s expenditure on waste is a constant share
of sales revenue:
7

In addition, results in Bovenberg and de Mooij [1] raise doubts about the kind of excess burden
calculation in Sullivan [9]. It is true that subsidies might have to be financed by raising some
other distorting tax, like a wage tax, which would reduce the real net wage and reduce labor
supply. However, the subsidy for waste disposal would reduce the equilibrium cost of goods
sold and thus raise the real net wage. This effect partly offsets the change to excess burden.

8

Since firms have different costs, we cannot assume that they all operate competitively in the
same output market. Instead, therefore, we assume that the market is segmented so that each
price-taking firm faces the demand of one representative price-taking consumer.
13

(2.10)

Pww = αPxx

To obtain the factor demand for waste, substitute (2.9) into (2.10) and solve for w:

(2.11)

w=

αγy (1 + t )
Pw

=

k (1 + t )
Pw

This equation modifies (2.4) by the addition of an output tax. Since Sullivan used k = 30, we
set αγy = 30 to be consistent with Sullivan when the output tax is zero.9

Table I: Computational Results for Toxic Waste Policy
Suggested
Optimal
Subsidy with Subsidy-Tax
Output Tax Combination

Laissezfaire

Suggested
Subsidy

0
0
0
0

0.349
150.5
0
0

0.349
71.7
1.10
523.8

0.643
193.0
1.80
642.9

Volume of disposal (barrels)
Legal
Illegal
Total
Number of unlawful firms

8,600
2,241
10,841
1,400

14,378
1,307
15,685
640

6,847
623
7,470
640

10,004
0
10,004
0

Benefits and costs
Benefit of waste (thousand $)
TCI (thousand $)
TCL (thousand $)
Net value of waste (thousand $)
Enforcement cost (thousands $)

2,091
572
111
1,408
20

2,206
333
310
1,563
20

1,984
159
70
1,755
20

2,072
0
150
1,922
20

Net welfare (thousand $)
Gain relative to laissez-faire

1,388
0

1,543
155

1,735
347

1,902
514

Policy variables
Subsidy rate
Subsidy budget (thousand $)
Output tax rate
Output tax revenue (thousand $)

Table I shows the results of our calculations. The first two columns show results when
the output tax is zero, as in Sullivan [9]. The subsidy rate is zero in the first column, to replicate

9

We have no need to specify separate values for α, γ, and y. Each is an exogenous constant,
and we need only their product.
14

Sullivan’s “Laissez-Faire” case, and it is .349 in the second column to replicate his “Optimum
Subsidy” case. These results emphasize Sullivan’s central point: when illegal disposal is hard to
observe, a subsidy to legal disposal can be an effective policy tool. It reduces illegal waste by
42% (from 2,241 to 1,307 barrels), and it increases the welfare benefit of this market by 11%
(from 1,388 to 1,543 in $ thousands). The welfare gain is $155,000. In doing so, however, this
policy raises the total amount of waste by 45% (from 10,841 to 15,685 barrels).
The next two columns show that a tax-subsidy combination can improve upon the
suggested subsidy policy. The third column calculates the benefit-maximizing output tax when
the subsidy is still .349, as in the previous column. If t = 1.10, then the welfare gain relative to
the laissez-faire equilibrium improves to $347 thousand – more than twice the gain from the
subsidy alone. The additional gain comes from reducing both legal and illegal waste.
The availability of an output tax means, however, that .349 is no longer the optimal
subsidy rate. The fourth column of Table I shows the results of our search for the optimal values
of both rates simultaneously. In this case, the optimal policy provides a subsidy of .643, large
enough to induce all firms to dispose of waste legally, and it imposes a relatively large tax on
output (t = 1.80). The net welfare benefit from this market is now 37% larger than with no
policy, a gain of $514 thousand – more than three times the gain from Sullivan’s subsidy alone.
The intuition behind this impressive gain is straightforward. In Sullivan’s framework, the
subsidy to legal disposal causes total waste to rise by 45%. Even legal waste imposes a social
cost. Therefore, this subsidy must be used in moderation. When the subsidy is combined with a
sufficiently large output tax, however, the demands for both types of wastes fall. Government
can then use the subsidy more aggressively to switch waste from illegal to legal disposal.
We next calculate what would be the optimal Pigovian tax, if it were available, and we
find that the welfare-maximizing rate would be $19.29 per barrel of illegal waste. The outcome
of this calculation exactly matches the last column of Table I. Thus, in this model as well as the
15

previous one, the optimal two-part instrument replicates the effects of the unavailable Pigovian
tax – even though each part applies to an observable market transaction: a subsidy to legal
disposal and a tax on sale of output.
Sullivan’s computational model provides important insights into the problem of dumping
toxic waste. Illegal dumping is hard to detect, so it's hard to tax. However, government can
induce voluntary reductions of costly illegal waste by subsidizing legal disposal. The subsidy
increases total waste, however, unless that subsidy is combined with an output tax.

3.

A Model of Technological Adoption
Stranlund [8] analyzes three policy tools of a government that wants firms to abate

pollution: an abatement standard (s), the probability of an audit (p), and publicly-provided
technological assistance (q) for pollution abatement technology. In order to achieve any
abatement, government must use strictly positive amounts of the first two tools. If audits are
expensive, Stranlund shows that a cost-minimizing government may also use positive amounts of
technological assistance. By providing such assistance, the government can achieve a given
level of abatement while doing fewer audits.
Stranlund’s framework considers a risk-neutral firm that minimizes expected compliance
cost while facing a standard stated in total emissions (or equivalently, total abatement). Here, we
extend his model to analyze the trade-off between monitoring and technological aid when firms
face a per-unit emissions or abatement standard. Thus we broaden the applicability of
Stranlund’s analysis, as per-unit standards are common policy tools. For example, policies to
control mobile-source pollution focus on emissions per vehicle, rather than the hard-to-monitor
total emissions. In addition, whereas Stranlund leaves implicit the firm’s choice of output, we
will add explicit consideration of how the per-unit abatement standard affects output choices.
We can then add a tax on output.
16

Whereas Stranlund allows output implicitly to change, and uses a to represent total
abatement, we use a to represent abatement per unit. Similarly, the abatement standard (s)
represents the required abatement per unit of output. When all of Stranlund’s variables are redefined to represent amounts per unit of output, we then simply note that all his derivations still
hold and all his results can be re-interpreted to involve abatement or emissions per unit. We then
add explicit changes in output and analyze what happens to total output and total emissions.

Extending the model in this way produces an interesting result. Because technological
aid reduces costs to firms, equilibrium output rises. Therefore, while this aid increases
abatement per unit, it also increases the number of units of output. Consequently, the effect of
technological aid on total emissions is ambiguous. In many industries, the cost of pollution
control equipment is negligible when compared to the industry’s other costs. In these cases, the
impact of a technology subsidy on output is likely to be negligible, and our extension does not
significantly modify Stranlund’s results. In other industries, however, pollution control is a
significant fraction of overall costs.10 In these cases, we show that a cost-minimizing
government may still wish to conduct environmental policy by using technological aid.
However, the use of technological aid is sub-optimal unless accompanied by a tax on output.
As Stranlund models them, the compliance costs for reducing emissions consist of three
parts. First, the firm pays the direct cost of abatement, v(a, z), which depends on abatement and
on the level of pollution control technology (z). We re-define a as abatement per unit and v as
the cost per unit, but all derivations follow Stranlund: the cost per unit rises with abatement

(∂v / ∂a ≡ va > 0) and falls with better technology (∂v / ∂z ≡ v z < 0) .
10

Second, the firm faces the

U.S. Commerce Department [11] compares firms’ expenditures on pollution abatement to the
value of output. The data show significant variation by industry. For example, firms producing
petroleum and coal products (SIC 29) spend about 2¢ per dollar of output, while firms producing
stone, clay and glass products (SIC 32) spend about one-tenth of that amount.
17

cost of maintaining and using the technology, w(z, q). This (per unit) cost increases as the level
of technology increases (wz>0), but may be offset by a government subsidy or technological aid,
q (where wq<0).11 Third, the firm may pay a fine if it does not fully comply with the “required”

abatement standard (s). The fine (per unit) is a function f of the degree to which a firm
“cheats”, (s – a), and the expected fine depends on the probability of an audit (p). Overall
compliance costs (per unit of output) are thus defined by:
(3.1)

C(a, z) = v(a, z) + w(z, q) + pf(s – a)

Here, we retain Stranlund’s consideration of heterogeneity (even though we suppress his firmspecific index for notational simplicity). In principle, these costs can vary among firms both
because firms have different ability to abate and because a regulator can set different abatement
standards, probability of audit, degree of technological aid, and fine for non-compliance (even
though Stranlund assumes that technological aid and fines are uniform).
To study Stranlund’s policy options in a model where output varies, we add notation x
to denote output, and we say that the firm’s “potential pollution” is proportional to output. In
fact, we can define a unit of “potential pollution” as the amount associated with one unit of
output. With no abatement per unit (a = 0), emissions are x. Then actual total emissions are:
(3.2)

e = x(1 – a)

We also add a production function in terms of a single input, labor (l), so that:
(3.3)

x = g(l)

In Stranlund’s formulation, government assistance comes in the form of a publicly-provided
good that all firms may access. We do not consider the degree to which this aid is rival or
excludable, so we use the terms “subsidy” and “technological aid” interchangeably.

11

18

where gl > 0 and gll < 0. Each price-taking firm faces the market price P for its output, and it
must pay an output tax t. Thus, the firm chooses z, a, and l to maximize profits (Π):
(3.4)

∏(z, a, l) = g(l)[P – t – C(a, z)] – l

where l is the numeraire. After using equation (3.2) and simplifying, the problem produces the
following first-order conditions:
(3.5a)

v z ( a , z ) + wz ( z , q ) = 0

(3.5b)

v a (a , z ) − pf ′( s − a ) ≤ 0 [if < 0, then a = s]

(3.5c)

gl ·[P – t – C(a, z)] – 1 = 0

where the subscripts denote partial derivatives. The first two conditions are identical to those of
Stranlund’s model (his equations 2.2 and 2.3, p. 232). Thus, his comparative statics hold here as
well: when firms do not fully comply (a < s), they increase abatement in response to increased
aid (aq > 0), an increased standard (as > 0), or increased audits (ap > 0). We merely reinterpret his results to show the effects of these policies on abatement per unit. Thus, we proceed
directly to show effects on total pollution. Differentiating the first order conditions shows the
output response to a technological subsidy:

(3.6)

xq ≡ g l ⋅ lq =

( g l ) 2 ⋅ wq
g ll ⋅ [ P − t − C (a, z )]

>0

The sign of this comparative static follows because wq and gll are both negative while the net
price [P – t – C(a, z)] is positive.12 Therefore, equation (3.6) verifies that the subsidy q

Because the firm has no fixed costs and decreasing returns to scale (gll < 0), any firm
producing positive output must be making positive profits [P – t – C(a, z)].

12

19

reduces the firm’s marginal cost and therefore raises its optimal level of output. Other
comparative statics may be similarly derived. In particular, xp, xs, and xt are all negative. In
addition, at and zt are both zero: if a firm is already minimizing its cost per unit, then a tax on
output does not affect abatement per unit or technology per unit. Since e = x(1– a), these
comparative statics define how each instrument affects total emissions:
(3.7a)

e p = xp(1– a) – xap < 0

(3.7b)

es = xs(1– a) – xas < 0

(3.7c)

et = xt (1– a) < 0

(3.7d)

eq = xq(1– a) – xaq ≷ 0

where subscripts again denote partial derivatives. Stranlund shows that aq > 0, as > 0, and
ap > 0. Thus, we show here that total emissions (e) are reduced by increased audits (p), an

increased standard (s), or by an output tax (t).
Equation (3.7d) looks at the effects of technological aid on emissions. Since both aq and
xq are positive, the sign of eq depends on relative magnitudes. If abatement costs are only a

small fraction of the firm’s total costs, then xq may be quite small. If xq were zero, then the
firm does not change output, and our extension reduces to Stranlund’s original model. On the
other hand, a technological subsidy might well affect output of the firm. From equation (3.7d),
the condition for eq to be positive is

xq
x

>

aq
(1 − a )

. Since (1 – a) is emissions and –aq is the

change in emissions (both per unit of output), the firm’s total emissions rise if the percentage
change in output exceeds the percentage change in per-unit emissions. This condition may hold
for any number of (heterogeneous) firms within an industry, and so it may hold for the aggregate
as well. If so, then the subsidy to abatement may increase aggregate pollution.
20

The possibility that technological aid may increase emissions (when the standard is per
unit) is a fundamental change in Stranlund’s result (where the standard was for total abatement).
For example, Stranlund shows that if his total abatement standard is fixed and a regulator wants
firms to cut total emissions, then the regulator can view monitoring and technological aid as
substitutes. Using the same methodology as Stranlund, we next show that if the abatement
standard is fixed per unit and the regulator still wants firms to cut total emissions, then
monitoring and technological aid may no longer be substitutes. All else equal, increased aid may
require more monitoring.
As in Stranlund, at this point, the abatement standard (s) and the fine (f) are fixed. The
regulator optimally trades off the probability of an audit (p) and the subsidy (q) to induce the
cost-minimizing choice of technology and abatement per unit. Since we add consideration of an
output tax, our regulator must find the cost-minimizing combination (q, t, and p) to achieve
the target for total pollution (e ≤ e ).
In order to derive the relationship between aid (q) and monitoring (p), let p *(q, t , e )
be the minimum monitoring effort needed to achieve the compliance goal, e , given any level of
aid and tax. Stranlund uses first-order conditions (3.5a and 3.5b) to define the firm’s choice of a
as a function of policy variables, a(q, s, p). Since s is fixed, this can be written as a(q, p).
Similarly, we use (3.5c) to define output x as a function of all policy variables, x(q, t, p).
Therefore, the function p* is defined implicitly by:

(3.8)

e = x(q, t, p * (q, t , e ) )·[1 – a (q, p * (q, t , e ) )]

Differentiate (3.8) with respect to q, rearrange, and use equations (3.7a) and (3.7d) to get:

(3.9)

p*q =

− eq
ep

≷0

21

This expression is analogous to equation (2.10) in Stranlund’s model (p. 233). Because he is
concerned with abatement in response to a total emission standard, he gets pq* = –aq/ap < 0.
When firms face a per-unit standard, however, we just showed that the sign of pq* = –eq/ep is
ambiguous (because the sign of eq is ambiguous). Regulators view monitoring and
technological aid as substitutes only if increased aid leads to lowered pollution (eq < 0).
Stranlund shows that technological aid can substitute for expensive audits when firms
face a standard on total pollution. We have shown that this substitution may not hold if firms
face a standard defined on pollution per unit of output. Nonetheless, we next show that if
regulators have three tools (q, p, and t), they can again view the first two as substitutes. That
is, regulators may well substitute technological aid for monitoring, in this more general setting, if
they can combine the technology subsidy with a tax on output. The intuition behind this
conclusion is simple. A regulator can reduce pollution through various combinations of reduced
output and increased abatement per unit, and the overall pollution goal can be accomplished in a
two-stage process. The first stage we assume to be exactly the same as in Stranlund’s paper
(redefining variables per unit): the regulator chooses the levels of aid and monitoring to achieve
the desired abatement per unit. With respect to this abatement, as Stranlund shows, monitoring
and aid do act as substitutes. Thus, the regulator may want to use positive amounts of aid. Our
extension focuses on the second part of the regulator’s problem. Having achieved the desired
abatement per unit, the regulator sets an output goal. Taking into account the optimal choices of
monitoring and aid, the regulator sets the output tax to meet this second goal. Since abatement is
not a function of the output tax, this choice does not alter abatement.
To model this two-stage problem, we adhere to Stranlund’s model and allow the regulator
to minimize the total social costs associated with regulation. In our extension, these costs can be

22

split into two categories: the costs associated with a certain level of abatement per unit, plus the
loss of consumer surplus associated with diminished output.
Stranlund identifies the costs associated with per-unit abatement as the sum of costs
borne by the firm, v(a, z) + w(z, q), and costs borne by government. The latter include the cost
per audit, r, and the cost of aid (where the unit price of aid is normalized to one). Note that the
expected fine, pf(s-a), is a transfer, so it does not enter social costs. Maintaining the assumption
that the standard is fixed, the expected social cost associated with the firm’s abatement is [v(a, z)
+ w(z, q)+ rp + q]. Like Stranlund, we assume that this function is convex and that the

regulator chooses p and q to minimize this cost of achieving a particular goal for a.13 Given
those choices (p* and q*), and the firm’s optimal responses (including z*), this cost can be
defined as a function of the goal for a:
Φ (a) = v(a, z*) + w(z*, q*)+ rp* + q*

(3.10)

In addition, these policies reduce output and thus diminish consumer surplus. Let x
represent the firm’s output when government applies none of its policy tools. We then define
Ω( x – x) as the lost consumer surplus when decreasing output from x to x. To minimize the

overall costs of achieving any particular reduction of pollution, the regulator therefore chooses x
and a to minimize:

(3.11)

ℒ = Φ(a) + Ω( x – x) + λ( e – x(1 – a))

This problem’s first-order conditions describe the optimal mix of per-unit abatement (a) and
output reduction ( x – x). The regulator chooses p and q (in 3.10) to achieve the optimal a.
13

The goal for a may be less than the standard, s, because firms may cheat when minimizing
their own expected costs in equation (3.1).
23

Then, output is controlled by choosing t conditional upon those choices (p* and q*). In other
words, if the regulator chooses to limit per-firm output to some level, x*, then the optimal t
satisfies x* = x(p*, q*, t). Inverting this expression, we have the optimal tax rate:14
t* = t(p*, q*, x*)

(3.12)

Stranlund finds that a regulator can view monitoring and aid as substitutes, but we find
this result does not hold with a per-unit emission standard. Nonetheless, Stranlund’s basic
intuition comes through unscathed. Our extension allows the regulator to solve the problem
sequentially. Stranlund’s model describes the first part of that sequence – how the regulator uses
technological aid to minimize the costs of abatement per unit. Our contribution shows that
different monitoring-subsidy combinations have different effects on output, which in turn affects
pollution. However, the regulator can control output by using an output tax. Thus, Stranlund’s
results still hold, even if aid tends to increase pollution, but only if the regulator combines the
optimal monitoring-aid package with an optimal output tax.
4.

Conclusion
Deacon, Sullivan and Stranlund study an important and topical subject. Currently,

regulators use a variety of environmental subsidies as policy tools. Just in the United States, we
find several examples. The Department of Agriculture (USDA) sponsors a Cooperative Forestry
Program that provides “technical and financial assistance to help rural and urban citizens,
including private landowners, care for forests” [10]. Municipal trash and recycling collection
programs subsidize the proper disposal of waste. Also, the Environmental Protection Agency
14

Each parameter may differ among firms, and so the optimal value of this tax rate would differ
among firms. Clearly, such a policy would be difficult to implement. Even a uniform output tax
can improve upon the welfare gain from using only the abatement subsidy, however, and a
computational version of this model could be used to show how much the gain exceeds that from
a subsidy alone (or falls short of that from firm-specific taxes).
24

(EPA) subsidizes new environmental technologies. The EPA’s 33/50 Program disseminates
information and offers technological assistance to firms in order to reduce air pollution (US EPA
[13]), and the agency’s Green Lights Program subsidizes energy efficient lighting (US EPA
[14]). The Department of Energy (DOE) promotes the use of alternative energy sources, and it
conducts basic research on how to abate and reduce pollution (US DOE [12]).
In combination, the papers of Deacon, Sullivan and Stranlund show that such subsidies
have positive effects. Subsidies are especially appealing when a Pigovian tax is not available.
With Deacon’s model, we show that proper implementation of such a subsidy matched with an
output tax is equivalent to a Pigovian tax. In Sullivan’s computational model, a subsidy by itself
increases social benefits by 11% (compared to the laissez-faire equilibrium). A subsidy-tax
combination increases that gain to 37% of laissez-faire market benefits – more than three times
the gain from using the subsidy alone.
Because Sullivan selected parameters to represent the toxic waste market, we have no
reason to believe that these numerical results would generalize to other situations. The point is
just to show a numerical example of our theoretical result. Another example is in Fullerton and
West [6], where vehicle pollution is reduced by a subsidy to clean-car purchases, but the addition
of a gas tax provides a welfare gain that is 3.5 times as large.
Our final example provides insight into this improvement. Using Stranlund’s model with
a per-unit standard, we show that a subsidy increases output. Therefore a subsidy, used alone,
has ambiguous effects on pollution and may require increased monitoring. To prevent output
from rising, however, regulators can use an output tax. Thus, indeed, a subsidy can help achieve
optimal results. To do so, however, the regulator must combine it with a tax on output.

25

References:
1. A. L. Bovenberg and R. A. de Mooij, Environmental levies and distortionary taxation,
American Economic Review 84, 1085-1089 (1994).
2. R. Deacon, Assessing the relationship between government policy and deforestation, Journal
of Environmental Economics and Management, 28, 1-18 (1995).
3. I. Ehrlich, Participation in illegitimate activities: An economic analysis, in “Essays in
Economics of Crime and Punishment,” (G. S. Becker and W. M. Landers, Eds.), National
Bureau of Economic Research, New York (1974).
4. G. Eskeland and S. Devarajan, “Taxing Bads by Taxing Goods: Pollution Control with
Presumptive Charges,” World Bank, Washington DC (1996).
5. D. Fullerton, Environmental levies and distortionary taxation: comment, American Economic
Review 87, 245-251 (1997).
6. D. Fullerton and S. West, Tax and Subsidy Combinations for the Control of Car Pollution,
NBER Working Paper No. W7774 (July 2000).
7. D. Fullerton and A. Wolverton, The case for a two-part instrument, in “Environmental and
Public Economics: Essays in Honor of Wallace E. Oates” (A. Panagariya, P. R. Portney
and R. M. Schwab, Eds.) Edward Elgar, Cheltenham (1999).
8. J. Stranlund, Public technological aid to support compliance to environmental standards,
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 34, 228-239 (1997).
9. A. M. Sullivan, Policy options for toxic disposal: Laissez-faire, subsidization, and
enforcement, Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 14, 58-71 (1987).
10. U.S. Department of Agriculture, “USDA Forest Service, State & Private Forestry,
Cooperative Forestry,” web page, http://www.fs.fed.us/spf/coop/, USDA, Washington
DC (July 13, 2000 version).
11. U.S. Department of Commerce (Bureau of the Census), “Pollution Abatement Costs and
Expenditures: 1994” Current Industrial Reports; MA299(94)-1, U.S. Government
Printing Office (1994).
12. U.S. Department of Energy, “Strategic Plan of the Office of Science,” U.S. DOE,
Washington DC (1999).
13. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, “EPA’s 33/50 Program Second Progress Report:
Reducing Risk through Voluntary Action,” U.S. EPA, Washington DC (1992).
14. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, “Green Lights: An Enlightened Approach to Energy
Efficiency and Pollution,” U.S. EPA, Washington DC (1993).
15. M. Walls and K. Palmer, Upstream pollution, downstream waste disposal, and the design of
comprehensive environmental policies, Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 41, 94-108 (2001).
26

