NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE RESPONSIVENESS OF CONSUMER PRICES TO EXCHANGE RATES AND THE
IMPLICATIONS FOR EXCHANGE-RATE POLICY: A SURVEY OF A FEW RECENT NEW
OPEN-ECONOMY MACRO MODELS
Charles Engel
Working Paper 8725
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8725
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2002

This paper was prepared for the Money, Macro and Finance annual conference in Belfast, Northern Ireland,
September 2001. The National Science Foundation has supported this research through a grant to the
University of Wisconsin – Madison. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Charles Engel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Responsiveness of Consumer Prices to Exchange Rates And the Implications for
Exchange-Rate Policy: A Survey Of a Few Recent New Open-Economy Macro Models
Charles Engel
NBER Working Paper No. 8725
January 2002
JEL No. F4, F3

ABSTRACT
The traditional case for flexibility in nominal exchange rates assumes that there is nominal price
stickiness that prevents relative prices from adjusting in response to real shocks. When prices are sticky
in producers’ currencies, nominal exchange rate changes can achieve the relative price change that is
required between home and foreign goods. The nominal exchange rate flexibility provides the desired
“expenditure-switching” effect of relative price changes. But if prices are fixed ex ante in consumers’
currencies, nominal exchange rate flexibility cannot achieve any relative price adjustment. In fact,
nominal exchange rate fluctuations are undesirable because they lead to deviations from the law of one
price. So, fixed exchange rates are optimal. The empirical literature appears to support the notion that
prices are sticky in consumers’ currencies. This paper surveys the approaches taken in the new open
economy macroeconomic literature to formalize the role of optimal monetary policy. The survey explores
how this literature has dealt with the empirical evidence on pass-through of exchange rate changes to
consumer prices.

Charles Engel
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
and NBER
cengel@ssc.wisc.edu

1. Introduction
Exchange-rate flexibility, it has been argued, is useful because it facilitates relative price
adjustment among countries.

Currency depreciation is a quick and painless way to lower

domestic prices relative to foreign prices. A burgeoning literature has examined the benefits of
exchange-rate stability in emerging economies. That literature has focused on the potential for
greater monetary and financial stability from either fixing exchange rates, or taking more
extreme measures such as adopting a currency board or dollarizing. But that analysis is not
directly applicable to the choice of adopting the euro facing some European countries. These
countries uniformly have stable monetary policy (at least as stable as the policy conducted by the
European Central Bank) and have deep, well-regulated financial markets. The economic benefit
of adopting the euro is the increased efficiency of transactions and the elimination of uninsurable
exchange-rate risk. On the other hand, a country adopting the euro cedes its monetary policy to
the European Central Bank, and no longer has the option of using monetary policy to respond to
local conditions. Furthermore, adopting the euro eliminates one possible avenue for adjustment
between countries – the relative price changes induced by exchange rate movements. It is this
latter effect that is the focus of this survey.

Specifically, I shall examine how the recent

theoretical literature in open-economy macroeconomics has addressed empirical evidence on the
effects of exchange rates on prices, and its implications for the choice of exchange-rate regime.
Much recent evidence has found that consumer prices are not much affected by nominal
exchange rate changes.1 This finding may imply that nominal exchange rate changes do not play
much of a role in changing relative prices of goods. If consumer prices are not responsive to
exchange rates, then a depreciation of the home currency, for example, may not increase much

1

I have been the perpetrator of some of this literature: for example Engel (1993, 1999, 2000) and Engel and Rogers
(1996, 2001). Other important works include Rogers and Jenkins (1995), Obstfeld and Taylor (1997) and Parsley
and Wei (2001a, 2001b). Mussa’s (1986) classic paper stimulated much of this research.

1

the price that consumers pay for imported goods. However, there are other interpretations of the
evidence on exchange rates and consumer prices. For example, there might be important relative
price effects but not for final consumer goods.

One possibility is that intermediate firms

(distributors, marketers or retailers) substitute between domestic and foreign goods based on
relative price changes, but set prices for consumers in a way that is unresponsive to exchangerate changes.
Understanding the extent of to which exchange rates alter relative prices is crucial for
examining the desirability of exchange-rate flexibility among advanced nations

Milton

Friedman (1953) was an early advocate of flexible exchange rates, on the grounds that they could
allow rapid change in relative prices between countries (p. 162):
“A rise in the exchange rate … makes foreign goods cheaper in terms of domestic
currency, even though their prices are unchanged in terms of their own currency, and domestic
goods more expensive in terms of foreign currency, even though their prices are unchanged in
terms of domestic currency. This tends to increase imports [and] reduce exports.”
This passage makes two assumptions: that goods prices are unchanged in the currency of
the producer of the good, and that there is significant pass-through of the exchange rate change
to the buyer of the good. On the nominal price stickiness, Friedman argues that the choice of
exchange-rate regime would matter little if nominal goods prices adjusted quickly to shocks (p.
165):
“If internal prices were as flexible as exchange rates, it would make little economic
difference whether adjustments were brought about by changes in exchange rates or by
equivalent changes in internal prices. But this condition is clearly not fulfilled. … At least in the
modern world, internal prices are highly inflexible.”
Friedman makes the following famous analogy (p. 173):
“The argument for flexible exchange rates is, strange to say, very nearly identical with
the argument for daylight saving time. Isn’t it absurd to change the clock in summer when
exactly the same result could be achieved by having each individual change his habits? All that
is required is that everyone decide to come to his office an hour earlier, have lunch an hour
earlier, etc. But obviously it is much simpler to change the clock that guides all than to have
each individual separately change his pattern of reaction to the clock, even though all want to do
2

so. The situation is exactly the same in the exchange market. It is far simpler to allow one price
to change, namely, the price of foreign exchange, than to rely upon changes in the multitude of
prices that together constitute the internal price structure.”
In his case against the euro, Feldstein (1992) makes a similar argument:
“A currency union means, of course, that nominal exchange rates cannot adjust to
achieve a needed change in the real exchange rate. The local price level must, therefore, adjust
to bring about the change in the real exchange rate. Thus a 10% fall in the real value of a
currency can be achieved either by a 10% fall in the nominal exchange rate or by a 10% fall in
local wages and prices.
Either form of adjustment can bring the real exchange rate to its equilibrium value, but a
decline in domestic prices is likely to require a period of increased unemployment. It would
certainly be better to have a decline in the nominal exchange rate. The shift to a single currency
in Europe would preclude such nominal exchange-rate adjustments and force real exchange-rate
reductions to be achieved through lower local wages and prices.”
In assessing this relative-price effect and its significance for the choice of exchange-rate
regime, Friedman is certainly correct to emphasize the importance of nominal goods price
stickiness. As Buiter (1999) has forcefully emphasized, the decision to join a monetary union, or
the choice of an exchange-rate regime, is a monetary issue. Relative-price behavior is usually
independent of monetary regime in a world of perfect goods price flexibility. The choice of
monetary regime in this case only matters for short-run adjustment problems – the period during
which nominal prices are adjusting.
I shall begin the survey by laying out a simple version of the type of new open economy
macroeconomic model that has built on the pioneering work of Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995, 1998,
2000a.) (Hereinafter, I shall call these authors OR.) Their initial work has assumed that nominal
prices are fixed in the producers’ currencies, so that prices for consumers change one-for-one in
the short run with changes in the nominal exchange rate. This is exactly the assumption of
Friedman and Feldstein. I shall call this the PCP (for “producer-currency pricing”) model. The
OR models offer a sound analytical foundation for the claim that flexibility of exchange rates is

3

desirable in this setting.2 They derive three important results: (1) Exchange-rate flexibility is
desirable as a means of achieving relative price adjustment under PCP pricing. Indeed, in their
models, flexible exchange rates are a perfect substitute for flexible nominal prices. That is, the
flexible nominal price allocations are achieved with PCP pricing but flexible exchange rates. (2)
The policy that achieves the flexible price allocation is a constrained Pareto optimum. The
monetary authorities can do no better. (3) This optimal policy is completely self-oriented. No
policy coordination across countries is required or desirable. In this sense, exchange rates are
perfectly flexible and optimal.
A number of recent papers (Betts and Devereux (1996, 2000), Chari, Kehoe, and
McGrattan (2000), and others) have examined OR-style models in which nominal prices are set
in advance in the currency of consumers. In that case, nominal exchange rate changes do not, in
the short run, change any prices – nominal or real – faced by consumers. I shall call this the LCP
(for “local-currency pricing”) model. Devereux and Engel (2001) have examined monetary
policy in this setting, and have concluded that there is no case for nominal exchange rate
flexibility – indeed, a fixed exchange rates are preferred. I shall demonstrate their case briefly.
However, there are other possible interpretations of the evidence that consumer prices do
not respond much to exchange rates. One is the approach of OR (2000b). In their model,
transportation costs and distribution costs increase the cost of imported goods, and serve to
segment national markets. Even if imported goods are nearly perfect substitutes for domestically
produced goods, they may not be consumed in great quantity because their cost is higher. In that
case, an exchange rate change will have only a small effect on the consumer price index.
A related approach observes that the actual physical good is only a small part of what the
consumer buys. The consumer also pays for the nontraded marketing, distribution and retailing

2

See Lane (2001) for an excellent general survey of the work stimulated by Obstfeld and Rogoff.

4

services that bring the good to the buyer. Perhaps these costs are quite large, and dominate the
cost of the physical good. If so, the influence of exchange-rate changes on real allocations is
likely to be small, since the exchange rate change only affects a small part of the cost of the good
cum service purchased by the consumer. This is the approach taken by McCallum and Nelson
(1999).
The new open economy macro literature also probably has not paid enough attention to
another possibility: that the low degree of pass-through of exchange rates to prices may not
primarily reflect price stickiness, but instead optimal price discrimination. Bergin and Feenstra
(2001) and Bergin (2001) build general equilibrium models in which pass-through is not 100
percent even when there is price flexibility. Corsetti and Dedola (2001) describe a setting in
which incomplete pass-through arises because of the differential distribution costs in home and
foreign markets.
Another approach is one where imported goods are intermediate products for which there
are domestic substitutes. Local producers combine imported intermediates with local goods to
make a final good for consumers. The price for consumers may be sticky in the local price, but
the intermediate import price may be sticky in the currency of the producer of that good. So, the
importer might switch between the imported intermediate and the locally produced alternative
when the exchange rate changes. Obstfeld (2001) argues that in this type of economy, there may
indeed be a significant expenditure-switching effect. It is not consumers who switch between
imports and locally-produced goods, but rather local producers who combine intermediate goods
to make the final consumer product. On the other hand, Devereux, Engel and Tille (1999) posit
that while distributors may indeed import goods priced in the exporter’s currency, they have little
opportunity for substitution with domestically produced products. It is both the degree of pass

5

through and the amount of substitutability that determine the strength of the expenditureswitching effect.
I have mentioned now several alternatives to the LCP model – ones in which consumer
prices do not respond much to exchange rate changes, but in which nominal exchange rate
flexibility still is important in allowing relative price movements. One additional wrinkle that
needs to be considered is the observation of Corsetti and Pesenti (2001), which is that in some
settings even if flexible nominal exchange rates can substitute for flexible nominal prices, such
an arrangement may not be optimal.

They show how there may be a tradeoff facing

policymakers between closing the output gap (that is, achieving the flexible-price equilibrium)
and eliminating deviations from the law of one price. It may be that limiting exchange rate
movements can actually improve on the flexible price equilibrium when in the presence of
monopolistic distortions that engender price discrimination across borders.
The new open economy macroeconomic models have delivered important new insights
into monetary and exchange rate policy objectives in open economies. But as these models have
developed, they point to areas where we need more empirical study. Until we have those studies
in hand, we must be cautious about interpreting existing evidence as being supportive of any type
of exchange-rate regime.

2. Models of exchange rates and relative prices
I examine some “new open economy macroeconomic” models in this section that have
the property that measured consumer prices are not very responsive to nominal exchange rate
changes. These models are fully-integrated equilibrium models in which households and firms
make optimal choices, but in which some nominal prices are not completely responsive to

6

shocks. I will work with a simplified framework in which I can embed all of the approaches I
want to discuss.
The older open-economy macroeconomic literature that put an emphasis on the strength
of the “expenditure-switching effect” is a direct sire of the newer literature. What the newer
literature is trying to achieve is a firmer micro foundation for our understanding of how nominal
exchange rates can help to reallocate resources in a more desirable way. The new studies build
micro-based macro models which try to match some of the stylized facts about exchange rates
and prices, in the hope of getting some insight into the channels through which exchange rates
influence aggregate outcomes.

The models can also provide a welfare-based criterion for

choosing between exchange-rate regimes.
There are two countries in the general model. I will assume that there is a single period,
though most of the results I discuss carry over to a multi-period framework.

I assume

households in the home country maximize:
U=

æMD
1
C 1− ρ + χ lnçç
1− ρ
è P

ö
÷ − ηL .
÷
ø

C is a consumption aggregate. Households consume goods produced in the home country and

in the foreign country. I will discuss a few different models with different sets of assumptions on
goods preferences.

All of the models assume homothetic preferences (so consumption

aggregates and price indexes are defined), but I will make no further assumptions beyond that for
now.
MD
Real balances,
, appear in the utility function, where P is the optimal price index.
P

Households get disutility from work, L . η is a shock to disutility of work.
Foreign households are assumed to have similar utility functions:

7

. U* =

æ M D* ö
1
C *1− ρ + χ lnçç * ÷÷ − η * L*
1− ρ
è P ø

Starred (*) variables are the foreign counterparts to the home-country variables.
Money is supplied exogenously through transfers. In equilibrium we have money supply
equals money demand in each country: M = M D , and M * = M D* .

Four variables will

determine the aggregate state of the economy: the distaste for work for the representative home
agent, η ; the analogous variable for the representative foreign agent, η * ; aggregate per capita
home money supply, M ; and aggregate per capital foreign money supply, M * .
I will assume there are complete financial markets of the type discussed in Devereux and
Engel (2000). Specifically, there are assets traded that have payoffs specific to each possible
state of the world. These assets are traded of course prior to the realization of the state. Most of
the models we consider have home and foreign consumers facing different prices for the same
good on spot markets. That is, the markets are segmented. We assume that it is impossible to
make state-contingent trades that allow payoffs in physical goods, as that would allow
households to get around paying the price set in their market. Instead, payoffs are specified in
nominal terms. In that case, optimal contracts ensure that the marginal utility from an additional
unit of currency is proportional between home and foreign consumers in all states (where I have
assumed the constant of proportionality is one):

C − ρ C *− ρ
=
.
P
SP *
S is the nominal exchange rate, expressed as the home currency price of foreign currency.

The assumption of complete markets is, of course, unrealistic. It is a useful benchmark,
and here it allows us to arrive at a simple flexible model that can be used to analyze relativeprice effects in general equilibrium. We can reproduce Friedman’s claim that nominal exchange
8

rate flexibility allows desirable relative price adjustments to occur rapidly under his assumption
of nominal prices fixed in producer’s currencies, but we can also analyze other assumptions
about how prices are set.
The following equilibrium conditions emerge using the first-order conditions for the
household optimization problem:
M = χPC ρ

M * = χP * C * ρ

W = ηPC ρ

W * = η * P *C * ρ

Here, W and W * are the home and foreign wage, respectively.
This framework, while making very specific assumptions about preferences, has the
advantage that it is easy to analyze under a variety of assumptions about goods pricing, and
about preferences over goods. We can derive a solution for the nominal exchange rate that does
not depend on any assumptions about the production side of the economy, about how nominal
prices are set, or without making any further assumption on goods utility:
S=

M
.
M*

Now we turn to the production side of the economy. There are a large number of goods
produced in each country, each by a monopolist (who faces a constant elasticity of demand,
given our CES assumption on preferences.) We will initially consider models in which output
for each firm i is produced using only a labor input: Yi = Li , and Yi* = L*i .3 We will consider a
variety of possible assumptions about how prices are set. Prices may be flexible – that is, set

3

One of the models we examine later will have an iceberg transportation cost for shipping goods overseas. We
will also consider models in which intermediate goods are used as inputs into final goods production.

9

with full information about the state. Or, in the new open economy models, firms must set
nominal prices in some currency prior to knowledge about the state.

3. Flexible Nominal Prices
It is helpful first to examine some of the properties of this model under completely
flexible nominal prices. We shall assume home and foreign households have identical CES
preferences over consumption goods.

Firms face constant elasticity demand curves, and

therefore set prices as a constant mark-up over wages. We allow firms to discriminate across
home and foreign markets. But because we assume identical preferences and CES utility, firms
choose to set the same price in both markets.
Aggregating across all home firms, we get

PH = µW ,
where PH is the home currency price of home goods. We have also PH = SPH* , where PH* is the
foreign-currency price of home goods. Likewise,
PF* = µW * ,

and PF = SPF* .
We can also derive these equations for nominal wages in equilibrium:

W=

η
M
χ

W* =

It follows from the equilibrium conditions that

PH PH*
η
= * = *.
PF
PF η

10

η* *
M
χ

The relative price of home goods falls when there is an increase in η , which is the parameter
measuring the distaste for work. When home households prefer to work less, home firms must
pay higher wages to entice workers into the workforce. Those wage costs are passed onto to
consumer in the form of higher prices.
I will not undertake a formal welfare analysis of the models I present here. Instead, I will
focus on what turns out to be a critical aspect of the welfare analysis: to what extent an
exchange-rate regime is beneficial in achieving the adjustment of the price of home goods
relative to foreign goods. Under the Friedman framework, exchange-rate flexibility allows
immediate adjustment of that relative price in response to real shocks. But, as we shall see, that
finding is a special case that depends critically on how Friedman assumes nominal goods prices
are set.

4. Sticky Nominal Prices: PCP Case
Now consider the model when firms must set nominal prices in advance. In the oneperiod framework here, this means that prices are set in advance of knowledge of the preference
shocks and money supply realizations. Perhaps there are menu costs or some other sorts of costs
that make it more profitable to set a non-state-contingent nominal price. First we take up the
case in which firms set prices in their own currencies. That is, home firms set prices in the home
currency, whether for sale to home or foreign households. We call this the PCP case.
Because of our assumptions of zero transportation costs for firms to ship the goods
overseas, and identical preferences of home and foreign households, firms do not set a different
price for home and foreign households (even though, in principle, we allow for price
discrimination.) That is, the law of one price holds for goods sold at home and in the foreign
country.
11

It follows that

PH PH*
P
= * = H* .
PF
PF
SPF
Under the PCP assumption, both PH and PF* are fixed ex ante and do not respond to shocks to
demand or money supply. Define κ ≡

PH
PF*

. Because these nominal prices are set in advance of

the realization of the state, κ does not depend on the outcomes of the random variables. Then
the relative price of home to foreign goods varies inversely with the exchange rate:

PH κ
= .
PF
S
Substituting in the expression for the equilibrium exchange rate, we get under PCP pricing:
PH
M*
=κ
.
PF
M

Here we can see the gist of Friedman’s argument for flexible exchange rates. If the
exchange rate were fixed, there would be no channel to translate real demand shocks into a
relative price change. That is, if the exchange rate were held constant at a value of S , the
relative price of home to foreign goods would not depend on the shocks that hit the economy:

PH κ
= .
PF
S
But with exchange-rate flexibility and the correct monetary policy (for example, one in which
monetary policy responds to local shocks so that M = k / η and M * = k * / η * ), the real demand
shocks can be translated precisely into the same relative price effect that occurs under flexible
prices. Here, the appropriate monetary policy involves having the monetary authorities set

12

monetary policy in a way that ignores the real shocks. In fact, if

k
= κ , the relative price will
k*

equal exactly its value under flexible prices:

PH PH*
η
= * = *.
PF
PF η
Although I have only shown that under flexible exchange rates we can achieve exactly
the relative price response that we find under flexible prices, Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000a)
demonstrate a stronger result. They show that in fact when monetary authorities follow policies
that allow the exchange rate to adjust in such a way that the relative price mimics the flexibleprice solution, we can achieve exactly the same welfare as under flexible prices. That is, very
much in accord with Friedman’s intuition: flexible exchange rates are a perfect substitute for
flexible goods prices in the presence of real shocks.
Moreover, in the models of OR (1998, 2000a), mimicking the flexible price allocation is
the constrained globally efficient monetary policy. While the flexible-price equilibrium itself is
not Pareto efficient (because of the monopoly distortions), optimal monetary policy can do no
better than to replicate the flexible-price allocation.
Moreover the monetary policy I set out above is not only the policy that would be set by a
global central planner.

It is, as OR (2000a) show, the policy that self-interested national

economic planners would follow.

That is, there is no gain to international monetary

coordination. Central banks following policies that maximize their own country’s welfare can
achieve the constrained globally efficient outcome. Thus, a system in which central bankers do
not cooperate at all and allow the exchange rate to float freely is optimal, as Friedman claimed.4

4

OR (1998, 2000a) have delicate sets of assumptions on preferences and market structure that insure that markets
are actually complete. But OR (2001) show that these basic conclusions are to a first order robust to market
incompleteness.

13

This model, however, has implications that seem counterfactual: that exchange rate
changes are passed through one-for-one into consumer prices, and that the law of one price holds
for all goods. It is this characteristic of the model that has led some researchers to consider the
local-currency pricing version of the sticky-nominal price model.

5. Sticky Prices: LCP Case
An alternative model for price setting is that firms set prices in the currency of consumers
of the product. That is, when a home firm sells in the home market it sets prices in the home
currency. But for sales to the foreign market, it sets prices in the foreign currency. We call this
the “LCP” (for “local currency pricing”) case.
It follows immediately in this case that a flexible nominal exchange rate cannot achieve
the optimal relative price adjustment. Ph and Pf are both set in the domestic currency and do
not respond to contemporaneous shocks. We cannot replicate the flexible-price solution of

PH PH*
η
= * = * with flexible exchange rates, no matter what the monetary policy.
PF
PF η

In fact,

Devereux and Engel (2000) go further and demonstrate that the optimal monetary policy in this
case delivers fixed exchange rates.5 Or, put another way, if the foreign country is following
optimal monetary policy, while the home country is using the exchange rate as its policy
instrument, the optimal exchange rate policy is to fix.
There is a simple way to understand the striking difference in optimal policy in the PCP
world versus the LCP world. There are two types of deviations from efficiency which monetary
policy might be able to rectify in a sticky-price world. One is that relative prices might not

5

Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2000) and Devereux and Engel (1998) also examine exchange-rate rules with localcurrency pricing. However, those analyses do not examine the real shocks that are at the heart of the issues we
discuss here.

14

respond in the correct way to real shocks, so that we might not achieve

PH PH*
η
= * = * . In the
PF
PF η

absence of optimal relative price changes, consumers do not receive the correct signals and do
not alter their demand for goods in the appropriate way when real shocks hit. As a consequence,
resources will not be allocated efficiently.
The other type of inefficiency comes because deviations from purchasing power parity
lead to incomplete risk sharing. As noted above, with a complete set of nominal contingent
claims traded, in equilibrium

C − ρ C *− ρ
=
. Asset markets do not deliver complete risk sharing
P
SP *

unless purchasing power parity holds, P = SP * .
When prices are set in producers’ currencies (PCP), purchasing power parity does hold,
so asset markets do deliver complete risk sharing. In that case, monetary policy can be devoted
entirely toward ensuring that relative prices respond in the appropriate way to real shocks. But,
of course, exchange rate flexibility is needed to deliver the relative price response.
Under local currency pricing, relative prices simply cannot change in the short run in
response to real shocks. It is useless for monetary policy makers to devote any effort to
achieving an efficient relative price response. But, under LCP pricing, both P and P * are
predetermined and not affected by real shocks. If the nominal exchange rate is fixed so that
purchasing power parity holds, S =

P
, then asset markets will achieve complete risk sharing.
P*

So fixed exchange rates are optimal.
This model is also apparently consistent with the empirical evidence that consumer prices
are unresponsive to exchange rate changes in the model. The law of one price does not hold in
the model: Ph ≠ SPh* and Pf ≠ SPf* .

15

Corsetti and Pesenti (2001) develop a model of “partial” pass-through of exchange rates
to final consumer prices. Ex ante, firms may pass-through only a fraction λ (taken to be
exogenous) of any exchange rate change to consumer prices. The PCP model is one extreme in
which λ = 1 , and the LCP is the other extreme in which λ = 0 . They examine optimal monetary
policy, and the optimal degree of exchange-rate flexibility in this framework. Since Corsetti and
Pesenti assume goods are sold directly to consumers (as do OR, and Devereux and Engel), it
seems as though the empirically relevant case is the one in which λ is nearly zero since passthrough to consumer prices is very small in the short run.
Corsetti and Pesenti show in their model that optimal policy minimizes a function of the
“output gap” and deviations from the law of one price. The output gap is “the distance between
actual and equilibrium employment levels.” In the context of the model above, the equilibrium
employment level in the home country is the flexible price level of L . OR (2000a) show that in
the PCP setting, the flexible price level of L is attainable under floating exchange rates when
policy is set as described above: M = k / η and M * = k * / η * . That policy allows the terms of
trade to change exactly as under flexible nominal prices, so labor demand in home and foreign
industries is the same as under flexible prices. That is, it eliminates the output gap. Since the
law of one price holds for all goods in the PCP model, we can conclude from the theorem of
Corsetti and Pesenti that such a policy is optimal.
But it is not always the case that eliminating the output gap is the optimal feasible policy.
Corsetti and Pesenti’s theorem implies that policy makers can improve welfare by using
monetary policy to help eliminate deviations from the law of one price. Sometimes there is
tension between that goal and the goal of eliminating the output gap. The Corsetti and Dedola
(2001) model, discussed below, is an example where monetary policy can eliminate the output

16

gap with sufficient exchange-rate flexibility, but where that policy is not optimal because it
leaves intact deviations from the law of one price that would exist under flexible prices.
Sutherland (2001) derives results that are similar to Corsetti and Pesenti: when the degree
of pass-through is close to unity, exchange-rate flexibility is desirable. Sutherland shows that
when we let leisure enter the utility function in a more general way (i.e., not the quasi-linear
specification of the model of section 2), that exchange rate flexibility may be desirable for a
small open economy even when pass-through is low. When the elasticity of substitution between
leisure and consumption is high, stabilizing the exchange rate may reduce the average terms of
trade for the small country. This occurs because the optimal ex ante price of exports is sensitive
to the degree of exchange rate volatility. Of course, this is quite a different case for exchangerate flexibility than the one advanced by Friedman.
In essence, Devereux and Engel (2001) take the evidence against the law of one price for
consumer goods as support for the position that nominal exchange rate changes are not capable
of achieving desirable relative price changes. But there are other ways to interpret the evidence
that do not rely on LCP behavior. We turn to a few of these alternatives.

6. Shipping Costs
The evidence on deviation from the law of one price for consumer goods uses data that is
not refined enough to distinguish between domestically produced goods and imported goods.
Even relatively narrowly defined goods, such as in the studies of Parsley and Wei (2001a,
2001b) do not make this distinction. A box of facial tissue (one of the goods in the Parsley and
Wei, 2001a, study) bought in Japan may be imported or not, and it probably is not exactly the
same brand and type of tissue that is purchased in the U.S.

17

One explanation for why the law of one price fails for tissues is that Japanese and
American consumers are consuming slightly different products. That is, suppose there are two
types of facial tissue, one produced in the home country and the other produced in the foreign
country. Assume no difference in tastes, but assume there are shipping costs as in OR (2000b).
With CES utility and an elasticity of substitution between types of tissues greater than one, home
residents will spend a greater share of income on the home-produced good. If the elasticity and
the per-unit transport costs are high enough, foreign goods may constitute a small share of
overall consumption and thus a small share in the measured price of home-country tissue
consumption. The converse will characterize the foreign country. So, the law of one price may
hold literally for specific types of tissues, but may fail grossly for the price index of tissues.
Let Pi be the price of a particular good, such as facial tissues. However, Pi is itself an
index over the price of two types of tissues – one produced at home and one in the foreign
country. Suppose home and foreign households have the same preferences for facial tissue:
λ −1
λ −1
C i = æçαC iH λ + (1 − α )C iF λ ö÷
ø
è

λ

λ −1

,

where the i subscript is for the good “facial tissues”, of which there are two types: H for home
and F for foreign. Let the per unit iceberg transport cost for exported goods be δ > 1 . Suppose
the law of one price holds for the prices not including transport cots. We have PiH* = δPiH S and
PiF = δSPiF* . The rest of the macro model is the same as specified above.

PiH
PiH*
Under flexible nominal prices,
and * respond to real shocks. If nominal prices
PiF
PiF
are sticky as in the Friedman framework of PCP, it is clear that a flexible exchange rate is
necessary to achieve a desirable response of

PiH
P*
(or iH* ) to movements in demand. This
PiF
PiF
18

framework potentially is also consistent with the observation that measured consumer prices do
not respond much to exchange rate changes. We have:

(

1−λ
Pi = α λ PiH
+ (1 − α ) λ PiF1−λ

)

1
1−λ

(

1− λ
= α λ PiH
+ (1 − α ) λ δ 1−λ S 1−λ PiF*1−λ

)

1
1− λ

,

and,

(

Pi * = α λ PiH*1−λ + (1 − α ) λ PiF*1−λ

)

1
1− λ

(

= α λ δ 1−λ S λ −1 PiH*1−λ + (1 − α ) λ PiF*1−λ

)

1
1− λ

.

The pass-through elasticity for the home country, for example, is

ε=

(1 − α ) λ δ 1−λ S 1−λ PiF*1−λ
.
α λ PiH1−λ + (1 − α ) λ δ 1−λ S 1−λ PiF*1−λ

For λ > 1 , ε → 0 as δ → ∞ . If the foreign good is a sufficiently high substitute for the
domestic good, then if the cost of the foreign good is high enough there will not be much effect
of exchange rates on home consumer prices. The point here is that the empirical studies of
consumer prices cannot measure the price of imported goods specifically. They only measure
prices of (sometimes very narrowly defined) categories of consumer goods. The price indexes of
these categories may not be very responsive to exchange rate changes.
Here we have a model in which the nominal exchange rate can play the role of adjusting
relative prices. Exchange rate flexibility allows

PiH
P*
(or iH* ) to adjust to changes demand. The
PiF
PiF

model also fits the stylized fact that measured consumer price levels do not respond much to
exchange rate changes.
But the problem with this model is that the reason there is so little pass-through of
exchange rates to consumer prices in the home country is that foreign goods are a small share of
total consumption. In fact, ε measures not only the elasticity of consumer prices with respect to
a change in the price of foreign goods; it also measures the share of foreign goods in
expenditures. So pass-through can only be small in this model if the expenditure share on
19

foreign goods is small. The case for floating rates is weak in this case. Floating rates might be
needed to achieve optimal relative price adjustments, but those relative price adjustments are not
very important to the functioning of the economy in this model.
In fact, Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000b) reason that the low pass-through to consumer prices
could not be fully explained by transportation costs, and that some other factors must be at play.

7. Non-traded Distribution Services and PCP

One possible explanation for the apparent non-responsiveness of consumer prices to
exchange rate changes is that CPIs measure a basket of both prices of consumer goods and the
distribution services that bring the goods to consumers. The argument is that the law of one
price might very well hold for the actual physical good (as in PCP models), but the measured
consumer price includes the price of the distribution service which is nontraded and for which
the law of one price need not hold. (See, for example, McCallum and Nelson, 1999.)6
Let the home price of imported good i be a composite of a traded goods price PiF for
which the law of one price holds, PiF = SPiF* , and the price of a nontraded distribution service,
PiN :

(

PiF = α λ PiN1−λ + (1 − α ) λ PiF1−λ

)

1
1− λ

(

= α λ PiN1−λ + (1 − α ) λ S 1−λ PiF*1−λ

)

1
1− λ

.

If PiF* is fixed in foreign currency terms, the pass-through of exchange rates is given by:

ε=

(1 − α ) λ S 1−λ PiF*1−λ
.
α λ PiN1−λ + (1 − α ) λ S 1−λ PiF*1−λ

As α → 1 , ε → 0 . That is, as the share of the nontraded distribution service increases toward
unity, the pass-through elasticity falls toward zero.
6

The model of OR (2000a) could be interpreted this way. The “final good” in that type of model is a composite of a
traded home-produced good, a traded foreign-produced good and a nontraded distribution service.

20

To flesh out this model a bit, assume the market for traded goods is competitive, and that
it takes a single unit of labor to make a good. So, PiF* = W * , and for goods produced in the home
country, PiH = W . Then

PH
W
=
. Under nominal wage and price flexibility, we have
PF SW *

PH
η
= *.
PF η
Suppose instead that nominal wages are fixed ex ante. Goods markets are competitive, so
PiF* = W * and PiH = W , which implies that PiF* and PiH are also fixed. To achieve the flexible-

price outcome when nominal wages are fixed, we need nominal exchange rate flexibility and
monetary policy in which M t = k / η and M * = k * / η * . This is in essence a version of the PCP
model. But, the final consumer price does not show complete pass-through because of the
distribution costs.
As in the model with transportation costs, if the nontraded marketing services are such a
large component of the cost of consumer goods that we barely observe any effect of exchange
rate pass-through, then the physical import must not be a very important component of our
consumer basket. Even if exchange-rate flexibility is desirable for achieving relative price
adjustments, it is not very important.
There is no requirement that there be only one explanation for why there is little response
of consumer prices to exchange rates. Perhaps a combination of the model involving nontraded
distribution services, and the model with transportation costs (from section 6) would bring us
close to a description of the real world: one in which pass-through to consumer prices is small,
but imports are not a negligible fraction of consumption.
Corsetti and Dedola (2001) take a special case of the above model in which the elasticity
of substitution between the physical product and the distribution service is zero, so that the
21

traded good and the non-traded distribution service must be combined in fixed proportions. In
this model, the distribution sector is competitive, so the final goods price is equal to the cost:
PiF = PiF + σPiN . However, Corsetti and Dedola do not assume that the law of one price holds

for the traded good. That is, they do not have PiF = SPiF* . Instead, the exporting firm, which is a
monopolist, marks up the price optimally. So, if it takes one unit of labor to produce the physical
good in the foreign country, and θ (> 1) is the elasticity of demand for the product, Corsetti and
Dedola show that the optimal price set by the exporter is: PiF =
goods price is then given by PiF =

(

θ æ
σ
ö
*
ç SW + PiN ÷ . The final
θ −1è
θ
ø

)

θ
SW * + σPiN .
θ −1

The elasticity of pass-through of the exchange rate to the price of the imported physical
good is

SW *
SW *
and the pass-through elasticity for the final good is
. Both
*
σ
*
SW
+
σ
P
iN
SW + PiN
θ

elasticities are smaller than unity. Actually, the pass-through to the final good would be exactly
the same if the producer incurred the distribution costs itself, rather than selling to a distributor.
But Corsetti and Dedola want to explain the observations that (1) there is less than 100 per cent
pass-through to imported goods prices, but (2) more pass-through to imported goods prices than
to final goods prices.
In this model, if wages were flexible, and using the general model of section 2, relative
wages are given by

W
SW

*

=

η
. As Corsetti an Dedola demonstrate, if nominal wages are fixed
η*

ex ante, but the exchange rate is freely floating, then the flexible-wage allocation can be
achieved through the inward-looking monetary policies that have M = k / η and M * = k * / η * . 7

7

This is true assuming the values of the constants are chosen appropriately, of course.

22

The fact that the law of one price does not hold for traded goods implies that the flexible
exchange-rate policy might not be optimal. As Corsetti and Dedola point out, the Corsett-Pesenti
theorem shows that the monetary authorities face a trade-off when there is price discrimination.
They want to use monetary policy to eliminate the output gap (i.e., achieve the flexible-price
allocation), but they can also use monetary policy to help eliminate the distortionary failures of
the law of one price. An inward-looking non-cooperative monetary policy that seeks only to
achieve the flexible-price allocation and allows the exchange rate to float freely may be less
desirable than a cooperative policy that to stabilizes exchange rates some extent and helps
eliminate international price differences.
Nonetheless, if this model is the sole explanation for the observed low pass-through
elasticities, it would require the distribution sector’s cost component, σ , to be very large.

8. Price Discrimination

In Corsetti and Dedola’s model, firms set goods prices flexibly, but segment home and
foreign markets so that the law of one price fails for traded goods. Their model has the feature
that the optimal mark-up varies with the exchange rate. However, in their set-up, the difference
in local distribution costs is important in the failure of the law of one price. Another approach in
which exporting firms actively price discriminate is that of Bergin and Feenstra (2001).
In their model, preferences are not CES but instead translog. Assume that all goods are
tradable, and that each good requires a unit of labor to produce. Further, assume as in section 7,
that nominal wages are fixed ex ante (home wages fixed in the home currency and foreign wages
in the foreign currency.)
Assume that there are N goods produced in each country, a fraction 1 − φ of which are
~
tradable. Thus in each country there are N = (2 − φ ) N different goods that are consumed.

23

Under symmetric translog preferences, the unit expenditure function is defined by (here I follow
Bergin, 2001 and Bergin and Feenstra, 2001):
~
N

~

~

ln( P ) 1 N N γ ln( Pi ) ln( Pj )
ln( P) = å ~ i + åå ~ ~
.
2 i =1 j =1 N ( N − 1)
N
i =1

γ
The elasticity of demand for each product is 1 + ~ , where ϕ i is the expenditure share
Nϕ i
on product i. The expenditure share depends on the prices of all goods:
1
ϕi = ~ +
N

~
N

γ ln( Pj ) γ
− ~ ln( Pi ) .
~ ~
N
j =1( j ≠i ) N ( N − 1)

å

Bergin (2001) shows that the price set by firms depends on costs and on prices of
competing goods. The foreign firm selling traded goods sets different prices for sale to foreign
households ( PF* ) and home households ( PF ):

PF* =
PF =

(2 − φ )(1 + γ )
(1 − φ )γ
W* +
PH* .
(2 − φ )(1 + 2γ ) − γ
(2 − φ )(1 + 2γ ) − γ

γ
(2 − φ )(1 + γ )
SW * +
PH .
(2 − φ )(1 + 2γ ) − γ (1 − φ )
(2 − φ )(1 + 2γ ) − γ (1 − φ )

Using similar equations for the home country, we derive:
æ
γ 1−φ ö * æ γ 1−φ ö
÷÷W + çç
÷÷(W / S ) .
PF* = çç1 −
è 1 + 2γ 2 − φ ø
è 1 + 2γ 2 − φ ø
æ
æ γ
γ
1 ö
1 ö
÷÷ SW * + çç
÷÷W .
PF = çç1 −
è 1 + 2γ 2 − φ ø
è 1 + 2γ 2 − φ ø

Here we see that if nominal wages are fixed ex ante, the elasticity of pass-through is less
than unity. The elasticity is given by

24

æ
γ
1 ö
çç1 −
÷÷ SW *
è 1 + 2γ 2 − φ ø
.
ε=
æ
æ γ
γ
1 ö
1 ö
*
çç1 −
÷÷ SW + çç
÷÷W
è 1 + 2γ 2 − φ ø
è 1 + 2γ 2 − φ ø

As long as γ > 0 , this ε is less than unity. Note however that the foreign price of the foreign
good is also sensitive to the exchange rate. In fact, if all goods were traded ( φ = 0 ), the law of
one price would hold for these goods. Thus, substantial deviations from the law of one price
require that there be a large proportion of goods that are traded (and that γ > 0 .) But in this
model, those nontraded goods are not necessarily distribution services (as in the models of
section 7), but can be any nontraded product or service.
While Bergin (2001) is a model in which all nominal prices are flexible, and Bergin and
Feenstra (2001) takes an approach that is somewhat non-comparable to the other models, it
appears we can draw conclusions similar to those in Corsetti and Dedola (2001). Namely, if
wages were flexible, and using the general model we have set up earlier, relative wages are given
by

W
SW

*

=

η
. If nominal wages are fixed ex ante, but the exchange rate is freely floating, then
η*

the same relative wage can be achieved through the inward-looking monetary policies that have
M = k / η and M * = k * / η * .

But in this case, while flexible exchange rates can achieve the same relative wage as
under complete price and wage flexibility, they are not a perfect substitute for wage and price
flexibility. Specifically, they cannot yield the same terms of trade as under flexible prices
because of the incomplete pass-through. For the home country, the terms of trade are:
æ
æ γ
γ
1 ö
1 ö
çç1 −
÷÷ SW * + çç
÷W
1 + 2γ 2 − φ ø
1 + 2γ 2 − φ ÷ø
PF
è
è
=
.
æ γ
γ
1 ö
1 ö
SPH* æ
*
çç1 −
÷÷W + çç
÷÷ SW
è 1 + 2γ 2 − φ ø
è 1 + 2γ 2 − φ ø

25

With flexible prices and wages, and using the general model of section 2, the terms of trade are:
æ
γ
1 ö * æ γ
1 ö
çç1 −
÷÷η + çç
÷η
1 + 2γ 2 − φ ø
1 + 2γ 2 − φ ÷ø
PF
è
è
=
.
æ γ
SPH* æ
1 ö
1 ö *
γ
çç1 −
÷÷η + çç
÷÷η
è 1 + 2γ 2 − φ ø
è 1 + 2γ 2 − φ ø

But no policy for exchange rates can achieve those terms of trade when W and W * are fixed.
This model requires further study. It seems likely that some exchange rate flexibility
would be desirable, but since the flexible-price allocations are not obtainable, the exact form of
optimal monetary policy is not immediately obvious.

9. Imports as intermediates

Obstfeld (2001) models imported goods as intermediate products. They are combined
with products produced locally to make final consumer goods (which are nontraded). There is
complete pass-through of exchange rates to imported goods prices in this framework. That is,
the price of imported goods is set in the producers’ currencies, so the imported price varies one
for one with the exchange rate. But imported goods are not sold directly to consumers. The
price of the final good is set in the consumers’ currencies.
This model, then, is completely consistent with the observation that consumer prices do
not respond much to exchange rate changes in the short run. But there is still an important role
for exchange-rate flexibility in changing relative prices. The final goods producer faces a
“sourcing” decision – to use imported intermediates or locally produced intermediates. There is
not perfect substitutability between the two, but there is some.8 So, a nominal exchange rate
adjustment can change the price of imported relative to locally produced intermediates.

8

Specifically, in Obstfeld’s framework there is a unitary elasticity of substitution.

26

There is a single final consumer good, sold by a monopolist that buys intermediate inputs
in competitive markets. The price of the final good in the home country is P , and it is fixed in
home-currency.
The cost of producing the good is not fixed ex ante. The cost is given by:

(

Γ = α λ PH1−λ + (1 − α ) λ S 1−λ PF*1−λ

)

1
1− λ

.

Here, PH is the price of the home-produced intermediate good. That good is produced using a
variety of labor inputs. In the Obstfeld set-up, each household is a monopoly supplier of a
unique type of labor. Nominal wages are fixed ex ante. The intermediate goods market is
competitive with free entry. The price, PH , is in principle flexible but under competitive
conditions it is equal to the ex ante fixed nominal wage (given the normalization that the total
number of units used to produce one unit of intermediate is one.)
Likewise, PF* is the price of the foreign produced intermediate in the foreign currency.
The structure of the foreign intermediate market is the same as in the home market, which
implies that PF* is fixed ex ante in the foreign currency. The home-currency price, PF = SPF* ,
changes with the exchange rate.
Under flexible nominal prices, using the general model of section 2, we find

PH PH*
η
= * = *.
PF
PF η
With fixed nominal wages, we have for example in the home country

PH
P
= H* . Since
PF
SPF

PH and PF* will be fixed under the market conditions described, we need exchange rate
flexibility to allow relative price adjustment. Indeed, since S =

27

M
with a suitably designed
M*

monetary policy of the form M = k / η and M * = k * / η * , the flexible price equilibrium can be
mimicked. Indeed, Obstfeld demonstrates that prices and allocations are identical under flexible
prices as under sticky nominal wages with this inward-looking monetary policy that has
exchange rate flexibility.9
Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000) present evidence that shows there is much more pass-through
of exchange rates to imported goods prices than to final consumer prices. While the passthrough is certainly not 100 per cent (as in the model just described), there appears to be a
sufficient degree of pass through to allow for a significant expenditure-switching effect
following from nominal exchange rate changes.
An important aspect of the Obstfeld (2001) model is the idea that there are final goods
producers or distributors who can substitute between locally produced and imported
intermediates. Devereux, Engel and Tille (1999) take an approach that is quite similar to
Obstfeld (2001). However they take the limiting case of the cost function in which the elasticity
of substitution is zero. That is, their model can be interpreted as one in which the distributor
combines imported goods and locally produced goods in fixed proportion.10 In that case, of
course, there is no possibility of substitution between imported goods and local goods when the
exchange rate changes, even though there is complete pass-through of the exchange rate to
imported prices.
Potentially there are wealth effects from exchange rate changes in this case. The demand
for imported goods is fixed because their price is fixed in consumers’ currencies and the
distributor cannot substitute toward locally produced goods.

When the home currency

depreciates, it raises the price that local distributors must pay for imported goods and lowers
9

In fact, in terms of real variables and prices of output, the model is isomorphic to the PCP model of Obstfeld and
Rogoff (2000a).
10
That is not exactly the set-up in Devereux, Engel and Tille, but there is little difference in substance between the
model I describe here and their precise model.

28

their profits. Foreign distributors have a windfall gain. In Devereux, Engel and Tille (1999),
these profit effects are not consequential because of their assumption of complete markets. But
Tille (2000) investigates the importance of these wealth effects on equilibrium demands. These
wealth effects, however, are a completely different channel through which exchange rates affect
equilibrium than the relative price effects that are so important to the Friedman-Feldstein
analysis.
The model of Devereux, Engel and Tille (1999) is best described as one in which imports
are primarily branded final goods. The distributor cannot substitute any local product for that
brand. That is, a Toyota dealer cannot substitute a Chevrolet Lumina for a Camry if the yen
becomes too expensive. The Obstfeld (2001) model is best thought of as a model in which the
consumer cannot differentiate between local and imported sources of inputs. Perhaps the typical
product in this set up is a can of beans, which may be filled with either imported or locally grown
varieties.
The empirical question is to what extent substitution occurs at some stage before the good
reaches the consumer.

For the question of exchange-rate flexibility, the key is whether

substitution can occur between imported and local products. That is, if the U.K. is considering
adopting the euro versus keeping an independent pound, the question is whether in response to a
pound depreciation British consumers can substitute toward British goods. Let me clarify what
by way of an example. Suppose the imported good is wine. If the euro appreciates relative to
the pound and dollar and thereby raises the pound price of French wine (as in the PCP
specification), then British might substitute away from French wine toward American wine. But
for that margin of substitution, the flexibility of the pound/euro rate does not matter at all. Even
if the pound/euro rate were fixed, the price of French wine would rise relative to American wine.
The question is the degree to which a euro appreciation leads British distributors to substitute
29

away from goods produced on the Continent toward U.K. produced goods. If a large degree of
such substitution occurs (as in the Obstfeld (2001) model) then exchange-rate flexibility is
desirable. If little such substitution occurs (as in Devereux, Engel and Tille (1999)), then there is
not so strong a case for an independent currency with freely floating rates.

10. Conclusions

The famous case for flexible exchange rates advanced by Friedman (1953) is based on a
view that appears at odds with empirical evidence. Friedman’s approach assumes that nominal
prices are set in producers’ currencies, and exchange rate changes are passed through completely
to final users of the goods. Thus an exchange rate change delivers a relative price adjustment
between foreign and domestically produced goods.
Recent theoretical papers confirm Friedman’s policy prescription under his assumption
about goods pricing.

Empirical evidence appears to contradict this assumption, because

consumer prices are not very responsive to exchange rates. If there is no effect of exchange rates
on prices that are paid by demanders of goods, then the exchange rate does not play the role in
adjusting relative prices that Friedman posits. However, we have seen that there are several
interpretations that still assign an important expenditure-switching role to the exchange rate, yet
can reconcile the evidence of low exchange rate pass-through to consumer prices.
In many cases, nominal exchange-rate flexibility is a perfect substitute for nominal wage
and price flexibility. If exchange rates are allowed to adjust freely, the same real allocations are
achieved as under price and wage flexibility. But even so, Corsetti and Pesenti (2001) raise
doubts as to whether full exchange-rate flexibility is optimal. In cases where there are deviations
from the law of one price, some control of the exchange rate might be desirable even if it moves
the economy away from the flexible-price, zero output gap equilibrium.
30

It is sometimes argued that in the presence of local-currency pricing, there is a prima
facie case for stable nominal exchange rates. Volatile nominal exchange rates can lead to large
short-run deviations from the law of one price when goods prices are set in consumers’
currencies. So, the case is made that fixing the exchange rate at the appropriate level can
eliminate the distortion that arises when consumers face different prices for identical goods. But
Engel and Rogers (2001) demonstrate that the logic of this argument is not airtight. Fixing the
exchange rate, or joining a currency union, entails altering monetary policy, which in itself has
welfare implications.

That paper produces a simple example to show that the loss of

independence of monetary policy might entail a cost equal in size to the welfare costs of
deviations from the law of one price.11
The example of Engel and Rogers (2001), as well as all of the models discussed here
assume that the exchange rate is driven by monetary and real factors, and there is no significant
role for speculative bubbles. If bubbles are important in determining exchange rates, then
perhaps a stronger case for fixed exchange rates or currency union can be made. Bubbles would
cause real distortions, especially under local currency pricing. Friedman (1953) was aware of
this, but defended floating exchange rates with his well-known refutation of the possibility of
destabilizing exchange-rate speculation (p. 175):
“People who argue that speculation is generally destabilizing seldom realize that this is
largely equivalent to saying that speculators lose money, since speculation can be destabilizing in
general only if speculators on the average sell when the currency is low in price and buy when it
is high.”
Friedman, of course, was writing at a time when the world had limited experience with exchange
rate flexibility. Perhaps his conclusions would be less sanguine in view of our experience with
floating exchange rates in the post-Bretton Woods era.
11

Devereux and Engel (2001) find fixed exchange rates are optimal under LCP when monetary policy rules are
optimal. The example in Engel and Rogers (2001) is one where exchange rates are fixed but monetary policy rules
are suboptimal.

31

The new open economy macroeconomics has given us a structured way to think about the
issues that are important when considering the desirability of floating exchange rates versus
currency union. Unfortunately for policy makers facing a near-term deadline for choosing an
exchange-rate system, our knowledge has not advanced far enough to offer a firm
recommendation backed up by appropriate theory. We will undoubtedly see many advances in
this area of research over the next decade, further refining the models to determine exactly what
matters for the choice of exchange rate regime. In addition, the models point the direction for
empirical researchers to take to gather the precise information we need to calibrate the size of the
expenditure-switching role for exchange rates.

32

References

Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop, 2000, “Does Exchange Rate Stability Increase Trade
and Welfare?” American Economic Review 90, 1093-1109.
Bergin, Paul R., 2001, “One Money One Price? Pricing to Market in a Monetary Union,”
Department of Economics, University of California, Davis, manuscript.
Bergin, Paul R. and Robert C. Feenstra, 2001, “Pricing-to-Market, Staggered Contracts, and Real
Exchange Rate Persistence,” Journal of International Economics 54, 333-359.
Betts, Caroline, and Michael B. Devereux, 1996, “The Exchange Rate in a Model of Pricing-toMarket,” European Economic Review 40, 1007-1021.
Betts, Caroline, and Michael B. Devereux, 2000, “Exchange Rate Dynamics in a Model of
Pricing-to-Market,” Journal of International Economics 50, 215-244.
Buiter, Willem, 1999, “The EMU and the NAMU: What is the Case for North American
Monetary Union?” Canadian Public Policy 25, 285-305.
Chari, V.V.; Patrick J. Kehoe; and, Ellen R. McGrattan, 2000, “Can Sticky Price Models
Generate Volatile and Persistent Exchange Rates?” National Bureau of Economics
Research Working Paper, no. 7869.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, and Luca Dedola, 2001, “Macroeconomics of International Price
Discrimination,” University of Rome III, manuscript.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, and Paolo Pesenti, 2001, “International Dimensions of Optimal Monetary
Policy,” University of Rome III, manuscript.
Devereux, Michael B., and Charles Engel, 1998, “Fixed vs. Floating Exchange Rates: How Price
Setting Affects the Optimal Choice of Exchange-Rate Regime,” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper, no. 6867.
Devereux, Michael B., and Charles Engel, 2001, “Monetary Policy in the Open Economy
Revisited: Exchange Rate Flexibility and Price Setting Behavior,” University of
Wisconsin – Madison, manuscript.
Devereux, Michael B.; Charles Engel; and Cédric Tille, 1999, “Exchange Rate Pass-Through and
the Welfare Effects of the Euro,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper,
no. 7382.
Engel, Charles, 1993, “Real Exchange Rates and Relative Prices: An Empirical Investigation,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 32, 35-50.

33

Engel, Charles, 1999, "Accounting for U.S. Real Exchange Rate Changes," Journal of Political
Economy 107, 507-538.

Engel, Charles, 2000, “Local-Currency Pricing and the Choice of Exchange-Rate Regime,”
European Economic Review 44, 1149-1472.

Engel, Charles, and John H. Rogers, 1996, “How Wide is the Border?” (with John Rogers),
American Economic Review 86, 1112-1125.

Engel, Charles, and John H. Rogers, 2001, “Deviations From the Purchasing Power Parity:
Causes and Welfare Costs,” Journal of International Economics 55, 29-57.
Feldstein, Martin, 1992, “The Case Against the EMU,” The Economist, vol. 323, no. 7763, 1922.
Friedman, Milton, 1953, “The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates,” in Essays in Positive
Economics (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), 157-203.

Lane, Philip R., 2001, “The New Open Economy Macroeconomics: A Survey,” Journal of
International Economics 54, 235-266.

McCallum, Bennett T., and Edward Nelson, 1999, “Nominal Income Targeting in an OpenEconomy Optimizing Model,” Journal of Monetary Economics 43, 553-578.
Mussa, Michael, 1986, “Nominal Exchange Rate Regimes and the Behavior of Real Exchange
Rates: Evidence and Implications,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy 25, 117-213.

Obstfeld, Maurice, 2001, “International Macroeconomics: Beyond the Mundell-Fleming Model,”
National Bureau of Economics Research Working Paper, no. 8369.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1995, “Exchange Rate Dynamics Redux,” Journal of
Political Economy 103, 624-660.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1998, “Risk and Exchange Rates,” National Bureau of
Economics Research Working Paper, no. 6694.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2000a, “New Directions for Stochastic Open Economy
Models,” Journal of International Economics 50, 117-153.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2000b, “The Six Major Puzzles in International
Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000,
339-390.

34

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2001, “Global Implications of Self-Oriented National
Monetary Rules,” Department of Economics, University of California, Berkeley,
manuscript.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Alan M. Taylor, 1997, “Non-linear Aspects of Goods Market Arbitrage
and Adjustment: Heckscher’s Commodity Points Revisited,” Journal of the Japanese
and International Economies 11, 441-479.

Parsley, David C., and Shang-Jin Wei, 2001a, “Explaining the Border Effect: The Role of
Exchange Rate Variability, Shipping Costs and Geography,” Journal of International
Economics 55, 87-105.

Parsley, David C., and Shang-Jin Wei, 2001b, “Limiting Currency Volatility to Stimulate Goods
Market Integration: A Price Based Approach,” Owens Graduate School of Management,
Vanderbilt University, manuscript.
Rogers, John H., and Michael Jenkins, 1996, “Haircuts or Hysteresis? Sources of Movements in
Real Exchange Rates,” Journal of International Economics 38, 339-360.
Sutherland, Alan, 2001, “Incomplete Pass-Through and the Welfare Effects of Exchange-Rate
Volatility,” Department of Economics, University of St. Andrews, manuscript.
Tille, Cédric, 2000, " 'Beggar-Thy-Neighbor' or 'Beggar-Thyself'? The Income Effect of
Exchange Rate Fluctuations", Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Report 112.

35

