                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           OUTSOURCING IN A GLOBAL ECONOMY


                                          Gene M. Grossman
                                          Elhanan Helpman


                                         Working Paper 8728
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w8728


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2002




We thank Patrick Bolton, Oliver Hart, Wolfgang Pesendorfer, and Ariel Rubinstein for helpful comments
and suggestions and Yossi Hadar and Taeyoon Sung for developing our simulation programs. We are also
grateful to the National Science Foundation and the US-Israel Binational Science Foundation for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Gene M. Grossman and Elhanan Helpman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Outsourcing in a Global Economy
Gene M. Grossman and Elhanan Helpman
NBER Working Paper No. 8728
January 2002
JEL No. F12, L14, L22, D23



                                             ABSTRACT


        We study the determinants of the location of sub-contracted activity in a general equilibrium
model of outsourcing and trade. We model outsourcing as an activity that requires search for a partner
and relationship-specific investments that are governed by incomplete contracts. The extent of
international outsourcing depends inter alia on the thickness of the domestic and foreign market for input
suppliers, the relative cost of searching in each market, the relative cost of customizing inputs, and the
nature of the contracting environment in each country.




Gene M. Grossman                                                 Elhanan Helpman
Department of Economics                                          Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Princeton University                                             Tel Aviv University
Princeton, NJ 08544                                              Ramat Aviv
and NBER                                                         Tel Aviv 69978 Israel,
grossman@princeton.edu                                           and Harvard University,
                                                                 and NBER
                                                                 helpman@post.tau.ac.il
              “Subcontracting as many non-core activities as possible is a central
          element of the new economy.” – Financial Times, July 31, 2001, p.10.



1         Introduction
We live in an age of outsourcing. Firms seem to be subcontracting an ever expanding
set of activities, ranging from product design to assembly, from research and develop-
ment to marketing, distribution, and after-sales service. Some firms have gone so far
as to become “virtual” manufacturers, owning designs for many products but making
almost nothing themselves.1
        Vertical disintegration is especially evident in international trade. A recent annual
report of the World Trade Organization (1998) details, for example, the production
of a particular “American” car:

          Thirty percent of the car’s value goes to Korea for assembly, 17.5 per-
          cent to Japan for components and advanced technology, 7.5 percent to
          Germany for design, 4 percent to Taiwan and Singapore for minor parts,
          2.5 percent to he United Kingdom for advertising and marketing services,
          and 1.5 percent to Ireland and Barbados for data processing. This means
          that only 37 percent of the production value ... is generated in the United
          States. (p.36)

Feenstra (1998), citing Tempest (1996), describes similarly the production of a Barbie
doll. According to Feenstra, Mattel procures raw materials (plastic and hair) from
Taiwan and Japan, conducts assembly in Indonesia and Malaysia, buys the molds in
the United States, the doll clothing in China, and the paints used in decorating the
dolls in the United States. Indeed, when many observers use the term “globalization,”
they have in mind a manufacturing process similar to what Feenstra and the WTO
have described.
    1
        See The Economist (1991) for an overview of trends toward greater outsourcing in manufactur-
ing. Helper (1991), Gardner (1991), Bardi and Tracey (1991), Bamford (1994) and Abraham and
Taylor (1996) document increased subcontracting in particular industries or for particular activities.

                                                   1
       To us, outsourcing means more than just the purchase of raw materials and stan-
dardized intermediate goods. It means finding a partner with which a firm can es-
tablish a bilateral relationship and having the partner undertake relationship-specific
investments so that it becomes able to produce goods or services that fit the firm’s
particular needs. Often, but not always, the bilateral relationship is governed by a
contract, but even in those cases the legal document does not ensure that the partners
will conduct the promised activities with the same care that the firm would use itself
if it were to perform the tasks.2
       Because outsourcing involves more than just the purchase of a particular type of
good or service, it has been diﬃcult to measure the growth in international outsourc-
ing. Audet (1996), Campa and Goldberg (1997), Hummels et al. (2001) and Yeats
(2001) have used trade in intermediate inputs or in parts and components to proxy
for what they have variously termed ‘vertical specialization’, ‘intra-product special-
ization’ and ‘global production sharing’. While these are all imperfect measures of
outsourcing as we would define it, the authors do show that there has been rapid
expansion in international specialization for a varied group of industries that includes
textiles, apparel, footwear, industrial machinery, electrical equipment, transportation
equipment, and chemicals and allied products. It seems safe to tentatively conclude
that the outsourcing of intermediate goods and business services is one of the most
rapidly growing components of international trade.
       In this paper, we develop a framework that can be used to study firms’ decisions
about where to outsource. We consider a general equilibrium model of production
and trade in which firms in one industry must outsource a particular activity. These
firms can seek partners in the technologically and legally advanced North, or they
can look in the low-wage South. Our model of a firm’s decision incorporates what we
consider to be the three essential features of a modern outsourcing strategy. First,
firms must search for partners with the expertise that allows them to perform the
   2
       Marsh (2001, p.10) notes some of the pitfalls in outsourcing: “Outsourcers depend on others
caring as much about the product as they do. If you ask someone else to make a vital component,
you may lose control over the way it evolves.”




                                                 2
particular activities that are required. Second, they must convince the potential sup-
pliers to customize products for their own specific needs. Finally, they must induce
the necessary relationship-specific investments in an environment with incomplete
contracting.
   Using the framework developed in Sections 2 and 3, we are able to examine in
Sections 4 and 5 several possible determinants of the location of outsourcing. First,
the size of a country can aﬀect the ‘thickness’ of its markets. All else equal, a firm
prefers to search in a thicker market, because it is more likely to be able to find
a partner there with the appropriate skills that would make it able and willing to
tailor a component or service for the final producer’s needs. Second, the technology
for search aﬀects the cost and likelihood of finding a suitable partner. Search will
be less costly and more likely successful in a country with good infrastructure for
communication and transportation. Third, the technology for specializing compo-
nents determines the willingness of a partner to undertake the needed investment
in a prototype. Finally, diﬀerences in contracting environments can impinge on a
firm’s ability to induce a partner to invest in the relationship. We study the con-
tracting environment by introducing a parameter that represents the extent to which
relationship-specific investments are verifiable by an outside party.
   While our model is rich in its description of the outsourcing relationship, it is
limited by its focus on activities for which firms have no choice but to outsource.
Elsewhere (see Grossman and Helpman, 2002) we have studied a firm’s decision of
whether to undertake an activity in-house or to outsource it. There, like here, we
cast individual firms’ choices in the context of an industry and general equilibrium.
But we focus narrowly on a closed rather than a global economy. The next step in
our progression would be a model in which firms have a four-way choice of whether
to undertake an activity either in-house or by subcontract, and either at home or
abroad. Such a model would come closer to describing the central decisions facing
modern, multinational firms. But the current paper takes an important intermediate
step, because it highlights the considerations that are bound to be important in a
more complete analysis.


                                           3
2     The Model
Consider a world with two countries, North and South, and two industries. Firms in
either country can produce a homogeneous consumer good z with one unit of local
labor per unit of output. Firms in the North also can design and assemble varieties of
a diﬀerentiated consumer good y. The South lacks the know-how needed to perform
these activities. Both countries are able to produce intermediate goods (business
services or components), which are vital inputs into the production of good y.
    The varieties of good y are diﬀerentiated in two respects. First, as is usual in
models of intra-industry trade, consumers regard the diﬀerent products as imperfect
substitutes. Second, the varieties require diﬀerent components in their production.
We capture product diﬀerentiation in the eyes of consumers with the now-familiar
formulation of a CES sub-utility function. On the supply side, we associate each final
good with a point on the circumference of a unit circle, so that the “location” of a
good represents the specifications of the input needed for its assembly.
    Consumers in both countries share identical preferences. The typical consumer
seeks to maximize
                             "Z       Z                            # αβ
                                  1       n̂(l)
                 u = z 1−β                        y (j, l)α djdl          , 0 < α, β < 1.   (1)
                              0       0


where z is consumption of the homogeneous final good and y(j, l) is consumption
of the j th variety located at point l on the unit circle (relative to some arbitrary
zero point). We shall assume that there is a continuum of goods located at each
point on the circle, but (1) implies that consumers regard the various goods at the
same location on the circle as diﬀerentiated. In the limit to the integral, n̂(l) is the
measure of varieties available to consumers that require an intermediate input with
characteristics l. Note that, as usual, β gives the spending share that consumers
optimally devote to the homogeneous good, and ε = 1/(1 − α) is the elasticity of
substitution between any pair of varieties of good y.
    The production process is as follows. First, firms in the North enter as potential
producers of a variety of good y. Entry requires an investment of w N fn in product


                                                       4
design, where wN is the Northern wage rate and fn is the amount of labor needed
to develop a diﬀerentiated product.3 The production of a diﬀerentiated product
requires one unit of a customized intermediate input per unit of output. The final-
good producers cannot manufacture these inputs themselves (or, it is prohibitively
costly for them to do so due to their relatively small scale of production). Rather,
they must outsource this activity to a specialized producer of components in one
country or the other. If a final producer is successful in finding a suitable partner
and in convincing this firm to tailor an intermediate good for its use, it needs no
additional inputs to assemble the final output.4 The location on the circle of a firm’s
requisite component is a random element in its product design, and all locations are
equally likely.
       At the same time that firms in the North enter as potential final producers, firms in
either country may enter as suppliers of intermediate products. Such entry involves
an investment in expertise (and, perhaps, equipment).                  A supplier’s expertise is
represented by a point on the unit circle. The investment in developing expertise is
large relative to the cost of designing a single final product, so there are relatively few
(i.e., a finite number) of suppliers of components in any country, each of which serves
many final producers. The cost of entry by a component producer in country i is
wi fm
    i
      , where wi is the wage in country i for i = S, N, and fm
                                                             i
                                                               is the labor requirement
there.
       Figure 1 shows the location of the intermediate producers in one of the coun-
tries. For ease of visualization, we have depicted a market with only eight suppliers,
although for reasons that will become clear, we have in mind equilibria with larger
numbers than this. We neglect the integer “problem,” and treat the finite number
of input suppliers in country i, mi , as a continuous variable. In equilibrium, the
suppliers in any market will be equally spaced around the circle.
   3
       Since there is a continuum of diﬀerentiated final goods, the fixed cost of designing a single
product is infinitesimally small. Of course, the total resources used in designing a positive measure
of such goods is finite.
    4
      This is an inessential simplification. We could as well assume that production of final goods
requires labor and components in fixed proportions.



                                                  5
                                                  (
                                             •h       1
                                         (
                                                          2
                                 8




                            (
                             7                                3
                       2x   •k

                            (        6                    4

                                                      5




                        Figure 1: Locations of input suppliers

   Once entry has occurred, the next stage involves search.         Northern firms that
have developed designs for final products must locate suppliers for their components.
Each firm must choose the market in which it will seek a supplier, because search in
one geographic region is a distinct activity from search in the other. For reasons that
will become clear, a firm’s goal in its search is to find a partner whose expertise (as
represented by its location on the circle) is close to the firm’s own input requirement.
   Final producers are assumed to know how many suppliers are active in each coun-
try (the “thickness” of the market) but not the precise locations of these producers
in terms of their expertise. The firms know that the suppliers in a market are equally
spaced around the circle, and regard all equi-spaced configurations as equally likely.
Each firm chooses the intensity of its search in the market of its choice, with search
costs rising quadratically in the extent of search. We assume that search must be
carried out by Northern labor. A search of intensity x in market i requires η i x2 units
of labor, and thus costs wN η i x2 . Such a search will turn up all suppliers in an arc of
length 2x. Since each firm seeks a supplier with expertise appropriate to its needs, it
searches symmetrically about its own location in input space. In Figure 1 we show
two firms, at h and k, that conduct searches of equal intensity x, as represented by the


                                                      6
indicated arcs. In this case, the firm at location k is successful in finding a potential
supplier (input producer 7), but the firm at location h fails in its search eﬀort. A
firm that fails to locate a supplier of components is unable to produce final output
and thus forfeits its initial investment.
       A successful search results in a bilateral match. This leads to a negotiation and
possibly to a relationship-specific investment by the input supplier. We postpone
discussion of the bargaining and contracting issues for a moment, to focus on the
technological considerations. In order to produce the customized inputs needed by
a particular final producer, a supplier must invest in a prototype.                        The greater
is the distance between the supplier’s expertise and the final producer’s needs, the
larger is the cost of customization. In particular, if a supplier in country i wishes to
provide components to a final producer whose location is at a distance x from its own
expertise, then it must pay a fixed cost of w i µi x to develop the prototype. Thereafter,
it can produce customized components for its partner at constant marginal cost, with
one unit of local labor needed per unit of output.


2.1        Bargaining and Contracting
Bargaining occurs in two stages. When a final producer locates a potential supplier
in a given market, the two firms first negotiate over the extent of the supplier’s in-
vestment in customization and the amount of compensation for the prototype. Later,
they negotiate over the quantity and price of an input order. The size of the order
and the payment cannot be negotiated ahead of time, because then the input supplier
might make no investment in customization but still produce inputs and demand to
be paid.5
   5
       Alternatively, we might allow the two sides to negotiate a price of inputs when they first meet
while giving the final producer the option to decide the size of its order after it inspects the prototype.
Such a contract typically would be renegotiated ex post, but it would alter the disagreement point for
the second-stage negotiation and thus could be used to induce investment by the supplier. We have
investigated such contracts and find that they can stimulate investment that would not otherwise be
made if and only if α > 1/2 (i.e., ε > 2). But even in cases where an initial negotiation of price with
an option to buy can mitigate the hold-up problem, it can never induce the same investment choices


                                                    7
    We shall refer to the contract that governs the supplier’s investment in the pro-
totype as the investment contract and that which governs the exchange of inputs as
the order contract. Note that the prototype is valuable only inside the relationship.6
Also, while the supplier’s investment (or its result) can be perfectly observed by the
final producer, we assume that it is only partly verifiable to outside parties. As is
familiar from the work of Williamson (1985), Hart and Moore (1990), and others, the
imperfect verifiability of investment constrains the contracting possibilities. Thus,
the investment contract is an incomplete contract. In contrast, the order contract is
a complete contract, because both quantity and price are verifiable.
    We wish to allow for diﬀerent contracting environments in the two countries,
inasmuch as this may be an important consideration in a firm’s choice of where to
outsource. To this end, we extend the existing literature on imperfect contracts to
incorporate intermediate cases between the familiar extremes of “no contracts” and
“perfect contracts.” We assume that, in country i, an outside party can verify a
fraction γ i < 1/2 of the investment in customization undertaken by an input sup-
plier for a potential downstream customer. The parameter γ i may be given a literal
interpretation: the development of the prototype requires a number of stages or sub-
investments, some of which are verifiable and others are not. More figuratively, we
imagine that γ i captures the quality of the legal system in country i; the greater is
γ i , the more complete are the contracts that can be written there.


2.1.1    The Investment Contract

Now consider the negotiation of an investment contract between an input producer in
country i and a downstream firm whose required component is at a distance x from
as would result if customization were fully contractible. Since the flavor of the analysis with the
possibility of first-stage price contracts is similar to what we describe below, we choose to preserve
the simpler contracting environment.
   6
     In other words, we assume that a firm’s input requirements are unique, and in particular diﬀerent
from those of other firms located at the same point on the unit circle. Also, final producers may
not use components that nearly fit but not precisely so. These assumptions simplify the analysis
without significantly aﬀecting the nature of the hold-up problem.



                                                  8
the supplier’s expertise. The contract can stipulate a level of investment, but not one
greater than γ i wi µi x. The constraint reflects the limit on verification. The contract
also can specify a payment P i for which the downstream firm will be liable if the
supplier carries out the agreed investment. We assume Nash bargaining wherein the
parties share equally in the surplus that accrues from the contract.7
       Let S i denote the profits that the parties will share if the supplier develops a
component that fits the buyer’s needs, and if the two parties subsequently negotiate
an eﬃcient order contract. The parties anticipate that if they reach a stage where
a suitable prototype exists, their negotiation will lead to an equal sharing of S i . So
the parties each can expect to earn S i /2 if a first-stage bargain is reached, and if the
supplier chooses to invest the full amount wi µi x needed for production to proceed.
       The supplier will not make the full investment in customization unless its share of
the prospective profits, S i /2, exceeds the cost of that part of the investment that is
not governed by the contract. Thus, if (1 − γ i )w i µi x > S i /2, the supplier will invest
at most γ i wi µi x (doing so if and only if P i ≥ γ i wi µi x), and the final producer will be
left with a component that is useless for its purposes. In such circumstances, there
is no surplus to be shared in the relationship, and so no deal is struck.8
       Next note that, if S i /2 ≥ wi µi x, it is worthwhile for the supplier to proceed with
the full investment in customization, even if there is no first-stage contract and no
initial payment. Here, the supplier’s share of the prospective profits covers the full
cost of the requisite investment. In such circumstances, the parties’ threat points in
the first stage are S i /2 for the final-good producer and S i /2 − wi µi x for the supplier
   7
       In principle, the downstream firm might search for two potential suppliers, and then hold one
supplier in reserve to improve its bargaining position vis-à-vis the other. Typically, this strategy
would not prove profitable in the equilibria we describe. But, in any case, we wish to avoid a
taxonomic treatment with many diﬀerent strategies. Accordingly, we assume that, if a downstream
firm locates more than one potential supplier, it must choose one firm with which to conduct
negotations. In the event the negotiation with this firm fails, there is no time to take up with
another supplier. With this assumption, the outside options for both firms are zero.
   8
     Note that this condition requires S i /2 ≥ wi µi x when γ i = 0; this is the usual condition requiring
half of the surplus to cover the cost of the relationship-specific investment that applies when all
investment expenses are unverifiable.


                                                    9
of inputs.9 But these options sum to exactly what the parties stand to share if they
reach a first-stage agreement, which means that there is nothing to be gained from
signing a contract. It follows that the investment contract is a null contract in this
case, with P i = 0 and with no required investment.
       In contrast, when S i /2 < wi µi x, the input producer will not make the investment
absent an first-stage agreement with its customer. Meanwhile, when S i /2 ≥ (1 −
γ i )wi µi x, the supplier would be willing to make the unverifiable investment provided
the verifiable part is governed by a binding contract. In such circumstances, the
parties can generate profits if they manage to conclude a first-stage deal, but their
outside options are zero if their initial negotiation fails. The Nash bargain calls for
an equal sharing of surplus, which means an initial payment by the downstream firm
that provides equal net rewards to both parties. The final producer’s reward net of
the payment is S i /2 − P i , while the input producer’s reward net of the investment
cost is S i /2 + P i − wi µi x. Equating the two, we have P i = wi µi x/2, when x is
such that w i µi x > S i /2 ≥ (1 − γ i )wi µi x. In other words, the two sides divide the
investment cost evenly.
       To summarize, the investment contract and the induced investment behavior de-
pend upon the contracting environment in the supplier’s country, on the distance
between the supplier’s expertise and the final producer’s input requirement, and on
the amount of potential profits that would be generated by an eﬃcient order. Let
P i (x) be the payment that is dictated by an investment contract between a final pro-
ducer in the North and an input supplier in country i when the supplier’s expertise
diﬀers from the buyer’s input needs by x, and let I i (x) be the induced investment
level. Then                       
                                   1 wi µi x for         Si
                                                                  <x≤        Si
                                    2                    2wi µi         2wi µi (1−γ i )
                        P i (x) =                                                                   (2)
                                      0                          otherwise
   9
       Recall that, even if there is no first-stage contract, the supplier cannot commit to refrain from
negotiating an order contract in the second stage. Thus, the supplier has every incentive to make the
first-stage investment without any payment, which works to the benefit of its downstream producer.




                                                    10
and                            
                                wi µi x for x ≤      Si
                        i                        2wi µi (1−γ i )
                       I (x) =                                   .                 (3)
                                0             otherwise

2.1.2   The Order Contract

Once the input supplier has sunk its investment in the prototype, the partners have
coincident interests regarding the production and marketing of the final good. They
can write an eﬃcient contract to govern the manufacture and sale of the intermediate
inputs. The preferences in (1) imply that the producer of the j th variety of good y at
location l faces a demand given by

                                     y (j, l) = Ap (j, l)−ε ,                      (4)

when it charges the price p (j, l), where
                                                     P     i
                                                 β    iE
                             A = hR 1 R n̂(l)                             i        (5)
                                        0    0
                                                 p (j, l)1−ε djdl

and E i denotes spending on consumer goods in country i, for i = N, S. This is
a constant-elasticity demand function, which means that profits are maximized by
mark-up pricing. Any partnership in which the supplier resides in country i faces a
marginal cost of output of wi . Thus, joint profits are maximized by a price pi = wi /α
of final output. Maximal joint profits are
                                                      µ        ¶1−ε
                                 i           wi
                                S = (1 − α)A                          ,            (6)
                                             α
which are independent of the distance between the supplier’s expertise and the final
producer’s input type. The order contract that generates the maximal joint profits
dictates a quantity of inputs                    µ       ¶−ε
                                         i  wi
                                       y =A                                        (7)
                                            α




                                                 11
and a total payment by the final producer to the input supplier of10
                                               µ i ¶1−ε
                                         1+α    w
                                             A          .
                                          2     α

2.2        Search
We consider now the search problem facing a firm that has developed a variety of
good y. The firm must decide where to look for a partner and the intensity of its
search eﬀort.11 Suppose the firm searches at intensity x in country i. If x ≥ 1/2mi ,
the firm will find a potential partner with probability one. Otherwise, the probability
that it will find a partner is 2mi x, since the firms are spaced at distance 1/mi in
country i, and a search of intensity x covers an arc of length 2x.
       There are two self-imposed bounds on the firm’s search intensity in country i.
First, the firm would never choose x greater than 1/2mi , because search is costly and
in our model there is no benefit to finding a second partner whose expertise is less
suited to the firm’s input needs than the first. Second, the firm would never choose
x greater than S i /2wi µi (1 − γ i ), because even if it found a potential supplier at such
  10
       The payment is such that the input supplier’s reward net of manufacturing costs is half of the
joint profits. Thus, the payment is S i /2 + wi y i , which, with (6) and (7), implies the expressioin in
the text.
  11
     We assume that final producers search for an outsourcing partner in only one country. This
could be justified by assuming that the entry cost fn incorporates a component that is a fixed cost
of search (independent of intensity) and that a firm choosing to search in both markets would have
to bear this cost twice. If this cost element were large enough, then search in two countries would
be unprofitable.
  The equilibria described below with outsourcing in both countries would remain equilibria even
if we were to allow firms to search in both markets. In these equilibria, some firms break even by
searching only in the North and others by searching only in the South, so a firm that searched in
both places would suﬀer an expected loss. However, if firms were free to search in both markets,
there might be additional equilibria in which all firms search in both countries, and firms that find
potential partners in both places choose ex post where to outsource. This choice would be based on
the distance between their input requirement and the expertise of the two potential partners and
on the profit opportunities that would ensue from production of intermediates in the alternative
locations.


                                                   12
a distance, the input producer would be unwilling to make the necessary investment
in customization, in view of the contracting environment in country i. Accordingly, a
firm searching for a partner in country i chooses x to maximize its expected operating
profits,                                    Z        ·             ¸
                                                 x
                                                         Si
                          π in (x)      i
                                     = 2m                   − P (q) dq − wN η i x2 ,
                                                               i
                                                                                                 (8)
                                             0           2
subject to
                                                              1
                                                     x≤                                          (9)
                                                             2mi
and
                                                            Si
                                            x≤                         .                        (10)
                                                     2wi µi (1 − γ i )
In (8), the first term is the expected profits for the firm considering all the diﬀerent
partners it might find at the various distances q (and the possibility that it may find
no partner at all), and the second term is the cost of the search.12
       We let ri denote the optimal intensity of search for a final producer that searches
in country i. There are several cases to consider, depending upon whether one or the
other or neither of the constraints binds in the determination of ri . We will not say
anything more about that here, but will postpone further discussion of the optimal
search intensity until after we have described the remaining equilibrium conditions.
       Once we have rN and rS , we can identify the market or markets in which the
Northern firms will choose to search. If π N   N      S S
                                           n (r ) > π n (r ), all search is conducted in

the North and all outsourcing takes place there. Similarly, if π Sn (rS ) > π N   N
                                                                              n (r ), all

search focuses on the South and there is no domestic outsourcing. Mostly, we will
study equilibria in which outsourcing occurs in both regions. This requires π Sn (rS ) =
πN   N
 n (r ).



2.3        Free Entry and Market Clearing
The remaining equilibrium conditions comprise a set of free-entry conditions for pro-
ducers of intermediate and final goods, and a pair of market-clearing conditions for
  12
       Rauch and Trindade (2000) have also developed a trade model in which firms have to be matched.
But their formulation is very diﬀerent from ours.


                                                           13
the two labor markets.
       Final-good producers must enter in positive numbers, since consumers spend a
constant fraction of their income on diﬀerentiated products. All entrants earn zero
expected profits in equilibrium. The expected operating profits for a typical firm that
                               ©                  ª
enters industry y is π n = max π N    N     S S
                                  n (r ), π n (r ) , and the free-entry condition is


                                            π n = wN fn .                                      (11)

       Intermediate-good producers may enter in one or both countries.13 A firm that
enters in country i will serve a measure 2ni ri of final-good producers, where ni is the
total measure of final-good producers that searches in country i. A firm’s customers
are spread uniformly at distances ranging from 0 to ri in each direction from the
point representing the firm’s expertise. An intermediate-good producer earns profits
of P i (x) + S i /2 − wi µi x from its relationship with a final-good producer whose input
requirement is at a distance x from its own expertise. Thus, potential operating
profits for an input producer that enters in country i are
                                 Z ri ·                    ¸
                         i     i         i     1 i     i i
                       π m = 2n         P (x) + S − w µ x dx.                                  (12)
                                  0            2
We assume that the number of entrants is suﬃciently large so that, in making its
entry decision, each firm ignores the small eﬀect of its own choice on ri and S i . Then
free-entry implies
                                    ¡            ¢ i
                   π im ≤ wi fm
                              i
                                and π im − wi fm
                                               i
                                                  m =0             for i = N, S.

       We turn next to the labor-market clearing condition in the South. We examine
equilibria in which the wage rate in the North is higher than the wage rate in the
South, so that ω ≡ wN /wS > 1. In such equilibria, the entire world output of the
homogeneous good z is produced in the South. Since aggregate profits are zero in both
  13
       The intermediate producers also choose their expertise (i.e., location). We assume that this
choice is made with rational expectations about the choices of others. It is a dominant strategy for
each firm to locate at a point mid-way between the expected locations of the two most-distantly-
spaced adjacent producers of intermediates. This strategy gives rise to a symmetric equilibrium
with equi-spaced input producers.

                                                 14
countries, all income is labor income. Aggregate spending equals aggregate income
in country i, which implies that E i = wi Li , where Li is the labor supply there. A
fraction 1 − β of spending is devoted to homogeneous goods, which carry a price of
wS . This means that in equilibrium the South employs (1 − β)(ωLN + LS ) units of
labor in the production of good z.
   The South also devotes labor to entry by input producers, to investment in cus-
tomization, and to the manufacture of components. Entry absorbs mS fm
                                                                    S
                                                                      units of
labor. Customization requires µS x units of labor for a final-good producer whose
needs are a distance x from the expertise of the input producer.            Each of the mS
producers of intermediates undertakes such an investment for all final-good producers
that search in the South and that are located within rS to its right or to its left. Since
a constant density nS of final-final producers searches in the South, the Southern la-
                                                    R rS
bor needed for developing prototypes is 2µS mS nS 0 xdx = µS mS nS (rS )2 . Finally,
the density nS of Northern firms searching in the South results in a measure 2mS rS nS
of bilateral matches. Each such match generates a demand for y S units of Southern
labor to manufacture components. Therefore, manufacturing absorbs 2mS rS nS y S
units of Southern labor. Summing the components of labor demand, and equating
this to the fixed labor supply, we have

            (1 − β)(ωLN + LS ) + mS fm
                                     S
                                       + µS mS nS (rS )2 + 2mS rS nS y S = LS .          (13)

   In the North, labor is used in the design of final goods, in searching for outsourcing
partners, and in entry, investment and manufacturing by producers of intermediate
goods. The fixed costs of entry by final-good producers requires (nN + nS )fn units
of labor. The search for partners by these firms requires an additional nN η N (rN )2 +
nS η S (rS )2 units of labor. The components of labor demand by intermediate-good
producers in the North are analogous to those in the South. Therefore, the labor-
market clearing condition in the North is given by
        X          X
   fn       ni +       ni η i (ri )2 + mN f N + µN mN nN (rN )2 + 2mN rN nN y N = LN .   (14)
        i          i

This completes the description of the model.

                                               15
3     Outsourcing with Unverifiable Investment
To gain an understanding of the workings of the model, we begin with a case in which
incomplete contracting takes an extreme form: none of the supplier’s investment in
customization is verifiable by an outside party. We examine the case with γ N = γ S =
0 to shed light on the technological determinants of outsourcing behavior.
    With γ N = γ S = 0, the first-stage negotiations are pointless. The input supplier
cannot commit to undertake any investment, so the final producer will not promise
any up-front payment. Instead, the supplier invests in customization if and only if its
prospective share of the profits from the bilateral relationship exceeds the total cost of
developing the prototype. According to (3), with γ i = 0, I i = wi µi x if S i /2 ≥ w i µi x
and I i = 0 otherwise.
    We return now to the problem facing the final-good producer as regards the choice
of search intensity in a given market. As we noted before, the final-good producer
searching in country i maximizes π in given in (8), subject to (9) and (10). There are
diﬀerent possible solutions to this problem depending upon which, if either, of the
constraints binds. Let us suppose first that (10) binds, as illustrated in Figure 2.
The figure shows the marginal benefit and marginal cost of search as functions of the
search intensity. The benefit of a more intensive search is an improved prospect for
finding a partner. Since the probability of finding one rises linearly with the search
intensity (provided that x < 1/2mi ) and the prospective profits are independent of
x (provided that x ≤ S i /2w i µi , so that the supplier will invest in customization),
the marginal benefit is constant for low values of x. The marginal cost of added
search is 2wN ηi x, an increasing function of x. The figure depicts circumstances in
which the marginal benefit is relatively high, so that it exceeds the marginal cost
at x = S i /2w i µi . In this case, the final producer would be willing to search still
further than this, but for its recognition that any partner it might find at such a
great distance would not be willing to undertake the investment in customization.
We shall refer to this case as one of a binding investment constraint.
    Another possibility, illustrated in Figure 3, is that neither constraint binds. This
is a case where the marginal benefit of search is relatively low and the marginal

                                            16
                     MC, MB




                                          MB                      MC
                   m iS i




                              2w N η i                                 MB
                                                                            x
                       0                 S i/2w iµ   i   1/2m i




                Figure 2: Choice of ri : Binding investment constraint

cost of search rises steeply. We call this the case of costly search. It results in a
search intensity determined by equating the (positive) marginal benefit of search to
the marginal cost.
    The final possibility is that constraint (9) binds, as it will if S i /wi µi > 1/mi
and the marginal benefit of search exceeds the marginal cost at x = 1/2mi . In this
case (not shown), the final producer searches a distance equal to the space between
input suppliers, thereby ensuring itself of finding an outsourcing partner. This case
of assured matching is less interesting than the others, so we will pay little attention
to it.
    It is worth emphasizing that the thickness of the market has an important bearing
on the search decision. If there are many input producers, then ceteris paribus the
marginal benefit of search will be large. In such circumstances, the final producer
is more likely to search until it surely finds a partner, or else be constrained by the
unwillingness of some potential suppliers to invest in a prototype. Also, the profit
opportunity aﬀects the incentives to search. Of course, the two are related: the
greater is the number of intermediate producers, the greater will be the fraction of
final producers served by input suppliers, and so the smaller will be the demand for


                                                           17
                    MC, MB




                                                                 MC




                   m iS i    MB


                              2w N η   i                              MB
                                                                           x
                       0               S   /2w iµ i
                                           i
                                                      1/2m   i




                            Figure 3: Choice of ri : Costly search

a particular variety. While mi and S i separately aﬀect the search decision, these
variables are jointly determined in the general equilibrium.
   We are prepared now to write an equation for ri as a function of mi , S i , and
the wages. This equation delineates the various “regimes” to be considered. First,
when neither constraint binds, ri = mi S i /2wN η i . Neither constraint will bind if
                                                       p
mi < wN η i /wi µi (so that ri < 2S i /wi µi ) and mi < wN ηi /S i (so that ri < 1/2mi ).
Second, ri = S i /2wi µi when the investment constraint binds, as it does when mi falls
between w N ηi /wi µi and w i µi /S i . Finally, assured matching implies ri = 1/2mi , and
occurs when mi falls outside the indicated ranges. In short,
                                                    ½        q        ¾
                   
                      m iSi
                                 for       i           wN η i
                                         m ≤ min wi µi ,         wN ηi
                   
                    2wN ηi                                       Si
              i
             r =         Si
                                 for
                                               N
                                              w η  i           i
                                                     ≤ mi ≤ wSµi
                                                                  i      .           (15)
                   
                      2wi µi                 wi µi
                   
                    1
                        2mi
                              otherwise
   There are obviously many cases to consider, and we shall not dwell on all of them.
There might be equilibria with outsourcing in both countries and any combination
of binding investment, costly search and assured matching in each one. This gives
nine possible combinations. And there might be equilibria in which only one country
supplies all of the intermediate goods. Again, that country may be characterized by a

                                                       18
binding investment constraint, costly search, or assured matching. In what follows we
will discuss the procedure for finding all of the equilibria for a given set of parameter
values, and then concentrate on the comparative statics in selected regimes.


3.1     Equilibria
To identify equilibria, we construct a pair of reduced-form curves, one representing
the labor-market clearing condition in the North and the other representing the labor-
market clearing condition in the South. In deriving these curves we incorporate the
zero-profit conditions as well as the equilibrium search intensities. The curves are
constructed as follows. First, we hypothesize a combination of search regimes in the
North and the South, and derive the combinations of mN and mS that are consistent
with labor-market clearing in each region under the maintained hypothesis. Then we
find the region in (mN , mS ) space in which the hypothesized combination of search
regimes is realized. We repeat this procedure for all possible combinations of regimes
and “connect up” the curves at the boundaries between the regimes. The points of
intersection between the curves so constructed are equilibria of the world economy.
   We illustrate the construction of the reduced-form curves for the case of a binding
investment constraint in both the North and the South. Other cases are discussed in
Appendix A.
   When the binding constraint on search is the willingness of input suppliers to
undertake the necessary investment in customization, the search intensities are given
by (see (15))
                               i  Si
                             r =                   for i = N, S.                    (16)
                                 2w i µi
Assuming that outsourcing takes place in both countries, the free-entry conditions
imply
                     ri ni (S i − wi µi ri ) = wi fm
                                                   i
                                                          for i = N, S.             (17)

Substituting (16) and (17) into the South’s labor-market clearing condition (13)




                                              19
gives14
                                     ¡        ¢    1+α S S
                              (1 − β) ωLN + LS + 2     m fm = LS .                            (18)
                                                   1−α
       Next, we use (8) and (11), together with the recognition that πN     S
                                                                      n = π n if out-

sourcing takes place in both countries, to write
                            ¡                   ¢
                          ri mi S i − w N η i ri = wN fn       for i = N, S .                 (19)

Using this equation, (5) and (6), we derive15
                         X          X                    µ       ¶
                               i        i i
                                            ¡ i ¢2 1       N 1 S
                    fn        n +       n η r = (1 − α) β L + L ;
                          i         i
                                                   2         ω

that is, the value of labor used by final-good producers for product design and search
amounts to a fraction (1−α)β/2 of world income. Finally, we substitute this equation
together with (16) and (17) into the North’s labor-market clearing condition (14) to
derive                              µ       ¶
                         1            N 1 S    1+α N N
                           (1 − α) β L + L + 2     m fm = LN .                                (20)
                         2              ω      1−α
       The two equations, (18) and (20), involve mS , mN , and the relative wage, ω. But
the relative wage can be solved as a function of mS and mN using the requirement
that, if mS and mN are both positive, search for input suppliers must be equally
profitable in both countries. Substituting (16) into (19) and noting that (6) im-
plies S N = ω 1−ε S S , we can write an equal-profit condition for the case with binding
investment constraints in both countries, namely
                           µ           ¶       µ       ¶
                    ω 1−2ε    N    ηN        1   S  ηS
                             m − N = S m −ω S .                                               (21)
                     µN           2µ        µ      2µ
  14
       We also use yi = αS i /(1 − α)wi , which follows from (6) and (7).
  15
       The derivation uses the fact that pi = wi /α for all diﬀerentiated products assembled using
intermediate inputs from country i, and that the number of varieties of good y that are actually
produced using intermediate inputs from country i is 2mi ri ni . Together, these considerations and
(5) imply                                           P
                                                β    i   wi Li
                                        A= P              ³ ´1−ε .
                                                2mi r i ni wi
                                              i              α




                                                    20
                      mN
                   600         N
                                          E2
                                           •                          ω=1
                    500
                                                      •E1
                    400                                          N

                    300                                     S

                    200


                    100
                           S
                                                                            mS
                                   100   200   300    400       500   600




      Figure 4: Equilibria with binding investment constraints in North and South

This equation allows us to solve for the relative wage as a function of the numbers of
intermediate-good producers in the two countries, which we denote by ω(mS , mN ).
Substituting ω(mS , mN ) for ω in equation (18) yields the reduced-form SS curve that
applies when the investment constraint binds in both places. Substituting ω(mS , mN )
for ω in (20) yields the analogous N N curve.
      Now we identify the region of (mN , mS ) space in which the indicated equations
apply. According to (15), the investment constraint binds in the South when mS
falls between ωη S /µS and wS µS /S S . But (16) and (19) imply that mS ≤ wS µS /S S
              ¡ ¢2
whenever 4fn mS − 2µS mS /ω + η S ≤ 0. Thus, the SS curve has the indicated form
                                                       ¡ ¢2
in the region where mS ≥ ω(mN , mS )η S /µS and 4fn mS − 2µS mS /ω(mN , mS ) +
η S ≤ 0. Similarly, we find that the N N curve has the indicated form in the region
                              ¡    ¢2
where mN ≥ η N /µN and 4fn mN − 2µN mN + ηN ≤ 0. Outside of these regions,
the curves obey diﬀerent formulas, as detailed in Appendix A.
      Figure 4 shows the SS and N N curves for one set of parameter values.16 The
 16
      The parameter values for the case illustrated are: α = 1/2, β = 2/5, µS = µN = 1,
η S = 100, ηN = 60, fm
                     S    N
                       = fm = fn = 1/1200, LS = 10.5, and LN = 3.5.               The curves
have been drawn using Mathematica 4.1.         The simulation program can be downloaded from
http://www.princeton.edu/~grossman/grossman_working_papers.htm or obtained from either of


                                                 21
                    mN
                  300
                        N
                  250                    E2   •
                  200                                       E1
                                                            •      ω =1
                                                                     N
                  150
                                                                     S
                  100


                   50
                         S
                                                                          mS
                              50        100        150       200




Figure 5: An equilibrium with a binding investment constraint in North and costly
search in South

dashed line represents combinations of mS and mN for which ω = 1. Only points
above and to the left of this line (which have ω > 1) are of interest to us. The dotted
horizontal lines show the boundaries between the regions of costly search and binding
investment in the North (the lowermost line), and between binding investment and
assured matching in the North (the uppermost line). The dotted curves show the
boundaries between the regions of costly search and binding investment in the South
(the left-most curve), and between binding investment and assured matching in the
South (the right-most curve). Thus, the figure shows two equilibria, labelled E1 and
E2 , each characterized by active outsourcing in both countries and binding investment
constraints in both places.
   Figure 5 shows the NN and SS curves for a diﬀerent set of parameter values.17
This figure shows only the boundaries between the regions of costly search and binding
investment in each country, because the other boundary curves fall outside the range
the authors. We thank Yossi Hadar for writing the program.
  17
     These parameter are: α = 1/2, β = 1/2, µS = µN = 1, ηS = 100, ηN = 60, fm
                                                                             S    N
                                                                               = fm = fn =
1/1200, LS = 3.535 and LN = 1.55.


                                              22
of values illustrated in the figure. Here, there again are two equilibria with outsourcing
in both countries. The point labelled E1 has binding investment constraints in both
places; that labelled E2 has a binding investment constraint in the North and a regime
of costly search in the South.
       Parameter values also exist for which there are four diﬀerent equilibria with out-
sourcing in both countries. The reader can picture such a situation by reexamining
Figure 5 and imagining that the N N curve were just a bit higher than the one shown
there. Then the curve would intersect the SS curve twice in the region with costly
search in the South and twice more in the region with a binding investment constraint
in the South. In this case, all four equilibria would be characterized by a binding
investment constraint in the North.
       The possibility of multiple equilibria reflects an important feedback mechanism
in the model. The greater is the number of input suppliers in a country, the more
profitable it is for final producers to search for partners there. This is because a search
of given intensity is more likely to turn up a potential partner when there are more
input suppliers to be found. Moreover, when such a search does turn up a partner,
that partner will be more likely to be willing to undertake the needed investment in
customization. At the same time, the greater is the number of final producers that
search for partners in a given country, the more profitable it is for an input producer
to operate there.18
       The positive feedback associated with the thick-market externality is, however,
limited by a wage response. As more intermediate producers enter in a country, their
demand for labor bids up the country’s relative wage. This tends to dampen the in-
centive of final producers to search there. In our model, the general-equilibrium wage
response creates the possibility of multiple equilibria with production of intermediate
inputs in both countries and diﬀerent patterns of outsourcing.
       When several equilibria exist, it is natural to ask which ones are stable. We have
  18
       McLaren (2000) was the first to study the thick-market externality in international trade. He
pointed out that this externality can give rise to multiple equilibria when firms can choose between
outsourcing and in-house production.




                                                  23
conducted a stability analysis and report the results in Appendix B. In the analysis,
we take the numbers of each type of firm (final producers, intermediate producers in
the North, and intermediate producers in the South) as the state variables and assume
that entry and exit respond to profit opportunities. When profits net of entry costs
are positive for a typical firm of a given type, more firms of that type enter. When
profits are negative, firms exit. With this adjustment process, stability requires that
the N N and SS curves both be downward sloping and that the SS curve be the
steeper of the two at the point of intersection. Thus, the equilibria labelled E1 in
Figures 4 and 5 are stable, whereas those labelled E2 are not.
    There also may be equilibria with outsourcing concentrated in one country. For
example, an equilibrium with all outsourcing in the North (and ω > 1) always exists
when βLS > (1 − β)LN . In such an equilibrium, ω = βLS /(1 − β)LN , and the fact
that there are no input suppliers in the South (mS = 0) discourages final producers
from searching there. Given that no final producers search for partners in the South,
no input suppliers have an incentive to enter there. The equilibrium can be one with
costly search, a binding investment constraint, or assured matching in the North,
depending upon the size of the cost and demand parameters. When an equilibrium
exists with all outsourcing activity concentrated in the North, that equilibrium always
is stable. We do not consider such equilibria further in this paper.



4     Comparative Statics
In this section, we study how the pattern of outsourcing and world trade are aﬀected
by the sizes of the two countries and by the technologies for search and customiza-
tion. We begin with country size, because this allows us to illustrate some important
properties of the model.


4.1    Country Size
Consider growth in the resource endowment of the South, as would be reflected in
an increase in LS . An initial stable equilibrium with outsourcing in both countries is

                                          24
                    mN
                                    S
                            N

                                                       ω = ω1
                                         E1

                                              •
                                                  •E
                                                   2
                                                       N
                                              S
                                                                mS



                    Figure 6: Labor supply growth in the South

depicted in Figure 6 by point E1 . No matter whether the South is in a regime with
costly search or a binding investment constraint an increase in LS shifts the SS curve
to right. This is because the added labor in the South more than suﬃces to serve the
country’s increased demand for homogeneous goods. The new SS curve is represented
by the broken curve in the figure. In the North, the growth in Southern income means
additional demand for diﬀerentiated products, and thus a greater demand for labor
by final-good producers. This implies a leftward shift of the NN curve, as shown in
the figure. The new equilibrium is at point E2 .
   Evidently, expansion in the South induces entry by local producers of intermediate
goods and exit by such producers in the North. This has immediate implications for
the composition of world outsourcing activity. We define the volume of outsourcing
as v i = 2mi ri ni y i ; that is, the number of units of intermediate goods manufactured
by input suppliers in country i. In a regime with a binding investment constraint, for
example, (17), (19), and (7), together with (16), imply that
                                          4α
                                  vi =       mi fm
                                                 i
                                                   .                               (22)
                                         1−α
In this case, the volume of outsourcing in a country is proportional to the number
of input producers active there. In all regimes, an increase in LS boosts outsourcing

                                              25
activity in the South while diminishing such activity in the North.
   It is interesting to note the eﬀect on the relative wage. Figure 6 shows the com-
binations of mN and mS that imply the same relative wage as at point E1 . These
points satisfy ω(mS , mN ) = ω 1 , where ω 1 is the relative wage at E1 and ω(mS , mN ) is
the wage that ensures equal profits from search in both places. When the investment
constraint binds in both countries, the equal-profit condition (21) implies that the
locus of points with ω(mS , mN ) = ω 1 is a line with positive slope. The relationship
need not be linear for other combinations of regimes, as can be seen by inspecting the
various equal-profit conditions given in Appendix A, but it is always upward sloping.
Points above the curve correspond to a higher relative wage in the North than ω 1 ,
while points below the curve correspond to a higher relative wage for the South.
   We see that, as long as outsourcing continues to take place in both countries, an
increase in LS must boost the relative wage of the South. The direct eﬀect of an
increase in LS is to generate excess supply for labor in the South and excess demand
in the North. But the shift in outsourcing activity has the opposite eﬀects. Moreover,
the thick-market externality implies that outsourcing is an increasing returns activity
at the industry level. Only when the wage of the North falls relative to that of the
South will the final producers find it to be equally profitable to search in either region
in view of the now thinner market in the North and the thicker market in the South.
   An increase in LS also increases the value of world trade, the share of trade in
world income, and the fraction of world trade that is intra-industry trade. The value
of world trade is the sum of the value of Northern imports of homogeneous goods,
the value of Southern imports of final goods, and the value of Northern imports of
components. But trade balance implies that the total value of Southern imports,
βwS LS , equals the value of its exports of homogeneous goods and of components.
Therefore, the value of world trade is

                                     T = 2βwS LS ,                                   (23)

which rises with LS when measured either in terms of the numeraire good (so that
wS = 1) or in terms of Northern labor (so that wS rises). The ratio of trade to world


                                           26
income is
                                         T      2βLS
                                            =                                                   (24)
                                        GDP   ωLN + LS
while the fraction of trade that is intra-industry trade is19

                                     Tintra     1 − β ωLN
                                            =1−           .                                     (25)
                                       T          β    LS

It is clear that both of these ratios rise with LS , because the direct eﬀect and the
indirect eﬀect that derives from the change in the relative wage both point in the
same direction.
       We will not repeat the analysis for the case of an increase in LN . The reader may
confirm that the qualitative eﬀects on the number of intermediate producers in each
country, the location of outsourcing activity, the relative wage, the ratio of trade to
world income, and the share of intra-industry trade are just the opposite of those for
an increase in LS .20


4.2        Outsourcing Technology
The technology for outsourcing is reflected in the parameters that describe the cost
of search (ηi ) and the cost of customization (µi ). Arguably, improvements in trans-
portation and communication technology have lowered the cost of search for outsourc-
ing partners. The internet, especially, has facilitated business-to-business matching.
Also, changes in production methods associated with computer-aided design may
  19
       The volume of intra-industry trade is defined as twice the smaller of the North’s exports of
diﬀerentiated final goods and the South’s exports of intermediates. In this case, the latter quantity
is smaller. Since the volume of these exports equals βLS − (1 − β)ωLN (the diﬀerence between
the South’s imports of diﬀerentiated goods and the South’s exports of homogeneous goods, the
expression in (25) follows from (23).
  20
     An equi-proportionate increase in the size of both countries is not neutral with respect to the
composition of outsourcing activity. To see this, suppose to the contrary that mS and mN were
to grow by the same proportion as LS and LN . By (18) and (20), this can be consistent with
labor clearing in both countries only if the relative wage ω remains unchanged. But the equal-profit
condition (21) implies that the relative wage cannot remain unchanged when mS and mN grow
proportionately, except if search costs in both region are negligible.



                                                  27
have reduced the cost of customizing components. We investigate how improvements
in the search and investment technologies aﬀect the location of outsourcing activity.
   First, consider an equi-proportionate improvement in all search and investment
technologies; i.e., ηN , η S , µN and µS all fall by similar percentages of their initial
values. From the equal-profit condition (21) for the regime with binding investment
constraints in both countries, we see that this change has no eﬀect on the relative
profitability of searching in the North versus the South. The same conclusion applies
for the other combinations of regimes, as can be seen in Appendix A. Thus, there is no
shift in the relative wage function, ω(mS , mN ). Moreover, the search and investment
parameters either do not appear directly in the reduced-form SS and NN equations
(as is the case when the investment constraint binds), or they appear only in ratio
form. It follows that a uniform improvement in search and investment technologies
leaves all of these curves in their initial locations. There is no aﬀect on the number
of intermediate-good producers in either country, on the relative wage, on the levels
of outsourcing activity, or on the level and composition of international trade.
   When the technologies for search and investment improve worldwide, the prof-
itability of search rises in both locations. Final producers respond by conducting
more intensive searches for outsourcing partners, irrespective of the location of their
search. The more intensive search eﬀorts generate an increased number of bilateral
matches. As a result, consumers enjoy a greater variety of diﬀerentiated products,
while they consume smaller quantities of each one.
   Now we consider an improvement in technology in the South alone. This im-
provement may be reflected in a decline in search costs (fall in η S ) or a decline in the
cost to a Southern producer of customizing a component (fall in µS ), or both. To
limit repetition, we will formally investigate only the case in which the investment
constraint binds in both countries, although similar results can be derived for other
combinations of regimes.
   When η S or µS falls, it becomes more profitable for final producers to search for
partners in the South at the initial relative wage. The relative wage of the North
must fall to restore equal profitability of search in both places (see (21)). In other


                                           28
                      mN
                                      S
                             N

                                                            ω = ω1

                                          E1
                                               •
                                                   •
                                                       E2
                                                            N

                                               S
                                                                     mS




                  Figure 7: Technological improvement in the South

words, the technological improvements in the South cause the ω(mS , mN ) function
to shift down. But then the SS curve shifts up and the NN curve shifts to the left,
as illustrated in Figure 7. The equilibrium moves from E1 to E2 , corresponding to
an increase in the number of input suppliers in the South and a fall in their number
in the North. Outsourcing activity shifts from North to South (see(22)).
   The fall in η S or µS implies, by (21), that the relative wage ω 1 can be achieved
with a smaller number of input suppliers in the South (given mN ) than was true
before the technological change. Thus, the ω = ω 1 curve shifts to the left, as drawn.
At E2 , the relative wage of the North is lower than ω 1 . It follows, from (24) and (25),
that an improvement in the search technology or the investment technology in the
South results in an increased ratio of trade to world income and an increased share
of intra-industry trade.
   To summarize, a rise in international outsourcing with concomitant growth in the
importance of trade and of intra-industry trade can be explained by improvements in
the technologies for search and customization, but only if these improvements have
occurred to a disproportionate extent in the South. It is certainly plausible that such
technological catch-up has taken place in recent years.

                                               29
5     The Contracting Environment
We return now to a setting in which the relationship-specific investments are partially
verifiable In this setting, the final producer and its potential supplier can write
an incomplete contract governing investment in the prototype. The contract can
require the final producer to pay an agreed amount to the input supplier if the latter
carries out a subset of the investments needed for customization of the input. The
specified investment can include at most the fraction γ i of the tasks needed for full
customization that are verifiable by the courts. We take γ i < 1/2 to be an exogenous
measure of the contracting environment in country i.
    To derive the reduced-form SS and N N equations, we need to revisit the optimal
search problem facing a final producer in this environment. Consider a producer that
searches in country i. According to (2) and (3), if this producer finds a partner whose
expertise lies at a distance x ≤ S i /2wi µi from its input needs, the partner inevitably
undertakes the necessary investment in a prototype and the contractual payment is
zero. If the distance x between the partner’s expertise and the producer’s needs is
between S i /2w i µi and S i /2w i µi (1 − γ i ), the investment takes place, but at a cost to
the final producer of P i = wi µi x/2. Finally, if the distance x exceeds S i /2wi µi (1−γ i ),
the input supplier does not undertake any of the tasks associated with customizing
the component that are not verifiable by the court.
    As we have noted, a final producer chooses its search intensity to maximize its
expected profits in (8), subject to (9) and (10). The solution is illustrated in Figure
8. In the figure, the marginal cost of search is a rising linear function of intensity,
with slope 2wN η i . The marginal benefit of search is constant and equal to mi S i for all
search distances that result in only matches involving an up-front payment of zero.
For distances beyond S i /2wi µi , the final producer’s gain from a match is reduced
by the amount of its expected first-stage payment. This payment grows with the
distance between the final producer and its partner. Thus, the marginal benefit of
search falls discontinuously at S i /2wi µi , the smallest distance for which P i > 0, and
falls linearly thereafter until x = S i /2wi µi (1 − γ i ). At distances still greater than
this, the input supplier would not make the full investment in customization, and so

                                              30
                           MC, MB

                          m iS i                                                       MC
                                                   MB




                                    2w Nη      i                                       MB   x
                              0        S /2w iµ
                                           i        i   S /2w iµ i(1−γ i)
                                                         i
                                                                            1/2m   i




  Figure 8: Choice of search intensity with γ i > 0: binding investment constraint

the marginal benefit of search is zero.
       Figure 8 depicts a case in which the investment constraint binds. Here, the mar-
ginal benefit of search at x ≤ S i /2wi µi (1 − γ i ) exceeds the marginal cost; but the
final producer does not search any further than x = S i /2wi µi (1 − γ i ), because a more
distant potential partner would not make the full investment in customization given
the prevailing contracting environment. Other possible regimes arise when the M B
curve intersects the MC curve where the former is flat and the latter is rising, when
the intersection comes at the point of discontinuity of M B, when the intersection
comes where the M B curve is falling, or when matching is assured.21
  21
       Formally, the solution to the final producer’s problem is
                                                                        ½         q          ¾
                    
                            mi S i                            i           wN ηi       wN η i
                    
                           2wN ηi           for            m    ≤ min     wi µi ,      Si
                    
                                                                               n N i i io
                    
                                                         N i
                    
                               S i
                                             for      w η             i          2w η w µ
                           2wi µi                     wi µi ≤ m ≤ min             wi µi , S i
               i                                       N    i
                                                                             n         N i
                                                                                                      o
              r =            mi S i
                                             for    2w η
                                                               ≤ m ≤ min wi µ2w
                                                                    i                   η           i   ,
                         N η i +mi wi µi              i µi                         i (1−2γ i ) , m̂
                    
                    
                       2w                            w
                    
                               Si                            2wN η i              wi µi (1−γ i )
                                            for                              i
                    
                        2wi µi (1−γ i )                 wi µi (1−2γ i ) ≤ m ≤           Si
                    
                    
                               1
                                          otherwise
                              2mi

where                                              µ       q                      ¶
                                            1                       2
                                   m̂i =            wi µi + (wi µi ) + 16wN ηi S i ;
                                           4S i


                                                                31
    Changes in the contracting environment can aﬀect the outsourcing equilibrium
only when they alter the final producer’s search decision in at least one country, or
when they change the payment from final-good producers to their suppliers. But
search intensity and expected payments by the final producer are independent of γ i
except when the investment constraint binds. To focus on the most interesting case,
we henceforth assume that the investment constraint binds in both countries.
    When the investment constraint binds in country i, producers search up to the
limit at which suppliers are willing to make the full investment in customization.
Then
                                    Si
                             ri =                for i = N, S .                     (26)
                             2wi µi (1 − γ i )
Expected operating profits for a final producer searching in country i can be calculated
using (2), (19) and (26). Equating these expected profits to the fixed cost of product
design, we have the zero-profit condition for firms that search in country i:
            ·                                        ¸
                    1 i i i i i¡          ¢
         r m S − m w µ r γ 2 − γ − w η r = w N fn for i = N, S .
          i   i i                       i      N i i
                                                                                                 (27)
                    2
The diﬀerence between this equation and (19) – that applied when γ i = 0 – is
the second term in the square brackets. When multiplied by ri his term reflects the
expected first-stage payment by a final producer that searches according to (26).
    Similarly, we can use (2) and (12) to calculate the operating profits for a compo-
nent producer in country i. Equating these to the fixed cost of entry (and thereby
assuming that mi > 0 for i = N, S), we have
               ·                                 ¸
                    1 i i i i¡         ¢
          r n S + w µ r γ 2 − γ − w µ r = wi fm
           i i   i                   i     i i i   i
                                                     for i = N, S .                              (28)
                    2
The second term in the square brackets times ri ni is the total amount of up-front
payments received by the typical input supplier from its various customers.
    We now are ready to derive the reduced-form labor market clearing conditions
that apply when γ i > 0 and the investment constraint binds in both countries. Sub-
stituting (6), (7), (26) and (28) into (13), we find that
                                         ¡ ¢2
i.e., the largest value of mi for which 2 mi S i ≤ 2wN η i + mi wi µi . Note that γ i = 0 is a special
case in which there is no discontinuity in the MB curve and no downward-sloping segment. Then
the five possible regimes for ri collapse to three, as given in (15).

                                                   32
                                 "                      ¡ S ¢2 #
                                     1+α   1+3α S     1
                        ¡      ¢   2     −      γ   −    γ
               (1 − β) ωLN + LS + 1−α       1−α
                                                  1
                                                      2
                                                        2        mS f m
                                                                      S
                                                                        = LS .                      (29)
                                             S
                                        1 − γ − 2 (γ )S


Notice that (29) reduces to (18) when γ S = 0.
       Similarly, we use (5), (6), (7), (26), (27) and (28) to substitute for the terms in
(14). This yields
             µ       ¶ " N¡       1 N
                                      ¢ #
  1               1       γ   1 −   γ
    (1 − α) β LN + LS −           2
                                  1
                                           N N
                                        2 m fm
  2               ω          N
                        1 − γ − 2 (γ )N


           "    ¡           ¢ #          "                      ¡ N ¢2 #
             γ S 1 − 12 γ S     1 S S      2 1+α
                                             1−α
                                                 − 1+3α N
                                                    1−α
                                                        γ   − 1
                                                              2
                                                                 γ
         −           1       2    m fm +                  1      2       mN fm
                                                                             N
                                                                               = LN .
                 S
           1 − γ − 2 (γ )  S    ω                    N
                                                1 − γ − 2 (γ )N

                                                                                                    (30)

The first three terms on the left-hand side of (30) represent the total demand for labor
by final-good producers for entry and search, while the last term represents the labor
used by intermediate producers in the North for entry, investment, and production.
       To complete the construction of the reduced-form SS and NN curves, we need
an equal-profit condition that will allow us to replace the relative wage ω in (29)
and (30) by a function ω(mS , mN ). We substitute (6) and (26) into the free-entry
condition for final producers (27), and equate the expected operating profits from
search in either country, to derive
                    ½     ·                  ¸     ¾
         ω 1−2ε        N          N 1 ¡ N ¢2    ηN
                      m 2 − 3γ +       γ       − N
     µN (1 − γ N )2                 2           µ
                                                 ½        ·                     ¸      ¾
                                     1               S             S   1 ¡ S ¢2     ηS
                              =                    m          2 − 3γ +    γ       −ω S .            (31)
                                µ (1 − γ S )2
                                 S                                     2            µ
The left-hand side of (31) is an increasing function of γ N for all values of γ N between
zero and one-half while the right-hand side of (31) is an increasing function of γ S
for all such values of γ S .22 This means that – holding the relative wage and the
thickness of each market constant – an improvement in the contracting environment
in a country raises the relative profitability to final producers of searching there.
  22
       To substantiate this claim, we make use of the fact that mi ≥ 2ηi /µi (1 − 2γ i ) in a regime with
a binding investment constraint in country i, as can be seen in footnote 16.

                                                     33
5.1    Improvements in Contracting in the North
We begin by examining improvements in the contracting environment in the North.
Suppose that, initially, γ N = γ S = 0, and consider a marginal increase in γ N . As
we have just noted, this raises the relative profitability of search in the North. The
relative wage ω must rise at given mS and mN to equalize the expected profits from
search in either market.
   The upward shift in ω(mS , mN ) induces an inward shift of the SS curve, as we
have depicted in Figure 9. This shift reflects the greater amount of Southern labor
needed to produce homogeneous goods for the now better-paid Northern consumers.
In the Northern labor market, there are several influences to be assessed. First,
the fall in the relative wage of the South spells a reduction in Southern demand for
diﬀerentiated products, which tends to reduce employment by final producers. The
demand for labor by final producers at given mN also falls for another reason: the
improved contracting environment facilitates investment by intermediate producers,
which means that final producers are willing to search at greater distance in the input
space. Since each final producer ultimately has a better chance of finding a suitable
partner, there are more final goods produced for any given number of entrants. The
increased competition in the market for diﬀerentiated products means that fewer
such producers enter. This eﬀect is reflected in the second term on the left-hand
side of (30), which is zero when γ N = 0 but turns negative as γ N grows. The fall in
labor demand by final-good producers is oﬀset, however, by an increase in demand
by component producers, which reflects their greater numbers of customers and their
higher investment levels; the fourth term on the left-hand side of (30) grows with γ N .
It is easy to verify that these latter two eﬀects exactly oﬀset one another when γ N
increases slightly from zero. This leaves only the eﬀect of the rise in ω(mS , mN ), and
so the N N curve shifts out, as illustrated in the figure.
   The net result is an increase in the number of component producers in the North,
a decline in the number of component producers in the South, and a hike in the
North’s relative wage. This can be seen in Figure 9, which shows the new equilibrium
at E2 , above and to the left of E1 . Note that this equilibrium lies above the broken

                                           34
                         mN
                                               S

                              N
                                              E2                      ω = ω1
                                             •
                                                   •
                                                   E1




                                                                  N
                                                             S
                                                                               mS



                Figure 9: Contracting improves in the North: Low initial γ N

line parallel to ω = ω 1 , which shows the combinations of mS and mN that give the
same relative wage as at E1 considering the change in the contracting environment
that has taken place. It is also easy to show that the volume of domestic outsourcing
rises while the volume of international outsourcing falls.23 Since equations (24) and
(25) describe the ratio of trade to world income and the share of intra-industry trade
in total trade, respectively, and both decline with the relative wage in the North, it
follows that the ratio of trade to world income and the share of intra-industry trade
in total trade both fall.
       While an initial improvement in contracting conditions in the North causes out-
sourcing to relocate from the South, further improvements in the contract environ-
ment need not have this eﬀect. In fact, once γ N is positive, the boost in labor demand
by component producers at given ω and mN induced by further growth in γ N out-
weighs the fall in such demand by final-good producers (i.e., the fourth term in (30)
  23
       The volume of outsourcing now is given by

                                          4α        1 − γi
                                  vi =                              mi fm
                                                                        i
                                                                          .
                                         1 − α 1 − γ i − 12 (γ i )2

So vN grows, because there are more Northern intermediate producers and each one produces more
components. In the South, the fall in outsourcing results from the exit of Southern input suppliers.



                                                        35
grows by more than the second term shrinks). Still, there is an additional fall in de-
mand by final-good producers owing to the decline in Southern income (and reflected
in the shift in ω(mS , mN )). On net, the NN curve may shift in either direction.
It is easy to find situations in which an increase in γ N from an initially high level
causes exit by intermediate-good producers in the North, entry by intermediate-good
producers in the South, and an expansion in international outsourcing and trade.24
       We have solved the model numerically for a wide variety of parameter values. In
these computations, we generally took search costs to be negligible, so that the invest-
ment constraints would bind in any equilibrium without assured matching. Holding
γ S = 0, we varied γ N gradually from zero to 0.4 and found a recurring pattern.
Namely, the volume of outsourcing in the North rises then falls as γ N increases, but
always remains above the level for γ N = 0. Meanwhile, the volume of outsourcing
in the South falls and then rises, while remaining below the level for γ N = 0. The
relative wage of the North rises, then falls, which implies that the ratio of world
trade to world income and the share of intra-industry trade in total trade do just the
opposite.25


5.2        Improvements in Contracting Worldwide
Before we turn to the contract environment of the South, it is helpful to discuss
the eﬀects of worldwide gains in contracting possibilities. We again take an initial
  24
       This occurs, for example, whenever search costs are low in both countries and γ N > γ̄ N , where
γ̄ N < 1/2 is the unique solution to
                                    ¡            ¢
                                γ̄ N 1 − 12 γ̄ N                  1 − 2γ̄ N
                                                        =                                .
                                1 − γ̄ N −   1    N 2       2 − 3γ̄ N + 12 (γ̄ N )
                                                                                     2
                                             2 (γ̄ )

The value of γ̄ N has been calculated so that the downward shift in SS at the initial mS exactly
matches the downward shift in NN . With this initial value of γ N , an improvement in the contracting
environment in the North results in a fall in mN and no change in mS or the relative wage. For still
larger initial values of γ N than γ̄ N , the N N curve shifts down by more than the SS curve, so mS
rises and mN falls.
   25
      Such a pattern obtains, for example, when ηN = ηS = 0, µN = µS = 50, α = 0.5, β = 0.75,
 N    S
fm = fm = 0.01, LN = 40 and LS = 32.



                                                        36
situation with unverifiable investment in both countries (γ N = γ S = γ = 0) but this
time consider a change in the legal environment that makes some investment tasks
contractible in both countries (dγ > 0). We will show that, perhaps surprisingly,
such a development would not be neutral with respect to the siting of outsourcing
activity.
   From the equal-profit condition (31) we see that an increase in a common γ from
an initial level of γ = 0 raises the relative profitability of outsourcing in the North
(at given ω, mS and mN ) if mN ηS /µS > mS ηN /µN and raises the relative profitabil-
ity of outsourcing in the South if the inequality runs in the opposite direction. If
mN η S /µS = mS ηN /µN – as would be the case, for example, were search costs to
be negligible in both countries – then the change in the common contract parame-
ter would have no direct eﬀect on the relative profitability of outsourcing in either
location. We take this as our benchmark case – with the implication that a small
increase in γ leaves the function ω(mS , mN ) undisturbed.
   With no shift in ω(mS , mN ), an increase in γ must shift the SS curve to the left,
as depicted in Figure 10. As can be seen from (29), an increase in γ S increases the
demand for labor (at given mS and ω) by Southern producers of components. These
producers need more labor, because they undertake more investment and serve more
customers. The NN curve, in contrast, shifts to the right. While it is true that
Northern component producers demand more labor (at given mN and ω) for much
the same reason as their Southern counterparts, this is more than oﬀset by a decline
in employment by final producers. As we noted previously, at γ N = 0, the second
term on the left-hand side of (30) decreases with γ N by the same amount as the
fourth term increases. But now we also have a decline in the third term of (30)
due to the growth in γ S . The additional relationships that are consummated by
final producers with input suppliers in the South are an added source of intensified
competition in the product market. In response, final producers exit in even greater
number than they do when contracting improves only in the North. The result is an
overall decline in labor demand in the North at given wages and given numbers of
component producers.


                                          37
                           mN
                                               S

                                N
                                                                ω = ω1
                                              E2•
                                                    •E1




                                                                 N
                                                          S
                                                                            mS



                           Figure 10: Contracting improves worldwide

       As the figure shows, a worldwide improvement in contracting possibilities is not
neutral with respect to the location of outsourcing. In the new equilibrium at E2 ,
there are more producers of components in the North and fewer producers of compo-
nents in the South than before. The improvement in the legal environment induces
a shift in outsourcing activity from South to North.26 The asymmetric eﬀects of the
change in γ come about, because the improved prospects for investment by input
suppliers mitigates the need for entry by final-good producers. With the resources
freed from the activity of designing diﬀerentiated products, the North can expand its
outsourcing activities. Meanwhile, the improvements in contracting possibilities raise
world income (evaluated in terms of the numeraire good), and with it the demand for
homogeneous goods. More labor must be devoted in the South to producing these
goods, which means that less is available for serving the needs of final producers.
  26
       Outsourcing activity falls in the South, despite the increase in γ S , because mS falls by a greater
percentage than output per firm rises.




                                                     38
5.3        Improvements in Contracting in the South
We are now ready to explain why improvements in the contracting environment in the
South, even if achieved from a very low initial level, need not result in an expansion
of outsourcing activity there. We take an initial situation with γ N > γ S = 0 and
consider a marginal increase in γ S .
       For reasons that are familiar by now, an increase in γ S raises (at given ω, mS
and mN ) the relative profitability of search in the South. To restore the equal-profit
relationship, the function ω(mS , mN ) must shift down. The movement in the relative
wage (or the terms of trade) expands the demand for diﬀerentiated goods by the
South, and reduces the demand for homogeneous goods by the North. Thus, the shift
in ω(mS , mN ) exerts rightward pressure on the SS curve and downward pressure on
the NN curve, both of which tend to generate an expansion of outsourcing activity
in the South and a contraction of such activity in the North.
       But the eﬀects of the change in relative profitability are oﬀset by impacts on labor
demand at the initial pattern of search activity. In the South, component producers
are able to serve more customers, and so their demand for labor grows for both
investment and production purposes. This alone would shift the SS curve to the
left. At the same time, the intensified competition in the product market that results
from the broader search eﬀorts of firms seeking partners in the South spells the exit
of some final producers in the North. This alone reduces labor demand, tending to
push the N N curve upward. On net, the SS curve can shift in either direction, as
can the N N curve.
       Again, we resorted to numerical computations to see what outcomes are possible.
Taking search costs to be small and holding γ N fixed at γ N = 0.4, we varied γ S from
0 to 0.4 for a wide range of values of the remaining parameters. Repeatedly, we found
that the volume of outsourcing in the North rises monotonically with γ S , while the
volume of outsourcing in the South rises at first, but then falls to a level below that for
γ S = 0.27 So too does the ratio of world trade to world income and the share of intra-
  27
       If search costs are not so small, improvements in the contracting environment in the South may
lead to a decline in international outsourcing for all initial values of γ S .   Take, for example, the



                                                   39
industry trade in total trade. In other words, the volume of international outsourcing
and the volume of world trade typically are largest when the legal environment allows
somewhat less complete contracts in the South than in the North.28



6     Conclusions
We have developed a framework for studying outsourcing decisions in a global econ-
omy. In our model, producers of diﬀerentiated final goods must go outside the firm
for an essential service or component. Search is costly and firms choose whether to
conduct it in one national market or the another. If a firm finds a potential partner
with suitable expertise, the supplier must customize the input for the final producer’s
use. Such relationship-specific investments are governed by incomplete contracts, and
the contracting environment may vary across national markets.
    Our model features a thick-market externality: search in a market is more prof-
itable the more suppliers are present there, while input producers fare best when
they have many customers to serve. This externality creates the possibility of multi-
ple equilibria, some of which may involve a concentration of outsourcing activity in
one location. But stable equilibria need not involve complete specialization of input
production in a single country. In the paper, we focus on equilibria in which some
firms outsource at home while others fill their input needs abroad.
    First, we studied how country size and the technologies for search and investment
aﬀect the equilibrium location of outsourcing activity. As the South expands, its
share of world outsourcing grows, as does the ratio of trade to world income and the
share of intra-industry trade in total world trade. A uniform worldwide improvement
in search and investment technologies, as might result from technological progress
in communications and computer-aided design, has no aﬀect on the volume of out-
parameter values that underlie Figure 4 and suppose that γ N = 0.2.Then, as γ S rises from 0 to
0.1, there is a monotonic decline in outsourcing activity in the South and an increase in outsourcing
activity in the North.
  28
     These patterns obtain, for example, when when ηN = η S = 0, µN = µS = 50, α = 0.5, β = 0.75,
 N    S
fm = fm = 0.01, LN = 40 and LS = 32.



                                                 40
sourcing or its international composition. But a disproportionate improvement in the
search or investment technology of the South spells a shift in outsourcing activity
from North to South.
   Next, we investigated the role of the contracting environment. We characterized
the legal setting in a country by the fraction of a relationship-specific investment
that is verifiable to a third party. An improvement in the contracting possibilities
in a country raises the relative profitability of outsourcing there, given the numbers
of component producers in each country and the relative wage. But changes in the
contracting environment also aﬀect the demand for labor by component producers and
final-good producers at a given wage. A global increase in the fraction of contractible
investment tends to favor outsourcing in the North, whereas an improvement in the
legal environment of the South can raise or lower the volume of outsourcing there
while raising outsourcing from the North.
   Our model does not allow for in-house production of components by final produc-
ers. Therefore, it cannot be used to study the make-or-buy decision that is a central
issue in the organization of a firm. In future research, we intend to enlarge the set
of opportunities open to a firm, and to study the four-way choice between domestic
investment, foreign investment, local outsourcing, and international outsourcing.




                                          41
7     Appendix A: Equilibrium Conditions
In this appendix we develop equilibrium conditions for regimes with outsourcing in
both countries and assured matching in neither. Thus, we examine cases in which
both countries have costly search, both have a binding investment constraint, and one
has costly search and the other a binding investment constraint. We also consider
the existence of equilibria with all outsourcing activity concentrated in the North.
Throughout this appendix we assume that none of the relationship-specific investment
is verifiable; i.e., γ N = γ S = 0.


7.1     Outsourcing in Both Countries
We begin with the labor-market clearing condition in the South. In Section 3.1
we showed that, if the investment constraint binds in the South, the number of
component producers and the relative wage must be such that
                               ¡        ¢    1+α S S
                        (1 − β) ωLN + LS + 2     fm m = LS .                    (A1)
                                             1−α
When the investment constraint does not bind in the South and final producers
find themselves in a regime of costly search, the optimal search intensity is rS =
mS S S /2wN η S . Substituting this expression, together with the output equation (7)
and the free-entry condition (17) into (13) yields

                             ¡        ¢ 1+α             S
                                                      ωfm
                      (1 − β) ωLN + LS +                      µS
                                                                    = LS .      (A2)
                                         1−α         ω
                                                          −
                                                     mS       2ηS

This equation replaces (A1) as the Southern labor-market clearing condition in a
regime with costly search in the South.
    Now we turn to the labor market in the North. We have seen that when the
investment constraint binds on final producers seeking a partner at home, then rN =
S N /2wN µN and labor-market clearing requires
                            µ           ¶
                 1             N    1 S        1+α N N
                   (1 − α) β L + L + 2            f m = LN .                    (A3)
                 2                  ω          1−α m


                                          42
When, instead, there is a regime of costly search in the North, the optimal search
intensity is given by rN = mN S N /2wN η N . Substituting this expression, together
with the output equation (7) and the free-entry condition (21) into (14) gives
                           µ            ¶              N
                1             N    1 S       1+α      fm
                  (1 − α) β L + L +                          = LN .            (A4)
                2                  ω         1 − α 1N − µNN
                                                       m   2η

   Finally, we consider the requirement that, with outsourcing in both countries,
search must be equally profitable in both places. If the investment constraint binds
for search in both countries, then the equal-profit condition is
                            µ           ¶       µ              ¶
                     ω 1−2ε    N     ηN       1      S     ηS
                              m − N = S m −ω S ,                                 (A5)
                      µN            2µ       µ            2µ
as we have seen before. If the investment constraint binds in the South but final
producers are in a regime of costly search in the North, then rS = S S /2w S µS and
rN = mN S N /2wN ηN . These expressions for the search intensities, together with the
free-entry condition (19) imply an equal-profit condition of the form
                         ¡     ¢2          µ       ¶
                             mN ω 1−2ε   1   S  ηS
                                       = S m −ω S .                              (A6)
                               2ηN      µ      2µ
If the investment constraint binds for search in the North but not in the South, then
the equal-profit condition is
                                      µ         ¶ ¡ S ¢2
                             ω 2−2ε         η N    m
                                       mN − N =          .                       (A7)
                              µN           2µ      2η S
Finally, if final producers are in a regime of costly search in both countries, then
ri = mi S i /2wN η i for i = S, N. This, together with the free-entry conditions (19)
implies an equal-profit condition of the form
                                      mS  mN ω 1−ε
                                      p = p        .                             (A8)
                                       ηS    ηN

   Now we can derive the reduced-form SS and N N curves that apply for each
combination of regimes. First, we take the appropriate equal-profit condition to
derive the relative wage that is consistent with equal profitability given the numbers
of component producers in each country. This gives the function ω(mS , mN ) for the

                                            43
particular regime combination. We then substitute this function into (A1) if the
investment constraint binds in the South, or into (A2) if the South has a regime of
costly search. This generates the SS curve. Similarly, we substitute the applicable
form of ω(mS , mN ) into either (A3) or (A4) to derive the NN curve, depending upon
whether the North has a binding investment constraint or a regime of costly search.
Finally, we use (15) to derive the boundaries between the various combinations of
regimes.
       We applied this procedure for the particular parameter values indicated in the
text to draw the SS and NN curves that are represented in Figures 4 and 5.


7.2        Outsourcing in the North only
We now consider the conditions for an equilibrium with outsourcing only in the North,
with production of homogeneous goods only in the South, and with a binding invest-
ment constraint that limits search by final producers.29 In such an equilibrium, there
is no entry by component producers in the South, and no search by final-good pro-
ducers for potential partners there.
       With mS = nS = 0 the labor-market clearing condition for the South (13) implies
                                                   β LS
                                           ω=             .                                     (A9)
                                                 1 − β LN
Thus, for the existence of an equilibrium of this type with wN > w S , we need that
βLS /(1 − β)LN > 1. In the North, the assumption of a binding investment con-
straint implies the labor-market clearing condition (20). Substituting (A9) into this
expression and rearranging terms, we find

                                           N (1 − α) LN
                                         m =       N
                                                        .                                      (A10)
                                                4fm
Finally, we use the free-entry conditions (17) and (19) with i = N to derive
                                      N
                                        ·                  ¸
                                N   fm    (1 − α) LN    ηN
                          n=n =                 N
                                                     − N                                       (A11)
                                     fn      2fm        µ
  29
       There might be other types of equilibria that we do not consider here. For example, outsourcing
may be concentrated in the South, or homogeneous goods may be produced in both locations. In
the latter case, the wage in the South must be equal to the wage in the North.

                                                   44
and                           µ        ¶1/2 ·                     ¸−1/2
                         N        fn            (1 − α) LN   ηN
                        r =                                −              .           (A12)
                                  µN               2fmN      µN
The expression that appears in the square brackets in both (A11) and (A12) must
be positive for the existence of such an equilibrium; but this is guaranteed by the
requirements for a binding investment constraint (see (15)). It follows that these
conditions, together with the requirement that βLS / (1 − β) LN > 1, are suﬃcient
for the existence of an equilibrium with outsourcing concentrated in the North and
ω > 1. Such an equilibrium exists, for example, for the parameter values used to
draw Figures 4 and 5.



8     Appendix B: Stability
In this appendix, we consider the stability of equilibria with outsourcing in both
countries and search limited by a binding investment constraint in both the North
and the South. We also consider the stability of equilibria with outsourcing only in
the North and a binding investment constraint there. The stability conditions for
other combinations of regimes can be derived with similar methods.
    Our procedure for conducting the stability analysis is as follows. First, we cal-
culate a “temporary” equilibrium for a given number of final-good producers and
given numbers of component producers in each country. This temporary equilibrium
involves optimal search behavior by final producers given the numbers of firms and
requires that both labor markets and all product markets clear. The temporary equi-
librium implies levels of net profits (operating profits less entry costs) for each type
of firm. We assume that the numbers of firms adjust over time, with positive profits
inducing entry and negative profits inducing exit. For the purposes of this appen-
dix, we take γ i = 0 for i = S, N and treat the numbers of component producers as
continuous variables.
    More formally, our procedure is to calculate functions Π̂n (n, mS , mN ), Π̂Sm (n, mS , mN )
and Π̂N      S   N
      m (n, m , m ), where Π̂n (·) is the expected profit for a typical final-good pro-

ducer net of fixed costs when there is a measure n of final-good producers in the North

                                                 45
and mi component producers in country i, and Π̂im (·) is the net profit of a typical
component producer in country i under the same conditions. We measure Π̂im (·) in
units of the labor of country i and Π̂n (·) in units of Northern labor. We then assume
that the numbers of the diﬀerent types of firms adjust according to
                                           ¡          ¢
                                ṅ = λn Π̂n n, mS , mN ,                         (B1)

and
                                     ¡          ¢
                       ṁi = λim Π̂im n, mS , mN , for i = S, N,                 (B2)

where λn , λSm and λN
                    m are arbitrary positive constants. An equilibrium is a triplet
¡           ¢
  n, mS , mN that implies zero net profits for final producers, zero net profits for
component producers in country i if mi > 0, and zero or negative net profits for
component producers in country i if mi = 0. We consider such an equilibrium to be
(locally) stable if and only if the adjustment process represented by (B1) and (B2) is
stable for all positive values of λn , λSm and λN
                                                m.



8.1    Stability of Equilibria with a Binding Investment Con-
       straint in Both Countries
We consider first the stability of equilibria such as those depicted in Figure 4. For
an equilibrium to be locally stable for all adjustment speeds, the system comprising
(B1) and (B2) must be stable for all positive values of λSm and λN
                                                                 m as λn → +∞.

To derive necessary conditions for stability, we focus on the extreme case with very
fast adjustment in the number of final producers (λn → +∞). In this case n ad-
justs instantaneously to the numbers of component producers mS and mN , and
Π̂n [n(mS , mN ), mS , mN ] = 0 in the temporary equilibrium.
   For the limiting case with λn → +∞, the stability analysis can be conducted with
the two equations that result from substituting n(mS , mN ) for n in equation (B2).
We write this system as
                                                              
                               ṁS           λSm ΠS (mS , mN )
                                    =                                        (B3)
                               ṁN           λN  N  S   N
                                              m Π (m , m )


                                             46
where Πi (mS , mN ) ≡ Π̂im [n(mS , mN ), mS , mN ].
       First, we need an expression for the profit levels for component producers in a
temporary equilibrium. These profits are the diﬀerence between operating profits and
fixed costs (in units of local labor), or

                                             Si
                              Πi = ri ni (      − µi ri ) − fm
                                                             i
                                                                 for i = N, S.              (B4)
                                             wi

We can use (B4), together with the zero-profit condition for final-good producers (19)
and the equal-profit condition (21) to derive the labor-market clearing conditions in
a temporary equilibrium.30 In place of (18), we have
                 µ                ¶
    S  S   N               1 + 3α
  D (m , m ) + 1 − β +              mS ΠS + (1 − β)ω(mS , mN )mN ΠN = LS , (B5)
                            1−α
where
                                       £ ¡       ¢       ¤    1+α S S
                DS (mS , mN ) = (1 − β) ω mS , mN LN + LS + 2    f m
                                                              1−α m
is demand for Southern labor when all profits are zero; i.e., the left-hand side of (18).
The new terms in (B5) represent the demand for Southern labor that results from
the profit income in each country.
       To derive a reduced-form equation for labor-market clearing in the North, we
combine (6), (19) and the expression for A in footnote 26 to obtain
       X        X ¡ ¢2                     µ                              ¶
            i       i   i   i   1              N   1 S       N N    1 S S
    fn    n +      η r n = (1 − α) β L + L + m Π + m Π .
        i        i
                                2                  ω                ω

Substituting this equation, (16) and (B4) into (14) yields the new labor-market clear-
ing condition for the North,
                                      1                  ·                      ¸
       N       N
                   ¡    S   N
                                ¢       (1 − α) β S S      1             1 + 3α
  L =D                 m ,m         + 2
                                                   m Π +     (1 − α) β +          mN ΠN     (B6)
                                      ω (mS , mN )         2             1−α
  30
       Note that, in place of the expression for A in footnote 14, we have
                                               P
                                             β i wi (Li + mi Πi )
                                       A= P                 ³ ´1−ε .
                                                 2m i r i ni wi
                                               i             α

The numerator in this expression is the fraction β of total world income, including the profits or
losses of component producers.


                                                        47
where
                                                      ·                  ¸
                   N
                       ¡       S   N
                                       ¢    1           N      1       S   1+α N N
               D           m ,m            = (1 − α) β L +            L +2    f m
                                            2                  S   N
                                                           ω (m , m )      1−α m

is demand for Northern labor when all profits are zero (i.e., the left-hand side of (20)).
   The labor-market clearing conditions (B5) and (B6) can be used to solve for the
profit levels. The solutions are
                                   1                 1+3α
      S
          ¡    S       N
                           ¢       2
                                       (1 − α) β +    1−α
                                                            £      ¡       ¢¤
  Π           m ,m             =                          LS − DS mS , mN
                                            ΓmS                  ¡       ¢
                                                        (1 − β) ω mS , mN £ N     N
                                                                                    ¡ S N ¢¤
                                                      −                     L − D    m ,m    (B7)
                                                                ΓmS

and

    ¡       ¢                              1           £ S      ¡       ¢¤
                                           (1 − α) β
  ΠN mS , mN = −                           2
                                             S   N   N
                                                        L − DS mS , mN
                                       Γω (m , m ) m
                                                         1 − β + 1+3α
                                                                  1−α
                                                                      £ N    ¡       ¢¤
                                                       +        N
                                                                       L − DN mS , mN , (B8)
                                                             Γm

where
            µ            ¶·                      ¸
                  1 + 3α    1             1 + 3α    1
          Γ= 1−β+             (1 − α) β +          − (1 − α) β (1 − β) > 0 .
                  1−α       2             1−α       2

   Finally, we are ready to examine the stability of system (B3) at an equilibrium
                                    ¡         ¢           ¡        ¢
point, say (m̃S , m̃N ), at which ΠS m̃S , m̃N = 0 and ΠN m̃S , m̃N = 0, and thus
Di (m̃S , m̃N ) = Li for i = S, N. Stability requires ΠSS < 0, ΠN           S N
                                                                N < 0, and ΠS ΠN >

ΠSN ΠN          i     i  S   N    j         i
     S , where Πj = ∂Π (m , m )/∂m . Since Dj > 0 for i 6= j, it follows from (B7)

that ΠSS < 0 requires DSS > 0. Similarly, it follows from (B8) that ΠN
                                                                     N < 0 requires
  N
                                                        ¡       ¢
DN  > 0. Therefore, both the SS curve (defined by DS mS , mN = LS ) and the N N
                      ¡       ¢
curve (defined by DN mS , mN = LN ) must be downward sloping at a locally stable
equilibrium. Also, ΠSS ΠN    S N            S N     S  N
                        N > ΠN ΠS requires DS DN > DN DS , which in turn requires

that the SS curve be steeper than the NN curve at a stable point of intersection.
We conclude that point E2 in Figure 4 is not a stable equilibrium point.




                                                                48
8.2     Stability of Equilibria with a Binding Investment Con-
        straint in the North and Costly Search in the South
In this case, the equal-profit condition is given by (A7). We use it to solve for
                             ¡        ¢
the relative wage function ω mS , mN . Since we assume that final-good producers
enter and exit very rapidly in response to profit opportunities, we have Πn = 0 at
every moment in time, which implies that (19) holds also at every moment in time.
Therefore, the labor-market-clearing condition for the North is the same as in (B6),
except that the relative wage function now is derived from (A7).
   For the South, we need to derive a new labor-market-clearing condition that ac-
counts for the profits (or losses) of input suppliers there. In place of (13), we have

 (1 − β)(ωLN + LS + ωΠN + ΠS ) + mS fm
                                     S
                                       + µS mS nS (rS )2 + 2mS rS nS y S = LS . (130 )

Now, using the expression for the profits of intermediate-good producers given in
(B4), together with the facts that y S = αS S / (1 − α) wS and that the equilibrium
search distance is rS = mS S S /2wN ηS , the labor-market-clearing condition for the
South becomes
                                                             
              µ     ¶                   ω(mS ,mN )
               1+α
  S  S   N
D (m , m )+                                 mS
                                     ω(mS ,mN )    µS
                                                         − β  mS ΠS +(1−β)ω(mS , mN )mN ΠN = LS ,
                1−α                             − 2η
                                        mS           S

                                                                                                          (B50 )
where
                                                                    µ         ¶    ¡       ¢ S
                          £ ¡       ¢       ¤                           1+α       ω mS , mN fm
      D (m , m ) = (1 − β) ω mS , mN LN + LS +
        S   S       N
                                                                                  ω(mS ,mN )       µS
                                                                        1−α                    −
                                                                                     mS            2η S

is demand for Southern labor when all profits are zero. Here too the relative wage
          ¡       ¢
function ω mS , mN is the one derived from (A7).
   The labor-market-clearing conditions (B50 ) and (B6) can be used to solve for the
profit levels. The solutions are
                                     1
            S
                ¡    S   N
                             ¢       2
                                         (1 − α) β + 1+3α
                                                      1−α
                                                          £ S     ¡        ¢¤
            Π       m ,m         =              0 S
                                                           L − DS mS , mN
                                              Γm       ¡      ¢
                                             (1 − β) ω mS , mN £ N      N
                                                                          ¡ S N ¢¤
                                           −                    L   − D    m ,m                           (B70 )
                                                    Γ0 mS

                                                         49
and
               ¡       ¢             1                  £ S       ¡ S N ¢¤
                                       (1 − α) β
             ΠN mS , mN = −          2
                                                         L  − D S
                                                                   m ,m
                                 Γ0 ω (mS , mN ) mN
                                  ¡ 1+α ¢ ω(m ,m      )
                                                S   N

                                                  S
                                                m
                                    1−α ω(mS ,mN ) µS
                                                          −β
                                             mS
                                                    − S
                                                      2η
                                                              £ N      N
                                                                         ¡ S N ¢¤
                                +                              L   − D    m ,m    ,    (B80 )
                                            Γ0 mN
where
                                           
         µ       ¶      ω(mS ,mN )            ·                      ¸
     1+α                                        1             1 + 3α    1
Γ =
 0                          mS
                     ω(mS ,mN )    µS
                                         −β      (1 − α) β +          − (1 − α) β (1 − β) .
     1−α                        − 2η            2             1−α       2
                        mS           S


Note that Γ0 > 0, because the term in the first square bracket is larger than 1 − β
and so its product with 12 (1 − α) β is larger in absolute value than the negative term.
   Finally, we are ready to examine the stability of system (B3) at an equilibrium
                                    ¡         ¢           ¡        ¢
point, say (m̃S , m̃N ), at which ΠS m̃S , m̃N = 0 and ΠN m̃S , m̃N = 0, and thus
Di (m̃S , m̃N ) = Li for i = S, N . Stability requires ΠSS < 0, ΠN           S N
                                                                 N < 0, and ΠS ΠN >

ΠSN ΠN          i     i  S   N    j                            0
     S , where Πj = ∂Π (m , m )/∂m . In view of the fact that Γ > 0, however,

ΠSS ΠN    S N                  S N     S  N
     N > ΠN ΠS if and only if DS DN > DN DS .

     Since DSN > 0, it follows from (B70 ) that ΠSS < 0 requires DSS > 0. There are now
                           S         S          S
two possibilities: either DN ≥ 0 or DN < 0. If DN ≥ 0, it follows from (B80 ) that
ΠN               N
 N < 0 requires DN > 0. In this case, the NN and SS curves both slope downward

and DSS DN
         N    S
           > DN DSN requires that the SS curve is the steeper of the two. This is
similar to what we found in the previous section.
                        S
     Alternatively, if DN < 0, the SS curve slopes upward, because DSS > 0 at a stable
equilibrium. Now ΠN                          N                          N
                  N < 0 does not imply that DN > 0. If it happens that DN > 0,

then the equilibrium is unstable, because the requirement that DSS DN
                                                                    N    S
                                                                      > DN DSN will
be violated. Thus, an equilibrium at which the N N curve slopes downward and the
SS curve slopes upward — such as the one depicted by point E2 in Figure 5 — is not
                                                N
stable. The only remaining possibility is that DN < 0, in which case both the N N
and SS curves slope upward. Then the requirement that DSS DN
                                                           N    S
                                                             > DN DSN implies
that the NN curve must be the steeper. We have not been able to rule out the
existence of a stable equilibrium of this sort, but nor have we been able to construct
one in our numerical simulations.

                                                 50
8.3       Stability of Equilibria with Outsourcing Concentrated in
          the North
We examine next the stability of an equilibrium in which all intermediate goods are
produced in the North and a binding investment constraint limits the search of final
producers there. The conditions for such an equilibrium were derived in Appendix
A.
     When mS is close to zero, no final-good producer searches for an outsourcing
partner in the South. With nS = 0, the operating profits of a Southern component
producer are zero, and the total profits are negative; see (B4) with i = S. It follows
that if a small number of Southern component producers do happen to be in the
market, they will gradually exit according to the dynamics given in (B2).
     The profits of Northern component producers are given by (B4) with i = N . The
profits of final-good producers are given by
                                   µ      N
                                                 ¶
                                 N     NS    N N
                          Πn = r     m N −η r      − fn .                        (B9)
                                         w
In the South, the labor-market clearing condition in a temporary equilibrium becomes
                      ¡                                ¢
          LS = (1 − β) ωLN + LS + ωnΠn + ωmN ΠN + mS ΠS + fm
                                                           S S
                                                             m                  (B10)

while in the North it is
                    µ                              ¶
   N     1              N 1 S       N N      1 S S
 L = (1 − α) β L + L + nΠn + m Π + m Π
         2                ω                 ω
                                        1 + α N N 1 + 3α N N
                              − nΠn + 2       f m +      m Π . (B11)
                                        1−α m        1−α
Now we can use (B4), (B9), (B10), (B11) and ΠS = −fm
                                                   S
                                                     to solve for the expected
profits of final-good producers and the profits of the typical Northern component
producer, both as functions of n and mN . The solutions are
                              ηN   µ              ¶
      ¡     N
                ¢       2mN − µN         4
 Πn n, m            =               LN −      N N
                                            f m
                        nΩ (mN )        1−α m
                                           ¡               ¢
                                                     1+3α ·µ        ¶        ¸
                                         mN 1−α
                                             1+α
                                                 + 2 1−α 2     N ηN   N
                                       +                     2m − N fm − nfn
                                            nΩ (mN )             µ

                                            51
and
                                       µ                      ¶
     N
         ¡      N
                    ¢        1              N   4   N N
 Π           n, m       =                  L −     fm m
                          Ω (mN )              1−α
                                                                         ·µ       ¶       ¸
                                                                  1          N ηN   N
                                                             +             2m − N fm − nfn ,
                                                               Ω (mN )         µ

where                                           µ                    ¶
                           ¡   N
                                   ¢    ηN          1−α    1 + 3α
                          Ω m          = N +            +2        − 2 mN > 0 .
                                        µ           1+α    1 − α2
   The necessary and suﬃcient conditions for stability are ∂Πn /∂n < 0, ∂ΠN /∂mN <
                                ¡            ¢
0, and (∂Πn /∂n) (∂ΠN /∂mN ) > ∂Πn /∂mN (∂ΠN /∂n). At an equilibrium point
                                      ¡                 ¢ N
with mN = (1 − α) LN /4fmN
                            and n = 2mN − η N /µN fm        /fn , these conditions are
satisfied. Therefore, when there exists an equilibrium with outsourcing concentrated
in the North and a binding investment constraint, that equilibrium is stable.




                                                        52
References
 [1] Abraham, Katharine G. and Taylor, Susan K. (1996), “Firm’s Use of Outside
    Contractors: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Labor Economics, 14, 394-424.

 [2] Audet, Denis (1996), “Globalization in the Clothing Industry,” in Globalization
    of Industry: Overview and Sector Reports, Paris: Organization for Economic
    Cooperation and Development.

 [3] Bamford, James (1994), “Driving America to Tiers,” Financial World, November
    8, 1994, 24-27.

 [4] Bardi, Edward J. and Tracey, Michael, “Transportation Outsourcing: A Survey
    of U.S. Practices,” International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics
    Management, 21, 15-21.

 [5] Campa, José and Goldberg, Linda (1997), “The Evolving External Orientation
    of Manufacturing Industries: Evidence from Four Countries,” Federal Reserve
    Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, 4, 79-99.

 [6] The Economist (1991), “The Ins and Outs of Outsourcing,” August 31, 1991,
    54-56.

 [7] Feenstra, Robert C. (1998), “Integration of Trade and Disintegration of Produc-
    tion in the Global Economy,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12, 31-50.

 [8] Gardner, Elizabeth (1991), “Going On Line with Outsiders,” Modern Healthcare,
    July 15, 1991, 21, 35-47.

 [9] Grossman, Gene M. and Helpman, Elhanan (2002), “Integration versus Out-
    sourcing in Industry Equilibrium,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, forth-
    coming.

[10] Hart, Oliver and Moore, John (1990), “Property Rights and the Nature of the
    Firm,” Journal of Political Economy, 98, 1119-1158.


                                        53
[11] Helper, Susan (1991), “Strategy and Irreversibility in Supplier Relations: The
    Case of the U.S. Automobile Industry,” Business History Review, 65, 781-824.

[12] Hummels, David, Rapoport, Dana and Yi, Kei-Mu (2001), “The Nature and
    Growth of Vertical Specialization in World Trade,” Journal of International Eco-
    nomics, 54, 75-96.

[13] Marsh, Peter (2001), “A Sharp Sense of the Limits to Outsourcing,” The Finan-
    cial Times, July 31, 2001, 10.

[14] McLaren, John (2000), “‘Globalization’ and Vertical Structure,” American Eco-
    nomic Review, 90, 1239-1254.

[15] Rauch, James E. and Vitor Trindade (2000), “Information and Globalization:
    Wage Co-movements, Labor Demand Elasticities, and Conventional Trade Lib-
    eralization,” NBER Working Paper No. 7671.

[16] Williamson, Oliver E. (1985), The Economic Institutions of Capitalism, New
    York: Free Press.

[17] World Trade Organization (1998), Annual Report 1998, Geneva: World Trade
    Organization.

[18] Yeats, Alexander J. (2001), “Just How Big is Global Production Sharing?” in
    Arndt, Sven W. and Henryk Kierzkowski (eds.), Fragmentation: New Production
    Patterns in the World Economy (Oxford: Oxford University Press).




                                        54
