                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   DO INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS INSTITUTIONS IMPACT ECONOMIC OUTCOMES?:
             INTERNATIONAL AND U.S. STATE-LEVEL EVIDENCE


                                           Morris M. Kleiner
                                            Hwikwon Ham


                                          Working Paper 8729
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8729


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2002




Funding was provided in part by the Austrian Ministry of Science and Transportation. We thank Sandy
Donovan for her assistance with this paper, and Mario Bognanno, John Budd, Ronald B. Davies, John
Freeman, Richard Freeman, Takao Kato, and Yijiang Wang for their comments on earlier versions of this
paper as well as participants at seminars at the Australian National University, National Bureau of Economic
Research, University of Minnesota, and the University of Vienna. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Morris M. Kleiner and Hwikwon Ham. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Do Industrial Relations Institutions Impact Economic Outcomes?:
International and U.S. State-Level Evidence
Morris M. Kleiner and Hwikwon Ham
NBER Working Paper No. 8729
January 2002
JEL No. J5, F2, P0



                                               ABSTRACT


        The impact of government social and labor market institutions on economic outcomes have
generated a great deal of attention by economists and policymakers in the U.S. and in other nations. The
theoretical model suggests that there are trade offs of higher levels of economic outcomes with more
equity-producing labor market institutions. This study examines the impact of national levels of
unionization, strike levels, public policies toward labor, and the structure of collective bargaining within
a nation on a country's foreign direct investment (FDI). As an additional test of the relationship of labor
market institutions and state labor market policies and economic outcomes, we examine the empirical
relationship with the economic growth of U.S. states. Examining 20 OECD nations from 1985 through
1995 and all U.S. states from 1990 to 1999, our statistical analysis shows that higher levels of industrial
relations institutions are usually associated with lower levels of FDI and slower economic growth for U.S.
states. However, within the context of the model the results do not necessarily suggest that a nation or
state would be better off trading social equity through fewer restrictive industrial relations institutions for
higher levels of economic growth.




Morris M. Kleiner                                                   Hwikwon Ham
University of Minnesota                                             University of Minnesota
Humphrey Institute and                                              Department of Economics
Industrial Relations Center                                         1035 Heller Hall
260 Humphrey Center                                                 1028 27th Ave South
301 19th Street South                                               Minneapolis, MN 55455
Minneapolis, MN 55455                                               612-625-1304
and NBER                                                            hwikwon@econ.umn.edu
mkleiner@hhh.umn.edu
“It (exchanging equity for efficiency) is, in my view, our biggest socioeconomic tradeoff, and it plagues

us in dozens of dimensions of social policy. We can’t have our cake of market efficiency and share it

equally.”

Arthur M. Okun, 1975, p.2.




Introduction

        The impact of government social and labor market institutions on economic outcomes have

generated a great deal of attention by analysts and policymakers in the U.S. and in other nations. An

integral part of the issue has been determining the appropriate level of labor market institutions. A

central question has been what is the impact of labor market institutions on the potential equity versus

efficiency trade-off in the economy that Arthur Okun referred to in the above quotation (Okun, 1975)?

Recent comparative analysis of the effect of labor market institutions on economic efficiency has stated

that a holistic approach to institutions, one that includes not just a single factor but a whole group of

laws and customs, should form the basis of the ranking of these labor market institutions (Freeman,

2000). In one of the models that Richard Freeman presents, he assumes that there are tradeoffs

between different types of labor market institutions and economic outcomes. However, in other

examples there is assumed to be multiple equilibrium with many different levels of labor market

institutions leading to optimal levels of economic efficiency. Within these alternative models trading

efficiency for equity (e.g., reducing income inequality) is small. For example, large increases in equity

are associated with small changes in efficiency as evaluated through measures of investment or

economic growth.

                                                      1
        Recent studies on this issue have found contradictory theoretical and empirical results. A

theory-based analysis shows that there is much controversy about the kind of industrial relations

institutions that encourage foreign direct investment (FDI), with higher levels of centralization of labor

market institutions leading to greater levels of FDI (Leahy and Montagna, 2000). Empirical work using

U.S. states as the unit of observation shows there is considerable variation in the estimates of the impact

of state labor policies on measures of economic growth, but that greater restrictions are associated with

some declines in economic outputs (Autor, Donohue, and Schwab, 2000). In contrast, other studies

find that higher levels of overall labor market institutions have no impact on economic outcomes at the

state level (Block, Roberts, and Clarke, forthcoming). However, an analysis of the decline in the level

of U.S. labor market institutions over time shows that they impact income inequality (DiNardo, Fortin,

and Lemieux, 1996). Consequently, not only is the direction of the impact important, but also the

elasticity of labor market institutions and its effects on economic outcomes of interest in determining the

role of labor market institutions on economic outputs (Hatzius, 2000).

        This study examines the economic impact of labor market institutions that affect wages, benefits,

and the “voice” of workers in the labor market as well as policies that influence the allocation of labor.

Specifically, we focus on the impact of national levels of unionization, strikes, bargaining structure,

voice-related public policies toward labor such as works councils, and the level ( i.e. plant, industry or

national) at which collective bargaining takes place within a nation on foreign direct investment (FDI).

As an additional test of the impact of labor market institutions, we examine the effect of state labor

market policies on various measures of economic growth for U.S. states. In our cross-country analysis

we assume and model that FDI in a country takes place relative to investment in the host nation and in

                                                      2
other developed nations. Consequently, we examine foreign investment between nations and over time.

Since we do not have measures of FDI for our U.S. state level measures, we specify estimates which

include outcomes such as gross state product, employment, and per capita income.

         Labor-related factors such as methods of wage determination, strike activity, unionization,

mandated works councils, and other restrictions on management’s ability to allocate labor have often

been mentioned by business executives as important factors causing reductions in a firm’s willingness to

invest in a country1. The recent focus by groups concerned with the growth of international trade and

investment have stated that nations which compete for international capital are growing more concerned

about developing and maintaining the appropriate economic climate for the growth and maintenance of

good jobs. Since these factors together can be considered as an industrial relations system, we

develop a single measure to capture these elements into one variable consistent with the approach taken

by John Dunlop (1993). In this paper we examine the role of the industrial relations climate for those

nations deciding where to invest funds. We gather and use information on foreign direct investment



         1
            There are many additional reasons or other labor-related factors that affect FDI beyond the ones we could
quantify. Therefore, we also did some qualitative investigations by tape recording in-depth discussions with multi-
national chemical manufacturing managers in two companies using a structured set of questions. In addition, faculty
and Ph.D. students in Austria interviewed managers of similar companies in Germany. The dominant factors in the
interviews for FDI were the opportunities in the product market in other countries. However, several of the managers
in one U.S. chemical firm stated that they had an “artificial intelligence” system or equation where the industrial
relations structure had explicit weights in the decision-making. U.S. firms we interviewed saw labor costs and
restrictions in their ability to allocate labor resources within an establishment or company as an impediment to
efficiency that had to be counterbalanced by economic returns in the product market.
          Other insights that were gained from our interviews with auto and chemical executives for the EU were that
EU managers were envious of the low levels of unionization and the ability to hire and fire workers in the U.S.
Moreover, one auto executive mentioned that FDI was used to put pressure on local German unions by building
new plants in low union and low wage regions of the U.S. These interviews suggest that the economic opportunities
offered in the U.S. to E.U. nations appear to be relatively more attractive than the potential profits offered to
American firms in the E.U. Although corporate decision- makers on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean view labor
costs as only a moderately important item, restrictions in Western Europe seem to encourage outflows of FDI and
discourage investment by Americans.


                                                          3
outflows in countries with the fewest labor market restrictions relative to countries where labor market

restrictions are much more widespread and limiting for management. We also attempt to provide

evidence on the role of these institutions for U.S. states. Although there has been much recent research

examining the determinants of U.S. investment in other countries, there has been little work comparing

the investment levels of the host relative to the receiving nation (Cooke, 1997, Cooke and Noble,

1998, and Cooke, 2000 and Bognanno et. al, 1998). Moreover, there also has been little research on

the role of labor market institutions on economic growth across U.S. states (Bartik, 1985, Block,

Roberts, Ozeki, and Roomkin, 2001).

        While any one industrial relations factor may be important for a particular organization, these

factors taken together as an industrial relations system may provide the underlying latent variable that

will influence these economic decisions. The concept of an industrial relations system has been one of

the basic tenants of this field dating to the mid 1950s with publication of John Dunlop’s Industrial

Relations System in 1960 (1993). An overarching concept within the model was the view that parts

and elements of labor/management relationships and related public policies toward labor are

interdependent and may each affect other elements and the outcomes of the system as a whole

(Dunlop, 1993). Sumner Slichter noted that “ arrangements in the field of industrial relations may be

regarded as a system in the sense that each of them more or less intimately affects each of the others so

that they constitute a group of arrangements for dealing with certain matters and are collectively

responsible for certain results (Slichter, 1955).” Within this approach, public policies, bargaining

structure, and unionization would all have a prominent role to play in understanding the role of labor

market institutions. Consequently, any attempt to quantify the impact of industrial relations should be

                                                     4
taken in total rather than as a variable holding the other factors’ constant. The interactions of these

variables would be more important than each factor by itself. Unfortunately, statistical approaches that

use overall contextual variables are rare and as a result the systems approach has not been tested

regarding its relationship to economic outputs. In a manner similar to the estimates of the factors that

affect firm performance, a single independent factor may not matter, but together the industrial relations

system may affect economic outcomes (Ichniowski, Shaw, and Prennushi, 1998).

        This study develops further the theory and rationale for using foreign direct investment (FDI)

decisions in both the host and receiving nation, and we discuss the role of the industrial relations system

on FDI. The model shows that firms and nations that take advantage of opportunities to invest abroad

will base those decisions in part on the costs of the industrial relations system. Further, our analysis of

states also assumes the industrial relations system impacts economic outcomes.

Theoretical Background of Firm Investment Decisions in Foreign Countries

        In order to develop a model of the role of labor market institutions on economic outcomes, we
model a Nash efficient bargaining solution between labor and the owners of capital and include the
impact of labor market institutions, which in our model is the industrial relations system, as the
determinant of bargaining power.
        At time period 0 a firm invests capital based on their profit maximization condition. Then at
time period 1 the firm bargains the wage contract with workers. If the bargain succeeds, the firm
produces products at their full capacity and pays bargained wage w*, which is determined by the
industrial relations system. Otherwise, it will fall back to its threat point production *f(k,1) and pay w0
to those workers willing to work at their reservation wage (Budd and Wang, 2001). * is the fraction
indicating sub-optimal production due to the quantity or quality of workers, which also is determined by
the industrial relations system.



                                                      5
The bargaining problem at time period 1 is
Max (w - w0)"(B - B0)1-" subject to B = f(k,1) - w ( k is a sunk cost) (1)
  k,w



Where       w: Wage
            w0 : Reservation Wage
            k : Capital
            B : Profit

           B0 : *f(k,1) - w0 where 0 # * < 1

        f(k,1) : Production function. Labor is normalized
        fN >0 , fO < 0
        0#" #1
Then the solution is w* = "(f(k,1) - B0) + (1- ")w0                                      (2)
At time period 0 the rational firm uses this negotiated wage w* to decide on the optimum investment by
maximizing profits B = f(k,1) - rk - w.


Max f(k,1) - w - rk                                                                        (3)
   k



we substitute w with w* then
Max f(k,1) - "(f(k,1) - B0) + (1- ")w0 - rk                                               (4)
   k
or
Max (1- ")(f(k,1) - w0) + "B0 - rk
  k




The first order condition is
(1- ")f(k*,1)N + " *f(k*,1)N - r = 0                                                       (5)


k* solving the first order condition is the optimum investment for the firm at time 0.




                                                      6
From here we obtain


                 f ' −δ f '
 ∂k *
 ∂α
        =    (1−α ) f ''+αδ f ''
                                   <0                                                       (6)


This implies that when a company makes investment decisions among locations which are identical
except for the industrial relations system (") , it will invest more where the industrial relations system
restrictions are fewer from management’s perspective.
A Game Theoretic Approach when the Industrial Relations System Provides Equity
        The theory, thus far, has focused on the economic output aspects of FDI. In this section we
extend the model to explicitly include the equity effects of industrial relations institutions (IR). We
propose that countries also consider the industrial relations system to be an important determinate of
the social stability of a nation. For example, industrial relations institutions affect income distribution,
employee voice in the political system, and crime, which are all presumed to be elements of social well-
being (Rees, 1963, Freeman, 1994, DeNardo, Fortin and Lemieux, 1996,). Consequently, a country
may not want to engage in maximization behavior for only FDI at the expense of reducing the benefits
of having a well-developed industrial relations system. We model how countries may consider both the
industrial relations system and outputs of the economy through the level of FDI and chose an optimal
amount of each “good.”
        Following a general game theoretic approach for an optimal level of labor market institutions
and its relationship to efficiency we expand upon these models to include two major players (Freeman
and Lazear, 1995, and Levine, 1995). We initially assume that there are only two countries or blocs
of countries A and B (e.g. the U.S.A. and the E.U.), and five strategies, which conform to a standard
Likert scale, with increasing values regarding the restrictiveness of the industrial relations system. The
lower values give management greater bargaining power.
            The payoff is constructed as follows: Uf is the additional FDI, Uc is the additional social benefit
from implementing a specific IR system ( e.g. greater worker voice or bargaining power resulting in
more social stability). The industrial relations system is allowed to differ between countries and is



                                                        7
nonlinear. In Appendix 1 we solve for the equilibrium levels of both FDI and IR systems using a Nash
equilibrium approach. We also give examples of outcomes under conditions of efficiency but with no
social benefits as a consequence of an industrial relations system in the Appendix Table 1A. In
addition, we provide the case where there are explicit tradeoffs of equity and efficiency in the Appendix
Table 1B. The optimal solutions show that there are two pure Nash equilibrium solutions [(1,1) and
(5,5)] in our model, which are all at the extremes of either the FDI or IR ranges. The examples
provided from this model suggest that there can be multiple equilibrium levels of trade-offs of equity for
efficiency. Consequently, any further examination of this issue requires data gathering and empirical

analysis.

The Structure of the Industrial Relations System

        In order to quantify the industrial relations system for a country or a state, we assume that there

is an underlying structure for the system that cannot be captured by any single variable, which is

consistent with industrial relations theory. Further, we also assume that there is an underlying structure

that goes from a lenient industrial relations policy to a more restrictive one from management’s

perspective. We further hypothesize that there is a structure to the industrial relations system which is

linked in a hierarchical manner and provides a natural scaling of industrial relations characteristics in a

nation. The degree or intensity with which those characteristics are implemented in a country forms the

basis of firm decisions to invest in that nation. In order to operationalize this structure of the industrial

relations variables, we create latent variables for the industrial relations factors in each nation and for

each state in the U.S. Each individual factor in the industrial relations system was divided into five

categories to resemble a Likert-type scale, and they are categorized from lowest to highest in terms of

their restrictiveness to employers. In order to examine the robustness of the impacts of this variable we

develop two alternative measures. In the first case we use a summated rating scale of industrial

                                                      8
relations system variables which include extent of union coverage, days lost due to strikes per 1000

employees per year, the degree of bargaining centralization and level of bargaining structure, and the

extent of employee voice (Calmfors and Drifill, 1988 and Traxler and Kittel, 2000). This summated

rating scale is an additive one that measures the intensity of each of the factors and aggregates these

factors into one variable (Bartholomew, 1996). An alternative latent variable measure is the Rasch-

type model that places each of the variables within a logical structure. The empirical measure of the

Rasch model we use is known as a partial credit model. This approach assumes that the distance

between parameters is equal and that the categories are equal integers (Wang, 1996). Although we

obviously do not include all of the factors that might go into a fully specified structural industrial relations

system variable, we think that we can capture the major institutions which likely impact industrial

relations and economic outcomes.

Measuring Foreign Direct Investment

         Firm-level investment is assumed to be an economic measure that is highly responsive to the

institutional characteristics of the firm, which includes unionization (Hirsch, 1991). By extension we

anticipate that this would also apply to national labor market institutions. Even if FDI has some

measurement problems in capturing “pure gross investment,” it does enhance the economic prospects

within a country by, at a minimum, moving resources to their optimal use (Lipsey, 2000)2.

         Analyzing investment patterns across countries assumes that companies are responsive to the

economic characteristics of the home country relative to opportunities in the host country.


         2
          Direct investment capital flows are defined as “equity capital, reinvested earnings, and other capital
associated with various intercompany debt transactions” and comprised about 8 percent of international capital
flows (Lipsey, 2001).


                                                          9
Consequently, our measure of foreign direct investment used in hypothesis testing is total direct foreign

investment from the ith country to the jth divided by the total foreign investment in the ith nation, and this

is consistent with other analysis of economic and industrial relations factors that impact U.S. FDI

(Cooke, 2000). The use of this measure of FDI allows us to capture the relative flows of FDI

between two nations based on economic differences and variations in institutions, such as the industrial

relations system in a country. However, given this construct, countries like the U.S., which has a large

share of other countries’ FDI would usually comprise a disproportionate share of FDI just by virtue of

its economic size. Nevertheless, this is generally perceived to be a better measure of the flows of FDI

than using total expenditures or gross inflows, which would have an even greater bias toward large

nations and have a greater potential for heteroskedastic error terms. Our analysis includes 20 OECD

countries using annual data for 10 years from 1985 to 1995.

        In Appendix two the means and standard deviations of the economic and institutional variables

used in our model are presented. The table gives measures of the industrial relations system variable

which includes both the summated rating scale and the Rasch measure. For collective bargaining we

use national union coverage, since countries like France have “low unionization rates,” but a high

percent of coverage via the collective bargaining agreements for workers who do not belong to a union.

Since unions and works councils both influence the ability of managers to make decisions, we use a

measure of the interaction of intensity of mandated employee representation in the country and the level

of unionization ( Freeman and Lazear, 1995, Kleiner and Ay, 1996). We include the index value of the

“strike rate per thousand employees” in our analysis, since this variable affects the ability of

management to maintain a stable and consistent level of production for its workforce (Beggs and

                                                      10
Chapman, 1987).3 As part of our measures of the industrial relations system, we present the level of

bargaining centralization and coordination which reflects whether there is establishment, local or national

wage bargaining in a manner developed by both Calmfors and Drifill (1988) as well as a subsequent

study by Traxler and Kittlel (2000)4. The last two columns of the Table show measures from

management’s perspective of the summated rating scale and the Rasch scale for each of the countries’

industrial relations system. The summated rating scale ranges from a high of 20 for Australia to a low

of six for the United States. Our industrial relations system values use a hierarchical scaling system and

we find results which are consistent with this scaling5. Since there is no overriding statistical or

theoretical reason to use one approach over the other, we present both in most of our analysis.

Statistically, these measures of the industrial relations system are highly correlated. For the composite

index measure we found that Cronbach’s alpha measure of the inter correlation of the industrial

relations variables was .81, which was beyond the acceptable statistical threshold (Nunnally, 1978).

         In order to specify a model to capture the impacts of the industrial relations system on FDI we


         3
          Even though there is controversy of this measure based on various definitions across countries, there is
no reason to believe the changes over time are similarly biased ( Beggs and Chapman, 1987)

         4
           In this context the Calmfors and Drifill index of the industrial relations system is of the degree of
centralization of bargaining, whereas the Traxler and Kittlel index modifies this index to include the coordination of
bargaining of national and local labor market objectives.

         5
          Each of the factors of an industrial relations system that are in each of the countries in our sample are
scaled by the intensity of use of those factors. A higher value means that a factor would reduce the likelihood that
FDI would occur in a particular nation. If there is a single dimensional ordering for the four industrial relations
system variables, no country would have a more advanced or intense level of a policy without also having a lower
practice. Our data fits this pattern reasonably well, but not perfectly. For example, nations that have high levels of
union coverage are more likely to have most of the other practices, and 12 nations have this practice with at least one
other high intensity practice, which is the highest value for all the system factors. No other industrial relations
system variables have more other high intensity levels of industrial relations coverage. Values generated using
factor analysis found that all of these factors were highly intercorrelated, except for strike intensity, which had a
negative factor loading.


                                                           11
specify a reduced form model. The Data Appendix 2 shows a clear variation in the types of labor

market institutions in the U.S. versus E.U. countries. The U.S. epitomizes the “free” labor market from

management’s perspective, since both union membership and coverage are low, and other

governmental institutions that restrict managerial behavior also are minimal. If there is an equity versus

efficiency trade-off for investors, having lots of industrial relations institutions would be associated with

more FDI going to the U.S. and away from E. U. countries. In addition to many of the standard

controls found in studies of FDI, we include the tax rate of the receiving country relative to the host

country in order to control for potential tax treatment effects. We use data from the OECD volume on

“Taxing Profits in a Global Economy” ( OECD, 1992). Since we assume that countries with similar

industrial relations systems may want to invest in nations that have complementary systems, we control

for this interaction by adding a dummy variable for whether the sending and host nation has the same

quintal industrial relations system using the summated rating scale.

Extensions of the Model to U.S. States

        Unfortunately, we do not have measures of outcomes, like FDI, at the state level, which are

highly responsive to economic and institutional incentives. We do, however, use a similar approach to

analyze the impact of the industrial relations system on U.S. states. One advantage of examining U.S.

states is the reduction in unobserved heterogeneity in customs, English -speaking language, common

legal framework, and standard capital markets relative to examining cross-national FDI. Yet, there is

still considerable variation among the states for measures such as unemployment benefits, minimum

wages, disability payments, right to work laws, and levels of unionization. Using a latent variable

approach similar to the one we used to examine FDI, Richard Freeman developed an index of social

                                                     12
legislation favorable to labor from a “composite worker protection index” and gathered data from

various government sources. We have modified this index to include industrial relations factors and

structured it to fit into a summated rating scale index that captures the systems approach, yet differs by

providing the scale from managements’ perspective (Freeman, 1986, Spector, 1992). In this model

levels of economic outcomes follow a standard function as specified in the equations one through six,

but the capital market is assumed to be the same across U.S. states. Instead of measures of FDI, our

estimates include gross state product, employment, and per capita income. Although there is no

agreement as to of these factors is the best measure of economic outcomes, we examine all of them to

determine whether there are trade-offs between equity and economic outcomes across all these

measures as robustness checks of our estimates. Our state level controls for economic factors that

vary across states include the log of population, overall tax rates, and the log of manufacturing

employment in the state. Since the price of capital is assumed to be the same across U.S. states there

is no control variable for this measure. The benefit of using this unit of analysis is the ability to difference

out unobservables that are not easily accomplished by attempting to estimate international differences in

economic outcomes. Moreover, the state data within the U.S. gives evidence and serves as an

additional check on the ability to generalize these findings to other political entities.

        In Appendix Table 3 we give the basic values for the state level analysis. This table presents

the means for the basic changes in state output, employment, and per capita income for the time period

we analyze. These IR variables include labor union coverage density and measures of labor regulations

such as unemployment insurance coverage, workers’ compensation coverage, and minimum wages.

Again, we find a high correlation for the measures of the industrial relations variables which comprise

                                                       13
our industrial relations system measure. The Cronbach’s alpha, which measures the inter correlation of

the industrial relations variables or consistency, was .85, and this is beyond the acceptable threshold

(Nunnally, 1978)

Industrial Relations Institutions, Income Inequality, and FDI

   In Figure one we show the basic country relationships between our measures of industrial relations

institutions and income inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient in panel A and the ratio of earnings

of persons in the 90th percentile relative to those at the 10th percentile in panel B. Our measure of the

industrial relations system is the summated ratings’ value for each nation. Consistent with findings in

other studies, the slope of the line is negative, suggesting that the impact of more numerous and more

intense levels of labor market institutions are associated with less inequality in the country (DiNardo,

Fortin, and Lemieux, 1996). Of course, analysis with greater controls and econometric modeling may

change the basic relationship. Nevertheless, this result is suggestive of the basic equity- efficiency trade-

off of the impact of industrial relations institutions suggested by Okun in the opening comment to this

paper.

         Figure 2 presents the basic relationship between FDI outflows to other countries as a

percentage of total outflows from the U.S. in panel A and from Germany in panel B for 1990, the

midpoint of our data analysis. The vertical axis shows the percent of total FDI outflow that goes to

other nations and the horizontal axis presents the nation’s industrial relations summated rating scale.

Estimates for the U.S. show a modest negative slope in panel A, but there is a much steeper negative

slope for Germany in panel B. Perhaps countries like Germany with more restrictive industrial relations

systems are more likely to choose to invest in countries with less rigid institutions, as our interviews with

                                                     14
German executives suggested. These results, however, fail to control for many of the covariates that

are likely to affect FDI.

Estimates From the FDI Model

         Table 1 gives reduced form panel corrected standard error regression estimates of the equation

specified above using yearly data for the countries in our analysis. This specification is consistent with

the theoretical model using industrial relations as a determinate of FDI. In columns one and two we

give the linear specification of both the summated rating scale and the Rasch estimates. In columns

three and four we present the quadratic form of the specification by giving the linear and squared term

for both the summated rating scale and the Rasch estimates. We have year by country effects on FDI,

and our sample size of 2442 observations are based on i to j movements of FDI with adjustments for

purchasing power parity (PPP) for the specific country6. We use reduced form panel corrected

standard error estimates with three- year moving averages for the economic variables as a statistical

smoothing technique, but the use of yearly averages without smoothing shows similar qualitative results.7

The values of FDI are the outflows as a percentage of overall FDI to the countries in our sample. We

also estimated a similar model using FDI inflow as a percentage of all FDI to the nation and found

basically the same qualitative results as presented in Table 1. In Appendix 4 we present random effects



         6
             Since there is some controversy about the use of PPP for normalizing economic variables, we estimated
models using both adjusted and unadjusted values and found qualitatively similar results.

         7
           This approach estimates the coefficients using OLS and their standard errors with corrections to allow for
heteroskedasticity, cross-panel heteroskedasticity and panel specific autocorrelation. In our model the number of
cross-section observations is larger than time series ones. Consequently, we can not use GLS with this error
structure. As a result we used panel corrected standard error estimates found in several econometrics software
packages (Stata, SHAZAM, Limdep). For more details about this econometric approach see Beck and Katz(1995)
and Greene(2000) .


                                                          15
specifications of our basic model and find similar results to those shown in Table 1. Further, analysis

for large trading blocs of countries like the U.S. and E.U. show similar qualitative results for the impact

of industrial relations variables on FDI (Kleiner and Ham, 2000).

         The economic variable controls included in our model of FDI are yearly measures of education

using percent of the workforce having completed high school, nonpublic sector compensation

differences between the two countries, interest rate differences, gross domestic product per capita,

imports minus exports divided by gross domestic product, relative tax rate, measures of industrial

relations complementarity, and the unemployment rate. These variables largely capture the variables in

our theoretical model for the role of market factors that affect FDI. Other factors which are constant

over time include whether the nations with FDI outflows had the same native language, and the distance

in miles between the capitals of the two countries8. Our measures of the industrial relations system

remain relatively constant over time, since there were small changes in most of the relative components

of the variables, although measures such as the strike rate and union density showed some variability.

Nevertheless, the use of one variable to capture the industrial relations system, the use of yearly

economic data, and controls for capital markets should provide more consistent estimates of the overall

impact of labor institutions on FDI flows.

         The results show that the summated rating scale and the Rasch measures of the industrial




         8
            Estimates were made of F-levels for each of the equations with and without the industrial relations system
variables. We found that the F-level for column 1 was 7.20 and for column 2 was 8.15, each of these values are
statistically significant at a 99 percent confidence level. We also estimated these equations with the lag of FDI and
they showed similar results.


                                                          16
relations system are statistically significant in all of the specifications, and negatively related to FDI.9 In

the quadratic specifications the squared term is positive and statistically significant, suggesting that there

is a positive or at least a flattening out of the negative relationship between the industrial relations system

and FDI. These general results are similar to ones found for the impact of labor variables for U.S. FDI

outflows (Bognanno et. al., 1998, Cooke and Noble, 1998, and Cooke, 2000). Moreover, the

coefficients for the other control variables are consistent with other studies of FDI that focus on the

effects of taxes or exports and imports (Summers, Gruber, and Vergara, 1993, Engen,and Skinner,

1996, Blonigen and Davies, 2000).

        In order to test for the robustness of our results in panel A of Table 2 we also estimated the

equations in Table 1 dropping one of the measures of the industrial relations system variables and then

examining the results. The estimates seem robust to dropping an element of the overall value of the

latent variable. In panel B we estimate the direct effect of each of the elements of the industrial

relations system on FDI and find that bargaining centralization, strikes, and mandated employee

representation is all statistically significant on their own. It appears that the overall industrial relations

system construct matters rather than any one variable, and there is a complementarity with the variables

in our overall latent variable index. To further proxy a potential “fixed effect” for a country that changed

their industrial relations institutions, we saw that large changes in labor market institutions occurred in

New Zealand during the 1990s. In that country-specific case, there were more business- sponsored

industrial relations policies implemented which resulted in large gains in imports and growth in foreign


        9
          When available we used the percentage of employees covered by collective bargaining agreements.
However, when this information was not available we used the percent belonging to a union in the country, and
denoted this with a dummy variable in our statistical analysis (Little and Rubin, 1987).


                                                       17
capital (Blumenfeld, Crawford, and Walsh, 2001).10

         Beyond FDI activity, however, these industrial relations variable institutions seem to have

produced narrowing levels of wage and income dispersion within countries (Freeman and Katz, 1995,

DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux, 1996 ). Consequently, the effect of industrial relations institutions may

be to reduce the ability of managers to allocate resources, but the benefits to workers through greater

voice and labor standards for all employees may be worth the costs to a nation through less foreign

investment. However, from our game theory examples, countries may choose higher levels of industrial

relations institutions, which they see as optimal from a social perspective, even though it means lower

levels of FDI.

U.S. State Level Evidence on Measures of Economic Outcomes

         Table three shows estimates of our state level model of the impact of the IR system on

measures of state economic growth, which includes employment change, change in per capita income,

and gross state product.11 We present two sets of econometric results. In Panel A we show the

estimates for changes from 1990 or 1993 to 1998 or 1999 using all 50 U.S. states, with the summated

rating scale index for the beginning year.12 Panel B we show the impact of the industrial relations


         10
            A country that moved in the other direction in terms of implementing more stringent levels of industrial
relations institutions was South Korea. This nation had few industrial relations institutions in 1985, but greatly
increased the number and kinds of collective bargaining-related policies during the late 1980s and 90s.

         11
             We also estimated the model using state exports and found qualitatively similar results. However, upon
further examination we found that the state exporter of record is not necessarily where the product was produced.
Further, the state of production is not neccesarily the exporter, but rather the point of shipment state gets credit for
the state of export. For all these reasons we decided against reporting these results given the major potential errors
in variables problems.

         12
           Estimates using the Rasch approach showed similar statistically significant results. These estimates are
available from the authors. Estimates using end of period IR system variables showed similar results.


                                                           18
variable using year by year results from 1990 or 1993 to 1998 or 1999 using panel corrected standard

error regression estimates with a sample size ranging from 400 to 450. In Appendix 5 we give

estimates from a random effect econometric approach to estimating our model and the results are

similar to those in Table 3. The estimates of the industrial relations variables in both sets of

specifications are robust for all the measures of economic outcomes using the pooled cross-section-

time series results and for most of the change in economic variables from 1990 to 199913. The

interpretation of the variables is that a one unit change in the IR system is associated with a .05 percent

reduction in the growth rate of state per capita income.14 These estimates for states are consistent with

firm level analysis using aggregate latent variable measures of human resource practices on productivity

(Ichniowski, Shaw, and Prennushi, 1998).

         The consistency of the measures of economic outcomes for international comparisons of FDI

and state-level comparisons of economic growth are similar. For firms seeking profit-maximizing

investments, labor costs and the ability to allocate labor in the most efficient manner possible appears to

have an impact on key measures of economic outputs. These results are consistent with our game

theory simulation, which says that states may choose lower economic growth for the social gains of a

more equitable labor market.

Counterfactual Simulations for Countries and States



         13
         We do not include a quadratic specification because the U.S. is at the lowest end of the IR system values.
Consequently, there would be little variation among the states in comparison to the wide variance in national IR
systems.

         14
           Estimates using an F-test for the significance of all the individual variables shows that the industrial
relations variables are statistically significant for employment changes with an F-value of 2.55 for the cross-section
estimates from 1990 to 1999 and a Chi-squared value of 15.14 for the pooled time-series cross-section estimates.


                                                          19
         Table 4 gives the results of a simulation for both international FDI, and for changes in state per

capita income. In this model we use the coefficients from the regression estimates from Tables 1 and 3

and estimate the impact of changes from a country or state that has the lowest values of their industrial

relations system as measured by the summated rating scale relative to the other more intense

institutional arrangements in other countries or states15. These results can be thought of as a

counterfactual estimate of the impact of a change in the industrial relations system on measures of

economic outcomes relative to the one with the lowest level of these labor market institutions. In panel

A we show the effect of the countries in our sample adopting the same industrial relations system as the

U. S. on FDI. The results for the top five and bottom five affected nations show that annual FDI

inflow would be increased by more than 2 percent per year for Japan if they adopted the U.S. IR

system. In contrast, this assumed change to a U.S. industrial relations system would increase FDI

inflows from the nations in our sample by almost 10 percent per year for Australia, the country with the

highest level of industrial relations-related benefits. Panel B presents the state level estimates. The

estimates show what the impact would be on other states of a change from the industrial relations

system in Arizona, the state with the lowest worker-related benefits, relative to the five top and bottom

U.S. states. The results range from no change for a state like Mississippi to a growth of almost one

percent per year in per capita income per year for Alaska and by .72 percent for Connecticut,

Maine, Michigan and New Jersey. Worker protections and related institutions are important to the

overall state social safety net, as well as for employee well- being. However, they appear to come at a



         15
           Estimates using the Rasch approach for the coefficients for the industrial relations variables produced
similar results for both international and state level estimates.


                                                         20
price of reduced growth in per capita income.

Conclusions

        This study has examined the impacts of the industrial relations system on direct foreign

investment, as well on measures of economic growth for U.S. states. We implement a systems

approach, rather than using individual variables to examine the role of industrial relations on the amount

of direct foreign investment in the destination nations. We state the rationale for this latent variable

method using industrial relations theory, rather than using a single variable or a group of individual

variables. Our theoretical model suggests that nations with higher levels of industrial relations reduce

returns to capital within a Nash model. Further, using a game theory approach shows that nations can

have multiple equilibrium when both FDI and industrial relations system voice and equity factors are

considered. The measures that we use seem to fit into this systems approach and include measures of

unionization, strike activity, centralization and level of bargaining, and mandated employee involvement.

The data and time period for our study includes 20 OECD nations for the ten years 1985 through

1995, as well as 50 U.S. states from 1990 to 1999.

        Linear and quadratic estimates from the reduced form model, which is consistent with theory,

show that the industrial relations system is statistically significant and of moderate size in the

specification of the systems variable. Moreover, developing a counterfactual estimate using our model

and the industrial relations system coefficients, shows that a movement from a country with institutions

like Australia to the U.S. would diminish the host nation’s FDI by almost 10 percent per year.

However, the transactions cost of changing an industrial relations system is presumably high, although

countries like New Zealand and South Korea have done so with some economic impacts.

                                                      21
        In contrast to some previous analysis our results suggest further that multinational firms in more

developed nations tend to be somewhat sensitive to the industrial relations climate, preferring ones that

provide management with a greater amount of leeway in allocating labor and setting standards at work.

Of course public policies must consider more than foreign investments by large firms and their choice of

the kinds of an industrial relations and social climate they wish to provide employees. Giving workers

an environment where they have a greater say at the workplace with higher wages and benefits may be

worth the reduction in foreign investment which is the unintended consequence of these policies.

However, policy makers and interest groups need to be aware of the efficiency consequences of their

constituents’ equity concerns (Okun, 1975, Freeman, 2000). Further examination using more nations

and time periods with changers to different systems, as well as using more microeconomic data and

field interviews of executives and other employees, may complement the insights into this issue which

can be provided by this large- scale analysis using aggregate data.




                                                    22
                                           References

  Autor, David H., John J. Donohue, and Steward J. Schwab, “The Costs of Wrongful Discharge Laws,”

          National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Ma., July 2000.

  Baldi, Stephane and et.al., International Education Indicators : A Time- Series

    Perspective, 1985-1995. Washington, DC : U.S. Dept. of Education, 2000.

 Bartholomew, David. The Statistical Approach to Social Measurement, Academic Press, London, 1996.


 Bartik, Timothy, “Business Location Decisions in the United States: Estimates of the Effects of Unionization,

    Taxes, and Other Characteristics of States,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 3: pp. 14-

    22, 1985.


 Beck, Nathaniel ; Katz, Jonathan N. “What to Do (and Not to Do) with Time-Series Cross-Section Data”

    American Political Science Review v89, n3 (September 1995): 634-47


Beggs, John J. and Bruce J. Chapman, “Declining Strike Activity in Australia 1983-85: An International

   Phenomenon?” Economic Record Volume 63, no. 183 (December 1987): pp. 330-39.


Block, Richard, Karen Roberts, Cynthia Ozeki, and Myron J. Roomkin, “Models of International Labor

   Standards,” Industrial Relations, Vol 40, No. 2, April 2001, pp. 258-292.


Block, Richard, Karen Roberts, and R. Oliver Clarke, Labor Standards in the United States and Canada,

   Kalamazoo, Mi. : W.E. Upjohn Insitute for Employment Research, forthcoming.


Blonigen, Bruce, A. and Ronald B. Davies, “ The Effects of Bilateral Tax Treaties on U.S. FDI Activity”,



                                                     23
   NBER Working Paper 7929, pp. 35, October 2000.


Blumenfeld, Stephen, Aaron Crawford, and Pat Walsh, “ Import Penetration and Union Membership in a

   Small Open Economy: New Zealand in the 1990s”, Proceedings of the Industrial Relations Research

   Association, New Orleans, January 2001, p. 317-325.


Bognanno, Mario. F., Keane, Michael. P., Yang, D. "The Influence of Wages and Industrial Relations

   Environments on the Production Location Decisions of US Multinational Corporations." Working Paper,

   Industrial Relations Center, University of Minnesota, 1998.


Budd, John and Yijiang Wang, “Labor Policy and Investment”, University of Minnesota, Working Paper,

   2001.


 Calmfors, L., Driffill, J. "Bargaining Structure, Corporation and Macroeconomic Performance." Economic

       Policy, April 1988, 14-61.


Cooke, W. N. "The Influence of Industrial Relations Factors on U.S. Foreign Direct investment Abroad."

   Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 1997, 50 (1), 3-17.


______ and Noble, D. S. "Industrial Relations Systems and U.S. Foreign Direct Investment Abroad." British

   Journal of Industrial Relations, 1998, 51 (2), 171-186.


______ and ______ , “ The Effects of Labor Costs and Workplace Constraints on Foreign Direct Investment

   Among Highly Industrialized Countries, Working Paper, Wayne State University, 2000.


Dinardo, John, Nicole Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux, “Labor Market Institutions and the Distribution of

                                                   24
   Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach”, Econometrica, Vol. 65, September 1996, pp. 1001-

   44.


Dunlop, John T. Industrial Relations Systems. Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1993.


Engen, Eric M. and Jonathan Skinner, “Taxation and Economic Growth”, NBER Working Paper 5826,

   November 1996.


Figlio, David N. ; Blonigen, Bruce A. “The Effects of Foreign Direct Investment on Local Communities”

   Journal of Urban Economics v48, n2 (September 2000): 338-63


Fitzpatrick, Gary L. and Modlin, Marilyn J., Direct-line Distances. Metuchen, N.J. : Scarecrow Press, 1986.


Freeman, Richard B., "Crime and the Job Market." NBER Working Paper, w4910, October 1994.


______ , "Single Peaked Vs. Diversified Capitalism: The Relation Between Economic Institutions and

   Outcomes." NBER Working Paper, w7556, February 2000.


______ , “Unionism and Protective Labor Legislation,” Industrial Relations Research Association,

   Proceedings, 1986, pp. 260- 267.


______ and Katz, Lawrence F. Differences and Changes in Wage Structures. Chicago: University of

   Chicago Press, 1995.


______ and Edward Lazear, “An Economic Analysis of Works Councils,” in Works Councils, ed. Joel

   Rogers and Wofgang Streeck, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995.


                                                    25
Fudenberg, D., and Jin Tirole. Game Theory. Cambridge, Mass. MIT Press. 1991


Gibbons, Robert. Game Theory for Applied Economists. Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press 1992.


Golden, Miriam, Peter and Michael Wallerstein. Union Centralization Among Advanced Industrial Societies:

   An Empirical Study. http://shelley.sscnet.ucla.edu/data . 11-3-1998 .


Greene, William, Econometric Analysis, Fourth Edition, Prentice-Hall, 2000


Hatzius, Jan, “Foreign Direct Investment and Factor Demand Elasticities,” European Economic Review,

   44, pp. 117-143, 2000.


Hirsch, Barry, Labor Unions and the Economic Performance of Firms, W.E. Upjohn Institute for

   Employment Research, Kalamazoo, Michigan, 1991.


Hufbauer, G. C. "The Multinational Corporation and Direct Investment," Kenen, Peter B. Ed., International

   Trade and Finance : Frontiers for Research. Cambridge: Cambridge University, 1975.


Hsiao, Cheng. Analysis of Panel Data, Cambridge; New York and Sydney: Cambridge University Press

   1986


Ichniowski, Casey, Kathryn Shaw, and Giovanna Prennushi, “The Effect of Human Resource Practices on

   Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing Lines,”American Economic Review, Vol. 87, No. 3, June 1997,

   pp.291-313.


ILO Bureau of Statistics. LABORSTA. http://www.ilo.org/public/english/support/lib/dblist.htm.


                                                   26
Kleiner, Morris M. and Chang-Ruey Ay, “Unionization, Employee Representation, and Economic

   Performance: Comparisons Among OECD Nations,” Advances in Industrial and Labor Relations, Vol.

   7, JAI Press, pp 97- 121.


Kleiner, Morris M. and Hwikwon, Ham, “What Impact Do the Different Industrial Relations Systems in the

   U.S and the European Union Have on Foreign Direct Investment?”, in Multinational Companies and

   Transnational Workplace Issues, ed. W. Cooke, M.E. Sharpe Publishers, Armonk, New York, 2002,

   pp. 83-94.


Leahy, Dermot ; Montagna, Catia “Unionisation and Foreign Direct Investment: Challenging Conventional

   Wisdom?” Economic Journal, v110, n 462 (March 2000): pp. 80-92


Levine, David, Reinventing the Workplace, Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. 1995.


Little, Roderick, and Daniel Rubin, Statistical Analysis with Missing Data. New York, NY: John Wiley

   and Sons, 1987.


Lipsey, Robert E. “ Interpreting Developed Countries’ Foreign Direct Investment”, NBER Working Paper

   7810, pp. 1-24, July 2000.


______ , Foreign Direct Investment and the Operations of Multinational Firms: Concepts, History and Data,

   National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, 8665, Cambridge, Massachusetts, December

   2001.


Nunnally, J C., Psychometric Theory. 2nd ed. New York : McGraw-Hill, 1978.


                                                   27
OECD. "Trends in Trade UnionMembership,"Employment Outlook. Paris: Organizationfor Economic Co-

   operation, and Development, 1991, 97-134.


OECD. "Collective Bargaining: Levels and Coverage," Employment Outlook. Paris: Organization for

   Economic Co-operation, and Development, 1994, 167-194.


OECD. "Economic Performance and the Structure of Collective Bargaining," Employment Outlook. Paris:

   Organization for Economic Co-operation, and Development, 1997, 63-92.


OECD and DSI, Data Service. OECD Statistical Compendium : CD-ROM. 1998.


OECD. “ Taxing Profits in a Global Economy: Domestic and International Issues, 1992.


Okun, Arthur M,. Equality and Efficiency: The Big Tradeoff. Washington: The Brookings Institution,

   1975.


Rees, Albert, “ The Effects of Unions on Resource Allocation” Journal of Law and Economics, pp.69-78,

   V. I, 1963.


 Slichter, S. Proceedings, of the Eighth Annual Meeting of the American Academy of Arbitrators.

    Boston: Bureau of National Affairs, 1955.

 Summers, Lawrence, Jonathan Gruber, and Rodrigo Vergara, “Taxation and the Structure of Labor

  Markets: The Case of Corporatism”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, v108, n2 (May 1993): pp.

  385-411

 Spector, Paul, E., Summated Rating Scale Construction, Sage Publications, Newbury Park, Ca. 1992,.

                                                 28
Traxler, Franz and Kittel Bernhard, “The Bargaining Systems and Performance: A Comparison of 18

 OECD Countries,” Comparative Political Studies, Volume 33, No. 9, 2000, pp. 1154-1190.

Wang, Andrew. “Economic Reform and State Enterprise Productivity in China: An Application of Robust

 Estimation and Latent Variable Measurement Methods,” Ph.D. Thesis, Harvard University, 1997.




                                                29
            Figure 1. Industrial Relations System Relationship with the Gini Coefficient and Percentile Ratio 90/10
                    ( using the Summated Rating Scale by country)


                                                                                                                  New Zealand



                                                                                                                               Greece



                                                 Japan

                        United States    Korea                    United Kingdom


          0.32                                                                       Portugal




                                                                                                                                                             Gini Coefficient
Panel A




                                                                                    Switzerland
                                                                                                  Spain                                         Australia


                                                                                      France                                    Italy
                                                                     Canada

                                                                                                          Netherlands


                                                                                                                     Germany

                                                                                                                                      Denmark
                                                                                                           Belgium             Sweden Norway
                                                                                                                                      Austria


          0.21


                    5                                     10                                       15                                             20

                                                          Industrial Relations System Summated Rating Scale




                         United States




             5

                                                                   United Kingdom




                                                                                                                                                                    Percentile Ratio 90/10
Panel B




                                                                                                                                                 Australia
                                                  Japan
                                                                                                   Spain

                                                                      Canada                                                     Italy
                                                                                     Switzerland
                                                                                       France



                                                                                                           Netherlands
             3                                                                                                       Germany           Austria
                                                                                                                                       Denmark
                                                                                                             Belgium            Sweden Norway




                     5                                    10                                        15                                              20
                                                          Industrial Relations System Summated Rating Scale




                                                                           30
                            Figure 2. FDI Outflows and the Industrial Relations System Relationships in 1990
                                                ( using the Summated Rating Scale by country)


                                                                                            Switzerland




                                                                              Canada


                    0.10




                                                                                                                                                                      U.S. FDI Outflows
                                                                                                                          New Zealand
                                                                                                                           Germany
Panel A




                                                                                             France                                     Italy
                                                           Japan
                                                                                                                                                          Australia
                                                                                                                   Belgium
                                                                                                          Spain
                                                   Korea                                                                             Sweden
                                                                                             Portugal                                       Austria
                                                                                                                                     Greece Denmark
                                                                                                                                            Norway
                                                                           United Kingdom




                    -0.05
                                                                                                                  Netherlands




                            5                        8                  11                     14                               17                          20
                                                               Industrial Relations System Summated Rating Scale




                                                                           United Kingdom


                    0.14        United States                                                                       Belgium




                                                                                                                  Netherlands                                             German FDI Outflow in 1990
          Panel B




                                                                                            Switzerland
                    0.06                                                                      France
                                                                                                          Spain

                                                                              Canada                                                    Italy


                                                                                                                                                Austria
                                                           Japan
                                                                                             Portugal                                               Australia
                                                   Korea                                                                             Greece Denmark
                                                                                                                          New ZealandSweden Norway




                            5                       8                   11                     14                               17                           20
                                                               Industrial Relations System Summated Rating Scale




                                                                                       31
Table 1. Panel Corrected Standard Error Estimates of the Impact of the Industrial Relations System on the Percent of Total
Net FDI Outflows (1985 - 1995)**

                                                          (1)              (2)                     (3)             (4)
    Host Country IR System                             -.0069 *                                 -.0479 *
    (Summated Rating)                                 (.0020)                                  (.0112)

                         2
    (Summated Rating)                                                                            .0015 *
                                                                                               (.0004)

    Host Country IR System                                              -.0454 *                                -.0130 *
    (Rasch)                                                            (.0090)                                 (.0159)

              2
    (Rasch)                                                                                                      .0242 *
                                                                                                               (.0085)

    Language Complementarities                          .0815 *          .0842 *                 .0913 *         .0928 *
                                                      (.0324)          (.0309)                 (.0333)         (.0312)
    IR System Complementarities                         .0205            .0228                   .0253           .0250
                                                      (.0190)          (.0186)                 (.0176)         (.0162)

    High School      Graduation                         .0009 *          .0010 *                 .0009 *         .0010 *
         ***
    Rate                                              (.0003)          (.0003)                 (.0004)         (.0003)

                                                       -.0045 *         -.0047 *                -.0057 *        -.0051 *
    Distance Between Countries
                                                      (.0008)          (.0008)                 (.0012)         (.0011)

    Employee Compensation                              -.0003           -.0005                  -.0013          -.0010
                  ****
    Differences                                       (.0007)          (.0007)                 (.0007)         (.0007)

                                    ****               -.0021           -.0022                  -.0016          -.0011
    Interest Rate Differences
                                                      (.0014)          (.0013)                 (.0014)         (.0012)

                                                       -.0092 *         -.0095 *                -.0106 *        -.0100 *
    Tax Rate
                                                      (.0032)          (.0029)                 (.0025)         (.0029)

                     ****
    GDP per Capita                                      .0065            .0033                   .0004          -.0006
                                                      (.0043)          (.0043)                 (.0038)         (.0042)

                     ****
    (Export-Import)                                    -.1165           -.0131                  -.0446           .0141
                                                      (.3081)          (.2985)                 (.3062)         (.2853)

                             ****
    Unemployment Rate                                   .0031 *          .0030 *                 .0035 *         .0031
                                                      (.0014)          (.0014)                 (.0016)         (.0016)

    Constant                                            .0267           -.0280                   .4095           .0370
                                                      (.1050)          (.1057)                 (.1080)         (.0902)
    No. of Observations                                  2442             2442                    2442            2442
      2
    R                                                      .035           .037                    .039            .041
    Note
    * Significant at 5% level
    ** Standard Errors in Parenthesis and all results include year dummies.
    ***Average over Various years
    **** Three Year Moving Average (1983 - 1995)
                                                            32
Table 2 Responsiveness of the FDI Model to Alternative Specifications: Impact of the Industrial Relations
System on the Percent of Total Net FDI Outflows (1985 - 1995)1

                                                                                                                       Panel A

                                                                                                                                                                                                         (1)          (2)
                                                                                       Host Country IR System                                                                  -.0118 *
                                                                                       (Summated Rating)                                                                      (.0022)
    Without Union Density
                                                                                       Host Country IR System                                                                                                      -.0180 *
                                                                                       (Rasch)                                                                                                                    (.0022)

                                                                                       Host Country IR System                                                                  -.0038
                                                                                       (Summated Rating)                                                                      (.0023)
    Without Strike Rate
                                                                                       Host Country IR System                                                                                                      -.0104 *
                                                                                       (Rasch)                                                                                                                    (.0047)

                                      Host Country IR System                                                                                                                   -.0077 *
                                      (Summated Rating)                                                                                                                       (.0023)
    Without Bargaining Centralization
                                      Host Country IR System                                                                                                                                                       -.0420 *
                                      (Rasch)                                                                                                                                                                     (.0096)

                                                                                       Host Country IR System                                                                  -.0090 *
                                                                                       (Summated Rating)                                                                      (.0018)
    Without Bargaining Level
                                                                                       Host Country IR System                                                                                                      -.0488 *
                                                                                       (Rasch)                                                                                                                    (.0081)

                                                                                       Host Country IR System                                                                  -.0074 *
                                                                                       (Summated Rating)                                                                      (.0029)
    Without Worker Representation
                                                                                       Host Country IR System                                                                                                      -.0483 *
                                                                                       (Rasch)                                                                                                                    (.0122)




                                                                           Panel B :Individual Variable Impacts

                                                                                                                      Bargaining                                         Bargaining                                   Worker
    Union Density                                                    Strike Rate                                    Centralization                                            Level                            Representation

                       .0026                                              -.0124 *                                          -.0191 *                                         -.0120                                     -.0299 *
                     (.0046)                                             (.0046)                                           (.0084)                                          (.0076)                                    (.0054)


Note
* Significant at 5% level
1
    Standard Errors in Parenthesis and all results include same control variables as in Table 1.




                                                                                                                          33



         P   e   r   C   a   p   i   t   a   I   n   c   o   m   e                 (   -.   . 26   3 01   2 )   *                (   - 2(   1 ..   . 27   4 24 9 )   *        (   -.   .0   0 14   5 )    *                 (   -.   . 01   25   1 )   *
                                                                                                           1
Table 3. Estimates of the Impact of the Industrial Relations System on Economic Outcomes for U.S. States


                            A. % change between1990-1999              B. % Change over a Year (Panel 1990-1999)
                                     3                    3                   3                       3
                                IR SR            IR Rasch                IR SR               IR Rasch

Gross State Product2                -1.39 *               -6.45 *           -.17 *                -.76 *
                                     (.61)               (2.22)            (.04)                 (.15)


Per Capita Income                    -.32 *              -1.49 *            -.05 *                -.21 *
                                    (.20)                 (.74)            (.01)                 (.05)


Employment                          -1.11 *               -4.22 *           -.11 *                -.39 *
                                     (.35)               (1.29)            (.02)                 (.06)




* Significant at 5% level
1
  All regressions include constant and control variables;high school graduation rate, log of per capita tax revenue,
log of population and manufacturing employment. Standard errors are in parenthesis. Economic Data is from the BLS
and BEA Website
2
    Gross State Product includes only data through1998
3
    The industrial relations system variable uses a summated ratings scale ( See Freeman 1986)




                                                           34
Table 4. Simulated Impacts of Switchings the IR System on Economic Outcomes from the Country/State with the
Lowest IR Value : 5 Highest and Lowest Rated Values

                            Panel A. Country-Effects : Changes in % Annual FDI

                 Change in FDI      Change in FDI                           Change in FDI     Change in FDI
Country                                                    Country
                     (SR)             (Rasch)                                   (SR)            (Rasch)
Australia                  9.69%             13.84%        Switzerland                5.54%             9.76%
Denmark                    8.99%             13.03%        United Kingdom             4.15%             8.35%
Norway                     8.99%             13.03%        Canada                     4.15%             8.35%
Austria                    8.99%             13.03%        Japan                      2.08%             5.67%
Italy                      8.30%             12.35%        Korea                      1.38%             4.45%




                      Panel B. State-Effects : % Changes in Annual Per Capita Income

                 Change in Per      Change in Per                           Change in Per     Change in Per
State            Capita Income      Capita Income          State            Capita Income     Capita Income
                    (SR90)           (Rasch90)                                 (SR99)          (Rasch90)
Alaska                     0.86%              1.49%        Tennessee                  0.09%             0.24%
Connecticut                0.72%              0.98%        Texas                      0.09%             0.24%
Maine                      0.72%              0.98%        Georgia                    0.05%             0.15%
Michigan                   0.72%              0.98%        Louisiana                  0.05%             0.15%
New Jersey                 0.72%              0.98%        Mississippi                0.00%             0.00%




                                                      35
        Appendix 1A. Normal Form Game When the Payoff is FDI


                                       B

                 1             2              3                4           5

                     5             0              0                0           0
    1
             5             5              5             5              5

                     5             4              0                0           0
    2
             0             4              4             4              4
A
                     5             4              3                0           0
    3
             0             0              3             3              3

                     5             4              3                2           0
    4
             0             0              0             2              2

                     5             4              3                2           1
    5
             0             0              0             0              1




                                36
    Appendix 1B. Normal Form Game When the Payoff is Sum of FDI and Utility from IR Equity


                                                       B

                             1               2                3                 4                 5

                                 6               1.5              2.24              3.34              5
             1
                        6              6                6                 6                 6

                                 6               5.5              2.24              3.34              5
             2
                       1.5             5.5             5.5               5.5               5.5
A
                                 6               5.5              5.24              3.34              5
             3
                      2.24            2.24             5.24              5.24              5.24

                                 6               5.5              5.24              5.34              5
             4
                      3.34            3.34             3.34              5.34              5.34

                                 6               5.5              5.24              5.34              6
             5
                        5              5                5                 5                 6




                                             37
Appendix 2. Summary of Economic and Industrial Relations System Variables by Country (1985-1995) *



                 Employee   Per Capita   (Import-           Interest Unemployment   High School      IR System      IR System
Country                                            Tax Rate                                      1                2
               Compensation    GDP     Export)/GDP            Rate       Rate     Graduation Rate Summated Rating    Rasch2

Australia          19,665       15,806      -0.002       8.16    11.33         8.51            88.50     20            0.76
                   (2423)       (3216)       (.01)      (1.07)   (2.33)       (1.55)

Austria            22,553       19,818      -0.054       7.13     7.39         5.05            85.02     19            0.58
                   (3776)       (5939)       (.01)      (1.11)   (0.83)       (0.66)

Belgium            29,403       19,676      -0.013       6.79     8.61        11.12            79.10     16            0.14
                   (5591)       (5846)       (.03)       (.47)   (1.14)       (1.52)

Canada             25,411       18,503       0.024       8.48     9.54         9.56            70.28     12           -0.45
                   (3827)       (2548)       (.01)      (1.58)   (1.03)       (1.35)

Denmark            20,469       23,779       0.006       7.17     9.51         9.87            98.91     19            0.58
                   (3187)       (6019)       (.03)       (.92)   (1.39)       (1.58)

France             25,772       19,596      -0.007       7.89     9.15        10.41            73.62     14           -0.14
                   (3560)       (4901)       (.01)      (1.04)   (1.40)       (1.04)

Germany            23,733       19,515       0.032       6.41     7.17         7.82            87.35     17            0.28
                   (3070)       (6685)       (.018)      (.47)   (0.83)       (1.08)

Greece             13,309        7,567      -0.125       7.75    19.82         8.21            78.23     18            0.43
                   (1294)       (2007)       (.02)      (3.91)   (2.29)       (1.08)

Italy              23,904       23,274      -0.010       7.09    12.09         9.95            52.62     18            0.43
                   (3429)       (5521)       (.02)       (.79)   (1.26)       (1.09)

Japan              23,352       26,724       0.022       8.11     5.21         2.54            93.60      9           -1.04
                   (3788)       (8764)       (.01)      (1.55)   (1.07)       (0.35)
                                                                  38
Appendix 2. Summary of Economic and Industrial Relations System Variables by Country (1985-1995) (continued)*



                      Employee   Per Capita   (Import-           Interest       Unemployment     High School            IR System          IR System
Country                                                 Tax Rate                                                 1                     2
                    Compensation    GDP     Export)/GDP            Rate             Rate       Graduation Rate       Summated Rating        Rasch 2


Korea                  12,116        4,688       -0.024        -3      13.54        2.75            85.50                   8                -1.31
                       (3818)       (1990)        (.01)                (1.52)      (0.62)

Netherlands            26,213       18,301       0.022         7.11     7.24        7.12            73.81                   16               0.14
                       (3725)       (4871)       (.02)        (1.41)   (0.95)      (1.21)

New Zealand            15,860       12,241       0.002         9.64    11.72        6.97              -3                    17               0.28
                       (2006)       (2544)       (.02)        (1.79)   (3.86)      (2.50)
Norway                 22,620       25,773       0.043        6.47     10.45        4.33            76.35                   19               0.58
                       (4118)       (5490)       (.03)        (.64)    (2.43)      (1.55)

Portugal               12,001        6,801       -0.123        7.93    18.72        6.17            31.22                   14               -0.14
                       (2301)       (2725)        (.04)       (1.94)   (5.29)      (1.64)

Spain                  22,860       10,720       -0.052        8.25    12.15       20.05            63.55                   15               0.00
                       (3718)       (3593)        (.01)       (1.94)   (1.45)      (2.73)
Sweden                 22,057       22,829       0.020         6.42    10.92        4.04            80.75                   18               0.43
                       (3229)       (4972)       (.02)        (1.40)   (1.43)      (2.72)
Switzerland            29,586       31,031       -0.024        6.85     5.03        1.90            84.56                   14               -0.14
                       (5161)       (8049)        (.02)       (1.09)   (0.93)      (1.76)

U.K.                   22,281       15,459       -0.025       6.98      9.58        9.10            78.20                   12               -0.45
                       (3062)       (3417)        (.01)       (.84)    (1.29)      (1.99)

U.S.                   29,627       23,032       -0.019        7.51     7.91        6.34            72.32                   6                -2.29
                       (3800)       (3367)        (.01)       (1.59)   (1.29)      (0.78)

* OECD Statistical Compendium Unless Otherwise Specified
1
    Average over Various Years (International Education Indicators)
2
    Based on Average over 1981-1992 (Data Source: Bognanno, Keane and Yang 1998 Golden, Peter and Michael Wallerstein 1998)
3
    Not Available

                                                                       39
                  Appendix 3. Summary of Economic and Industrial Relations System Variables by State


                Gross State Per Capita     Total                 2           2   Manufacturing    High School    SR   Rasch
State                   1             2             3   Population Employment               2
                 Product     Income       Exports                                 Employment     Graduation Rate 1990 1990
Alabama                 90         19       3,844            4,230       2,233             394        67            9   -1.4
Alaska                  24         26         875              596         367              19        87           25   4.2
Arizona                 97         21       9,361            4,219       2,255             203        79            6   -2.9
Arkansas                50         18       1,764            2,459       1,356             256        66           11   -0.9
California             914         25      91,772           31,502      17,354           2,004        76           16   0.2
Colorado               104         25       9,572            3,681       2,418             206        84           13   -0.5
Connecticut            116         32      11,834            3,275       1,986             301        79           22   1.8
Delaware                26         26       4,446              713         447              64        78           16   0.2
Florida                329         23      19,720           14,080       7,529             513        74           10   -1.2
Georgia                191         22       8,927            7,126       4,155             587        71            7   -2.2
Hawaii                  36         25         252            1,166         745              21        80           21   1.4
Idaho                   24         19       1,652            1,140         656              76        80           15   0.0
Illinois               344         25      29,501           11,820       6,780             977        76           21   1.4
Indiana                141         22      11,826            5,760       3,346             672        76           10   -1.2
Iowa                    69         21       2,725            2,830       1,776             252        80           17   0.4
Kansas                  63         22       4,348            2,571       1,605             200        81           12   -0.7
Kentucky                87         19       5,818            3,832       2,092             312        65           13   -0.5
Louisiana              108         19       4,117            4,308       2,193             194        68            7   -2.2
Maine                   27         20       1,402            1,240         718             100        79           22   1.8
Maryland               135         27       3,493            4,996       2,807             190        78           16   0.2
Massachusetts          191         28      14,984            6,064       3,712             474        80           21   1.4
Michigan               239         23      36,578            9,616       5,115             969        77           22   1.8
Minnesota              127         25      12,567            4,582       2,978             434        82           19   0.9
Mississippi             51         17       1,255            2,673       1,349             257        64            6   -2.9
Missouri               132         22       6,222            5,300       3,192             430        74           12   -0.7
Montana                 17         19         335              851         498              28        81           15   0.0
                                                                 40
                  Appendix 3. Summary of Economic and Industrial Relations System Variables by State(Continued)


                   G r o s s S t a t e Per Capita    Total                                   Manufacturing     High School    SR      Rasch
State                          1              2               3   Population2 Employment 2
                     Product         Income         Exports                                   Employment 2    Graduation Rate 1 9 9 0 1 9 9 0

Nebraska                      42              22       2,195           1,627         1,073              112          82             9   -1.4
Nevada                        46              25         717           1,502           956               37          79            14   -0.3
New Hampshire                 31              25       1,669           1,145           684              109          82            12   -0.7
New jersey                   262              29      18,569           7,943         4,369              523          77            22   1.8
New Mexico                    39              18       1,268           1,650           872               50          75             9   -1.4
New York                     586              28      43,536          18,121         9,760            1,006          75            20   1.1
North Carolina               184              22      11,242           7,136         4,331              860          70            14   -0.3
North Dakota                  14              19         530             638           413               22          77            14   -0.3
Ohio                         281              23      22,442          11,103         6,279            1,107          76            20   1.1
Oklahoma                      68              19       2,466           3,256         1,808              181          75            10   -1.2
Oregon                        78              22       8,463           3,105         1,839              244          82            21   1.4
Pennsylvania                 304              24      17,283          11,998         6,493              983          75            22   1.8
Rhode Island                  25              24       1,029             994           546               89          72            22   1.8
South Carolina                82              19       4,880           3,691         2,050              376          68             9   -1.4
South Dakota                  17              20         454             720           463               45          77             9   -1.4
Tennessee                    127              21       8,797           5,195         3,101              535          67             8   -1.8
Texas                        497              22      49,512          18,517        10,469            1,073          72             8   -1.8
Utah                          44              19       2,649           1,942         1,139              126          85            13   -0.5
Vermont                       14              21       2,579             580           363               50          81            18   0.6
Virginia                     183              24      10,445           6,554         3,934              420          75             9   -1.4
Washington                   148              24      29,503           5,363         3,134              375          84            22   1.8
West Virginia                 34              18       1,055           1,810           833               87          66            15   0.0
Wisconsin                    127              22       8,245           5,099         3,098              602          79            18   0.6
Wyoming                       15              22         128             472           298               12          83            11   -0.9

1
    In Billion
2
    In Thousand
3
    In Million

                                                                           41
Appendix 4. Random Effect Estimates of the Impact of the Industrial Relations System on the Percent of
                                                     **
Total Net FDI Outflows (1985 - 1995)

                                                              (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)

Host Country IR System                                     -.0058 *                -.0417 *
(Summated Rating)                                         (.0018)                 (.0118)

                             2
(Summated Rating)                                                                   .0013 *
                                                                                  (.0004)

Host Country IR System                                                 -.0390 *                -.0126
(Rasch)                                                               (.0097)                 (.0133)

          2
(Rasch)                                                                                         .0235 *
                                                                                              (.0083)

Language Complementarities                                  .0951 *     .0940 *     .0931 *     .0938 *
                                                          (.0216)     (.0214)     (.0211)     (.0210)

IR System Complementarities                                 .0297       .0303 *     .0319 *     .0313 *
                                                          (.0152)     (.0151)     (.0150)     (.0148)

                                               ***          .0006       .0007       .0003       .0005
High School       Graduation Rate                         (.0005)     (.0005)     (.0005)     (.0005)

                                                           -.0038 *    -.0040 *    -.0046 *    -.0043 *
Distance Between Countries
                                                          (.0011)     (.0011)     (.0011)     (.0011)

Employee Compensation                                      -.0008      -.0010      -.0020      -.0016
               ****
Differences                                               (.0014)     (.0014)     (.0015)     (.0014)

                                        ****               -.0011      -.0012      -.0005      -.0002
Interest Rate Differences                                 (.0019)     (.0019)     (.0019)     (.0019)

                                                           -.0067      -.0067      -.0072 *    -.0063 *
Tax Rate
                                                          (.0037)     (.0036)     (.0036)     (.0036)

                      ****
GDP per Capita                                              .0052       .0026      -.0002      -.0020
                                                          (.0030)     (.0032)     (.0034)     (.0035)

                      ****
(Export-Import)                                            -.1210      -.0380      -.0182       .0547
                                                          (.1688)     (.1711)     (.1697)     (.1723)

                                 ****
Unemployment Rate                                           .0036 *     .0033 *     .0034 *     .0028
                                                          (.0016)     (.0015)     (.0015)     (.0015)

Constant                                                    .0230      -.0229       .3806       .0658
                                                          (.0848)     (.0765)     (.1431)     (.0818)
No. of Observations                                          2442        2442        2442        2442
    2
R             W ithin                                       .001        .001        .001         .001
              between                                       .194        .208        .216         .225
              overall                                       .042        .045        .047         .050
Note
*Significant at 5% level.
** Standard Errors in Parenthesis and all results include year dummies.
*** Average over Various years
* * * * Three Year Moving Average (1983 - 1995)

                                                              42
Appendix 5. Random Effect Estimates of the Impact of the Industrial Relations System on Economic Efficiency
for U.S. States 1



                           A. % change between1990-1999              B. % Change over a Year (Panel 1990-1999)
                                           3                    3               3                          3
                                   IR SR              IR Rasch             IR SR                 IR Rasch


Gross State Product 2            -1.39 *                  -6.45 *           -.12 *                -.54 *
                                 (.61)                   (2.22)            (.03)                 (.10)



Per Capita Income                 -.32 *                 -1.49 *            -.06 *                -.24 *
                                 (.20)                   (.74)             (.02)                 (.06)



Employment                       -1.11 *                  -4.22 *           -.06 *                -.21 *
                                 (.35)                   (1.29)            (.01)                 (.05)




* Significant at 5% level
1
  All regressions include constant and control variables;high school graduation rate, log of per capita tax
revenue, log of population and manufacturing employment. Standard errors are in parenthesis. Economic Data is
from the BLS and BEA Website
2
    Gross State Product includes only data through1998
3
    The industrial relations system variable uses a summated ratings scale ( See Freeman 1986)




                                                         43
