                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF MEANS-TESTED TRANSFERS IN THE U.S.


                                             Robert Moffitt


                                          Working Paper 8730
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8730


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2002




Prepared for the 2001 NBER Tax Policy and the Economy Conference, October 30, 2001. The author would
like to thank the Smith-Richardson Foundation for support for the conference and NBER volume upon which
this paper is based. Comments from Robert LaLonde, Edgar Olsen, Karl Scholz are appreciated. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.


© 2002 by Robert Moffitt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Economic Effects of Means-Tested Transfers in the U.S.
Robert Moffitt
NBER Working Paper No. 8730
January 2002



                                             ABSTRACT


        The system of means-tested transfers in the U.S. has evolved in important ways over the last
decade, with significant expansions of Medicaid , the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the Supplemental
Security Income program, and with significant contraction in Aid to Families with Dependent Children,
now titled the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families program. To determine where we are in our
understanding of each of these programs, as well as the other major programs in the system of
means-tested transfers, a volume is under preparation by the National Bureau of Economic Research that
surveys the current structure and historical evolution of each of these programs and that synthesizes the
results of the research that has been conducted on their economic effects. In addition to the
AFDC-TANF, Medicaid, EITC, and SSI programs, reviews have been conducted for the Food Stamp
program and for housing, child care, job training, and child support programs. This paper summarizes
the results of those reviews and highlights the large number of important findings from existing research.




Robert Moffitt
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
moffitt@jhu.edu
       Reform of the system of means-tested transfers in the U.S. continues to be an important

topic for public policy as well as an area of continued research by economists. Policy and

research interest have been kept particularly high by significant transformations in the means-

tested transfers system over the last decade. The most important structural changes have taken

place in three programs. One is the Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program-

-now named the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program--whose generosity

has been significantly reduced and whose eligibility conditions have been restricted to those who

can and are willing to comply with work requirements and other new rules. A second is the

Medicaid program, which has been significantly expanded to cover more families and children

off the AFDC-TANF program. The third is the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), whose

benefits have greatly expanded and whose expenditures now exceed those in the traditional

AFDC-TANF program. A fourth program which has undergone significant expenditure and

caseload expansion, although without major structural change, is the Supplemental Security

Income (SSI) program.

       To determine where we stand in our understanding of each of these programs, as well as

the other major programs in the system of means-tested transfers, a volume is under preparation

by the National Bureau of Economic Research that surveys the current structure and historical

evolution of each of these programs and that synthesizes the results of the research that has been

conducted on their economic effects (Moffitt, forthcoming).     In addition to the AFDC-TANF,

Medicaid, EITC, and SSI programs, reviews have been conducted for the Food Stamp program
and for housing, child care, job training, and child support programs. This paper summarizes the

results of those reviews.

       The paper first provides a brief background discussion of trends in expenditures on

means-tested transfers as a whole. It then goes on to discuss each of the major programs

individually.




Overall Trends in Expenditures in Means-Tested Transfer Programs

       Figure 1 shows trends since 1968 in per capita expenditures in the eighty largest means-

tested transfer programs in the country. The figure reveals that there have been four phases of

spending growth: an expansionary phase beginning in the 1960s and running through the early or

mid-1970s; a contractionary (or stationary) phase beginning in the mid-1970s and running until

the mid-1980s; another expansionary phase running from the late 1980s to the mid 1990s; and

another contractionary (or stationary) phase beginning in the mid-1990s.

       The first phase saw an increase in AFDC benefits; enactment of a major piece of welfare

legislation--the 1967 Social Security Amendments--which raised earnings disregards in the

program (i.e., lowered the tax rate on earnings); and witnessed the creation of the Food Stamp

and Medicaid programs and, later in the period, the Supplemental Security Income program.

Caseloads grew rapidly in all four of these programs. This period was later termed the era of

the “welfare explosion” and set the modern framework of means-tested transfers.

       The second phase saw a steady decline in real AFDC benefits; enactment of a major piece

of AFDC legislation--the 1981 Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act--which effectively


                                                2
eliminated the earnings disregards enacted in 1967 and consequently cut thousands of families

with earnings from the rolls; and witnessed an increasing interest in work requirements and

mandatory training programs for welfare recipients among federal policy-makers. Declining real

AFDC benefits were accompanied by slow but steady growth in the number of single-mother

families, and the offsetting effects of these two forces left AFDC expenditures more or less

unchanged in real terms.

       The third phase--which is not always recognized, for it is often presumed that the system

has been in steady contraction since the 1970s--saw a dramatic expansion of the Earned Income

Tax Credit (EITC); major expansions of eligibility in the Medicaid program, primarily to non-

AFDC families; and sizable expansions of the caseload in the SSI program, arising mostly from

increased numbers of disabled adults and children. The Family Support Act of 1988, although

occurring in the third phase and seemingly contractionary--it mandated work and training for

AFDC recipients more heavily than in the past--is best viewed as neutral, for not only was it

never effectively implemented but it also could be interpreted as expansionary inasmuch as it

required new expenditures on work programs for AFDC recipients. The runup of expenditures in

this period, although not quite as large in magnitude as that resulting from the welfare explosion

of the late 1960s and early 1970s, occurred much more quickly--essentially occurring in a five-

year period between 1990 and 1995.

       The fourth phase, which is continuing at this writing, is a combined result of 1996

welfare legislation which contracted the AFDC-TANF program, as well a robust economy which

has led to declining caseloads in many programs, thereby slowing expenditure growth. The




                                                 3
Food Stamp and Medicaid programs have seen declining caseloads as well as AFDC-TANF.1

       Table 1 shows, in more detail, the sources of expenditure growth in the third,

expansionary period. AFDC expenditures actually declined, presaging the further decline which

has occurred subsequent to the 1996 legislation. The Food Stamp program expanded by 42

percent, however, indicating robust growth. A very large percentage expansion occurred in the

Medicaid program, which grew by 88 percent. As will be discussed further below, the Medicaid

program covers different types of recipients and the growth over this period came from not only

expansions of expenditures for single mothers and their children, but also from increased

expenditures on the disabled. While single mothers and their children represent the largest

fraction of the Medicaid caseload, expenditures are greater for the disabled because of their

greater medical needs. The largest percentage expansion in Table 1, however, occurred in the

EITC program, whose expenditures almost tripled over the period. As will be discussed below,

major expansions of the size of the credit resulted in this growth. Housing programs grew

modestly during the period but the SSI program grew by a large amount, 59 percent, reflecting, as

in Medicaid, increases in expenditures on the disabled.2

       The last row of Table 1 shows the shares of total expenditure growth in the largest eighty

means-tested transfers from 1990 to 1996 accounted for by each of these six programs.


       1
           The unemployment rate appears to have started to increase in late 2000 or 2001,
possibly indicating the beginnning of a recession. Whether this will signal the beginning of a
fifth phase or a modification of the fourth remains to be seen, and will depend on legislative
developments and on the course of expenditure growth over the next few years.
       2
          If medical care prices are used to deflate Medicaid expenditures instead of a general
price index, Medicaid expenditure growth amounted to only 34 percent. Which index should be
used depends on whether the goal is to value expenditures from the point of view of the taxpayer
or the recipient.

                                                 4
Medicaid expenditure growth, while not the largest in percentage terms, is the largest in dollar

terms and accounts for the largest fraction, 60 percent. The EITC and SSI together account for

another 23 percent. Altogether, these six programs accounted for 93 percent of the overall

increase in means-tested expenditures in the 1990-1996 expansionary phase.

        Finally, Table 2 shows the expenditures and caseloads in the ten largest means-tested

transfer programs in FY 1997. The largest is Medicaid, as expected, and the next five--SSI,

EITC, Food Stamps, TANF, and subsidized housing--are of the same general magnitude but at a

large distance from Medicaid. The TANF program, which in the 1960s was the largest of the six,

is now a distant fifth in rank.

        The evolution of means-tested transfers which has led to the ranking in Table 2 reflects

several trends. One is the gradual decline of unrestricted cash transfers like AFDC relative to in-

kind transfers like Medicaid, Food Stamps, and housing. Voters and legislators appear to prefer

to make transfers tied to specific consumption items rather than open-ended cash transfers. A

second is the increasing narrowness of the targeting of transfers, for the programs which have

seen the largest growth in the last decade are tied to specific eligibility groups. The EITC is

specifically targeted to families with earnings, the SSI program is targeted to the disabled and

elderly, and Medicaid is targeted to the disabled and--in the expansions that have occurred--

mainly to single mothers and their children off TANF. This development represents a

continued, if not increased, categorization of the nation’s welfare population into a system in

which different demographic groups are judged to be needy not just on the basis of income but

on the basis of some other specific characteristic that leads them to be deserving in the eyes of

the public. This also explains why the EITC and SSI programs, which provide tied cash


                                                 5
transfers, have expanded while the AFDC-TANF program has not. As a consequence of these

developments, the great expenditure expansion of the late 1980s and early 1990s increased total

transfers to the low income population but also changed the distribution of those transfers.

Families off welfare with earnings and the disabled gained, for example, relative to low income

single mother families as a whole, particularly those on welfare or not working.

       The transfer programs reviewed in the forthcoming NBER volume include the six largest

programs shown in Table 2. In addition, several smaller but important programs are covered.

These include child care programs (approximate FY 1999 expenditures of $17 billion across all

programs), programs for child support enforcement ($3 billion in 1996), and job training

programs for the disadvantaged (expenditures of $4 billion in 1998).

       These nine programs will be discussed in this chapter roughly in order of their total

expenditures. For each program, the discussion first covers the structure and rules of the

program and its historical evolution, followed by a discussion of trends in expenditures and

caseloads and recipient characteristics, then followed by a review of research findings.



Medicaid

       The Medicaid program, as noted by Gruber (forthcoming), is really four separate

programs rolled into one. One supports the medical expenses of low income single mothers and

their children. The other three provide public insurance for portions of medical expenditures not

covered by Medicare for the low-income elderly, support medical expenses for the low income

disabled, and provide coverage of nursing home expenditures of the institutionalized elderly.

The first program has a majority of the recipients but the other three programs are responsible for


                                                 6
a majority of the expenditures.

       Medicaid was created in 1965 by the same legislation that created the Medicare program.

It is administered by the states which must operate under federal regulation, and the federal

government pays a fixed share of state expenditures (the state share, determined by a formula

involving various state characteristics including median income, is approximately 43 percent).

The program was initially aimed at providing medical benefits to traditional welfare populations-

-low income single mothers and children, and the aged, blind, and disabled. However, over time

eligibility has been expanded to other groups. Early in the program some coverage was extended

to low income children in two-parent families and a Medically Needy program was instituted

which provided care for low income families (usually single mother families) with income too

high for welfare eligibility, albeit with numerous restrictions on eligibility. Beginning in 1984,

and accelerating after 1987, more significant expansions were first allowed, and then mandated,

requiring states to cover children in families with incomes below 133 percent of the poverty line,

or higher at state option. Pregnant women were also covered but otherwise there was no

expanded coverage for adults. These expansions are part of the reason for the expenditure

increase discussed in the last section. A further major expansion took place in 1997 with the

creation of the Children’s Health Insurance Program, which provides a capped federal match for

state creation of programs to cover groups outside of existing Medicaid eligibility or with higher

incomes. Some states have chosen to expand their Medicaid programs while others have created

wholly new programs to cover these additional groups.

       Medicaid mandates a specific list of services that states must provide to all “categorically

needy” recipients. States may go beyond this at their option, but few do and, when they do, most


                                                 7
states cover the same types of extra services; as a result, there is considerable uniformity in the

service package across states. Reimbursement rates, on the other hand, are given much more

leeway and there is major cross-state variation. Reimbursement rates are generally quite low

and below those of Medicare and private payers. States are allowed waivers to experiment with

different options for care provision, and the major direction states have pursued is the use of

managed care for their Medicaid caseloads. By 1998, 54 percent of Medicaid recipients were in

managed care plans.

       Gruber shows that both expenditures and enrollment in the Medicaid program have

increased enormously over the last decade, as indicated in the background discussion above. The

major enrollment growth has been among the disabled and among children under 21.

Enrollment growth has slowed in recent years, possibly because of 1996 federal welfare reform

legislation which contracted the AFDC-TANF program. Calculations of participation rates in

the Medicaid program have only been computed for children and pregnant women because they

are the only groups for which eligibility has been calculated; no estimates are available for the

elderly and disabled. Eligibility has expanded greatly, as already noted, but takeup has slipped

behind significantly, resulting in declines in participation rates. Whereas participation rates

among eligible children were close to 100 percent prior to 1989, by 1996 they had fallen to 73

percent.

       There has been a great deal of research by economists on the Medicaid program. One

issue concerns reasons for the declining participation rates just noted. Research has shown that

much of the explanation is that the increased eligibility arising from coverage expansions was to

groups with higher than usual incomes, groups with less need for insurance; to groups outside the


                                                  8
AFDC program and who therefore do not have the relatively easy institutional access to the

program that welfare recipients do; and to groups who already are covered by other forms of

insurance. This last finding is related to a significant area of research on Medicaid “crowdout,”

which occurs when Medicaid expansions result in substitutions of Medicaid coverage for private

insurance coverage. There are a variety of empirical estimates of the extent of crowdout, with

some indicating relatively small effects but others estimating quite large effects. For example, in

the latter category estimates have indicated that approximately 50 percent of those who have

taken up Medicaid would have been privately covered otherwise. Research continues in this

area in an attempt to resolve the differences in the magnitude of the effect.

        Another area of research concerns the effect of the Medicaid expansions on health and

health outcomes. The studies which use nationwide data rather than data from individual states

typically show significant positive effects of the Medicaid expansions on infant mortality,

prenatal care utilization, child preventative care, and that they lead to more hospitalizations (but

fewer “avoidable” ones). Research also indicates that the positive impacts are larger for those in

demographic groups with typically worse health, such as black families, immigrants, and those

with low educational levels. Effects are also larger for ‘targeted’ expansions which are aimed at

low income mothers and children than for ‘broad’ expansions which reach further up the income

distribution.

        The effect of the Medicaid program on the labor supply of recipients and on their AFDC-

TANF participation decisions has been another focus of research, concentrating on single

mothers and their children rather than the elderly and disabled. While there is a range of

research using different methodologies, virtually all research shows that the close historical tie of


                                                  9
Medicaid eligibility to AFDC receipt tended to increase AFDC participation rates, and that the

Medicaid expansions which loosened that tie also tended to reduce AFDC participation rates.

Also, because AFDC has some negative work disincentives, the historical link has tended to

decrease labor supply, while the Medicaid expansions have tended to increase it. While the

magnitudes of these effects are not precisely estimated in the literature, the direction of effect is

supported by most studies. Related work on the effect of Medicaid expansions demonstrates

that they lowered savings and increased consumption, consistent with the notion that welfare

recipients engage in less precautionary saving when they know that the program will support

them should their income decline.

       Finally, there has been research on the impacts of reimbursement policy and long-term

care provision in Medicaid. The literature on physician reimbursement rates usually shows that

higher reimbursement rates lead to somewhat increased participation by physicians in the

program, increased access to care, and occasionally better health outcomes, although the linkage

between reimbursement policy and utilization and health is far from simple. In terms of long-

term care, research indicates that Medicaid recipients are often on long waiting lists and have less

access to care than private pay patients, but also that increases in subsidies to nursing home care

raises overall nursing home utilization. Some other research raises the issue of whether nursing

home quality might be reduced as nursing homes increase the percentage of their patients who

are minimum-pay Medicaid recipients.




The Supplemental Security Income Program


                                                  10
       As described by Daly and Burkhauser (forthcoming), the SSI program is a federal

program which pays cash benefits to low income individuals who are 65 or older, or who are

blind or disabled. It was enacted in 1972 and was to a large extent a product of the proposals by

the Nixon administration for a negative income tax.        Eligibility requires not only low income

and assets but also, for the blind and disabled, a medical test. The test is most complex for

disabled adults and involves a multistep process meant to insure that the individual is incapable

of working, for the goal of the program is to serve only those who are totally disabled.

Assessments by medical examiners as well as more general determinations of the nature and

severity of the disability and capacity for employment are conducted. An earnings test is also

used, which requires that applicants earn less than a fixed dollar amount. All in all, about 63

percent of the applicants are denied by this process.

       Eligibility determination for children is different because the employment test is less

appropriate and need is instead based on the presence of a severe functional limitation. In 1990,

a court decision (the Zebley decision) required that children also be given a particular additional

functional assessment test which, when later implemented, effectively lowered eligibility

standards by allowing children onto the rolls who did not pass the more formal medical tests. In

the same 1996 legislation that restructured the AFDC program, Congress narrowed the basis for

SSI child eligibility and moved it back towards the pre-1990 standard in terms of breadth. The

legislation also denied SSI eligibility for noncitizens.

       The SSI has work incentive features that reflect its origins in discussions of a negative

income tax. After eligibility has been established and individuals begin receiving benefits,

earnings (after disregards) are reduced by only 50 cents for every extra dollar of income, thus


                                                  11
providing some incentives to work. However, despite these incentives, the percent of SSI

recipients with earnings has always been very low. Only 4.4 percent of the caseload had

earnings in 1996, and the percent had never exceeded 4.7 percent in the history of the program.

In addition, special incentives allowing working beneficiaries to retain Medicaid coverage after

their incomes had exceed normal eligibility levels has been taken up by only 1.3 percent of the

caseload. Consequently, work incentives are still a major issue in the program and mechanisms

for increasing work are still under active discussion.

       Caseload and expenditure growth in the program has been positive since its inception in

1974 but was exceptionally high in the early 1990s, as noted previously. This growth was

disproportionately concentrated in those portions of the caseload composed of the blind and

disabled, children, and noncitizens (rather than the elderly). Growth in the number of recipients

who qualified on the basis of mental impairments saw particularly strong growth. Since the

1996 welfare legislation, the child and noncitizen caseloads have declined. Nevertheless,

despite the strong caseload growth in the 1990s, there has been continued concern that many

eligibles do not participate in the program. Estimated participation rates among the eligible

elderly population, for example, range from 45 to 60 percent.

       Research on the SSI program has focused on a number of issues. One of the most heavily

studied focuses on the reasons for the caseload growth. Much of this research has examined

historical fluctuations in applications and awards for the nonelderly. These fluctuations, shown

in Figure 2, have been very large. Increases in applications in the late 1970s, subsequent

declines in the early 1980s, and revived growth in the mid-1980s can be explained largely by

administrative changes in screening stringency over the period which were perceived by the


                                                 12
eligible population. The rise in applications in the late 1980s and early 1990s, and a portion of

the decline after 1994 have been shown to be heavily affected by the business cycle. This is an

important finding because it establishes that labor market participation is a realistic alternative to

many disabled individuals, contrary to the notion that only those incapable of working are in the

program. The business cycle is also responsible for much of the very large increase in

applications in the early 1990s, but only for some eligibility groups. Caseload growth among the

disabled with mental health and musculoskeletal (e.g., back pain) conditions, and among

children, were equally the result of relaxation of screening and eligibility rules. Declines in

applications subsequent to 1996 can also be partly attributed to the 1996 federal legislation as

well as the business cycle.

       Another factor in the growth of the child caseload identified in the research is the

relationship between SSI and AFDC benefit levels. For AFDC families with children who can

qualify for SSI, the greater benefit levels in SSI as compared to AFDC provide an incentive to

move children from the latter program to the former. The gap between benefits has also been

growing over time. Research has shown that this has made some contribution to the growth in

the child SSI caseload. In addition, related research has shown that work disincentives for single

mothers accompany this shift, as the availability of SSI benefits allows single mothers to

participate less in the labor market than they otherwise would.

       Some research has also been conducted on exploring reasons for the low participation

rates of SSI-eligible elderly. Lack of information about the program does not seem to be a

factor, but financial need does, for many nonapplicants have alternative sources of income.

Nevertheless, the research on this subject has failed to clarify sufficiently why so many eligibles


                                                  13
fail to apply for the program.

       Research on the work incentives of the SSI program has yielded rather discouraging

results to date for the disabled. Disabled SSI recipients appear to be relatively unresponsive to

financial incentives, and experimental tests of programs which offer financial and other

incentives to undergo additional training or vocational rehabilitation have experienced very small

takeup. In addition, as noted previously, very few recipients take advantage of the less-than-one-

for-one benefit reduction rate in the program. A major and continuing policy challenge in the

program is the search for mechanisms to encourage and allow disabled recipients to fulfill their

employment potential.



The Earned Income Tax Credit

       The EITC, as noted by Hotz and Scholz (forthcoming), has been one of the fastest-

growing means-tested tax programs in the country. Its popularity stems from its emphasis on

rewarding families that have significant levels of employment and earnings. The program

provides a refundable tax credit to families with earnings which can be as high as $3,800 a year

(1999). A small credit to childless families is also available. The program was introduced into

the tax code in 1975 but did not see significant expansion in terms of generosity until the 1980s,

when the size of the subsidy was increased and then indexed to inflation. Tax bills in 1990 and

1993 increased the amount of subsidy greatly and have led to the sizable growth in expenditures

in the 1990s which was noted earlier.

       Receipt of the subsidy is obtained by filing a tax return and reporting the number of

qualifying children in the household and the earnings of the father and mother. The size of the


                                                14
tax credit is proportional to earnings up to some maximum level, and then is phased out as

earnings increase. In 1999, for example, a two-child family could receive a credit equal to 40

percent of their earnings up to an annual earnings level of $9,540, and the credit was phased out

at a 21 percent rate until the credit fell to zero, which occurred at an earnings level of $30,580.

Thus families fairly high in the income distribution were eligible for benefits. Fourteen states

and the District of Columbia have state EITCs which provide for further tax credits.

        An issue in the administration of the EITC has been overpayment of subsidies, which in

1995 were estimated to be 25 percent of tax expenditures. Most of these result from

inaccuracies in the claim for qualifying children. While the overpayments are high, it is often

noted that 17 percent of taxes are not paid to the IRS overall and more than 25 percent of taxes

are not paid for some forms of capital income and income from the informal sector. In addition,

despite the overpayments in the EITC, participation rates of EITC eligibles appear to be less than

100 percent, sometimes much less so. For example, participation rates among eligible single

mothers, who historically have low tax filing rates, have been estimated to be in the range of 42

to 54 percent.

        Much of the research on the EITC has concerned its effects on work incentives, since this

is one of the main appeals of the program. While the EITC should increase labor force

participation, 77 percent of families eligible for the credit fall into the flat or phaseout region of

the credit, where there are more likely to be work disincentives than work incentives. Most

studies have indicated that there is a strong and significant positive effect on the labor force

participation rates of single mother households. The participation rates of such households have

risen markedly over the last decade, and the EITC is one of the leading causes of that increase.


                                                  15
At the same time, however, research has suggested that the program may have had a slight

negative effect on the employment rates of married women, for many women are married to men

who earn sufficiently high wages that additional earnings from the wife fall into the phaseout

region of the EITC (that is, the region where additional earnings actually reduce the amount of

the credit). In addition, there is some evidence that, while increasing employment rates overall,

the EITC may have dampened hours of work of men and women in two-earner families.

       There has also been some concern that the EITC may discourage marriage because men

and women in certain earnings ranges can receive a greater EITC sum by not marrying and filing

separate returns than by marrying and filing joint returns.   The empirical evidence to date,

however, suggests little effect of this incentive on actual patterns of marriage.

       There has also been some research on the advance payment option in the EITC by which

recipients can receive their credit over the tax year in question, as they earn wages, rather than in

a lump sum at the end of the year or in the following Spring. Some observers believe that the

work incentives of the EITC would be greater if recipients could see the link between their

earnings and the credit more quickly and immediately.      Hotz and Scholz point out the high

administrative costs of making this option more widespread, however, and describe the potential

for noncompliance and fraud which would make monitoring procedures necessary. The

advance payment option is used in the United Kingdom in a somewhat different program, but it

appears that little monitoring for noncompliance is conducted there.




                                                 16
Food and Nutrition Programs

       As discussed by Currie (forthcoming), the Food Stamp Program (FSP) is only one among

several programs that support food expenditure and nutrition among low-income families. The

Food Stamp program is the largest, but also important are the Special Supplemental Nutrition

Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC), the National School Lunch Program (NLSP),

and the School Breakfast Program (SBP). Expenditures on the latter three programs are over 50

percent of those of the FSP, thus constituting a sizable additional amount of spending. All of

these programs are federally financed and uniform across the states. Also, there are many other

smaller programs that support food and nutrition in the U.S., even though they cover fewer

individuals and more specialized populations.

       The FSP provides food assistance to families and individuals, regardless of family

structure, who meet income and asset conditions. Families on TANF, SSI, or general assistance

are automatically eligible. The nominal tax rate on earnings in the program--the amount by

which benefits are reduced for each dollar increase in income--is 30 percent, although this rate is

affected by the presence of deductions and exemptions. Benefits have historically been paid by

the issuance of paper coupons but have recently been increasing paid by electronic transfers using

debit cards. This change has been thought to reduce the incidence of fraudulent selling of paper

coupons, although the extent of that activity has never been accurately determined. The FSP

began as a small pilot program in 1961 and was gradually expanded over time, finally being

mandated for all counties in 1974. It was indexed to inflation in the 1970s, thus preventing the

decline in real benefit amounts experienced in the AFDC program. The program was largely

untouched by the 1996 federal welfare legislation that restructured AFDC, although work


                                                17
requirements and eligibility for certain categories of single adults as well as immigrants were

restricted.

        The WIC, NSLP, and SBP are quite different. WIC provides financial assistance for the

purchase of nutritious foods, nutrition education, and access to health services for pregnant or

lactating women and children under 5. It is thus aimed specifically at improving nutrition

among women and young children. Eligibility requires not only low income and assets but also

that the women and children be at “nutritional risk,” such as having inadequate or inappropriate

nutritional intakes, specific nutrition-related health deficiencies, large weight-for-height, or a

number of other measures that are set by the states. The NLSP and SBP allow children in low-

income families to receive reduced-price or free school lunches or breakfasts. They are thus like

the FSP in subsidizing food expenditure per se but like the WIC in having a specific target

population. In addition, the meals provided to the children must meet USDA nutritional

guidelines, although there has been some concern recently that the meals remain high in fat and

low in certain nutrients. The NLSP is the far larger program of the two, having almost five

times larger expenditure than the SBP.

        Caseloads in the FSP rose in the late 1980s and early 1990s, but have fallen since the

enactment of 1996 welfare reform legislation. The data show that this is partly the result of an

improving economy as well, but partly a result of the decline in AFDC-TANF caseloads, for

participation rates among eligibles have also declined. Expenditures and caseloads in the WIC

and NSLP programs, on the other hand, although having risen in the late 1980s and early 1990s,

have continued to rise in the mid 1990s, albeit at a slower rate.

        There has been a considerable amount of research on the FSP, WIC, and NLSP programs.


                                                  18
One area of research has focused on the effects of these programs on food expenditures, nutrient

availability, and nutrient intake. Research indicates unequivocally that the FSP increases food

expenditures, although not dollar-for-dollar, implying that recipients reduce some food

expenditure out of their own income and spend it on other goods. It also appears that the

program increases nutrient availability--that is, the nutritional content of the foods purchased or

brought into the home--but there is much weaker evidence on nutritional intake (i.e., taking

account of wastage and food eaten away from home). Evidence on the WIC program generally

indicates favorable effects on child birthweight but also that the program tends to discourage

breastfeeding, which is generally preferable to using infant formula. The latter effect arises

because the WIC program gives free formula to participating mothers. The effect of WIC on

infant outcomes is more variable, but the evidence does indicate increases in nutrient

consumption and reductions in the incidence of anemia. Research on the NLSP indicates that it

improves nutrient intake.

       There have also been a number of studies of the determinants of participation rates in the

FSP, for such rates are generally in the range of 60 percent and thus not all eligibles are in the

program. The research indicates that three factors are important in explaining nonparticipation

in the program: lack of information about eligibility for the program, transactions costs which

make participation onerous, and the stigma of being a welfare recipient. Research on the WIC

program indicates that administrative barriers to participation is an important factor in explaining

lack of takeup. In the NLSP, an additional factor is the nutrient content of the lunches offered,

for it appears that students are less likely to participate, the higher that nutritional content. Steps

to make the school lunches both nutritious and appealing to students have been discussed.


                                                  19
       Two other areas of research on these programs concern whether the FSP should be

“cashed out”--that is, whether cash should be provided to recipients instead of food coupons--and

whether the programs have a negative effect on work incentives. The first of these issues is

motivated in large part by the rather low levels of FSP coupons relative to private food

expenditures of the poor, suggesting that the coupons simply substitute for private food spending

and hence are no different than cash welfare to the recipient. Interestingly, both econometric

evidence and evidence from cashout demonstrations indicate that Food Stamp coupons have a

greater effect on food expenditures than does cash, creating a puzzle that has not been adequately

explained. The second of these questions concerns the traditional issue of whether a welfare

program such as the FSP, which provides assistance even to those who do not work, has work

disincentives. The several studies on this issue show relatively little labor supply response to the

program, perhaps because its benefits are small relative to the magnitude of other forms of

income received by the household.




The AFDC-TANF Program

       Despite its decline in terms of caseloads and expenditures to a point where it is only the

fifth-largest means-tested program in the country, the AFDC-TANF program continues to receive

the most attention from policy-makers, the general public, and researchers. In his review of past

and current research developments in the program, Moffitt (forthcoming) charts the growth and

decline of the program over the last three decades and reviews the research conducted on it. The

program was created by the 1935 Social Security Act and was targeted at low-income children


                                                 20
living with only one biological parent, and was intended to support widows with children. The

caseload grew slowly through the 1950s and then accelerated in the 1960s and early 1970s.

Subsequent to the 1970s, benefit levels in the program declined in real terms and an emphasis on

work requirements grew steadily. The 1988 Family Support Act mandated employment

programs in all states but required a human capital, education-and-training emphasis to be part of

the program mix. But the 1996 Personal Responsibility and Reconciliation Act (PRWORA)

changed the program in more fundamental ways, by devolving the responsibility of major

program design elements as well as financing to the individual states, imposing strict work

requirements in order to qualify for federal aid, and imposing lifetime limits on the number of

years of benefit receipt which could be paid to a parent out of federal funds.

       Table 3 shows the major elements of the 1996 Act and how they changed the program.

The legislation converted the previous matching grant to a block grant and removed much of the

federal regulatory authority over the design of the program, leaving the states free to set the

benefit level, tax rate, income limits, asset requirements, and even the form of assistance (cash or

in-kind services). In addition, no federal definition of who is to be included in the assistance unit

is imposed; states can cover two-parent families at their own discretion, for example. The

entitlement nature of the program is abolished and states are not required to serve all eligibles.

At the same time, however, the law imposed new federal authority in a few specified areas.

Federal funds are not to be used to pay adults for more than 60 months of TANF benefits over

their lifetimes (although states are allowed an exemption from this requirement for 20 percent of

their caseloads) and new work requirements are imposed which require that states engage much

greater fractions of the caseload and which exempt many fewer families (as many as 50 percent


                                                 21
of single mother recipients and 90 percent of two-parent families must comply). Recipients

involved in general education and training cannot be counted toward these participation

requirements; most activities require direct work.

       The most important new features are the time limit and work requirement provisions.

Lifetime time limits are a new concept in U.S. transfer programs and are based on a quite

different philosophy of the aims of public assistance than has been the case heretofore, namely,

that families are only entitled to temporary assistance. States have embraced time limits with

vigor, for half of them have chosen to adopt time limits even shorter than the federal five-year

maximum. The work requirements in the new legislation are much stronger than in previous law

and change its orientation from education and training to work per se. Indeed, most states have

adopted a "Work First" approach in which recipients and new applicants for benefits are moved

as quickly as possible into work of any kind, with an deemphasis on education and training.

The law also allows states to impose sanctions on recipients for failure to comply with the work

requirements, sanctions which are much stronger than in past law and which have been actively

enforced. With the aim of reinforcing the effect of these work requirements on employment,

states have generally lowered their tax rates to encourage work as well, a feature that historically

has been strongly supported by economists who believe they will provide work incentives.

       Another new goal of welfare programs in the 1990s has been to reduce the rate of

nonmarital childbearing and to encourage marriage. Although there were few provisions of the

PRWORA legislation that were directly aimed at these family structure outcomes, the provisions

aimed at reducing the amount of government assistance and encouraging women to sustain

themselves off welfare were thought to implicitly encourage marriage and discourage nonmarital


                                                 22
childbearing.

       As shown previously in Table 1 and as discussed earlier, caseloads in the AFDC-TANF

program have been falling for several years and real expenditures have been declining. The per

capita TANF caseload is now below what it was in 1970. The decline began prior to 1996 but

accelerated thereafter. Expenditures have also changed in composition, as a smaller fraction is

devoted to traditional cash expenditures and a larger fraction is devoted to noncash expenditures

on services such as child care and other social services, reflecting a preference by states to

support families in those ways. Real benefits also fell from the 1970s until the mid-1990s, when

the decline abated and benefit amounts leveled off. It is important to note that the recent

reforms have contracted the program in many ways but reductions in benefit amount have not

been one of them.

       The characteristics of AFDC-TANF recipients have changed in some ways over time but

not dramatically. The one major change has been a shift in the types of single mothers on the

rolls. Whereas the program began with a caseload composed mostly of widows, it shifted in the

1960s and 1970s to one composed mostly of divorced women. It then shifted again in the 1980s

to one composed mostly of never-married single mothers who have had children out of wedlock.

These trends partially parallel larger trends in the society. They may also partially explain the

decline in popularity of the program among voters.

       Economic research on the AFDC and TANF programs has been large in volume. The

most heavily researched issue is the effect of the programs on labor supply and work effort. The

research on this issue indicates that transfer programs like AFDC which provide open-ended

support reduce work effort and that providing unrestricted benefits to those who do not work has


                                                 23
work disincentives. At the same time, research on the effect of reducing tax rates on recipients--

by increasing earnings disregards--shows it to have a much smaller effect on overall labor supply

than expected, because tax rate reduction has the offsetting effect of drawing additional women

onto the rolls and inducing them to decrease their work effort. One way to reduce this offset is

to provide additional work incentives to those off welfare as well as on, that is, to provide a more

universal work subsidy (to low income families) that is not tied to welfare. The EITC is one

program of this kind. Other programs that have been proposed allow women to “take” their

subsidy off the rolls and to continue to obtain earnings supplements afterward.

       Under TANF, most states have increased their earnings disregards but the existing

evidence therefore suggests that this will have little effect on overall work effort. However, the

new work requirements are more likely to have a positive effect. Theoretical research on work

requirements strongly suggest they will increase work effort, as should be expected, with a

possible cost if some recipients who need assistance cannot comply and leave the welfare rolls.

However, work requirements require that the welfare system be converted to a categorical

program which divides recipients into those who can and cannot work, and imposes the work

requirements only on the former. Dividing the caseload up in such a way is difficult and opens

the door to possible inequitable treatment as borderline cases are assigned to one group or

another and either gain or lose as a consequence. The theoretical literature in this area cannot

answer the practical question of how well categorization can be implemented but it does

highlight the tradeoff between better targeting of assistance--that is, providing work requirements

to some recipients but benefits without requirements to others--and the costs of making that

separation.


                                                24
        Another area of economic research has focused on the relative merits of the Work First

approach embodied in TANF and more education, human-capital oriented approaches. There

have been a long series of evaluations of different types of employment and training programs in

the AFDC program which, overall, show that modest positive effects on earnings can be

achieved with relatively low-cost job search and job assistance programs even for the very

unskilled population that the program covers. Typical gains, for example, are in the range of

$300-$600 per year. Research to date on Work First programs indicates that they have a more

immediate impact on employment and earnings than human capital programs, but one which

fades out over time. Human capital programs appear to have effects that are more long-lasting.

No clear winner emerges in this comparison, and many researchers have taken the rather different

tack of investigating whether different programs might be tailored to different individuals,

commonly called a “mixed strategies” approach, in which some recipients are deemed

sufficiently job-ready that a Work First approach is best while others are seen to be in more need

of basic skills training.

        The other major feature of TANF, time limits, has also been the subject of considerable

research attention. Researchers have noted that, while time limits should eventually force

recipients off the welfare rolls with consequent increases in employment and earnings, recipients

may also take action to leave the rolls early in order to “bank” their benefits for a later time when

they are most in need of them. Indeed, the most important development thus far is how few

recipients have hit time limits. The massive reduction in the caseload, whether it has been the

result of a good economy or of welfare reform, and regardless of whether some of it has been the

result of banking behavior, has had the result that many families have not used up their years of


                                                 25
eligibility even though five years have passed since 1996. However, this may change as the

economy slows down and as states with five-year time limits experience more families hitting

those limits.

       A large volume of research has been devoted to estimating the overall effects of the 1996

PRWORA legislation and of the creation of the TANF program. Descriptive evidence, for

example, reveals that employment rates of single mothers have increased and that the incomes of

all but a small lower tail of the distribution have risen since the legislation. A sizable body of

research has sought to disentangle the effects of the economy from those of welfare reform in

explaining these trendds. The majority of results from this literature indicate that the law has

indeed had a significant and large additional effect beyond that of the strong economy.    Prima

facie evidence for this view is that, after 1996, the decline in the national unemployment rate

slowed but the decline in the AFDC-TANF caseload accelerated.

       Another area of research has focused on the effect of welfare reform on marriage, fertility,

and other demographic outcomes. There is a large body of research on the effects of AFDC on

these outcomes, which has gradually moved, over the past decade, to a consensus that there are

some nonzero effects of this kind--that is, that variation in AFDC benefits across states, provided

primarily only to single mothers and not to two-parent families, tends to be positively correlated

with the rate of single motherhood. Research into the causes of the time-series increase in single

motherhood, on the other hand, suggests that that increase is primarily the result of deeper

economic and social forces such as the rise in female job opportunities and the decline in

unskilled male wages. The TANF program, while having few direct provisions relating to

marriage or fertility (aside from family caps), nevertheless was intended to have a positive effect


                                                 26
on marriage and a negative effect of nonmarital fertility. The research evidence to date,

however, is mixed at best in its results.   There is little sign in the data of a strong effect of

welfare reform per se on these outcomes, again, perhaps, because they are so driven by larger

social, cultural, and economic forces.

       While the research evidence on the overall effects of welfare reform is by now reasonably

large in volume and has yielded important new findings, most of the research on the effects of

detailed individual provisions of TANF--time limits, work requirements, and so on--has

unfortunately foundered on difficulties of evaluating their effects. By and large, researchers

have not been successful in using the variation in programs across states to isolate the

independent effects of these individual components of reform, and to estimate how much of the

overall effect would have occurred if all elements of reform had been enacted except each of

these components, in turn. The cross-state variation under TANF is sufficiently great, and the

types of program variation so complex, that the effects of the components per se have not thus far

been sufficiently isolated. Random-assignment evaluations could in principle do better, for they

could be designed to alter each component while holding the others fixed, but they have not been

designed in that way thus far.

       Finally, there has been considerable research attention paid to the effects of the block

grant system put in place by PRWORA. The conventional view based on existing research on

the effects of matching grants, which were used for AFDC, and block grants, which are in place

for TANF, is that they have different price effects because the latter does not subsidize state

expenditures above the block grant at all, whereas the former does. This should curtail spending

over the block grant amount. Theoretical research has also shown the possibility of a “race to


                                                  27
the bottom,” as states facing a high price of expenditures lower their benefits to avoid in-

migration of the poor from other states, causing a cascading series of benefit reductions by all the

states. However, to date none of these effects have occurred because the block grant allocations

made to the states are generally much in excess of what states are spending, primarily because of

the marked decline in the caseload and consequent reduction in state spending. Ascertaining

whether the block grant structure will lead to restricted state spending or to benefit reductions

around the country will have to await a period when welfare spending rises up to the block grant

level, where it will become binding.




Housing Programs

       The set of housing programs for low-income families in the U.S. constitute a complex

mix of programs with different features. Over time, new programs have been added to the

system and the rules of existing programs have changed frequently (Olsen, forthcoming). These

programs are much more expensive than commonly realized because they rely to a much greater

extent than other welfare programs on indirect subsidies that do not appear in the records of the

administering agency.

       Programs divide up into those that are project-based, either owned by the government or

by private contractors who are subsidized by the government, and tenant-based programs in

which eligible families receive subsidies to defray the rent in private housing. The public

housing program, begun in the 1930s, is the best known project-based program. It offers rental

units to low-income families in newly constructed projects owned and operated by the


                                                 28
government. Beginning in 1954, the government began in addition to contract with private

parties to construct low-income housing or to rehabilitate existing housing for this purpose, in

most cases insuring the mortgages of the contractors. The Section 8 New Construction Program

established in 1974 is the largest program of this type. Under this program, the government

subsidized the construction costs of privately built housing for low-income families and provided

monthly rental payments. In 1983, Congress halted additional commitments under HUD's new

construction programs except for small programs for the elderly and disabled. Today the largest

housing subsidy program is tenant-based. The Housing Choice Voucher Program enacted in

1998 consolidated the two variants of the Section 8 Existing Housing Program that had operated

simultaneously for fifteen years. This program pays a portion of the rent of eligible low-income

households who locate housing in the private market that meets the program's minimum housing

standards. Although HUD or USDA programs have produced few new units in recent years, the

IRS's Low Income Housing Tax Credit, enacted in 1986, will soon become the second-largest

housing program in the country and it is growing much more rapidly than any other program.

       Eligibility for these housing programs is based on a number of factors, the first being the

requirement that adjusted family income fall below certain thresholds determined by family size

and the median income in the locality. However, because fixed budgets are authorized for these

programs and there is excess demand for subsidies, they must be rationed; that is, housing

programs are not entitlement in nature. Local housing authorities and owners of private projects,

operating under general guidelines from Congress, determine their “preferences” by giving

weight to characteristics of the families in granting assistance to individual families. Once

assistance is granted, families in project-based programs are offered specific units and families in


                                                29
tenant-based programs are authorized to locate eligible units in the private market. A substantial

majority of assisted families participate in programs that require families to pay 30 percent of

their income toward rent. However, many assisted families pay rents that are independent of

their income.

       Research on housing programs has addressed a number of different topics. One concerns

the cost-effectiveness of different program types. The studies are unanimous in finding that

tenant-based assistance provides housing equal in quality to that of project-based assistance at a

much lower total cost Another key issue is whether the programs indeed increase the housing

consumption of their recipients, certainly a main goal of the program but not one guaranteed to

occur, at least for project-based housing. The literature indicates indeed that housing

consumption is raised--that is, that families occupy higher quality housing than they would in the

absence of the program--both in housing projects and housing occupied by voucher recipients.

There appears to be some leakage in the subsidy, for consumption of non-housing goods arises as

well, although this should be expected if part of the goal is to enable families to reduce what are

often very high housing expenditures. The housing programs also appear, according to the

research, to increase housing consumption more than would a pure cash grant, consistent with the

rationale for housing assistance.

       The Housing Allowance Supply Experiment conducted in the 1970s studied the market

effects of an entitlement housing voucher program similar to the limited enrollment Section 8

Voucher Program that operated between 1983 and 1998. The Supply Experiment operated for

ten years in two small metropolitan areas with very different initial vacancy rates and minority

populations. About 20 percent of the families in the two counties were eligible to receive


                                                 30
assistance. Participation rates of eligibles never exceeded 50 percent, partly because subsidies

for those with moderately high incomes were not large enough to outweigh the costs of moving

and participating in the program. The results showed that an entitlement program of

tenant-based assistance would produce a substantial increase in the supply of dwelling units

meeting minimum housing standards but would have little effect on rent levels.

       There have been a few research studies on other topics as well. Some examine the work

disincentives of housing programs, on the presumption that, like all welfare programs, the

reduction in the subsidy with an increase in earnings will reduce the incentive to work. The

results show that such work disincentives probably exist but that they are quite small. Another

set of studies examine the relative effects of public housing and tenant-based housing on the

choice of neighborhood, finding that public housing exacerbates economic and racial segregation

while tenant-based subsidies ameliorate them to some extent. Findings from the recent Moving

to Opportunity Experiment that offered randomly selected families in public housing vouchers on

the condition that they move to neighborhoods with very low poverty rates indicate

improvements in the educational attainment of the children involved and reductions in their

violent criminal behavior. It also increases the earnings of adults in these families.




Child Care Programs

       Blau (forthcoming) describes the structure of means-tested child care programs in the

U.S. He notes that such programs have at least three different goals, not always mutually

compatible. One is to increase the rate of employment of low income women, particularly when


                                                 31
operated through the AFDC-TANF program or when aimed at assisting low-income parents in

general to work. A second is to increase the quality of child care for low income children, and a

third is to assist in the development of disadvantaged children through early education programs

such as Head Start. These goals may conflict, as they would for programs which encourage low-

income women to work through the provision of inexpensive child care.

       A variety of programs serve one or more of these goals. One of the largest is the Child

Care and Development Fund (CCDF), which provides funds to states to subsidize child care for

low income families and is intended to support employment of low income parents. It was

created in 1996 by Congress and consolidated a number of prior programs, some of which had

served primarily the AFDC population and some of which had served the “working poor,”

meaning low income families not on AFDC. When requiring such consolidation, Congress also

required that minimum percentages of the grant be spent on the AFDC-TANF-based population

(not only current recipients but also families who had recently left AFDC or are at risk of going

on) and that minimum percentages be expended on the working poor. A second program, the

Title XX Social Services Block Grant, provides states with funds to expend on a variety of social

services for the poor, including child care; states spend approximately 15 percent of their funds

on that service. The Dependent Care Tax Credit, a nonrefundable tax credit in the federal

income tax, also provides a subsidy for child care which declines as income rises. Finally, three

programs are intended for early education and child development, and are not tied to parental

employment. These include the Head Start and Title I-A programs, which provide early

education for disadvantaged children, and the Child Care and Adult Food Program, which

provides subsidies for nutritious meals in child care settings for low income children. All the


                                                32
programs are federally financed and have uniform national rules except the CCDF and Title XX

Social Services Block Grant, which give considerable discretion to the states on operation within

federal guidelines.

       In terms of expenditure on low income families, the CCDF and Head Start programs are

currently the largest at about $5 billion each, followed by the Dependent Care Tax Credit at

approximately $3 billion. The number of children served is the largest in the Dependent Care

Tax Credit, followed by the CCDF; Head Start is one of the smallest. Expenditures per child are

essentially inversely related to size: the Dependent Care Tax Credit gives $720 per child while

Head Start expends $5,759 per child.

       Eligibility in the three federal early education programs is related to various measures of

low income and are nationwide, while eligibility in the CCDF and Title XX Grant are set by the

states within federal guidelines. Title XX funds must be spent on child in families with income

below entirely state-chosen limits, while CCDF funds must be spent on families with income no

greater than 85 percent of state median income. States are free to set a wide variety of subsidy

mechanisms in their CCDF-funded programs, with fees that have maximums and minimums or

which are waived for certain groups, with vouchers or direct contracts with providers, and with

flexibility in setting reimbursement rates for providers. Child care facilities must meet state

licensing and regulatory requirements.

       Research on the effects of child care programs has been concentrated on a few selected

issues. One is whether child care subsidies in general increase the employment of mothers.

Based both on evidence from demonstrations and random-assignment trials as well as

nonexperimental studies which use variation in child care price to estimate employment


                                                33
responsiveness, the literature strongly indicates that child care subsidies have a positive impact

on employment and hours of work. However, the magnitude of the effect is quite uncertain and

varies considerably across studies. In his review, Blau finds that the studies with the best data

and which account most realistically for the child care market find relatively low price elasticities

of employment response, but ones that are still statistically significant.

       Research on several other issues has been conducted as well. One study of the effect of

price on the quality of care chosen by parents using formal day care centers found that child care

subsidies led parents to use more care but care at lower quality centers, as measured by child-

staff ratios and staff training. Another study examined the effect of child care subsidies on the

probability that single mother would be on AFDC, and found that such subsidies lower that

probability, presumably by allowing AFDC mothers to go off welfare and work.         Blau also

reviews the large literature on the effect of early childhood education on child outcomes, finding

that the evidence supports an effect of such education on some outcomes for some programs.

Whether the effects fade out over time or persist is more controversial, although some studies do

show persistent effects.




Employment and Training Programs

     As discussed by LaLonde (forthcoming), the main omnibus employment and training

program in the U.S. at the present time is the Workforce Investment Act (WIA). Passed by

Congress in 1998 and taking effect on July 1, 2000, WIA replaced the Job Training Partnership

Act (JTPA), which was the main program for employment and training in the U.S. from 1982 to


                                                  34
1998. WIA provides block grants to the states to fund employment and training programs for

adults and youth. WIA contains several titles with different programs and different services.

These include Title I.B.5, which covers adults; Title 1.B.4, which covers youth; and Title 1.C,

which covers the Job Corps, a high-cost training program for disadvantaged youth.

        Except for the Job Corps program, states have great freedom to design their own

WIA-funded programs, but must meet certain federal requirements. The adult programs are not

restricted to low income individuals but priority must be given to cash welfare recipients.

Training programs for youth, on the other hand, both the Job Corps as well as other youth

programs, do require that the individual have low income and other measures of economic

disadvantage. All adults are eligible for job search assistance but more comprehensive services

require that the individual be unemployed and be unable to find a job or otherwise need intensive

services to maintain employment. Training is primarily provided through "individual training

accounts" which allow the individual to choose from a list of acceptable providers, and thus

retains some features of a voucher. A system of "one stop shopping" is required by the

legislation, allowing WIA enrollees to go to only one agency, provider, or location to be directed

to all services.

        There are three generic types of training programs typically provided. One general

category is aimed at enhancing skill development, and includes both classroom training and

on-the-job training. A second is "work experience," which involves temporary placement in an

actual job. A third general category is employability development, which includes job search

assistance and career counseling. The first is aimed at increasing the individual's long run labor

market skill level, while the second and third are aimed more at encouraging immediate


                                                35
employment. Typically an individual's needs are first assessed and then he or she is assigned to

one of these types of programs.

         There is no research on the WIA program because it has been put in place so recently.

However, there is a large body of research on JTPA and related training programs which should

still be quite relevant to WIA, given that the basic types of programs are unlikely to change

markedly. The majority of the research surveyed by LaLonde is from random-assignment

evaluations, where the effects of the training program in question are measured as the difference

in outcomes--usually earnings and employment--between an experimental group and a control

group. These experiments typically estimate training effects separately for adult women, adult

men, and youth. Adult women are always separated because they include a high fraction

of welfare recipients and, indeed, many of the training programs are explicitly targeted at that

group.

         The findings are quite different by group. For adult women, there is consistent evidence

of positive impacts from a variety of types of training programs on employment and earnings.

The programs include welfare-to-work programs tested by individual states on their welfare

recipients, high cost programs for disadvantaged women in general such as Supported Work, and

the JTPA program. The impacts persistent for several years and occur for all program types

(job search assistance, work experience, and employability development). For the job search

assistance programs, the magnitudes of the impacts are modest in size--ranging up to $500 per

year, typically--but are also very modest in terms of cost, leading to very favorable

cost-effectiveness ratios. Impacts of programs that provide classroom instruction or add work

experience on top of job search assistance have somewhat greater impacts. The high-cost


                                                 36
programs, such as Supported Work, have even greater impacts, ranging up to $1,000 per year.

Whether they are cost effective depends crucially on whether these impacts are permanent or

whether they fade over time. In the favorable event that they are permanent, even these

programs have strong cost-effectiveness ratios (e.g., 15 percent rates of return).

        The impact estimates for adult men and youth are more mixed. For men, most evaluations

show essentially little impact on employment and earnings overall. Some programs appear to

have positive impacts for certain subgroups of men, but the pattern does not have any clear

explanation. For youth, impacts estimated in the Supported Work experiment as well as JTPA

and other training programs reveal that these services have no impact. However, based on past

evaluations, the high-cost Job Corps has traditionally been thought of as the main program

showing favorable impacts for youth.

        A new experimental evaluation of the impact of the program confirms that impacts on

employment and earnings are positive, thus supporting the general wisdom about Job Corps. By

four years after enrollment, annual earnings impacts were on the order of 12 percent. The higher

impacts of Job Corps as compared to some of the other youth programs are thought to arise from

the comprehensive nature of its training services as well as, compared to some other programs,

its relatively high cost.   However, LaLonde also shows that subgroup analyses present a mixed

picture of Job Corps impacts, which vary by age and ethnicity markedly. Indeed, for some

subgroups (e.g. Hispanic 16 - 24 years olds) the program appears to have no impact. There also

is some support in the data for impacts being greater for young adults rather than teenagers, but

even this is not completely uniform.

        LaLonde concludes his review emphasizing the positive nature of the findings for adult


                                                 37
women and youth. For adult women, low-cost training programs have a fairly large impact

relative to cost and constitute what appears to be a worthwhile investment. He notes that the

cost of these programs is far less than the cost of a year of formal schooling, for example, and

should not be expected to have dramatic impacts as a result. Higher-cost programs may be

cost-effective as well, but this depends on the size of their long-term impact, about which little is

known. For youth, it appears that only high-cost comprehensive training programs are likely to

be productive social investments. The U.S. spends far less than other countries on training

programs, and this evidence suggests that a greater expenditure in these directions could increase

the earnings of many groups in the disadvantaged population.




Child Support

       The child support system in the U.S., while not formally a means-tested program or a

public transfer program at all, nevertheless plays an important role in discussions of transfer

policy to the low income population and to single mothers in particular. Lerman and Sorensen

(forthcoming) note that the Child Support Enforcement (CSE) system, the governmental program

aimed at enforcing private child support obligations, is concentrated on the low income

population. In their chapter, Lerman and Sorensen review the structure of the present system

and the research that has been conducted on it.

       The CSE program was established by Congress in 1975 to provide matching funds to

states to collect child support obligations, establish paternity, and obtain support awards. States

were required to provide child support enforcement services to AFDC recipients and to any non-


                                                  38
AFDC family that requested them. The statute also required that AFDC recipients assign their

child support rights to the state--that is, that any child support payments they received be taken

by the state and used to compensate for the AFDC benefit--and to cooperate in establishing

paternity and securing support. Thus reducing welfare costs as well as increasing child support

were both goals of the system, goals that have remained to the current time.

       Through legislation, Congress has steadily increased pressure on the states to strengthen

the child support enforcement system in many ways since 1975. In 1988 it set numeric goals for

the states to establish paternity for children, and later required that states establish voluntary

paternity acknowledgement procedures in hospitals. In 1984 and again in 1988, Congress

increased pressure on states to require judges to adhere to state child support guidelines

governing the setting of child support awards, which are generally tied to the income of the non-

custodial parent. This was aimed at preventing judges from setting child support awards that

were too low. Over the 1980s, Congress also increased requirements on states to use wage

withholding to obtain payments from non-custodial parents, and in 1996 went further by

requiring that every new hire be reported to the CSE agency in order to locate such non-custodial

parents who were delinquent in their payments and had not been locatable by the agency.

       The percent of low income custodial mothers who receive any child support at all was

only 24 percent in 1997 and, of those that receive child support, and even fewer receive the full

amount that has been awarded by the court. These low figures, despite the years of increased

stringency of child support enforcement, attest to the difficulty of the problem. The percent

receiving any support is, however, larger than it was twenty years earlier, when it was only 17

percent. The increase over the period has arisen from a greater percentage of poor custodial


                                                  39
mothers who actually have an award, which is no doubt partly a result of governmental efforts at

paternity establishment and encouraging awards. The increase would have been larger had it not

been for a decline in the fraction of mothers who actually received anything even if they have an

award. Part of the reason for this decline, though not all, has been a shift in the composition of

poor custodial mothers from those who are divorced or separated to those who are never married;

the latter have always received less support than the former. The percent of single mothers on

AFDC receiving child support is approximately 17 percent, even lower than that of all poor

custodial mothers.

       Research on child support issues has focused on several issues. One is aimed at

determining the income levels of poor noncustodial fathers in order to determine how much they

are capable of paying. This is a difficult task because there is no ready data set to identify

noncustodial fathers and their incomes, so most estimation is indirect. Estimates indicate that,

overall, noncustodials fathers could pay 3 to 4 times more than they are actually paying, given

their incomes and given customary guidelines for how child support awards are based on income.

However, no estimates are available for low income fathers alone. Evidence from ethnographic

studies indicate that poor noncustodial fathers have high rates of nonemployment, low levels of

education, little work experience, poor levels of health, and often have criminal histories and

unstable housing arrangements.

       Another area of research focuses on the effect of child support collections on AFDC

participation and on the work effort of welfare mothers Because states collect most of all child

support received by women on AFDC, an increase in child support paid by the noncustodial

father has no impact on a woman’s income while on welfare, but it increases income off welfare.


                                                 40
This should therefore decrease AFDC participation and increase labor supply. Although the

evidence is not as strong as it could be, the evidence does suggest that this is the case. Increases

in CSE reduce AFDC caseloads, according to the evidence, and increases in child support reduce

rates of AFDC participation and increase employment rates. However, there is also some

evidence that increases in child support reduce the work effort of custodial mothers not on

AFDC, for in this case the extra income allows them to reduce their hours of work or work effort

overall.

       Research in this area suggests that, in principle, child support payments and CSE in

particular might reduce the work effort of non-custodial fathers, as they are required to pay a

percent of their income toward support. However, the little empirical evidence available

indicates little response of this kind. This may be because non-custodial fathers have inelastic

labor supply curves, but it may also arise because courts update award amounts as incomes of

fathers change in only a minority of cases. Typically, award amounts are set in relation to

income at the time of the initial court judgement, but no further adjustments are made thereafter.

Nevertheless, ethnographic evidence does suggest that child support enforcement tends to drive

many men into the underground economy, where income is not reported. Indeed, much of the

research discussion of the incentives faced by noncustodial fathers focuses on the lack of

incentives to pay child support given the fact that all payments go to the government instead of to

the children if the mother is on welfare. An additional problem is that many men have

accumulated large amounts of child support debt which are very difficult to work off.

       There has also been attention paid to the effects of child support payments on marriage,

divorce, remarriage, and nonmarital childbearing. The predictions of the effect are in most cases


                                                 41
ambiguous because, while increased child support gives men an incentive not to marry, remarry,

or have child out of wedlock, it increases the custodial mother’s incentives in the other direction

(relative to the current situation) by making single motherhood less financially onerous. The

little evidence on the issue suggests that there are indeed effects in this direction, with child

support appearing to reduce remarriage, non-marital childbearing, and divorce, but whose

magnitudes are uncertain.

       Finally, there has been considerable research on the effectiveness of child support

enforcement policy itself on increasing paternity establishment, award rates, and payment of

child support. The evidence suggests that it has had an effect, particularly on the first of these.

This is consistent with the time series evidence mentioned earlier.     Thus CSE policy has been

shown to have an effect and for this reason it continues to enjoy strong support as a public policy.




Conclusions

       Economic research on the effects of the nation’s system of means-tested transfers has

yielded a large volume of important findings. One of the most basic is the repeated finding that

the programs are, by and large, attaining their central goals of increasing the consumption of low-

income families of medical care, food, housing, child care, and other targeted goods. Another is

that there has been an increased redirection of support toward the disabled, both adults and

children, both for the receipt of cash support as well as medical assistance, and toward needy

children off TANF, another worthy goal. A third is that the EITC has been successful in raising

the employment rate of low income single mothers, a long-sought goal of transfer policy in the


                                                  42
U.S.

       At the same time, research has demonstrated that the attainment of other goals of these

programs is still a challenge. Designing the transfer programs to provide strong work incentives

which are acted on is still an issue in the SSI program, for example, and the EITC has some work

disincentives for groups other than single mothers. The AFDC-TANF reforms have been

successful in raising employment among single mothers, but the effects on their incomes are less

unambiguously positive. The child support system in the U.S. has made great improvements in

increasing support for low income children, but too little support is still received by low income

mothers yet the burden on low income fathers is already onerous by many accounts. Effects of

all transfer programs on family structure has become an important topic but no program has been

successful in having a major impact on such outcomes. Designing reforms to address these and

other issues will continue to make this a fruitful area for research.




                                                  43
References


Blau, D. Forthcoming. “Child Care Subsidy Programs.” In Means-Tested Transfer Programs in
the U.S., ed. R. Moffitt. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Burke, V. 1993. “Cash and Noncash Benefits for Persons With Limited Income: Eligibility
Rules, Recipient and Expenditure Data, FY 1990-92. Washington: Congressional Research
Service.

________. 1996. . "New Welfare Law: Comparison of the New Block Grant Program with Aid to
Families with Dependent Children." Report 96-720EPW. Washington: Congressional Research
Service.

_______. 1999. “Cash and Noncash Benefits for Persons With Limited Income: Eligibility
Rules, Recipient and Expenditure Data, FY 1996-FY 1998. Washington: Congressional
Research Service.

Currie, J. Forthcoming. “U.S. Food and Nutrition Programs.” In Means-Tested Transfer
Programs in the U.S., ed. R. Moffitt. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Daly, M. and R. Burkhauser. Forthcoming. “The Supplemental Security Income Program.” In
Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the U.S., ed. R. Moffitt. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Gruber, J. Forthcoming. “Medicaid.” In Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the U.S., ed. R.
Moffitt. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Hotz, V.J. and J. K. Scholz. Forthcoming. “The Earned Income Tax Credit.” In Means-Tested
Transfer Programs in the U.S., ed. R. Moffitt. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

LaLonde, R. Forthcoming. “Employment and Training Programs.” In Means-Tested Transfer
Programs in the U.S., ed. R. Moffitt. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Lerman, R. and E. Sorensen. Forthcoming. “Child Support: Interactions Between Private and
Public Transfers.” In Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the U.S., ed. R. Moffitt. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Moffitt, R., ed. Forthcoming. Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the U.S. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.

________. Forthcoming. “The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program.” In Means-
Tested Transfer Programs in the U.S., ed. R. Moffitt. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


                                             44
Olsen, E. Forthcoming. “Housing Programs for Low-Income Households.” In Means-Tested
Transfer Programs in the U.S., ed. R. Moffitt. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Government Printing Office.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 2000. Statistical Abstract of the U.S.:
1996. Washington:Government Printing Office.




                                             45
                                              Table 1

           Change in Real Expenditures in Six Major Programs, FY 1990 to FY 1996
                                (in millions of 1996 dollars)


                      AFDC          Food       Medicaid       EITC        Housing     SSI
                                   Stamps



 1990                  $24,758      $20,654      $84,658      $8,092       $16,922   $20,125
 1996                  23,677       27,344       159,357      24,088       19,877    32,065
 Pct change from
 1990                    -4%         42%          88%          198%            17%    59%
 Share of growth         -1%          7%          60%          13%             4%     10%


Notes:
EITC amounts include reduction in tax liability, not just refundable portion
Housing is the sum of expenditures on public and section 8 housing
Federal and state combined totals shown

Sources: Burke (1993, Table 15), Burke (1999, Table 3,12).
                                           Table 2

        Annual Expenditures and Caseloads in Ten Largest Transfer Programs, FY 1997



                            Expenditures             Caseloads           Expenditures
                             (millions)              (thousands)         per Recipient



 Medicaid                     $167,359                 40,446               $4,138
 SSI                              32,395                6,984               4,638
 EITC                             28,800               58,143                495
 FS                               24,772               24,200               1,024
 TANF                             23,179               10,936               2,120
 Subsidized Housing               19,336                4,315               4,481
 Medical Care for
 Veterans without                 9,220                 153                 60,261
 service disability
 Foster Care                      6,794                 289                 23,509
 Social Service                   6,400                  NA                  NA
 Federal Pell Grants              5,660                 3,665               1,544


Source: Burke (1999, Table 12).
                                            Table 3

                        Comparison of the AFDC and TANF Programs



  Item                         AFDC                               TANF



Financing                Matching grant                    Block grant


Eligibility              Children deprived of support of   Children in low-income families
                         one parent or children in low-    as designated by state; AFDC-UP
                         income two-parent families        abolished. Minor mothers must
                         (AFDC-UP)                         live with parents; minor mothers
                                                           must also attend school
Immigrants               Illegal aliens ineligible         Aliens ineligible for five years
                                                           after entry and longer at state
                                                           option


Form of Aid              Almost exclusively cash           States free to use funds for
                         payment                           services and non-cash benefits


Benefit Levels           At state option                   Same


Entitlement Status       Federal government required to    No individual entitlement
                         pay matched share of all
                         recipients


Income Limits            Family income cannot exceed       No provision
                         gross income limits


Asset Limits             Federal limits                    No provision


Treatment of Earnings    After 4 months of work, only a    No provision
disregards               lump sum $90 deduction plus
                         child care expenses; and
                         nothing after 12 months
                                     Table 3, continued



   Item                       AFDC                               TANF



 Time Limits           None                               Federal funds cannot be used for
                                                          payments to adults for more than
                                                          60 months lifetime (20 percent of
                                                          caseload exempt)


 JOBS program          States must offer a program        JOBS program abolished
                       that meets federal law


 Work Requirements     Parents without a child under 3    Exemptions from work
                       required to participate in JOBS    requirements are narrowed and
                                                          types of qualified activities are
                                                          narrowed and prespecified
                                                          (generally excludes education and
                                                          classroom training) and must be
                                                          20 hours/week rising to 30/week
                                                          for single mothers


 Work Requirement      JOBS participation                 Participation for work
 Participation         requirements                       requirements rise to 50% by FY
 Requirements                                             2002


 Child Care            Guaranteed for all JOBS            No guarantee but states are given
                       participants                       increased child care funds
 Sanctions             General provisions                 Specific provisions mandating
                                                          sanctions for failure to comply
                                                          with work requirements, child
                                                          support efforcement, schooling
                                                          attendence, and other activities
 Child Support         States required to allow first     No provision
                       $50 of child support received
                       by mother to not reduce benefit

Source: Burke (1996)
                                         Figure 1: Real Per Capita Expenditures on Means-Tested Transfers, 1968-1998

                                1,600


                                1,400


                                1,200
Expenditures (FY1998 dollars)




                                1,000


                                  800


                                  600


                                  400


                                  200
                                                                                     State and Local      Federal       Total

                                    0
                                    1965               1970              1975               1980              1985              1990   1995   2000
                                                                                                    Year
                                Sources: Burke (1999, Tables 4 and 5), U.S. Dept. of Commerce (2000, Table 2, Population).
                                     Figure 2: SSI Applications and Awards Among Population 18-64
                                                         (per 1000 in population)




                                                                                                 Applications
                           10

                           9

                           8
Rate per 1000 population




                           7

                           6

                           5

                           4                                                                     Awards

                           3

                           2

                           1

                           0
                           1974   1976   1978   1980   1982   1984   1986   1988   1990   1992   1994     1996   1998
                                                                     Year
Source: Daly and Burkhauser (forthcoming).
