                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           DEFAULT, CURRENCY CRISES AND SOVEREIGN CREDIT RATINGS


                                          Carmen M. Reinhart


                                          Working Paper 8738
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8738


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2002




This paper was prepared for the New York University-University of Maryland Project The Role of Credit
Rating Agencies in the International Economy. The author wishes to thank François Bourguignon, Stijn
Claessens, Ricardo Hausmann, Peter Kenen and three anonymous referees for very helpful comments,
Facundo Martin, Juan Trevino, and Ioannis Tokatlidis for superb research assistance and the Center for
International Political Economy for financial support. This paper was written while the author was Professor
at the University of Maryland. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the IMF.


© 2002 by Carmen M. Reinhart. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Default, Currency Crises and Sovereign Credit Ratings
Carmen M. Reinhart
NBER Working Paper No. 8738
January 2002
JEL No. F30, F31, F34



                                               ABSTRACT


        Sovereign credit ratings play an important role in determining the terms and the extent to which
countries have access to international capital markets. In principle, there is no reason why changes in
sovereign credit ratings should be expected to systematically predict a currency crisis. In practice,
however, in developing countries there is a strong link between currency crises and default. About 85
percent of all the defaults in the sample are linked with currency crises. The results presented here suggest
that sovereign credit ratings systematically fail to anticipate currency crises--but do considerably better
predicting defaults. Downgrades usually follow the currency crisis--possibly highlighting how currency
instability increases default risk.




Carmen M. Reinhart
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20431
and NBER
Tel: 202-623-4793
Fax: 202-623-7271
Email: creinhart@imf.org
www.puaf.umd.edu/papers/reinhart.htm
                                          I. Introduction

       Sovereign credit ratings play an important role in determining the terms and the extent to

which countries have access to international capital markets. As more countries are added to the

list of rated sovereigns, the issue of the information content of ratings becomes even more

important.1 Credit ratings have been shown to have a significant impact on sovereign bond yield

spreads.2 Indeed, sovereign credit ratings are supposed to serve as a summary measure of a

country’s likelihood of default. Hence, it is hardly surprising to find that the countries with the

lowest ratings are those that are unable to borrow from international capital markets altogether

and depend on official loans from multilateral institutions or from individual governments. In

this cross-sectional sense, sovereign credit ratings do well in distinguishing across borrowers.

       Industrial countries take international capital market access for granted. At the other end

of the spectrum, many low income countries, mired with a debt overhang, have no access to

international lending even under relatively favorable states of nature.3 For emerging markets

(EMs), however, access to international capital markets is precarious and highly variable across

time. It is for these economies that the sovereign credit ratings play their most critical role.

       In principle, there is no reason why changes in sovereign credit ratings should be

expected to systematically predict a currency crisis or a banking crisis. After all, industrial


   1
    To cite a recent example, Standard and Poor’s added Guatemala to the list of rated
sovereigns in November 2001.
   2
     See, for example, Larrain, Reisen and Von Maltzan (1997), who find evidence that ratings
“Granger-cause” sovereign bond yield spreads.
   3
     Examples of favorable states of nature include both shocks that are idiosyncratic to the
country--such as an increase in the terms of trade, or common shocks such as declining world
interest rates.

                                                  2
countries have had their share of currency crises (i.e., France and the United Kingdom in the

1992-93 Exchange Rate Mechanism crisis), banking crises (Japan, the S&L crisis in the United

States), or both simultaneously (i.e., the Nordic countries and Spain).4 In practice, however, in

EMs there is a strong link between currency crises and default.5 Without the colossal bail-out

packages that were put together by the international community, there is little doubt that the

currency crises in Mexico, South Korea, Thailand and, more recently, Turkey would have all

produced a sovereign debt default.6 Hence, if credit ratings are forward-looking and currency

crises in EMs are linked to defaults, then it logically follows that currency crises should be

systematically preceded by downgrades. It is this temporal (rather than cross sectional) behavior

of credit ratings that I am interested in investigating.

        Yet, recent anecdotal evidence does not suggest that financial crises were preceded by

downgrades in credit ratings. As the chronology in Table 1 illustrates, the downgrades appear to

materialize after and not before the crises in Asia. A question that arises from these recent

episodes is if this failure on the part of the rating agencies to anticipate debt servicing difficulties

is more generalized and systematic. Goldstein, Kaminsky, and Reinhart (2000), who examine the

links between currency and banking crises and changes in sovereign credit ratings for 20

countries for Institutional Investor and Moody’s, find mixed evidence on rating agencies ability

to anticipate financial crises. Neither of the rating agencies predict banking crises but--they


   4
       For an analysis of twin crises episodes, see Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999).
   5
     Further more, some of the indicators that are useful in predicting currency crises arealso
useful to predict debt crises, see Detragiache and Spilimbergo (2001).
   6
     Even if the government does not have much outstanding debt, history has shown that in
such times governments assume private sector debt time after time.

                                                   3
present some evidence that the Moody’ sovereign ratings have some (very low) predictive power

for currency crises.

       In this paper, I cast the net wider. Depending on the rating agency, I examine the linkages

between crises, default, and rating changes for anywhere between 46 to 62 countries. The

analysis is also extended to include Standard and Poor’s sovereign ratings and different

approaches to date the currency crises.

       Calvo and Reinhart (2000) have suggested that one of the reasons why EMs may fear

devaluations (or large depreciations) is that these are associated with a loss of access to

international credit--which is associated with severe recessions.7 To examine this issue, Section

I begins by assessing the temporal links between defaults and currency crises. This section also

focuses on the behavior of sovereign credit ratings in the aftermath of crises--the issue is to

examine to what extent does a currency crises leads to a reassessment of sovereign default risk.

In Section III, I attempt to evaluate the predictive ability of sovereign credit ratings using the

approach taken in much of the literature on currency and, more recently, banking crises and

estimate a family of probit models. The next section examines the descriptive statistics for the

ratings along the lines of the “signals” approach and compares how these stack up to the other

leading indicators that have been analyzed. This section also discusses some of the

macroeconomic indicators that rating agencies focus on in their rating decisions while the

concluding section discusses the implications of the findings and possible extensions of this

analysis.



   7
    They present evidence that the recessions following devaluations are deeper in EMs than in
developed economies.

                                                   4
                               II. Crises, Default and its Aftermath

         In this section, I first examine the link between episodes of sovereign default and

currency and banking crises. As discussed earlier, the anecdotal evidence from the recent crises

episodes suggests that the downward adjustments in sovereign credit ratings came after the

currency crisis was well underway. Hence, in the second part of this section, I review the

evolution of credit ratings after the crises--with an emphasis on analyzing if there are distinct

patterns for developed and emerging economies.



1. Data and definitions

         My analysis covers the sovereign credit ratings issued by Moody’s Investor Service and

Institutional Investor (II), and Standard and Poor’s. The II sample begins in 1979 and runs

through 1999. For the Moody’s and Standard and Poor’s ratings, we have an unbalanced panel.8

For II, the ratings are an index that runs from zero (least creditworthy) to 100 (most

creditworthy). The II rankings are reported twice a year and are changed frequently. For

Moody’s, and Standard and Poor’s, which uses multiple letters to characterize a sovereign’s

creditworthiness, I map their letter ratings into sixteen possible categories, with sixteen

corresponding to the highest rating and zero to the lowest. 9 For illustrative purposes, Moody’s

scale is reproduced in Table 2. The ratings may be changed at any time, hence we have the

month during which any changes took place. Unlike the II rankings, rating changes are much



   8
    An unbalanced panel, in this case, refers to the fact that we do not have the same number of
observations for all the countries.
   9
       This approach follows the procedure adopted in Cantor and Packer (1996a and 1996b).

                                                  5
rarer.

          The country coverage of my sample for the three ratings is shown on Table 3. With 62

countries, II constitutes the largest sample. The smallest sample is Standard and Poor’s with 46

countries included; nonetheless, this is more than twice the size of the sample used in Goldstein,

Kaminsky, and Reinhart (2000).10 For the exercise which examines the links across currency

crises and defaults, my sample includes 59 countries and spans 1970-1999. The countries are

those listed in the bottom panel of Table 3.



2. Methodology issues

          To assess the interaction between currency and banking crises, default and sovereign

credit ratings, I must first date the crises. I construct a two currency crises indices. This allows

me to assess whether the links between the ratings and the crises results are sensitive to the

definition of crises used. The first of these crisis indices is that used in Kaminsky and Reinhart

(1999), for 20 countries--but now extended to the larger sample. The second is the crisis

definition employed by Frankel and Rose (1996).11

          The Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) crisis index (KR), I, is a weighted average of the rate

of change of the exchange rate, )e/e, and of reserves, )R/R, with weights such that the two

components of the index have equal sample volatilities,

              I = ()e/e) - (Fe/FR)*( )R/R)                                                         (1)



   10
         Their sample consisted of 20 countries.
   11
      In an earlier version of this paper also included a modified version of Frankel and Rose,
that dates “milder” crises episodes.

                                                   6
where Fe is the standard deviation of the rate of change of the exchange rate and FR is the

standard deviation of the rate of change of reserves. Since changes in the exchange rate enter

with a positive weight and changes in reserves have a negative weight attached, readings of this

index that were three standard deviations or more above the mean were cataloged as crises.

For countries in the sample that had hyperinflation, the construction of the index was modified.

While a 100 percent devaluation may be traumatic for a country with low-to-moderate inflation,

a devaluation of that magnitude is commonplace during hyperinflation. A single index for the

countries that had hyperinflation episodes would miss sizable devaluations and reserve losses in

the moderate inflation periods, since the historic mean is distorted by the high-inflation episode.

To avoid this, I divided the sample according to whether inflation in the previous six months was

higher than 150% and then constructed an index for each subsample.12 As noted in earlier studies

which use the signals approach, the dates of the crises map well onto the dates obtained if one

were to rely exclusively on events, such the closing of the exchange markets or a change in the

exchange rate regime, to define crises.

          The Frankel and Rose (FR) definition is a devaluation in a given month of 25 percent or

greater--which is at least 10 percent greater than the devaluation in the preceding month.13 14

          To date the default episodes, I rely on Beers and Bhatia (1999), who provide default dates



   12
     Similar results are obtained looking at significant departures in inflation from a six-month
and twelve-month moving average.
   13
        Frankel and Rose (1996).
   14
     The modified version of the FR index (MFR) used in my earlier paper classifies as crises a
devaluation in a given month of 20 percent or greater--which is at least 5 percent greater than the
devaluation in the preceding month.

                                                  7
from 1824 to 1999 (I focus on the 1970-1999 subperiod), Beim and Calomiris (2001), the World

Bank Debt Tables (various issues), the debt crises dates provided by Detragiache and

Spilimbergo (2001) are also used. 15 In some cases, these sources pinpoint the exact month in

which the default was announced. Both default on foreign currency bank debt and foreign

currency bond debt are included--defaults on local currency instruments are not. The sample

includes default dates for both rated and unrated sovereigns.



3. A sketch of the signals approach

        I next use the “signals” approach developed in Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) to compare

the performance of the ratings--and some of the economic indicators which rating agencies focus

on--to some of the other (and better) predictors of financial crises. In a nutshell, the “signals”

approach involves a set of possible outcomes is presented in the following two-by-two matrix,16

                         Crisis occurs in the following       No crisis occurs in the following
                                   24 months                             24 months
 Signal                 A                                    B
 No signal              C                                    D


A perfect indicator would only have entries in cells A and D.



   15
     Detragiache and Spilimbergo (2001) classify an observation as a debt crisis if either or both
of the following conditions occur: 1) there are arrears of principal or interest on external
obligations toward commercial creditors (banks or bondholders) of more than 5 percent of total
commercial debt outstanding; 2) there is a rescheduling or debt restructuring agreement with
commercial creditors as listed in the World Bank’s Global Development Finance.

   For a more detailed description see Lizondo, Kaminsky, and Reinhart (1998) and Goldstein,
   16

Kaminsky, and Reinhart (2000).

                                                  8
          With this matrix I can define several useful concepts which I will use to evaluate the

performance of each indicator. If one lacked any information on the performance of the

indicators, it is still possible to calculate, for a given sample, the unconditional probability of

crisis,

P© = (A+C)/(A+B+C+D).                                                                                (2)

If an indicator sends a signal and that indicator has a reliable track record, then it can be expected

that the probability of a crisis, conditional on a signal, P(C*S), is greater than the

unconditional probability. Where

P(C*S) = A/(A+B).                                                                                    (3)

Formally,

P(C*S) - P(C) > 0.                                                                                   (4)

The intuition is clear, if the indicator is not “noisy” (prone to sending false alarms), then there are

relatively few entries in cell B and P(C*S) . 1. This is one of the criteria that I will use to rank

the indicators. I can also define the noise-to-signal ratio, N/S as,

N/S = [B/(B+D)]/[A/(A+C)].                                                                           (5)

It may be the case that an indicator has relatively few false alarms in its track record. This could

be the result of the indicator issuing signals relatively rarely. In this case, there is also the danger

that the indicators misses the crisis altogether (it does not signal and there is a crisis). Hence, I

also wish to calculate for each indicator the proportion of crises accurately called,

PC = C/(A+C).                                                                                        (6)

          In the case of the credit ratings a downgrade in the 24 prior to the crisis would be

considered a signal.


                                                    9
4. Currency crises and default: the linkages

        For analyzing the interaction between defaults and currency crises, the two-by-two matrix

can be re-cast as follows,




                          Currency crisis occurs in the      No currency crisis occurs in the
                             following 24 months                  following 24 months
 Default                 A                                   B
 No default              C                                   D

if defaults signal currency crises or

                         Default occurs in the following         No default occurs in the
                                   24 months                      following 24 months
 Currency crisis         A                                   B
 No currency crisis      C                                   D

if the converse is true. To simply look at the joint occurrence of default and currency crises

without discriminating on their temporal occurrence, we would extend the 24-month window to

be two-sided around the default date.

        In this sample there are a total of 106 defaults and 154 currency crises, of which 135 are

in emerging markets. As shown in Table 4, the unconditional probability of defaulting is 13.3

percent if the developed economies are excluded from the sample; the probability of default in

this sample for the industrial economies is zero.17 The comparable unconditional probability of a


   17
     These are the probability of new defaults not the probability of being in a default state
which are larger. For example Sierra Leone was in default on its foreign currency bank debt
during 1983-84 and 1986-1995. As in Beim and Calomiris (2001), we treat this as a single

                                                10
currency crisis is about 17 and does not change much when industrial countries are excluded

from the sample, thereby highlighting that the key difference between developed and developing

is debt problems--although, as we shall see, debt problems are very much linked to currency

problems in the developing countries. The probability of having a currency crises within twenty

four months of defaulting (i.e, with the crisis either before or after the default) is about 84

percent. Since defaults are somewhat rarer than currency crises, the probability of having a

default within twenty four months of a currency crisis (i.e, with the default taking place either

before or after the currency crash) is lower: about 58 percent for the whole sample and 66 percent

for the developing country subset, which is the relevant group, as it accounts for all the default

episodes in our sample. In any case, the main pont that this exercise highlights is that in

developing countries (at least) there is a strong association between debt events and currency

crises.

          On the temporal pattern, the probability of having a currency crisis conditional on having

defaulted is about 61 percent while the probability of defaulting conditional on having had a

currency crisis is somewhat lower, at around 46 percent for the developing country subgroup.

The inference to draw from these results is not so much that there is any obvious causal pattern--

although currency crises conditional on having defaulted are more common, but rather that

currency crises are more frequent and do not, in about one-half of the cases (even in developing

countries), necessarily lead to default. This stylized fact, indeed, may help explain why credit

ratings do not do well in predicting currency crises, an issue I take up in Section III. Of course,

as discussed earlier, there are a few cases in this sample in which the currency crises would have


default episode which begins in 1983.

                                                  11
precipitated a default absent a major intervention from the financial community.



5. Sovereign credit ratings in the aftermath of crises

       Further evidence that devaluations (or large depreciations) are--more often than not

followed by debt servicing difficulties can be gleaned from studying the behavior of sovereign

credit ratings following such events. Tables 5 and 6 present several results from the analysis of

the II and Moody’s sovereign ratings, respectively. I report a variety of statistics that are meant

to capture the various manifestations of the extent and the terms of access to international

lending around currency crises episodes. The statistics reported include: the probability of a

downgrade for various time horizons following the currency crisis, the probability of multiple

downgrades, and the level of the assigned rating at the time of the crisis, and six and twelve

months following that event. I also report the percent change in the ratings at several time

horizons. I report the results for emerging and developed countries separately and test for

differences among the two groups. Significant differences are denoted by one or more asterisks,

depending on the significance level.

       Turning to the II results first, as shown in the top panel of Table 5, I find no significant

differences between developed countries and EMs in the probability of a downgrade (or multiple

downgrades) following the currency crisis. However, this is where the similarities among the

two country groups end. It is worth noting (see middle panel, Table 5) that at the time of the

crisis, the average rating for the EMs is 37.6, slightly less than half of the average score for

developed countries. This, of course, suggests that even in the absence of a crisis, access to

international lending is far from even for the two country groupings. Furthermore, that vast gap


                                                  12
widens further in the aftermath of the devaluations associated with the currency crises. In the

twelve months following the currency crisis, the magnitude of the downgrade is about five times

greater for EMs than it is for developed economies. On average, EMs’s sovereign rating index

falls 10.8 percent in the twelve months following the currency crisis. The differences between

the post-crisis downgrade for emerging and developed economies is significant at standard

confidence levels.

       The gulf between EMs and developed economies is even greater when a comparable

exercise is performed for the Moody’s ratings. As with II, the level of the ratings at the outset of

the currency crisis is significantly lower for EMs--the sovereign rating level is about a third of

that assigned to developed economies. Also, as the II results, the magnitude of the downgrade is

far greater for EM--about 9 percent versus less than one percent for developed countries.

However, as shown in Table 6, in the case of Moody’s sovereign ratings, both the probability of a

downgrade in the twelve months following the crisis and the probability of multiple downgrades

is significantly higher for the EMs in this sample. Consistent with the findings on the interaction

between defaults and currency crisis, the behavior of sovereign credit ratings in the aftermath of

currency crises suggests that currency crises increase the probability of default but not necessarily

that currency crises equals default.

       To complement the preceding analysis, I examine whether knowing that there was a

currency crisis indeed helps to predict sovereign credit rating downgrades for emerging and

developed economies. For Institutional Investor, for which there is a continuous time series, I

regress the six-month change in the credit rating index on the currency crisis dummy variable,

which takes on the value of one when there is a crisis and zero otherwise, six months earlier.


                                                 13
The method of estimation is generalized least squares, correcting for both generalized forms of

heteroskedasticity and serial correlation in the residuals. For Moody’s, the dependent variable is

three-month changes in the rating, while the explanatory variable is the crisis dummy three

months earlier. The latter specification will allow us to glean more precisely whether

downgrades follow rapidly after crises take place. In the case of Moody’s, the sovereign rating

dependent variable is allowed to assume the value of minus one, zero, or one, depending on

whether there was a downgrade, no change, or an upgrade. I estimate the parameters of interest

with an ordered probit technique that allows us to correct for heteroskedastic disturbances.

       The results of the estimation are summarized in Table 7 for both II and Moody’s ratings.

In the case of EMs, currency crises help predict downgrades, irrespective which rating index is

used. For developed countries, however, there is no conclusive evidence that ratings react to

currency crises in a systematic and significant way--this is perfectly consistent with the

probability assessment that showed no linkages between currency crises and default--at least

post-1970. For the developing countries, while the coefficients are significant at standard

confidence levels, their marginal predictive contribution remains small. For example, in the case

of Moody’s, a currency crisis increases the likelihood of a downgrade by five percent. The

results from this exercise re-enforces the view that large devaluations or depreciations in

emerging markets are seen as increasing the likelihood of default--as evidenced by the

markdowns in the sovereign ratings. The fact the currency crisis predictive ability is so low,

would suggest that other economic fundamentals play an important role in explaining changes in

sovereign credit ratings (see Cantor and Packer 1996a and 1996b, on this issue).

       These results are also in line with the findings of Laraine, Reisen, and von Maltzan


                                                 14
(1997), who find evidence of two-way causality between sovereign ratings and market spreads.

Hence not only do international capital markets react to changes in the ratings, but the ratings

systematically react (with a lag) to market conditions, as reflected in the sovereign bond yield

spreads.



                        III. Sovereign Credit Ratings Before the Crisis

       This analysis has shown that I) there is a strong connection between currency crises and

default in emerging markets--3/4 of defaults are associated with currency crises in the months

before or after the default we have also shown that ii) slightly more than half of the currency

crises are not linked with a subsequent default. Nonetheless, iii) it is evident from the preceding

exercise that currency crises do affect the probability of default--as EM sovereigns are

systematically downgraded after currency crises. Hence, while it is critical to assess how well

the ratings predict default, it is also useful (given the close connection in EMs) to assess how

well sovereign credit rating changes anticipate crises.

       Next I assess the predictive ability of ratings via probit estimation. The dependent

variable is a currency crisis dummy and the independent variable is the 12-month change in the

credit rating lagged one year. The comparable exercise is performed for the default episodes.

Alternative specifications, such as the 6-month change in the credit rating lagged six months, 19

months and 24 months are also considered.

       The basic premise underpinning the simple postulated model is as follows. If the credit

rating agencies are using all available information on the economic “fundamentals” to form their

rating decisions, then: (I) credit ratings should help predict defaults and may (or may not) predict


                                                 15
currency crises--if the macroeconomic indicators on which the ratings are based have some

predictive power and; (ii) the simple model should not be misspecified--that is, other indicators

should not be statistically significant, since that information would already presumably reflected

in the ratings themselves. Thus, the state of the macroeconomic fundamentals would be captured

in a single indicator--the ratings.

        Recent studies that have examined the determinants of credit ratings do provide support

for the basic premise that ratings are significantly linked with selected economic fundamentals

(see Lee, 1993 and Cantor and Packer, 1996a). For example, Cantor and Packer (1996a) find that

per capita GDP, inflation, the level of external debt, and indicators of default history and of

economic development are significant determinants of sovereign ratings.

        Tables 8-10 present the results of the probit estimation, for the II , Moody’s, and

Standard and Poor’s ratings as regressors, respectively for currency crises and defaults. The

results shown in Tables 8-10 are based on the 12-month change in the ratings, 12 months before

the crisis but alternative time horizons ranging from 6-month changes to 18- and 24- month

changes at a variety of lag lengths produced very similar results.18 The method of estimation

corrected for serial correlation and for heteroskedasticity in the residuals.

        For II (Table 8) for which there are 2,195 biannual observations, the coefficients of the

credit ratings have the anticipated negative sign for any of the three definitions of currency crises,

that is, an upgrade reduces the probability of a crisis. However, for the two currency crisis

definitions it is significant at the ten percent level. In all three cases, their marginal contribution



   18
     A subset of these results are reported in Appendix Tables 1-3, of an earlier version of this
paper while the rest are available from the author.

                                                   16
to the probability of a currency crisis is very small. Furthermore, as shown in an earlier version

of this paper (Reinhart, 2000), this result is not robust to other specifications. For instance, if the

6-month change in the credit rating, 6 months before the crisis is used as a regressor, none of the

coefficients are statistically significant. For defaults, the II ratings are significant--but only at the

ten percent confidence level.

        For the Moody’s ratings (Table 9) for which there are 4,774 monthly observations, the

coefficients on the ratings variable are statistically insignificant for all the definitions of currency

crises--in the case of the FR definition of currency crises, the coefficient has the wrong sign.

Hence, for the larger 48-country sample used here the Goldstein, Kaminsky, and Reinhart (2000)

results do not hold.19 Interestingly, for defaults, the II ratings are significant at the five percent

confidence level. Although if one includes the potential default cases of the 1990s--these are the

countries that received massive bail-out packages (without which default would have been

certain), ratings are only significant at the ten percent level and very sensitive to the lag structure

used.

        The Standard and Poor’s sample of 3,742 observations the results are line with those

obtained for Moody’s (Table 10). Irrespective of the crisis definition used or the specification of

lag structure used none of the coefficients on the credit rating changes were statistically

significant at standard confidence levels and often had the wrong sign for the crises dates--but




   19
      For the Moody’s sovereign ratings, they had found a statistically significant coefficient for
their 20-country sample; while significant, though, the marginal contribution of the ratings
variable was very small.

                                                   17
were, indeed, much better for the default dates. 20

        These results would, on the surface, be at odds with the findings of Laraine, Reisen, and

von Maltzan (1997), who find evidence that ratings “cause” interest rate spreads. My

interpretation, however, is that, while ratings may systematically lead yield spreads (they present

evidence of two-way causality)--yield spreads are poor predictors of crises but better predictors

of default--this is because, as shown earlier, not all currency crises lead to default. Hence, the

ratings inability to explain currency crises is not inconsistent with its ability to influence spreads.

This issue will be taken up later in the paper.



1. Credit Ratings and Macroeconomic Indicators of Crises

        Table 7 compares the performance of the ratings, and some of the economic indicators

which rating agencies focus on--to some of the better predictors of financial crises. These results

underscore the preceding ones, which used a different approach altogether. The table presents the

basic descriptive statistics that are used in the “signals” approach to gauge an indicators’ ability

to anticipate crises, namely: the noise-to-signal ratio, the percent of crises accurately called, and

the marginal predictive power (i.e. the difference between the conditional and unconditional

probabilities). I compare II sovereign ratings to averages for the more reliable monthly and

annual indicators of economic fundamentals. The basic story that emerges from Table 7 is that

the credit ratings perform much worse for both currency and banking crises than do the better

indicators of economic fundamentals--the individual better performing indicators are shown on



   20
      As with Moody’s the results are sensitive to the inclusion of potential default cases and to
the lag structure used (i.e., longer lead of the ratings times fared much worse).

                                                  18
Table 8. The noise-to-signal ratio is higher than one for both types of crises, suggesting a similar

incidence of good signals and false alarms. Hence, not surprisingly, the marginal contribution to

predicting a crisis is small relative to the top indicators; for banking crises the marginal

contribution is nil. Furthermore, the percent of crises called is well below those of the top

indicators. Indeed, the II ratings compare unfavorably with even the worst indicators.21 The

results for the II ratings for larger sample considered here are even worse than those shown in

Goldstein, Kaminsky, and Reinhart (2000).



2. Why don’t sovereign ratings do better predicting financial distress?

          Generally, financial crises are difficult to forecast--witness the poor performance of

international interest rate spreads and currency forecasts.22 Furthermore, while the overwhelming

majority of defaults in this sample are associated with currency crises the converse is not true.

The results presented here offer a tentative (although partial) answer to this question. It would

appear that rating agencies have tended to focus on a set of fundamentals that--when it comes to

anticipating currency crises--are not the most reliable. For instance, much weight is given to

debt-to-exports ratios--yet, as shown in Table 11 (memorandum item) these have tended to be

poor predictors of financial stress. Little weight is attached to indicators of liquidity, currency

misalignments, and asset price behavior, which as highlighted in Table 8, are more reliable

leading indicators of the kind financial stress that may lead to both currency crises and default.



   21
        See Goldstein, Kaminsky, and Reinhart (2000) for details.
   22
     See Lizondo, Kaminsky and Reinhart (1998) and Goldfajn and Valdés (1998), on the
performance of interest rate spreads and currency forecasts, respectively.

                                                   19
       Detragiache and Spilimbergo (2001), for instance, present evidence that liquidity

indicators, such as short-term debt and debt repayments due perform particularly well in

explaining subsequent debt servicing difficulties. Openness and, as noted earlier, measures of

currency overvaluation score high marks in their study.



                                   V. Results and Implications

       This paper has addressed the following questions: What is the interaction between

currency crises and defaults? What is the behavior of credit ratings following the crises? Are

there important differences in the behavior of credit ratings between developed and emerging

markets? Do sovereign credit ratings systematically help predict currency crises and default? If

not, why not? What, if anything, needs to change? The answers revealed by the analysis can be

summarized as follows:

       As to the interaction between currency crises and defaults I find that the overwhelming

majority of the EM defaults (84 percent) in this sample are associated with currency crises but

the converse is not true, with slightly less than ½ of the currency crises in EMs linked to default.

For the developed economies there is no evidence of any connection between currency crashes

and default.

       As regards the behavior of ratings after the crisis and differences between developed and

emerging markets, there is evidence that sovereign credit ratings tend to be reactive--particularly

when it comes to EMs. Both the probability of a downgrade and the magnitude of the downgrade

are significantly higher for EMs. Taken together, these findings point to a procyclicality in the

ratings but perhaps, a more instructive interpretation is that currency crises in EMs increase the


                                                 20
likelihood of a default. The economic intuition is straightforward. Much of EM debt is

denominated in dollars--devaluations can have significant balance sheet effects. Furthermore,

most of the empirical evidence suggests devaluations are contractionary. Calvo and Reinhart,

(2000), for instance, ask how the differences between developed and emerging markets in access

to international capital markets influence the outcomes of a currency crisis--particularly as

regards output. They present evidence that EMs are, indeed, very different from developed

economies in several key dimensions. In EMs devaluations, or large depreciations for that

matter, are contractionary, the adjustments in the current account and capital account are far more

acute and abrupt. Hence, currency crises often become credit crises as sovereign credit ratings

often collapse following the currency collapse and access to international credit is lost.

       As to the ability of rating changes to anticipate financial crises, the empirical tests

presented here on sovereign credit ratings and financial crises suggest that sovereign credit

ratings systematically fail to anticipate currency crises--but do considerably better predicting

defaults. Having said this, ratings would not have anticipated the nearly certain defaults that

would have taken place in several recent crises absent large-scale bail-outs by the international

community. These result appear to be robust across alternative crises definitions, model

specification, and approaches.

       On why are sovereign ratings such poor predictors of currency crises, I conclude that

generally, financial crises are difficult to forecast--witness the poor performance of international

interest rate spreads and currency forecasts. Yet, ratings do better predicting defaults--although

the latter results are not as robust as regards model specification. Nonetheless, the results

presented here suggest that rating agencies would do well to incorporate many indicators of


                                                 21
vulnerability that have received high marks from the literature on the antecedents of currency

crisis. For instance, much weight is given to debt-to-exports ratios--yet these have tended to be

poor predictors of financial stress. Little weight is attached to indicators of liquidity, currency

misalignments, and asset price behavior a recent study by Degatriache and Spilimbergo (2001)

presents evidence that many of these indicators, which are useful in predicting currency crises,

are also useful for predicting debt crises. Because another way of saying that one half of the

currency crises do not end in default--is to say that one half of them do.




                                                  22
                                         References

Beim, David, O., and Charles W. Calomiris, 2001. “ Emerging Financial Markets,” (New York:
      McGraw-Hill, Irwin)

Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carmen M. Reinhart, 2000. “Fixing for Your Life” in Collins and
       Rodrik (eds.) Brookings Trade Forum 2000, Policy Challenges in the Next Millenium,
       (Washington DC: Brookings Institution).

Cantor, Richard, and Frank Packer. 1996a. “Determinants and Impact of Sovereign Credit
       Ratings,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, (October), 1-15.

Cantor, Richard, and Frank Packer. 1996b. “Sovereign Risk Assessment and Agency Credit
       Ratings,” European Financial Management, Vol. 2, 247-56.

Detragiache, Enrica, and Antonio Spilimbergo, 2001. “Short-term Debt and Crises.”
       Mimeograph, Washington, DC, International Monetary Fund.

Demirguç-Kunt, Asli, and Enrica Detragiache. 1998. “Banking Crises Around the World: Are
      There Any Common Threads.” IMF Staff Papers 45, No. 1 (March), 81-109.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., and Andrew K. Rose. 1996. “Exchange Rate Crises in Emerging Markets.”
       Journal of International Economics 41, No. 3/4 (November), 351-68.

Goldfajn, Ilan, and Rodrigo O.Valdés. 1998. “Are Currency Crises Predictable?,” European
       Economic Review 42 (May), 887-895.

Goldstein, Morris, Graciela L. Kaminsky and Carmen M. Reinhart, 2000. Assessing Financial
       Vulnerability: An Early Warning System for Emerging Markets,(Washington, DC:
       Institute for International Economics).

Kaminsky, Graciela L., Saul Lizondo, and Carmen M. Reinhart, 1998. “Leading Indicators of
      Currency Crises,” IMF Staff Papers 45, No. 1 (March), 1-48.

Kaminsky, Graciela L., and Carmen M. Reinhart. 1999. “The Twin Crises: The Causes of
      Banking and Balance-of-Payments Problems,” American Economic Review 89 No. 3,
      (June) 473-500.

Larraín, Guillermo, Helmut Reisen, and Julia von Maltzan. 1997. “Emerging Market Risk and
       Sovereign Credit Ratings,” OECD Development Centre Technical Papers No. 124,
       (April). Paris: The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.

Lee, Suk Hun. 1993. “Are the Credit Ratings Assigned by Bankers Based on the Willingness of


                                             23
       Borrowers to Repay?,” Journal of Development Economics 40, (April), 349-59.

Radelet, Steven, and Jeffrey Sachs. 1998. “The East Asian Financial Crisis: Diagnosis,
       Remedies, Prospects,”Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1.

Reinhart, Carmen M., 2001. “Sovereign Credit Ratings Before and After Financial Crises,”
mimeograph, University of Maryland, College Park.




                                               24
                 Table 1. Performance of Ratings Agencies Prior to Asian Crisis:
               Moody’s and Standard and Poor’s Long Term Debt Ratings, 1996-1997

                                       Jan. 15, 1996         Dec. 2, 1996                Jun 24, 1997           Dec. 12, 1997

                                  Rating     Outlook    Rating         Outlook    Rating        Outlook    Rating       Outlook

 MOODY’S Foreign Currency Debt

 Indonesia                        Baa3                  Baa3                      Baa3                     Baa3

 Malaysia                         A1                    A1                        A1                       A1

 Mexico                           Ba2                   Ba2                       Ba2                      Ba2

 Philippines                      Ba2                   Ba2                       Ba2                      Ba2

 South                            A1                    A1             stable                              Baa2         negative
 Korea

 Thailand                         A2                    A2                        A2                       Baa1         negative

 STANDARD AND POOR’S                                                                                            October 1997

 Indonesia     Foreign Currency   BBB        stable     BBB            stable     BBB           stable     BBB          negative
               Debt

               Domestic                                 A+                        A+                       A-           negative
               Currency Debt

 Malaysia      Foreign Currency   A+         stable     A+             stable     A+            positive   A+           negative
               Debt

               Domestic           AA+                   AA+                       AA+                      AA+          negative
               Currency Debt

 Philippines   Foreign Currency   BB         positive   BB             positive   BB+           positive   BB+          stable
               Debt

               Domestic           BBB+                  BBB+                      A-                       A-           stable
               Currency Debt

 South         Foreign Currency   AA-        stable     AA-            stable
 Korea         Debt

               Domestic
               Currency Debt

 Thailand      Foreign Currency   A          stable     A              stable     A             stable     BBB          negative
               Debt

               Domestic                                 AA                        AA                       A            negative
               Currency Debt

 Mexico        Foreign Currency   BB         negative   BB
               Debt                                                               BB

               Domestic           BBB+                  BBB+           stable     BBB+          positive
               Currency Debt
Note: Rating Systems (from highest to lowest)
Moody’s : Aaa, Aa1, Aa2, Aa3, A1, A2, A3, Baa1, Baa2, Baa3, Ba1, Ba2, Ba3
S&P’s : AAA, AA+, AA, AA-, A+, A, A-, BBB+, BBB, BBB-, BB+, BB, BB-
Source: Radelet and Sachs (1998).


                                                             25
                  Table 2. Scale for Moody's Foreign Currency Debt Rating

              Rating Scale                              Assigned Value

                  Aaa                                         16
                  Aa1                                         15
                  Aa2                                         14
                  Aa3                                         13
                   A1                                         12
                   A2                                         11
                   A3                                         10
                  Baa1                                         9
                  Baa2                                         8
                  Baa3                                         7
                  Ba1                                          6
                  Ba2                                          5
                  Ba3                                          4
                   B1                                          3
                   B2                                          2
                   B3                                          1
                   C                                           0
Sources: Moody’s and the authors.




                                            26
                                    Table 3. The Sample

         Institutional Investors: biannual observations, 1979-1999 for 62 countries
Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Finland,
Ghana, Greece, Hong Kong, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Israel, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kenya, Malaysia, Mali, Mexico, Morocco, Nepal, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Africa, South Korea, Spain, Sri Lanka, Swaziland,
Sweden, Tanzania, Thailand, Turkey, United States, Uruguay, Venezuela, Zimbabwe.


    Moody’s Investor Service: monthly observations, unbalanced panel for 48 countries
Argentina, Australia, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Finland, Greece, Hong Kong,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco,
New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Pakistan, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Africa, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, United
States, Uruguay and, Venezuela.
       Standard and Poor’s: monthly observations, unbalanced panel for 46 countries
Argentina, Australia, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Finland, Greece, Hong Kong, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New
Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, United States,
and, Uruguay.
               Sample for the interaction between currency crisis and defaults:
                 59 countries, 1970-1999, 113 Defaults, 151 Currency crises
Algeria, Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chile,
Colombia, Congo, Democratic Republic, Costa Rica, Cote D’Ivoire, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, Madagascar,
Malawi, Mexico, Morocco, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Romania, Sao Tome, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Spain, Suda, Sweden, Tanzania, Togo, Trinidad,
Turkey, Uganda, Uruguay, Venezuela, Zambia, Zimbabwe.




                                              27
                        Table 4. The Twin D’s: Devaluation and Default, 1970-1999

    Probability                                                   All countries   Developing countries
                                                                                  only

    Unconditional probability of a default crisis occurring in    12.0 1          13.3
    the next 24 months

    Unconditional probability of a currency crisis occurring      17.3            16.9
    in the next 24 months

    Probability of a currency crisis occuring within 24           84.0 2          84.0
    months before or after default

    Probability of a default occuring within 24 months            57.5            65.7
    before or after the currency crisis

    Probability of a currency crisis occurring within 24          69.3            69.3
    months of having defaulted

    Probability of a default occurring within 24 months of        39.4            46.0
    having a currency crisis

1
 The probability of default for the developed economies in our sample is zero.
2
 The probability for the whole sample and the developing country subset are the same owing to
the fact that while the industrial countries had currency crises, none defaulted within our sample
period.




                                                             28
 Table 5. The Probability and Magnitude of Downgrades Around Currency Crises:Institutional
                        Investor Sovereign Credit Ratings, 1979-1999

                                                  Probability of
                                                   (in percent)
 Country         a downgrade in six        a downgrade in            more than one downgrade
 Group           months following           twelve months            in the twelve months
                      the crisis          following the crisis         following the crisis
 Emerging                      39.0                       79.3                           31.7
 Developed                     38.4                       73.1                           30.8
 Difference                     0.6                        6.2                             0.9
                                                     Index level


                 At crisis period          Next six months                 12 months later
 Emerging                      37.6                       36.0                           33.5
 Developed                     76.0                       74.9                           74.5
 Difference                   -38.4**                    -38.9**                         -41.0**
                                         Magnitude of the downgrade in
                                                (percent change)
                      six months          the next six months           the twelve months
                 following the crisis                                  following the crisis
 Emerging                       4.3                        6.9                           10.9
 Developed                      1.4                        0.5                             1.9
 Difference                     2.8*                       6.4**                           8.9**

Notes: One asterisk (*) denotes significance at the ten percent level, while two asterisks (**)
denote significance at the five percent level.
Sources: Calvo and Reinhart (2000) and the author.




                                                29
       Table 6. The Probability and Magnitude of Downgrades Around Currency Crises:
                       Moody’s Sovereign Credit Ratings, 1979-1999

                                                    Probability of
                                                     (in percent)
 Country         a downgrade in six       a downgrade in             more than one downgrade
 Group           months following         twelve months              in the twelve months
                 the crisis               following the crisis       following the crisis
 Emerging        20.0                     26.7                       6.7
 Developed       10.0                     10.0                       0.0
 Difference      10.0**                   16.7**                     6.7*
                                                      Index level


 Emerging        4.9                      4.5                        4.3
 Developed       15.0                     14.9                       14.9
 Difference      -10.1**                  -10.4**                    -10.6**
                                         Magnitude of the downgrade in
                                                (percent change)
                 six months               the next six months        the twelve months
                 following the crisis                                following the crisis
 Emerging        8.2                      4.4                        12.2
 Developed       0.7                      0.0                        0.7
 Difference      7.5**                     4.4**                      11.5**
Notes: One asterisk (*) denotes significance at the ten percent level, while two asterisks (**)
denote significance at the five percent level.
Sources: Calvo and Reinhart (2000) and the author.




                                                 30
     Table 7. Credit Ratings Following Currency Crises: Developed and Emerging Markets

 Dependent variable: Institutional                Estimation method:
 Investor six-month changes in sovereign          OLS with robust standard errors
 rating
 Independent variable                          Coefficient       Standard           R2
 is a currency crisis                                            error
         dummy                                        (1)           (2)              (4)
      Developed                                       -0.007         0.023            0.01
       Emerging                                       -0.08**        0.011            0.07
 Dependent variable: Moody’s three-               Estimation method:
 month changes in sovereign rating                Ordered probit
 Independent variable                          Coefficient       Standard        Pseudo R2
 is a currency crisis                                            error
         dummy                                        (1)           (2)              (4)
      Developed                                       -0.08          0.76             0.000
       Emerging                                      -0.31**          0.11            0.060
Note: An asterisk (*) denotes difference is significant at the ten percent level, while two asterisks
denote significant differences at the five percent level.




                                                 31
     Table 8. Do Changes in Sovereign Credit Ratings Predict Currency Crises or Default?
                        Probit estimation with robust standard errors
                          Institutional Investor, 2,195 observations

                                       Currency Crisis
 Dependent Variable:        Coefficient     Standard       Significance    Pseudo R2
 Crisis Dummy                               Error          Level
                                 (1)            (2)             (3)                (4)
 Kaminsky and Reinhart      -0.435          0.540          0.072           0.005
 Definition
 Frankel and Rose           -0.288          0.015          0.059           0.007
 Definition
                                          Defaults
 Defaults                   -0.214          0.015          0.063           0.011
 Defaults and potential    -0.161          0.021           0.141           0.008
 defaults
Notes: The independent variable is the 12-month change in the sovereign credit rating one year
earlier.




                                               32
     Table 9. Do Changes in Sovereign Credit Ratings Predict Currency Crises or Default?
                        Probit estimation with robust standard errors
                                Moody’s, 4,774 observations

                                       Currency Crisis
 Dependent Variable:        Coefficient     Standard       Significance    Pseudo R2
 Crisis Dummy                               Error          Level
                                 (1)            (2)             (3)                (4)
 Kaminsky and Reinhart      -0.217          0.761          0.412           0.001
 Definition
 Frankel and Rose           0.014           1.582          0.975           0.000
 Definition
                                          Defaults
 Defaults                   -0.197          0.102          0.048           0.010
 Defaults and potential    -0.204          0.180           0.099           0.007
 defaults
Notes: The independent variable is the 12-month change in the sovereign credit rating one year
earlier.




                                               33
            Table 10. Do Changes in Sovereign Credit Ratings Predict Currency Crises
                               or Defaults in Emerging Markets?
                          Probit estimation with robust standard errors
                            Standard and Poor’s, 3,742 observations

                                          Currency Crisis
 Dependent Variable:        Coefficient        Standard     Significance   Pseudo R2
 Crisis Dummy                                  Error        Level
                                    (1)            (2)           (3)               (4)
 Kaminsky and Reinhart      -0.08              0.091        0.772          0.001
 Definition
 Frankel and Rose           -0.014             0.076        0.721          0.001
 Definition
                                             Defaults
 Defaults                   -0.120             0.076        0.054          0.011
 Defaults and potential      -0.356        0.170           0.117           0.007
 defaults
Notes: The independent variable is the 12-month change in the sovereign credit rating one year
earlier.




                                                  34
             Table 11 Institutional Investor sovereign ratings and the fundamentals

   Type of crisis and        Noise-to-        Percent of        Difference between
      indicator               signal            crises           conditional and
                                              accurately          unconditional
                                                called              probability
                                 (1)             (2)                    (3)
   Currency crisis:
   Institutional Investor       1.07               29                    5.2
    sovereign rating
  Average of the top 5          0.45               70                   19.1
  monthly indicators
  Average of the top 3          0.49               36                   15.4
   annual indicators


  Memorandum item:              0.91               53                    6.1
  Debt-to-exports ratio
    Banking crisis:
  Institutional Investor        1.62               22                    0.9
    sovereign rating
  Average of the top 5          0.50               72                    9.1
  monthly indicators
  Average of the top 3          0.41               44                   16.3
   annual indicators
  Memorandum item:              1.04               56                    0.9
  Debt-to-exports ratio

Sources: The author and Goldstein, Kaminsky and Reinhart (2000).




                                              35
