                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   INTERPRETING THE TARIFF-GROWTH CORRELATION
                         OF THE LATE NINETEENTH CENTURY


                                            Douglas A. Irwin


                                          Working Paper 8739
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8739


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2002




The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.


© 2002 by Douglas A. Irwin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Interpreting the Tariff-Growth Correlation of the Late Nineteenth Century
Douglas A. Irwin
NBER Working Paper No. 8739
January 2002
JEL No. F1, N7



                                               ABSTRACT


        Recent research has documented a positive relationship between tariffs and growth in the late
nineteenth century. Such a correlation does not establish a causal relationship between tariffs and growth,
but it is tempting to view the correlation as constituting evidence that protectionist or inward-oriented
trade strategies were successful during this period. This paper argues that such a conclusion is
unwarranted and that the tariff-growth correlation should be interpreted with care. First, several
individual country experiences in the late nineteenth century are not consistent with the view that import
substitution promoted growth. For example, the two most rapidly expanding, high tariff countries of the
period – Argentina and Canada – grew because capital imports helped stimulate export-led growth in
agricultural staples products, not because of protectionist trade policies. Second, most land-abundant
countries (such as Argentina and Canada) imposed high tariffs to raise government revenue, and revenue
tariffs have a different structure than protective tariffs. The fact that labor-scarce, land-abundant countries
had a high potential for growth and also tended to impose high revenue-generating tariffs confounds the
inference that high tariffs were responsible for their strong economic performance during this period.




Douglas A. Irwin
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
douglas.irwin@dartmouth.edu
         Interpreting the Tariff-Growth Correlation of the Late Nineteenth Century



        Immediately following World War II, many economists believed that a trade policy

based on import substitution would best promote economic development. Subsequent

experience instead revealed the costs of protectionism (Krueger 1997). In the late nineteenth

century as well, many political economists (such as Friedrich List) advocated import tariffs to

promote the growth of domestic manufacturing in countries that were behind the industrial

leader, then the United Kingdom. But unlike the recent period, the late nineteenth century

experience is often interpreted as confirming the wisdom of import substitution. Writing in the

Cambridge Economic History of Europe, Bairoch (1989, p. 69) concluded that “protectionism

[equaled] economic growth and expansion of trade; liberalism [equaled] stagnation in both” in

the late nineteenth century. Recent work by O’Rourke (2000) and Clemens and Williamson

(2001) has strengthened this impression by finding a positive correlation between import tariffs

and economic growth across countries from 1875 to 1914.

        Such a correlation does not establish a causal relationship between tariffs and growth, but

it is tempting to view the correlation as constituting evidence that protectionist or inward-

oriented trade strategies were successful during this period. This paper argues that such a

conclusion is unwarranted and that the tariff-growth correlation should be interpreted with great

care. First, several individual country experiences in the late nineteenth century are not

consistent with the view that import substitution promoted growth. For example, the two most

rapidly expanding, high tariff countries of the period – Argentina and Canada – grew because

capital imports helped stimulate export-led growth in agricultural staples products, not because

of protectionist trade policies.
                                                 -2-

       Second, most land-abundant countries (such as Argentina and Canada) imposed high

tariffs to raise government revenue, and revenue tariffs have a different structure than protective

tariffs. The fact that labor-scarce, land-abundant countries had a high potential for growth and

also tended to impose high revenue-generating tariffs confounds the inference that high tariffs

were responsible for their strong economic performance during this period.



I. The Tariffs-Growth Relationship: Country Evidence

       Figures 1 presents the unconditional relationship between the average tariff in 1870 and

the average annual growth in real per capita GDP from 1870 to 1913 for 17 high-income “core”

countries.1 Average tariffs, calculated by dividing customs revenue by the value of imports, are

the most frequently used indicator of trade policy for this period.2 For these core countries, the

correlation between tariffs and growth is 0.68, but a causal interpretation of this correlation is

questionable.

       First, the correlation is driven by several key outliers: Argentina, Canada, and the United

States stand out as high tariff, high growth countries. Without these three countries, the

correlation falls to 0.08. These labor-scarce, land-abundant New World economies had the

potential for rapid growth that other European countries did not possess. For example, it is


       1
         The core includes most of Western Europe as well as Argentina, Australia, Canada,
New Zealand, and the United States. The eleven low-income countries of the periphery are
Greece, Spain, Portugal, Russia, Japan, China, India, Indonesia, Thailand, Brazil, and Mexico.
GDP data are from Maddison (2001).
       2
          Other trade policy instruments, such as import quotas, voluntary export restraints, and
antidumping duties, were rarely employed during this period. But this tariff measure is a crude
indicator of trade policy because it provides no information on the structure of protection across
industries or sectors.
                                                 -3-

doubtful that the Netherlands could have achieved growth rates equal to those of the New World

economies simply by imposing a higher tariff.

       Second, the core sample may be too limited. Figure 2 adds eleven low-income periphery

countries to the sample. The inclusion of countries such as Portugal and Brazil, which had high

tariffs but poor growth performance, reduces the tariff-growth correlation from 0.68 to 0.20 (or

from 0.08 to -0.09 if Argentina, Canada, and the United States are excluded).

       Third, a descriptive analysis of the high tariff, high growth outliers suggests that tariffs

did not play a major role in their economic development in the late nineteenth century. For

example, Argentina achieved the highest recorded rate of growth in per capita income during this

period and had very high average tariffs. But its trade policy was not designed to foster inward-

oriented development and its growth was not based on industrialization achieved through import

substitution. Argentina grew rapidly because it experienced an investment boom that led to an

export boom in staple products. Argentina received massive foreign investment (particularly

from Britain) in the 1880s that resulted in the construction of thousands of kilometers of railroad

track and other infrastructure-related public works. This literally paved the way for an enormous

expansion in exports, particularly wheat and livestock. As Cortés Conde (1993, p.75) explains,

the “growth which changed Argentina was based on the exploitation of staples: agricultural and

cattle products which found an outlet in international markets.”

       Argentina’s tariff code was not designed to promote industrialization based on import

substitution and “industrial growth did not stem from protectionist tariffs” (Cortés Conde 1993,
                                                  -4-

p. 68).3 As a by-product of the expansion of agricultural exports, complementary activities both

in manufacturing (food processing) and in services (transportation and construction) arose and

absorbed an increasing share of the labor force. Capital investments were direct toward activities

that would develop, facilitate, and service the agricultural exports and were not undertaken to

produce goods domestically in replace of imports. Thus, “manufacturing growth came mainly

from export expansion plus growth of the domestic market, with import substitution playing a

minor role” (Reynolds 1985, p. 88).4

       Canada was another high tariff country that grew rapidly from 1896 to 1913, but this

growth was not the result of import substitution or an inward-oriented development strategy.

Like Argentina, Canada experienced “a classic investment boom, a major part of it related

directly or indirectly to the settlement of the west. . . . that the settlement of the west was based

on the expectation, in the minds of the settlers, of there being a viable [international] market for

wheat is beyond doubt” (Urquhart 1986, pp. 35-36). Substantial investment in railroads (such as

the Canadian Pacific Railroad extending into the prairies) in the 1880s made possible an export

boom in its staple products, particularly wheat and flour. Industrialization was not critical to its

growth; indeed, during the period of its most rapid growth from 1891 to 1911, the share of the



       3
         Solberg (1987, p. 106) notes that “Although some Argentine industries did enjoy
marked tariff protection, no government during the 1880-1930 period attempted a consistent
protectionist policy to spur industrial growth through massive import substitution.”
       4
           Reynolds (1988, p. 88) further observes that “manufacturing output [in Argentina]
during this period grew only a little faster than GDP and was linked rather closely with export
expansion. Meat-packing firms, flour mills, and wool-washing establishments shipped a large
part of their output abroad. Railroad construction and repair, other export-oriented infrastructure
facilities, and housing and urban facilities for immigrants also provided a stimulus to
manufacturing.”
                                                -5-

labor force in Canadian industry (manufacturing and construction) was unchanged (Urguhart

1993, pp. 24, 305).

       Thus, two high tariff countries did grow rapidly, but export-led growth is a better

description of their development process than import substitution. What about the link between

tariffs and growth in other countries? In the United States, high tariffs on manufactured goods

originally imposed during the Civil War were kept in place after the war, but the United States

overtook Britain in terms of per capita income primarily by improving its productivity in the

service sector, not in manufacturing (Broadberry 1998, Irwin 2001). In Western Europe, Figure 1

suggests that the variation in tariff levels as well as the differences in growth performance were

relatively small, making it difficult to draw firm conclusions.

       Australia is an interesting case to consider. At first glance, Australia has characteristics

similar to Argentina and Canada – an agricultural exporter with high tariffs, abundant land, and

scarce labor. But unlike the others, Australia grew slowly during this period, perhaps due to the

fact that its share of employment in agriculture was already low by 1870 and therefore the

possibility of growth through structural change was limited. Australia is also intriguing because

each of the several colonies there pursued independent trade policies before Federation in 1901.

The two largest colonies, New South Wales and Victoria, adopted different tariff policies: New

South Wales eschewed tariffs and embraced free trade, while Victoria imposed protectionist

tariffs to promote manufacturing. The outcome of this experiment suggests that tariffs were not

decisive: as measured by the level or the growth of per capita GDP, economic performance in

the colonies was not all that different (Haig 2001).

       Some countries did pursue import substitution policies during this period. In Russia, for
                                                  -6-

example, “this process of import substitution and export promotion was actively fostered by the

government through tariff protection, government orders, location of railways and the railway

rate structure, and export premiums” and “was particularly dramatic for cotton fibre, copper,

steel, cloth and many types of machinery,” according to Dohan (1991, p. 215). Russia grew

rapidly after the 1880s, but doubts remain about the degree to which the tariff protection helped

manufacturing overall.5 Mexico also imposed high tariffs and brought about “substantial import

substitution, particularly in textiles, clothing, processed foods and beverages, tobacco, cement,

and other building materials” (Reynolds 1985, p. 100). Whether restrictive trade policies were

responsible for the strong growth is still open to question.

       Thus, the relationship between trade policy and economic performance is a complicated

issue that cannot be inferred from a simple correlation alone. As Morris and Adelman (1989, p.

1420) conclude, “success along this inward-oriented growth path varied greatly [in the late

nineteenth century] . . . . in moderately backward, import-substituting countries protection levels

varied greatly and did not systematically accelerate economic growth . . . . In sum, the effects of

tariff policies are complex and vary greatly across countries in ways depending strongly on

resources, institutions, and government strategies.”



II. What Explains the High Tariffs?

       Why did export-oriented countries such as Argentina levy high tariffs if they did not


       5
          The tariffs are commonly believed to have given certain manufacturers significant
market power, to the possible detriment of other manufacturing industries. Gregory (1994, pp.
60-61) states that “there is no evidence of discretionary tariffs to favor specific industries or to
encourage foreign industries to locate behind Russian tariff walls. Manufacturing inputs were
taxed at the same rates as manufacturers.”
                                                  -7-

employ them as part of an import substitution trade strategy? In many cases, import duties were

primarily designed to raise fiscal revenue for the government. Figure 3 illustrates that labor-

scarce, land-abundant countries often relied on customs duties to generate a large proportion of

their government revenue. Figure 4 shows that these countries also tended to impose high tariffs.

          Land abundant countries tended to impose high tariffs for public finance and for political

economy reasons. In terms of public finance, import taxes made sense for countries with low

population densities. Other means of raising revenue (excise taxes, land taxes, income taxes,

etc.) were not as feasible or as enforceable in countries with a widely dispersed population,

particularly in the late nineteenth century. The taxation of foreign goods arriving into the

nation’s ports reduced the problem of tax compliance. In terms of political economy, if a

majority of the population owns land (or if the government is controlled by landowners), they

may have an interest in avoiding direct taxes on land in favor of high taxes on imported luxury

goods.6

          Revenue tariffs can be structured quite differently from protective tariffs and were not

necessarily designed to protect domestic producers from foreign competition. Revenue tariffs are

often levied on just a few key commodities (such as alcoholic beverages, coffee and tea, sugar


          6
          As Platt (1972, p. 78) writes with respect to Argentina and other Latin American
countries, “each of the Republics was feeling the pressure for more revenue, and for each,
governed as it was by a landed oligarchy with a rooted distaste for direct taxation, the only
obvious source of increased revenue was taxation on a larger import trade. . . . A system of
federal inland revenue was not developed in Argentina until as late as 1891, and in the mid-’90s
the Customs House was accounting for between 70 and 80 percent of federal government
revenues.” As Solberg (1987, p. 106) notes,“the political base for a reorientation of Argentine
economic policy toward protected industrialization did not exist [prior to World War I], for the
pampa landed elite agreed with farmers as well as urban consumers that protectionism in an
export-oriented economy would raise the cost of rural production and reduce aggregate real
incomes.”
                                                 -8-

and tobacco), but are capable of raising more revenue than broadly based tariffs designed to

protect domestic producers. In the case of Argentina, import duties on most capital goods and

intermediate products related to the production and exports of staples entered duty free (such as

machinery, iron and steel, chemicals, etc.), whereas imported consumption items (sugar, wine,

etc.) were heavily taxed. The United Kingdom pursued a policy of free trade and did not use the

tariff to discriminate in favor of domestic producers, but still levied import duties on non-

competing goods (such as sugar, tea, and coffee) and on other goods (tobacco manufactures) to

balance domestic taxes on producers (Irwin 1993).

       Thus, high tariff measures (customs revenue divided by imports) are an imperfect

indicator of a country’s trade-policy orientation and may not always reflect protectionist policies.

Despite high measured tariffs, both Argentina and Canada ranked among the most open

economies in the world in 1913, according to Estevadeordal’s (1997) factor-endowment-based

indicators of “openness” to trade.



III. Conclusions

       This paper has questioned whether the correlation between tariffs and growth in the late

nineteenth century by itself tells us anything about the relationship between trade policy and

economic growth. Rapid growth in Argentina and Canada – two high tariff, high growth outliers

– was based on an export-orientation in staple products, not industrialization based on import

substitution. Labor-scarce and land-abundant countries such as Argentina and Canada often used

import tariffs as a means of raising government revenue. But those attributes (as well as sound

political institutions and other economic policies) also gave those countries unusually favorable
                                               -9-

prospects for economic growth. Rather than higher tariffs causing higher growth, the

relationship could be spurious: land-abundant countries relied on customs duties to raise

government revenue and also enjoyed favorable growth prospects, with little link between the

two.
                                             -10-

                                         References

Bairoch, Paul. “European Trade Policy, 1815-1914,” in Peter Mathias and Sidney Pollard, eds.,
Cambridge Economic History of Europe, Vol. XIII. New York: Cambridge University Press,
1989.

Broadberry, Stephen N. “How Did the United States and Germany Overtake Britain? A Sectoral
Analysis of Comparative Productivity Levels, 1870-1990.” Journal of Economic History, June
1998, 58, pp. 375-407.

Cortés Conde, Roberto. “The Growth of the Argentine Republic, c. 1870 - 1914,” in Leslie
Bethell, ed., Argentina Since Independence. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1993.

Clemens, Michael A., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. “A Tariff-Growth Paradox? Protection’s
Impact the World Around, 1875-1997.” National Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge,
MA) Working Paper No. 8459, September 2001.

Dohan, M. R. “Foreign Trade,” in R. W. Davies, ed., From Tsarism to the New Economic
Policy. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1991.

Estevadeordal, Antoni. “Measuring Protection in the Early Twentieth Century.” European
Review of Economic History, April 1997, 1, pp. 89-126.

Gregory, Paul R. Before Command: An Economic History of Russia from Emancipation to the
First Five-Year Plan. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994.

Haig, Bryan. “New Estimates of Australian GDP, 1861–1948/49.” Australian Economic History
Review, March 2001, 41, pp. 1-34.

Irwin, Douglas A. “Free Trade and Protection in Nineteenth Century Britain and France
Revisited: Comment on Nye,” Journal of Economic History, March 1993, 53, pp. 146-152.

Irwin, Douglas A. “Tariffs and Growth in Late Nineteenth Century America.” The World
Economy, January 2001, 24, pp. 15-30.

Krueger, Anne O. “Trade Policy and Economic Development: How We Learn.” American
Economic Review, March 1997, 87, pp. 1-22.

Maddison, Angus. The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective. Paris: OECD, 2001.

Morris, Cynthia Taft, and Irma Adelman. “Nineteenth Century Development Experience and
Lessons for Today.” World Development, September 1989, 17, pp. 1417-1432.

O’Rourke, Kevin H. “Tariffs and Growth in the Late 19th Century.” Economic Journal, April
                                            -11-

2000, 110, pp. 456-483.

Platt, D. C. M. Latin America and British Trade 1806-1914. London: Adam & Charles Black,
1972.

Reynolds, Lloyd. Economic Growth in the Third World, 1850-1980. New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1985.

Solberg, Carl E. The Prairie and the Pampas: Agrarian Policy in Canada and Argentina, 1880-
1930. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1987.

Urquhart, M. C. “New Estimates of Gross National Product, Canada, 1870-1926: Some
Implications for Canadian Development,” in Stanley L. Engerman and Robert E. Gallman, eds.,
Long-Term Factors in American Economic Growth. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1986.

Urquhart, M. C. Gross National Product, Canada, 1870-1926: The Derivation of the Estimates.
Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 1993.
                                                                                              -13-

Figure 1: Tariffs and Growth, 1870-1913: Core Countries



                                                                                                                      ARG
                                             2.50391
   Average Annual Growth in per capita GDP




                                                                                                                CAN




                                                                                                                        USA


                                                                          GER
                                                              SWI                                    DEN

                                                              FRA               FIN      SWE
                                                                    AUH
                                                                                          NOR
                                                                                  ITA
                                                                                                           NZ

                                                             BEL
                                                                            UK
                                                       NET
                                                                                        AUS
                                             .865099
                                                       .986                                                           29.29
                                                                                        Average Tariff in 1870
                                                                                                        -14-

Figure 2: Tariffs and Growth, 1870-1913: Core and Periphery Countries




                                                                                                                         ARG
                                          2.50391

                                                                                                       CAN
Average Annual Growth in per capita GDP




                                                                                                                           USA
                                                                                                                                   MEX
                                                                GER
                                                          SWI                             DEN
                                                           FRA        FIN         SWE
                                                               JAP
                                                             AUH
                                                                           GRE    NOR
                                                                          ITA
                                                                                                 NZ
                                                                                        SPA
                                                       BEL
                                                                     UK
                                                    NET
                                                                                 AUS RUS
                                                                                           IDN

                                                                                                 CHN
                                                                                                                         POR
                                                                          IND
                                                                          THA
                                                                                                                   BRZ
                                          .292428
                                                    .986                                                                          48.82
                                                                                                         Average Tariff in 1870




:
                                                                                                  -15-

Figure 3: The Fiscal Importance of Customs Duties in 1890



                                                                                    SWI
                                             .794872
  Share of Government Revenue from Customs




                                                                                                                                         ARG
                                                                                                                           AUS




                                                                                                                    CAN
                                                                                                              USA
                                                                                                GER


                                                                                            DEN
                                                                                                            NOR

                                                                                                              SWE
                                                                                          POR

                                                                                                                                 NZ

                                                                        GRE


                                                                       UK
                                                                                                      SPA
                                                                              ITA                     RUS
                                                                                      FRA
                                                                 BEL                                        AUH
                                                         IDN            NET
                                                                          JAP
                                                                            IND
                                             .026194
                                                       5.26286                                                                        11.0739
                                                                                    Log of Productive Land to Population
                                                                                -16-

Figure 4: Average Tariffs and Relative Land Abundance in 1890




                                                                                                                       ARG
                           38.3852
                                                                                    RUS
                                                                        POR




                                                                                            USA
  Average Tariff in 1890




                                                                                                               NZ


                                                      GRE                                         CAN

                                                                                                         AUS
                                                            ITA
                                                                                    SPA



                                                                          DEN               SWE
                                                                                          NOR

                                                                              GER
                                                                    FRA
                                                                                          AUH
                                       IDN                JAP
                                                     UK
                                                                  SWI
                                                            IND
                                               BEL
                                                      NET
                           .461538
                                     5.26286                                                                        11.0739
                                                                  Log of Productive Land to Population
