NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRODUCTIVITY, COMPUTERIZATION, AND SKILL CHANGE
Edward N. Wolff
Working Paper 8743
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8743
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2002

The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2002 by Edward N. Wolff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Productivity, Computerization, and Skill Change
Edward N. Wolff
NBER Working Paper No. 8743
January 2002
JEL No. D24, O30, J24

ABSTRACT
Using pooled cross-section, time-series data for 44 industries over the decades of the 1960s,
1970s, and 1980s in the United States, I find no econometric evidence that computer investment is
positively linked to TFP growth (over and above its inclusion in the TFP measure). However,
computerization is positively associated with occupational restructuring and changes in the composition
of intermediate inputs and capital coefficients. There is modest evidence that the growth of worker skills
is positively related to industry productivity growth. The effects are very modest -- adding at most 0.07
percentage points to annual labor productivity growth.

Edward N. Wolff
New York University
Department of Economics
269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
edward.wolff@nyu.edu

-2-

Robert Solow was, perhaps, the first to point out the anomaly between productivity
growth and computerization. Indeed, he quipped that we see computers everywhere except in the
productivity statistics. As we shall see below, industries that have had the greatest investment in
computers (namely, financial services) have ranked among the lowest in terms of conventionally
measured productivity growth. Moreover, at least until recently, there has been little evidence of
a pay-off to computer investment in terms of productivity growth.
However, another recent phenomenon of considerable visibility has been the rapid degree
of industrial restructuring among U.S. corporations. As I shall argue below, standard measures of
productivity growth are only one indicator of structural change. There are others such as changes
in direct input and capital coefficients. Changes in occupational mix and the composition of
inputs were greater in the 1980s than in the preceding two decades. This is coincident with the
sharp rise in computerization.
Though most of the attention in the literature has focused on the connection between
Information Technology (IT) or Information and Communications Technology (ICT) and
productivity, little work has been conducted on the linkage between IT and broader indicators of
structural change (with a few exceptions noted below). One purpose of this paper is to help fill
this gap. Indeed, I find evidence from regression analysis that the degree of computerization has
had a statistically significant effect on changes in industry input coefficients and other
dimensions of structural change.
Another apparent anomaly arises when we consider the relation between schooling and
skills on the one hand and productivity growth on the other hand. Human capital theory predicts
that rising educational attainment and skills will lead to increasing productivity. Considerable
policy discussion has also focused on the importance of education and skill upgrading as an
ingredient in promoting productivity growth. Yet, as we shall see below, while overall
productivity growth in the United States slowed down after 1973, the growth of schooling levels
and skills continued unabated. Indeed, college completion rates accelerated after 1970. In the
time-series data, from 1947 to 1997, there is virtually no correlation between the growth of total
factor productivity on the one hand and that of skills or educational attainment on the other.
Likewise, on the industry level, sectors with the highest skills -- namely services -- have had the
lowest productivity growth.
This paper will concentrate on the relation of skills, education, and computerization to

-3-

productivity growth and other indicators of technological change on the industry level. I find no
evidence that the growth of educational attainment has any statistically measured effect on
industry productivity growth. The growth in cognitive skills, on the other hand, is significantly
related to industry productivity growth, though the effect is very modest. Moreover, the degree of
computerization is not significant. In contrast, computerization has had a statistically significant
effect on changes in industry input coefficients.
The paper begins in Section 1, which reviews some of the pertinent literature on the role
of skill change and computerization on productivity changes in the U.S. economy. Section 2
introduces the accounting framework and model. Section 3 presents descriptive statistics on
postwar productivity trends. Descriptive statistics are also presented for key variables that have
shaped the pattern of productivity growth over the postwar period. In Section 4, multivariate
analysis is conducted on the industry level to assess their influence. Concluding remarks are
made in Section 5 of the paper.
1. Review of Previous Literature
Human capital theory views schooling as an investment in skills and hence as a way of
augmenting worker productivity (see, for example, Schultz, 1960, and Becker, 1975). This line of
reasoning leads to growth accounting models in which productivity or output growth is derived
as a function of the change in educational attainment. The early studies on this subject showed
very powerful effects of educational change on economic growth. Griliches (1970) estimated that
the increased educational attainment of the U.S. labor force accounted for one-third of aggregate
technical change between 1940 and 1967. Denison (1979) estimated that about one-fifth of the
growth in U.S. national income per person (NIPPE) employed between 1948 and 1973 could be
attributed to increases in educational levels of the labor force. Jorgenson and Fraumeni (1993)
calculated that improvements in labor quality accounted for one fourth of U.S. economic growth
between 1948 and 1986.
Yet, some anomalies have appeared in this line of inquiry. Denison (1983) in his analysis
of the productivity slowdown in the U.S. between 1973 and 1981, reported that the growth in
national income per person employed (NIPPE) fell by 0.2 percentage points whereas increases in
educational attainment contributed a positive 0.6 percentage points to the growth in NIPPE.
Maddison (1982) reported similar results for other OECD countries for the 1970-1979 period.

-4-

Wolff (2001), using various series on educational attainment among OECD countries, found no
statistically significant effect of the growth in mean years of schooling on the growth in GDP per
capita among OECD countries over the period from 1950 to 1990.
A substantial number of studies, perhaps inspired by Solow's quip, have now examined
the linkage between computerization or Information Technology (IT) in general and productivity
gains. The evidence is mixed. Most of the earlier studies failed to find any excess returns to IT,
over and above the fact that these investments are normally in the form of equipment investment.
These include Franke (1987), who found that the installation of ATMs was associated with a
lowered real return on equity; Bailey and Gordon (1988), who examined aggregate productivity
growth in the U.S. and found no significant contribution of computerization; Loveman (1988),
who reported no productivity gains from IT investment; Parsons, Gotlieb, and Denny (1993),
who estimated very low returns on computer investments in Canadian banks; and Berndt and
Morrison (1995), who found negative correlations between labor productivity growth and hightech capital investment in U.S. manufacturing industries. Wolff (1991) found that the insurance
industry had a negative rate of total factor productivity growth over the 1948-1986 period in the
U.S. even though it ranked fourth among 64 industries in terms of computer investment.
The later studies generally tend to be more positive. Both Siegel and Griliches (1992)
and Steindel (1992) estimated a positive and significant relationship between computer
investment and industry-level productivity growth. Oliner and Sichel (1994) reported a
significant contribution of computers to aggregate U.S. output growth. Lichtenberg (1995)
estimated firm-level production functions and found an excess return to IT equipment and labor.
Siegel (1997), using detailed industry-level manufacturing data for the U.S., found that
computers are an important source of quality change and that, once correcting output measures
for quality change, computerization had a significant positive effect on productivity growth.
Brynjolfsson and Hitt (1996, 1998) found a positive correlation between firm-level
productivity growth and IT investment over the 1987-1994 time period when accompanied by
organizational changes. Lehr and Lichtenberg (1998) used data for U.S. federal government
agencies over the 1987-1992 period and found a significant positive relation between
productivity growth and computer intensity. Lehr and Lichtenberg (1999) investigated firm-level
data among service industries over the 1977-1993 period and also reported evidence that
computers, particularly personal computers, contributed positively and significantly to

-5-

productivity growth. Ten Raa and Wolff (2000), developing a new measure of direct and indirect
productivity gains, found that the computer sector was the leading sector in the U.S. economy
during the 1980s as a source of economy-wide productivity growth. They also found very high
productivity spillovers between the computer-producing sector and sectors using computers. In
their imputation procedure, these large spillovers were attributable to the high rate of productivity
growth within the computer industry.
Sitroh (1998) and Jorgenson and Stiroh (1999, 2000) used a growth accounting
framework to assess the impact of computers on output growth. Jorgenson and Stiroh (1999)
calculated that one sixth of the 2.4 percent annual growth in output can be attributed to computer
outputs, compared to about zero percent over the 1948-1973 period. The effect came from capital
deepening rather than from enhanced productivity growth. A study by Oliner and Sichel (2000)
provides strong evidence for a substantial role of IT in the recent spurt of productivity growth
during the second half of the 1990s. Using aggregate time-series data for the U.S., they found
that both the use of IT in sectors purchasing computers and other forms of Information
Technology, as well as the production of computers, appear to have made an important
contribution to the speed-up of productivity growth in the latter part of the 1990s. Hubbard
(2001) investigated how on-board computer adoption affected capacity utilization in the U.S.
trucking industry between 1992 and 1997. He found that their use improved communications and
resource allocation decisions and led to a 3 percent increase in capacity utilization within the
industry.
One other factor that will be used in the data analysis is research and development. A
large literature, beginning with Mansfield (1965), has now almost universally established a
positive and significant effect of expenditures on research and development (R&D) on
productivity growth (see Griliches, 1979 and 1992, and Mohnen, 1992, for reviews of the
literature.
2. Modeling Framework
I begin with a standard neoclassical production function fj for sector j:
(1)

Xj = Zj fj(KCj, KEj, KSj, L j, Nj, R j )

-6-

where Xj is the (gross) output of sector j, KCj is the input of IT-related capital, KEj is the input of
other machinery and equipment capital goods, KSj is the input of plant and other structures, Lj is
the total labor input, Nj are total intermediate inputs, Rj is the stock of research and development
(R&D) capital, and Z j is a (Hicks-neutral) total factor productivity (TFP) index that shifts the
1

production function of sector j over time. For convenience, I have suppressed the time subscript.
Moreover, capacity utilization and adjustment costs are ignored. It then follows that
(2)

d ln Xj = d ln Zj + εCj d ln KCj + εEj d ln KEj + εSj d ln KSj + εLj d ln L j + ε Nj d ln Nj
+ εRj d ln Rj

where ε represents the output elasticity of each input and d ln Zj is the rate of Hicks-neutral TFP
growth. If we now impose the assumption of competitive input markets and constant returns to
scale, it follows that an input's factor share (αj) will equal its output elasticity. Let us now employ
the standard measure of TFP growth πj for sector j:
(3)

πj ≡ d ln Xj/dt - αCj d ln KCj/dt - αEj d ln KEj/dt - αSj d ln KSj/dt - αLj d ln L j/dt αNj d ln Nj/dt

It then follows that:
(4)

πj = d ln Zj/dt + αRj d ln R j/dt

In particular, in the standard neoclassical model, there is no special place reserved for IT capital
in terms of its effect on TFP growth.
As Stiroh (2002) argues, there are several reasons why we might expect the standard
necoclassical model to fail in the case of the introduction of a radically new technology that
might be captured by IT investment. These include the presence of productivity spillovers from
IT, problems of omitted variables, the presence of embodied technological change, measurement
error in variables, and reverse causality. If for one of these reasons, the output elasticity of IT εCj
1

This is a modified form of the production function used by Stiroh (2002),

-7-

exceeds its measured input share αCj , say by uCj, then
(5)

πj = d ln Zj/dt + αRj d ln R j/dt + uCj d ln KCj/dt

In other words, conventionally measured TFP growth πj will be positively correlated with the
growth in ICT capital.
A similar argument applies to labor productivity growth, LP, defined as:
(6)

LPj ≡ d ln Xj/dt - d ln L j/dt

If we again impose the assumption of competitive input markets and constant returns to scale, it
follows that:
(7)

LPj = d ln Zj/dt + αCj d ln kCj/dt + αEj d ln kEj/dt + αSj d ln kSj/dt + αNj d ln nj/dt +
αRj d ln R j/dt
2

where lower case symbols indicate the amount of the input per worker. If for the reasons cited
above there is a special productivity "kick" from IT investment, then the estimated coefficient of
kCj/dt should exceeds its factor input share.
However, as I indicated in the literature survey in the previous section, very few studies,
with the exception of Griliches and Siegel (1991), have found a direct positive correlation
between industry TFP growth and IT investment. As a result, in this study, I consider other
indicators of the degree of structural change in an industry. These include changes in the
occupational composition of employment and changes in the input and capital composition
within an industry. Productivity growth and changes in input composition usually go hand in
hand. To see this, let me first introduce three new matrices:
A = 45-order matrix of technical interindustry input-output coefficients, where aij
is the amount of input i used per constant dollar of output j.
2

Technically, we impose the assumption of constant returns to scale of the traditional factors of production, so that:
αCj + αEj + αSj + αNj + αLj = 1.

-8-

The technical coefficient (A) matrices were constructed on the basis of current dollar matrices
and sector-specific price deflators. Sectoral price indices for years 1958, 1963, and 1967 were
provided by the Brandeis Economic Research Center and those for 1972 and 1977 from the
Bureau of Economic Analysis worksheets. Deflators for 1982, 1987, 1992, and 1996 were
calculated from the Bureau of Labor Statistics' Historical Output Data Series (obtained on
computer diskette) on the basis of the current and constant dollar series. See the Appendix for
details on sources and methods and a listing of the 45 industries.
C = 45-order matrix of capital coefficients, where cij is the net stock of capital of
type i (in 1992 dollars) used per constant dollar of output j.
The capital matrix in constant dollars was provided by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (see the
Appendix for sources) and is based on price deflators for individual components of the capital
stock (such as computers, industrial machinery, buildings, etc.).
M = occupation-by-industry employment coefficient matrix, where mij shows the
employment of occupation i in industry j as a share of total employment in
industry j.
The employment data are for 267 occupations and 64 industries and are obtained from the
decennial Census of Population for years 1950, 1960, 1970, 1980, and 1990 (see Wolff, 1996, for
details).
Then, since for any input I in sector j, αIj = pI Ij/ pj Xj, where p is the price, I can rewrite
equation (3) as
(8)

πj = - [ Σi pi daij + Σi pi,c dcij + Σi wi dbij ] / pj

where pi is the price of intermediate input i, pi,c is the price of capital input i, bij= mijLj / Xj is the
total employment of occupation i per unit of output in industry j, and wi is the wage paid to
workers in occupation i. In this formulation, it is clear that measured TFP growth reflects
changes in the composition of intermediate inputs, capital inputs, and occupational employment.
Using the multiplication rule for derivatives, we can rewrite equation (8) as:

-9-

(9)

πj = - [ Σi pi daij + Σi pi,c dcij + Σi wiλj dmij + Σi wimij dλj ] / pj

where λj= Lj / Xj. From (5) it follows that in the circumstances enumerated above, there may be a
positive correlation between measures of coefficient changes (such as daij, dcij , and dmij) and IT
investment.
Though productivity growth and changes in input composition are algebraically related,
there are several reasons why they may deviate. First, there are costs of adjustments associated
with radical restructuring of technology, so that there may be a considerable time lag between the
two (see David, 1991, for example). Second, while new technology is generally used to lower
costs and hence increase measured output per unit of input, new technology might be used for
other purposes such as product differentiation or differential pricing. Third, in the case of
services in particular, output measurement problems might prevent us from correctly assessing
industry productivity growth. This problem could, of course, be partly a consequence of product
differentiation and price discrimination. Measures of structural change may therefore provide a
more direct and robust test of the effects of computerization on changes in technology than
standard measures of productivity growth. This is particularly so in the case when a radically new
technology is introduced and the consequent adjustment period is lengthy.
Finally, I include the change in average worker skills in the production function. There
are two possible approaches. Let the effective labor input E = QL, where Q is a measure of
average worker quality (or skills). Then (1) can be rewritten as:
(10)

Xj = Zj f*j(KCj, KEj, KSj, E j, Nj, R j )

Again assuming competitive input markets and constant returns to scale (to the traditional factors
of production) and still using (6) to define labor productivity growth, we obtain:
(11)

LPj = d ln Zj/dt + αCj d ln kCj/dt + αEj d ln kEj/dt + αSj d ln kSj/dt + αNj d ln nj/dt +
αLj d ln Qj/dt + αRj d ln R j/dt

In this formulation, the rate of labor productivity growth should increase directly with the rate of
growth of average worker quality or skills.

-10-

The second approach derives from the standard human capital earnings function. From
Mincer (1974),
Ln w = ao + a1S
where w is the wage, S is the worker's level of schooling (or skills), and a0 and a1 are constants. It
follows that
(dLn w)/dt = ai(dS/dt)
By definition, the wage share in sector j is αLj = wj L j/Xj. Under the assumptions of competitive
input markets and constant returns to scale, αLj = εLj, a constant. Therefore, X j/Lj = wj/εLj. In this
case, effective labor input E is given by the equation: Ln E = Q + ln L. It follows from (6) that
(12)

LPj = d ln Zj/dt + αCj d ln kCj/dt + αEj d ln kEj/dt + αSj d ln kSj/dt + αNj d ln nj/dt +
αLj dQj/dt + αRj d ln R j/dt

In other words, the rate of labor productivity growth should be proportional to the change in the
level of average worker quality or skills over the period.
3. Descriptive Statistics
A. Technological Change
Table 1 shows the annual rate of TFP growth for 12 major sectors over the decades of the
1950s, 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s. The periods are chosen to correspond to the employment by
occupation and industry matrices. Factor shares are based on period averages the (the TornqvistDivisia index. The labor input is based on Persons Engaged in Production (PEP), the number of
full-time and part-time employees plus the number of self-employed persons, and the capital
3

input is measured by fixed non-residential net capital stock (1992 dollars). See the Appendix for
details on sources and methods and a listing of the 45 industries.
3

A second index of TFP growth was also used, with Full-Time Equivalent Employees (FTE) as the
measure of labor input. Results are very similar on the basis of this measure and are not reported below.

-11-

As shown in Table 1 (also see Figure 1), the annual rate of TFP growth for the entire
economy fell from 1.4 percent per year in the 1950s to 1.0 percent per year in the 1960s.
plummeted to 0.4 percent per year in the 1970s (the "productivity slowdown" period) but
4

subsequently rose to 0.8 percent in the 1980s. 1 In the goods-producing industries (including
communications, transportation, and utilities), there was generally a modest slowdown in TFP
productivity growth between the 1950-1960 and 1960-1970 periods, followed by a sharp decline
in the 1970s (with agriculture, mining, and construction recording negative productivity growth)
and then a substantial recovery in the 1980s. The major exceptions are durable manufacturing
and communications, whose TFP growth rate rose between the 1960s and 1970s. TFP growth in
the goods-producing industries as a whole averaged 2.1 percent per year in the 1950-60 period,
fell to 1.5 percent per year in the 1960s and then collapsed to 0.3 percent in the 1980s before
climbing back to 2.0 percent per year in the 1980s.
TFP growth has been much lower in the service sector than among goods-producing
industries -- 0.48 percent per year over the 1950-90 period for the former compared to 1.48
percent per year for the latter. The pattern over time is also generally different for the service
industries. TFP growth in wholesale and retail trade had a similar pattern to goods industries -strong in the 1950-60 period (1.1 percent per year) before falling to 0.6 percent in the 1960s,
turning negative in the next decade, and then rebounding to 0.9 percent per year in the 1980s.
However, in finance, insurance, and real estate (FIRE, for short), general services, and the
government sector, TFP growth dropped between the 1950s and the 1960s, recovered somewhat
in the 1970s, and then slipped once again in the 1980s, turning negative in each case. Overall,
annual TFP growth among all services fell monotonically between the 1950s and 1980s, from 0.7
to 0.1 percent.
As noted above, I use three measures of structural change The first measure is the degree
to which the occupational structure shifts over time. For this, I employ an index of similarity. The
similarity index for industry j between two time periods 1 and 2 is given by:
4

In November of 1999, the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) released a major revision of the
U.S. national accounts. The new BEA data showed a faster rise in real GDP and hence labor productivity
during the 1990s than the older data indicated. One major element of the revision is the treatment of
software expenses as a capital good rather than as an intermediate purchase. However, the BEA has not
released the corresponding revised capital stock data. As a result, the statistics in this paper are based on
the older BEA national accounts data.

-12-

1

2

Σi m ijm ij
12
(13) SI = --------------------------1 2
2 2 1/2
[Σi (m ij) Σi (m ij) ]
t1

t2

The index SI is the cosine between the two vectors s and s and varies from 0 -- the two vectors
are orthogonal -- to 1 -- the two vectors are identical. The index of occupational dissimilarity,
DI, is defined as:
(14)

12

12

DIOCCUP = 1 - SI

Descriptive statistics for DIOCCUP are shown in Table 2. The DIOCCUP index for the
total economy, after rising slightly from 0.050 in the 1950-1960 period to 0.056 in the 1960-1970
decade, dropped to 0.019 in the 1970s but then surged to 0.095 in the 1980s, its highest level of
the four decades. These results confirm anecdotal evidence about the substantial degree of
industrial restructuring during the 1980s. Similar patterns are evident for the major sectors as
well. In fact, seven out of the twelve major sectors experienced their most rapid degree of
occupational change during the 1980s. The three sectors that experienced the greatest
occupational restructuring over the four decades were utilities (0.101), FIRE (0.068), and
communications (0.066). Occupational change was particularly low in agriculture (0.005),
mining (0.028), and transportation (0.029), and construction (0.031).
It is also apparent that the association between the DIOCCUP index and industry TFP
growth is quite loose. Though the degree of occupational restructuring has been somewhat
greater in the goods producing industries than in services (average scores of 0.062 and 0.045,
respectively, for the 1950-1990 period), the difference is not nearly as marked as for TFP growth
(annual rates of 1.5 percent and 0.5 percent, respectively, over the same period). Moreover, while
FIRE ranks second highest in terms of occupational change, it is the fourth lowest in terms of
TFP growth. In contrast, while agriculture ranks fourth highest in terms of TFP growth, it ranks
lowest in terms of occupational restructuring. The DIOCCUP index provides a separate and
relatively independent dimension of the degree of technological change occurring in an industry.
A second index reflects changes in the technical interindustry coefficients within an
industry:

-13-

1

(15)

2

Σi a ija ij
DIACOEFF = 1 - -----------------------1 2
2 2 1/2
[Σi (a ij) Σi (a ij) ]
12

Figures, shown in Table 3, indicate that the DIACOEFF index for the total economy, after
falling from 0.036 in the 1950-1960 period to 0.027 in the 1960-1970 decade, rose to 0.030 in the
1970s and again to 0.033 in the 1980s. Eight of the twelve major sectors also recorded an
increase in the degree of change in their interindustry coefficients between the 1960s and the
1980s. The two sectors with the greatest interindustry coefficient change over the four decades
were communications (0.129) and utilities (0.075), and mining (0.067), and the two with the least
were agriculture (0.007) and durable manufacturing (0.013).
The correlation between the DIACOEFF index and industry TFP growth is again quite
small. While TFP growth was much higher in goods-producing industries than in services,
DIACOEFF was higher for services than the goods sector. While agriculture, durable
manufacturing, and non-durable manufacturing all ranked high in terms of TFP growth, they
were the three lowest in terms of coefficient changes. The DIACOEFF index provides another
independent indicator of the degree of industry technological change.
A third index measures the change in capital coefficients within an industry:
1

2

Σi c ijc ij
12
(16) DIKCOEFF = 1 - -----------------------1 2
2 2 1/2
[Σi (c ij) Σi (c ij) ]
Table 4 shows that the DIKCOEFF index for the total economy, after declining from
0.020 in the 1950-1960 period to 0.014 in the 1960-1970 decade, increased to 0.018 in the 1970s
and to 0.028 in the 1980s. DIKCOEFF rose in nine of the eleven major sectors (capital stock by
type is not available for the government sector) between the 1960s and the 1980s. General
services and communications showed the greatest change in capital coefficients over the 1950-90
period, and agriculture and utilities the least. Here, again, while TFP growth was much higher in
goods than in service industries, DIKCOEFF was higher for the latter than the former. Moreover,
while agriculture, durable manufacturing, and non-durable manufacturing were all among the top
industries in terms of TFP growth, they were among the lowest in terms of capital coefficient
changes.

-14-

B. Changes in Skills and Educational Attainment
As discussed in the previous two sections, the human capital model predicts a positive
relation between changes in average education or average skill levels and productivity growth.
Figures on mean years of schooling by industry are derived directly from decennial Census of
Population data for years 1950, 1960, 1970, 1980, and 1990.
Educational attainment has been widely employed to measure the skills supplied in the
workplace. However, the usefulness of schooling measures is limited by such problems as
variations in the quality of schooling both over time and among areas, the use of credentials as a
screening mechanism, and inflationary trends in credential and certification requirements. Indeed,
evidence presented in Wolff (1996) suggests that years of schooling may not closely correspond
to the technical skill requirements of the jobs.
As a result, I also make use of the fourth (1977) edition of the Dictionary of Occupational
Titles (DOT) for my direct measures of workplace skills. For some 12,000 job titles, it provides a
variety of alternative measures of job-skill requirements based upon data collected between 1966
and 1974. This probably provides the best source of detailed measures of skill requirements
covering the period 1950 to 1990. Three measures of workplace skills are developed from this
source for each of 267 occupations, as follows (see Wolff, 1996, for more details):
1. Substantive Complexity (SC) is a composite measure of skills derived from a factor
analytic test of DOT variables. It was found to be correlated with General Educational
Development, Specific Vocational Preparation (training time requirements), Data (synthesizing,
coordinating, analyzing), and three worker aptitudes - Intelligence (general learning and
reasoning ability), Verbal and Numerical.
2. Interactive Skills (IS) can be measured, at least roughly, by the DOT "People" variable,
which, on a scale of 0-8, identifies whether the job requires mentoring (0), negotiating (1),
instructing (2), supervising (3), diverting (4), persuading (5), speaking-signaling (6), serving (7)
or taking instructions (8). For comparability with the other measures, this variable is rescaled so
that its value ranges from 0 to 10 and reversed so that mentoring is now scored 10 and taking
instructions is scored 0.
3. Motor Skills (MS) is another DOT factor-based variable. Also scaled from 0 to 10, this
measure reflects occupational scores on motor coordination, manual dexterity and "things" - job
requirements that range from setting up machines and precision working to feeding machines and

-15-

handling materials.
4. Composite Skills (CS). I also introduce a measure of composite skill, CS, which is
based on a regression of hourly wages in 1970 on SC, MS, and IS scores across the 267
occupations. The resulting formula is:
CS = 0.454 SC + 0.093 MS + 0.028 IS
SC is the dominant factor in determining relative wages in 1970, followed by MS and then IS.

5

Average industry skill scores are computed as a weighted average of the skill scores of
each occupation, with the occupational employment mix of the industry as weights.
Computations are performed for 1950, 1960, 1970, 1980, and 1990 on the basis of consistent
occupation by industry employment matrices for each of these years constructed from decennial
Census data. There are 267 occupations and 64 industries.
Figure 1 provides some evidence on trends in both cognitive skills (Substantive
Complexity), mean education of the work force, and the percentage of adults with a college
degree or more. Cognitive skills do not appear to be closely correlated with TFP growth. The
average annual change in the SC index between 1947 and 1973 was .0156 points, while TFP
growth averaged 1.4 percent per year, and .0170 points between 1973 and 1997, when TFP grew
at only 0.6 percent per year. Moreover, the growth of college graduates in the adult population
was much greater in the later period, averaging 0.45 percentage points per year, than in the earlier
period, averaging only 0.28 percentage points per year. Mean schooling, on the other hand, tracks
TFP more closely. The average annual change in mean education was .096 years over the 19481973 period and .053 years over the 1973-1997 period.
There is also very little cross-industry association between skill levels and productivity
growth. As shown in Table 5, cognitive skill levels (SC) were, on average, higher in the service
sector than the goods sector. In the 1980s, employees in FIRE had the highest average SC score
5

The regression results for 1970 hourly wages (HOURWAGE) are as follows:
2

HOURWAGE = 1.145 + 0.454 SC + 0.093 MS + 0.028 IS N=267, R = 0.535
(4.78) (12.1)
(2.37)
(0.70)
with t-ratios shown in parentheses. See Chapter3, Section 2, for more discussion and analysis, and for
corresponding regression results for other years.

-16-

(5.25), followed by general services (4.85), communications (4.74), and the government sector
(4.61). On the other hand, the growth in mean SC was somewhat higher in goods industries (0.53
points) than in services (0.43 points) between 1950 and 1990.
The pattern is very similar for the mean education of the workforce. Average schooling
was higher in services than the goods sector and was led by general services (13.7 in 1980-1990),
followed by FIRE (13.5), government (13.4), and communications (13.3). The change in mean
education over the four decades was also larger in the goods sector (3.4 years) than in the service
sector (2.6 years).
C. Investment in OCA
My measure of IT capital is the stock of office, computing, and accounting equipment
(OCA) in 1992 dollars, which is provided in the Bureau of Economic Analysis' capital data (see
the Appendix for sources). These figures are based on the BEA's hedonic price deflator for
computers and computer-related equipment. As shown in Table 6 (also see Figure 2), investment
in office, computing, and accounting equipment (OCA) per person engaged in production (PEP)
grew more than nine-fold between the 1950s and the 1990s, from $28 (in 1992 dollars) per PEP
to $263. Indeed, by 1997, it had reached $2,178 per worker. By the 1980s, the most OCAintensive sector by far was FIRE, at $1,211 per employee, followed by utilities ($628), mining
($393), durables manufacturing ($345), and communications ($285). On the whole, the overall
service sector has been investing more intensively in computer equipment than the goods sector,
but this was largely due to the very heavy investments made by FIRE. The trade and general
service sectors were actually below average in terms of OCA investment per PEP. Total
investment in equipment, machinery, and instruments (including OCA) per PEP was more than
fourteen times greater than OCA investment even in the 1980s, though by 1997 it accounted for
almost exactly one-third of total equipment investment.
On the surface, at least, there does not appear to be much relation between OCA intensity
and TFP growth. While investment in OCA per worker rose almost continuously over the
postwar period, TFP growth tracked downward, at least until the early 1980s (see Figure 2).
Moreover, the sector with the highest amount of OCA investment per worker, FIRE, averaged
close to zero in terms of TFP growth over the postwar period (see Figure 3).
On the other hand, OCA investment seems to line up well with measures of structural
change. As shown in Figure 4, the sectors with two highest rates of investment in OCA per PEP

-17-

over the 1950-1990 period are FIRE and utilities, which also rank in the top two in terms of the
average value of DIOCCUP over the same period. The sector with the lowest investment in OCA
per worker is agriculture, which also ranks lowest in terms of DIOCCUP. Utilities ranks highest
in terms of DIACOEFF over the 1950-1990 period and second highest in terms of OCA
investment per employee, while agriculture ranks lowest in both dimensions (see Figure 5). The
association is not quite as tight between OCA investment and DIKCOEFF (see Figure 6).
However, here again agriculture ranks lowest in both dimensions.
D. R&D
As shown in Figure 7, the ratio of R&D expenditures to total GDP has remained
relatively constant over time, at least in comparison to the wide fluctuations in TFP growth. It
averaged 2.0 percent in the 1960s, fell to 1.5 percent in the 1970s, recovered to 1.9 percent in the
1980s and remained at this level in the period from 1990-1997. The pattern is very similar for
individual industries, with the notable exceptions of industrial machinery (including OCA) and
instruments, which show a continuous rise over the three periods. The ratio of R&D to sales was
considerably higher in durable manufacturing than nondurables -- almost a factor of three. In the
1980-90 period, it ranged from a low of 0.4 percent in food products to a high of 18.3 percent in
other transportation (including aircraft). The other major R&D-intensive industries, in rank order,
are instruments, electric and electronic equipment, industrial machinery, chemicals, and motor
vehicles.
An alternative indicator of R&D activity is the number of full-time equivalent scientists
and engineers engaged in R&D per 1,000 full-time equivalent employees. Like the ratio of R&D
expenditures to GDP, this series shows a drop between the 1960s and 1970s, from 5.4 to 4.8, and
a recovery in the 1980s to 6.4 (see Figure 7). However, it shows a further increase to 7.3 in the
1990-1996 period. This indicator also gives a very similar industry ranking. The leading
industries in the 1980s, in rank order, are: other transportation, chemicals, electric and electronic
equipment, industrial machinery, instruments, and motor vehicles.
R&D expenditures does a much better job in lining up with TFP growth than either OCA
or equipment investment. Both R&D intensity and TFP growth fell between the 1960s and 1970s
and then recovered in the 1980s. Moreover, there is a strong cross-industry correlation between
TFP growth and R&D intensity -- for example, both R&D intensity and TFP growth are higher
in durable manufacturing than in nondurable manufacturing.

-18-

4. Regression Analysis.
In the first regression, the dependent variable is the rate of industry TFP growth. The
independent variables R&D expenditures as a percent of net sales and the growth in the stock of
OCA capital. The statistical technique is based on pooled cross-section time-series regressions on
industries and for the decades that correspond with the decennial Census data. The sample
6

consists of 45 industries and 3 time periods (1960-70, 1970-80, and 1980-90). The estimating
equation:
(17) TFPGRTHj = β0 + β1 RDSALESj + β2 OCAGRTHj + vj
where TFPGRTHj is the rate of TFP growth in sector j, RDSALESj is the ratio of R&D
expenditures to net sales in sector j, OCAGRTH is the rate of growth of the stock of OCA
capital, vj is a stochastic error term, and the time subscript has been suppressed for notational
convenience. It is assumed that the vjt are independently distributed but may not be identically
distributed. The regression results reported below use the White procedure for a
heteroscedasticity-consistent covariance matrix.
From (4) it follows that the constant β0 is the pure rate of (Hicks-neutral) technological
progress. From Griliches (1980) and Mansfield (1980), the coefficient of RDSALES is
interpreted as the rate of return of R&D, under the assumption that the (average) rate of return to
7

R&D is equalized across sectors. Time dummies for the periods 1970-80 and 1980-90 are
introduced to allow for period-specific effects on productivity growth not attributable to R&D or
6

The 1950-60 period can not be included in the regression analysis because the R&D series begins fully
only in 1958.

7

The proof is that RDSALES = dR/X. From (2) and (4) it follows that:
π = εR (dR/R) = εR (dR/X)(X/R) = (εRX/R)(dR/X)

Therefore,

β1 = (εRX/R) = (dX/X)(X/R)/(dR/R) = dX/dR.
The term dX/dR is the marginal productivity of R&D capital, which is equivalent tot he rate of return to R&D.

-19-

OCA investment. A dummy variable identifying the 10 service industries is also included to
partially control for measurement problems in service sector output.
A. Basic Regression Results
Regression results for the full sample are shown in Columns 1 and 2 of Table 7. The
constant term ranges from 0.015 to 0.016. These estimates are comparable to previous estimates
of the Hick-neutral rate of technological change (see Griliches, 1979, for example). The
coefficient of the ratio of R&D expenditures to net sales is significant at the five percent level.
The estimated rate of return to R&D ranges from 0.20 to 0.21. These estimates are about average
compared to previous work on the subject (see Mohnen, 1992, for example, for a review of
previous studies).

8

The coefficient of the growth of OCA is negative but not statistically significant. The
same result holds for two alternative measures of IT, the growth in the stock of computers and
the stock of OCA plus communications equipment (OCACM). As noted above, these
specifications really measure the excess returns to computer investment over and above that to
capital in general, since TFP growth already controls for the growth of total capital stock per
worker. The coefficient of the dummy variable for service industries is significant at the one
percent level. Its value is -0.017. the coefficient of the dummy variable for the 1970-80 period is
negative (significant in one of the two cases) and that for the 1980-90 period is positive (but not
significant).
Because of difficulties in measuring output in many service industries, regressions were
9

also performed separately for the 31 good producing industries (see Appendix Table 1). The
coefficient values and significance levels of the constant term, R&D intensity, the dummy
variable for services, and the two time period dummy variables are strikingly similar to those for
the all-industry regressions (see specifications 3 and 4 of Table 7). The coefficient of the growth
10

in computer stock remains negative but insignificant (specification 4).
8

The coefficient of the number of full-time equivalent scientists and engineers engaged in R&D per
employee is also significant in every case, typically at the one percent level. In the tables, I present results
using R&D expenditures because it is more conventional.

9

Since output measurement problems are less likely to affect transportation, communications, and
utilities, they are classified as goods producing industries here.

10

Results are again similar when the sample of industries is further restricted to the 20 manufacturing industries
(results not shown).

-20-

In the next two regressions, I focus on the "computer age", the period from 1970 onward.
Does the effect of computerization on productivity growth now show up for this restricted
sample? The answer is still negative, as shown in Specifications 5 and 6 of Table 7. The
coefficients of the other two computerization variables, the rate of growth in the stock of
computers and that of OCACM, are also insignificant (results not shown). R&D intensity
remains significant in these regressions, and the estimated return to R&D is higher, between 34
and 35 percent. The same results for computerization (and R&D investment) are found when the
sample is further restricted to the 1980-1990 period.
The seventh specification in Table 7 is based on a pooled sample of observations for the
1977-87 and 1987-97 periods, while the eighth is restricted to the 1987-97 period. As before, the
coefficient of the growth of OCA per worker is negative but not significant. Likewise, the
coefficients of the rate of growth in the stock of OCACM per employee, and the rate of growth of
computers per employee are insignificant (results not shown). In these regressions, the coefficient
of R&D intensity remains significant but is somewhat lower (a range of 0.13 to 0.17, while the
coefficient of the service dummy variable also stays significant but is higher in absolute value (a
range of -0.23 to -0.032).
B. Regression Results with Worker Skills
Table 8 shows the regression results for the various measures of worker skills and for the
two alternative formulations. Following (11) and (12), I use labor productivity growth as the
dependent variable. The first specification does not include skill change but splits total capital
into OCA and other capital. The coefficient of the growth of OCA per worker is virtually zero
and the t-statistic is close to zero. This provides further corroboration of a lack of a special effect
of OCA investment on productivity growth.
In the second specification, I include the annual change of the three measures of
workplace skill: Substantive Complexity (SC), Interactive Skills (IS), and Motor Skills (MS). I
also include the growth of total capital per worker. None of the skill variables is statistically
significant in this regression. The coefficients of the growth of IS and MS are, in fact, negative.
However, when the growth in cognitive skills is included by itself, its coefficient becomes
marginally significant (at the ten percent level). Its elasticity is 0.13. The growth in the
Composite Skill index CS is also significant at the ten percent level (with a higher t-ratio) and its
elasticity is 0.20 (specification 4). The best fit (highest adjusted R-square) occurs with the use of

-21-

the Composite Skill variable. The coefficient of the growth in mean schooling is also positive,
with an elasticity of 0.11, but not statistically significant (specification 5).
Estimated coefficients for the change in mean skills and mean schooling are not as
significant as those for the corresponding growth rates (specifications 6 and 7). None of the
coefficients is even close to significance. These results suggest that the labor productivity growth
is more closely related to the growth in worker schools rather than to their absolute change. This
set of results remains robust among alternative samples -- goods-producing industries only and
for the 1970-1990 period.

11

In the set of regressions shown in Table 8, R&D intensity is significant at the ten percent
level and its estimated value is somewhat lower than in the corresponding TFP regressions
(Table 7). The coefficient of the dummy variable for services is also slightly lower (in absolute
value) than in the TFP regressions. The coefficient of the growth of total capital per worker is in
the range of 0.24 to 0.25, somewhat lower than its income share, and is significant at the five
percent level in all cases.
As discussed in the Introduction, Brynjolfsson and Hitt (1996, 1998) found a positive
correlation between firm-level productivity growth and IT investment when the introduction of
IT was accompanied by organizational changes. This finding suggests that interaction effects may
exist between OCA investment and changes in occupational composition. This was investigated
by adding an interaction term between the growth of OCA per worker and DIOCCUP to the labor
productivity regression equation derived from (11). The regression was estimated for the full
sample of industries over both the 1960-90 and the 1970-90 periods and for goods industries only
over the two sets of periods. The coefficient of the interaction term is statistically insignificant in
12

all cases and actually negative in about half the cases.
C. Other Indicators of Technological Activity

In the last set of regressions, shown in Table 9, measures of structural change are used as
dependent variables. As before, the statistical technique is based on pooled cross-section time11

Results remain almost unchanged when an alternative measure of labor productivity growth, based on
Full-time equivalent employees (FTE) instead of Persons engaged in production, is used as the dependent
variable.
12

Regressions were also estimated with interaction terms between the growth of OCA per worker and the growth or
change in SC< CS, and mean education. None of these interaction terms was found to be statistically significant.

-22-

series regressions on industries and for the decades that correspond with the decennial Census
13

data. The sample consists of 44 industries and 2 time periods (1970-80, and 1980-90). The
basic estimating equation is of the same form as equation (17), with R&D intensity and the
growth of OCA stock as independent variables. Dummy variables are also included for the
service sector and the 1970-80 period. Moreover, following (11), I also use the growth of OCA
per worker and OCA investment per worker as independent variables in place of the growth of
total OCA stock.
The first of the dependent variables is the change in occupational composition
(DIOCCUP). In contrast to the TFP regressions, the coefficient of investment in OCA per worker
is positive and significant at the one percent level in the regression without the service and time
period dummy variables and positive and significant at the five percent level when the dummy
variables are included. The coefficients of the alternative computerization measures, the growth
in OCA per employee, investment in OCACM per worker, and the rate of growth in the stock of
OCACM per employee, are also significant at the one or five percent level (results not shown).
However, the best fit is provided by investment in OCA per worker. . The results also show that
R&D intensity is not a significant explanatory factor in accounting for changes in occupational
composition. Nor is the dummy variable for services. However, the time period dummy variable
is significant at the five percent level.

14

The second variable is DIACOEFF, a measure of the degree of change in interindustry
technical coefficients. In this case, too, computerization is significant at the one percent level
with the predicted positive coefficient. The best fit is provided by investment in OCA per worker.
The coefficient of R&D intensity is positive but not statistically significant, as is the coefficient
of the dummy variable for services. The coefficient of the time dummy variable is virtually zero.
The third index of structural change is DIKCOEFF, a measure of how much the
composition of capital has changed over the period. In this case, it is not possible to use
investment in OCA as an independent variable, since, by construction, it will be correlated with
13

The 1950-60 and 1960-70 periods are not included in the regression analysis because OCA investment
was very small during these time period. The government sector, moreover, cannot be included because of
a lack of data on OCA investment.
14

It is not possible to use changes in skill levels or education as independent variables, since, by
definition, they would be associated with shifts in occupational composition.

-23-

changes in the capital coefficients. Instead, I use the initial level of OCA per worker. The
computerization variable has the predicted positive sign and is significant, though only at the ten
percent level. The coefficient of R&D is positive but insignificant. However, the dummy variable
for services is positive and significant at the one percent level. The coefficient of the dummy
variable for 1970-80 is negative but not significant.
In sum, computerization is found to be strongly linked to occupational restructuring and
changes in material usage and weakly linked to changes in the composition of capital. With
regard to the first result, it might be appropriate to say a few words said about the construction of
industry OCA by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The allocation of investment in OCA is
based partly on the occupational composition of an industry. As a result, a spurious correlation
may be introduced between industry-level OCA investment and the skill mix of an industry. The
cross-industry correlation between OCA per worker and the mean SC level is 0.48 in 1970, 0.39
in 1980, and 0.56 in 1990, while that between OCA per worker and the mean schooling level of
an industry is 0.46 in 1970, 0.29 in 1980, and 0.37 in 1990.
However, there is no indication that this allocation procedure should affect the change in
occupational composition and hence introduce a spurious correlation between OCA investment
and the DIOCCUP variable. Moreover, the time-series evidence shows a marked acceleration in
the degree of occupational change between the 1970s and 1980s, when OCA investment rose
substantially. Regressions of the change in occupational composition (DIOCCUP) on both the
growth of equipment per worker and the growth of total capital per worker fail to yield
significant coefficients. As a result, we can surmise that this finding is on solid ground.
5. Conclusion and Interpretation of Results
Three sets of findings emerge from the regression analysis. First, the regression results
provide some modest evidence that skill growth is positively linked with productivity growth.
The coefficients of the growth in both cognitive skills (SC) and the Composite Skill index are
marginally significant (at the ten percent level). The effects are not large -- elasticities of 0.125
and 0.202, respectively. Between 1947 and 1997, cognitive skills have grown at an average
annual rate of 0.41 percent, and Composite Skills by 0.33 percent. The growth of cognitive skills
over this period would have added .05 percentage points to the growth of annual labor
productivity, while the growth of Composite Skills would have added 0.07 percentage points. On

-24-

the other hand, the coefficient of the growth of the mean education of the work force, while
positive, is not statistically significant. Its estimated elasticity is 0.110. Since mean education
grew, on average, by 0.69 percent per year over the 1947-1997 period, its growth would have
added 0.07 percentage points to annual labor productivity growth.
These findings appear to be inconsistent with growth accounting models, which have
attributed a substantial portion of the growth in U.S. productivity to increases in schooling levels
(see Section 1). The conflict stems from methodological differences in the two techniques.
Growth accounting simply assigns to schooling (or measures of labor quality) a (positive) role in
productivity growth based on the share of labor in total income. In contrast, in regression analysis
an estimation procedure is used to determine whether a variable such as education is a significant
factor in productivity growth.
The findings on the role of education in productivity growth also appear to be at variance
with the standard human capital model. There are several possible reasons. First, the causal
relation between productivity and schooling may be the reverse of what is normally assumed. In
particular, as per capita income rises within a country, schooling opportunities increase, and more
and more students may seek a college education (see Griliches, 1996, for a discussion of the
endogeneity of education). Second, the skills acquired in formal education, particularly at the
university level, may not be relevant to the work place. Rather, higher education may perform a
screening function and a university degree may serve employers mainly as a signal of potential
productive ability (see Arrow, 1973, or Spence, 1973). As enrollment rates rise, screening or
educational credentials may gain in importance, and a higher proportion of university graduates
may become over-educated relative to the actual skills required in the workplace.
A third possibility is that university education may be associated with rent-seeking
activities rather than lead directly to productive ones. This may be true for many professional
workers, such as lawyers, accountants, advertising personnel, and brokers. A fourth possible
explanation is the increasing absorption of university graduates by "cost disease" sectors
characterized by low productivity growth, such as health, teaching, law, and business (see
Baumol, Blackman, and Wolff, 1989). These are essentially labor activities, and, as such, are not
subject to the types of automation and mechanization that occur in manufacturing and other
goods-producing industries. Moreover, these industries may be subject to output measurement
problems, particularly in regard to quality change.

-25-

Second, there is no evidence that computer investment is positively linked to TFP growth.
In other words, there is no residual correlation between computer investment and TFP growth
over and above the inclusion of OCA as normal capital equipment in the TFP calculation. This
result holds not only for the 1960-1990 period but also for the 1970-1990, 1980-1990, 19771997, and 1987-1997 periods. The result also holds among exclusively goods-producing
industries and among exclusively manufacturing industries. This finding is not inconsistent with
recent work on the subject. Oliner and Sichel (2000), for example, found a strong effect of
computers on productivity growth only beginning in the mid-1990s, which is beyond my period
of analysis.
Third, in contrast, computerization is strongly and positively associated with other
dimensions of structural change. These include occupational restructuring and changes in the
composition of intermediate inputs. The evidence is a bit weaker for its effects on changes in the
composition of industry capital stock.
The bottom line is that the diffusion of IT appears to have "shaken up" the U.S. economy,
beginning in the 1970s. However, it is a technological revolution that shows up more strongly in
measures of structural change rather than in terms of productivity, if the previous literature is a
good guide on the latter issue. In particular, the strongest results of the effects of OCA on
productivity growth are found for the late 1990s in the U.S. My results seem to indicate that
OCA has had strong effects on changes in occupational composition and input structure dating
from the early 1970s.
These two sets of results might reflect the high adjustment costs associated with the
introduction of new technology. The paradigmatic shift from electromechanical automation to
information technologies might require major changes in the organizational structure of
companies before the new technology can be realized in the form of measured productivity gains
(see, David, 1991, for greater elaboration of this argument). The results on computerization are
also consistent with an alternative interpretation of its role in modern industry. The argument is
that a substantial amount of new technology (particularly, Information Technology) may be used
for product differentiation rather than productivity enhancement. Computers allow for greater
diversification of products, which, in turn, also allows for greater price discrimination (e.g.,
airline pricing systems) and the ability to extract a large portion of consumer surplus. Greater
product diversity might increase firm profits, though not necessarily its productivity. Some

-26-

evidence on the production differentiation effects of computers is provided by Chakraborty and
Kazarosian (1999) for the U.S. trucking industry (for example, speed of delivery versus average
load).

-27-

References
Bailey, Martin, and Robert Gordon (1988), "The Productivity Slowdown, Measurement
Issues, and the Explosion in Computer Power," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 2,
pp. 347-432.
Baumol, William J., Sue Anne Batey Blackman, and Edward N. Wolff (1989),
Productivity and American Leadership: The Long View, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Becker, Gary S. (1975), Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, 2nd
edition, (New York: Columbia University Press and National Bureau of Economic Research).
Berndt, Ernst R. and Catherine J. Morrison (1995), "High-tech Capital Formation and
Economic Performance in U.S. Manufacturing Industries," Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 69, pp.
9-43.
Brynjolfsson, Eric, and Lorin Hitt (1996), "Computers and Productivity Growth: FirmLevel Evidence, "mimeo, MIT Sloan School, July.
Brynjolfsson, Eric, and Lorin Hitt (1998), "Information Technology and Organizational
Design: Evidence from Micro Data", mimeo, MIT Sloan School, January.
Chakraborty, Arreya, and Mark Kazarosian (1999), "Product Differentiation and the Use
of Information Technology: Evidence from the Trucking Industry," NBER Working Paper 7222,
July.
David, Paul A. (1991), "Computer and Dynamo: The Modern Productivity Paradox in a
Not-Too-Distant Mirror," in Technology and Productivity: The Challenge for Economic Policy,
OECD, pp. 315-348.
Denison, Edward F.(1979), Accounting for Slower Economic Growth: The United States
in the 1970s, Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
-------, (1983), "The Interruption of Productivity Growth in the United States," Economic
Journal Vol. 93, pp. 56-77.
Franke, R.H. (1989), "Technological Revolutions and Productivity Decline: The Case of
U.S. Banks," in T. Forester ed., Computers in the Human Context: Information Technology,
Productivity, and People, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Griliches, Zvi (1970), "Notes on the Role of Education in Production Functions and
Growth Accounting," in W. Lee Hansen editor, Education, Income, and Human Capital, Studies
in Income and Wealth 35, New York, NY: National Bureau of Economic Research and Columbia
University Press, pp. 71-115.
--------- (1979), "Issues in Assessing the Contribution of Research and Development to

-28-

Productivity Growth," Bell Journal of Economics, 10 (1), Spring, pp. 92-116.
--------- (1980), "R&D and the Productivity Slowdown," American Economic Review,
Vol. 70, No. 2, May, pp. 343-347.
--------- (1992), "The Search for R&D Spillovers," Scandinavian Journal of Economics,
94, pp. 29-47.
--------- (1996), "Education, Human Capital, and Growth: A personal Perspective," NBER
Working Paper 5426, January.
Hubbard, Thomas N. (2001), "Information, Decisions, and Productivity: On-Board
Computers and Capacity Utilization in Trucking," mimeo, March 26.
Jorgenson, Dale W., and Barbara M. Fraumeni (1993), "Education and Productivity
Growth in a Market Economy," Atlantic Economic Journal Vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 1-25.
Jorgenson, Dale W., and Kevin J. Stiroh (1999), "Information Technology and Growth,"
American Economic Review, Vol. 89, No. 2, May, , pp. 109-115.
Jorgenson, Dale W., and Kevin J. Stiroh (2000), "Raising the Speed Limit: U.S.
Economic Growth in the Information Age," Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, No. 1, pp.
125-211.
Lawson, Anne M. (1997), "Benchmark Input-Output Accounts for the U.S. Economy,
1992," Survey of Current Business, Vol. 77, No. 11, November, pp. 36-83.
Lehr, William, and Frank Lichtenberg (1998), "Computer Use and productivity Growth in
US Federal Government Agencies, 1987-92", Journal of Industrial Economics, Vol. 44, No. 2,
June, pp. 257-279.
Lehr, William, and Frank Lichtenberg (1999), "Information technology and its impact on
productivity: firm-level evidence from government and private data sources, 1977-1993",
Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 32, No. 2, April, pp. 335-362.
Lichtenberg, Frank R. (1995), "The Output Contribution of Computer equipment and
Personnel: A Firm Level Analysis," Economics of Innovation and New Technology, Vol. 3, No.
4, pp. 201-217.
Loveman, G.W. (1988), "An Assessment of the Productivity Impact of Information
Technologies," in Management in the 1990s, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Maddison, Angus (1982), Phases of Capitalist Development, Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press.
Mansfield, Edwin (1965), "Rates of Return from Industrial Research and Development,"

-29-

American Economic Review, 55 (2), May, 310-322.
--------- (1980), "Basic Research and Productivity Increase in Manufacturing," American
Economic Review, 70 (5), December, 863-873.
Mincer, Jacob (1974), Schooling, Experience, and Earnings, (New York: National
Bureau of Economic Research).
Mohnen, Pierre (1992),The Relationship between R&D and Productivity Growth in
Canada and Other Major Industrialized Countries, (Ottawa, Canada: Canada Communications
Group).
Oliner, Stephen, and Daniel Sichel (1994), "Computers and Output Growth Revisited:
How Big is the Puzzle?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 2.
Oliner, Stephen, and Daniel Sichel (2000), "The Resurgence of Growth in the Late 1990s:
Is Information Technology the Story?" mimeo, Federal Reserve Board of Washington, May.
Parsons, Daniel J., Calvin C. Gotlieb, and Michael Denny (1993), "Productivity and
Computers in Canadian Banking," Journal of Productivity Analysis, Vol. 4, June, pp. 91-110.
Schultz, Theodore W. (1960), "Capital Formation by Education," Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 68, No. 6, pp. 571-83.
Siegel, Donald (1997), "The Impact of Computers on Manufacturing Productivity
Growth: A Multiple-Indicators, Multiple-Causes Approach," Review of Economics and Statistics,
pp. 68-78.
Siegel, Donald, and Zvi Griliches (1992), "Purchased Services, Outsourcing, Computers,
and Productivity in Manufacturing," in Zvi Griliches ed., Output Measurement in the Service
Sector, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Steindel, Charles (1992), "Manufacturing Productivity and High-Tech Investment,"
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Quarterly Review, Vol. 17, December, pp. 39-47.
Stiroh, Keven J. (1998), "Computers, Productivity, and Input Substitution," Economic
Inquiry, Vol. 36, No. 2, April, pp. 175-191.
------ (2002), "Are ICT Spillovers Driving the New Economy?" Review of Income and
Wealth, Vol. 48, No. 1, March, forthcoming.
Wolff, Edward N. (1991), "Productivity Growth, Capital Intensity, and Skill Levels In the
U.S. Insurance Industry, 1948-86," Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance, Vol. 16, No. 59,
April, pp. 173-90.
----- (1996), "Technology and the Demand for Skills", OECD Science, Technology and

-30-

Industry Review, 18, pp. 96-123.
----- (2001), "Human Capital Investment and Economic Growth: Exploring the CrossCountry Evidence", Structural Change and Economic Dynamics. Vol. 11, No. 4, December, pp.
433-472.

-31-

Data Appendix
1. NIPA employee compensation: Figures are from the National Income and Product Accounts
(NIPA), available on the Internet. Employee compensation includes wages and salaries and
employee benefits.
2. NIPA employment data: Full-time equivalent employees (FTE) equals the number of
employees on full-time schedules plus the number of employees on part-time schedules
converted to a full-time basis. FTE is computed as the product of the total number of employees
and the ratio of average weekly hours per employee for all employees to average weekly hours
per employee on full-time schedules. Persons engaged in production (PEP) equals the number of
full-time equivalent employees plus the number of self-employed persons. Unpaid family
workers are not included.
3. Capital stock figures are based on chain-type quantity indexes for net stock of fixed capital in
1992$, year-end estimates. OCA investment data are available for the private (non-government)
sector only. Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, CD-ROM NCN-0229, "Fixed
Reproducible Tangible Wealth of the United States, 1925-97."
4. Educational attainment:
(a) median years of schooling, adult population; (b) percent of adults with 4 years of high
school or more; and (c) percent of adults with 4 years of college or more. Source: U.S. Bureau of
the Census, Current Population Reports, available on the Internet. Adults refer to persons 25 of
age and over in the noninstitutional population (excluding members of the Armed Forces living
in Barracks).
(b) Mean (or median) schooling of workers by industry for 1950, 1960, 1970, 1980, and 1990
are derived from the decennial U.S. Census of Population Public Use Samples for the
corresponding years.
4. Research and development expenditures performed by industry include company, federal, and
other sources of funds. Company-financed R&D performed outside the company is excluded.
Industry series on R&D and full-time equivalent scientists and engineers engaged in R&D per
full-time equivalent employee run from 1957 to 1997. Source: National Science Foundation,
Internet. For technical details, see National Science Foundation, Research and Development in
Industry, (Arlington, VA: National Science Foundation), NSF96-304, 1996.
5. The original input-output data are 85-sector U.S. input-output tables for years 1947, 1958,
1963, 1967, 1972, 1977, 1982, 1987, 1992, and 1996 (see, for example, Lawson, 1997, for details
on the sectoring). The 1947, 1958, and 1963 tables are available only in single-table format. The
1967, 1972, 1977, 1982, 1987, 1992, and 1996 data are available in separate make and use tables.
These tables have been aggregated to 45 sectors for conformity with the other data sources. The
1950, 1960, 1970, 1980, and 1990 input-output tables are interpolated from the benchmark U.S.
input-output tables.

-32-

Appendix Table 1. 45-Sector Industry Classification Scheme
Industry
1 Agriculture, forestry, and fishing
2 Metal mining
3 Coal mining
4 Oil and gas extraction
5 Mining of nonmetallic minerals, except fuels
6 Construction
7 Food and kindred products
8 Tobacco products
9 Textile mill products
10 Apparel and other textile products
11 Lumber and wood products
12 Furniture and fixtures
13 Paper and allied products
14 Printing and publishing
15 Chemicals and allied products
16 Petroleum and coal products
17 Rubber and miscellaneous plastic products
18 Leather and leather products
19 Stone, clay, and glass products
20 Primary metal products
21 Fabricated metal products, including ordnance
22 Industrial machinery and equipment, exc. electrical
23 Electric and electronic equipment
24 Motor vehicles and equipment
25 Other transportation equipment
26 Instruments and related products
27 Miscellaneous manufactures
28 Transportation
29 Telephone and telegraph
30 Radio and TV broadcasting
31 Electric, gas, and sanitary services
32 Wholesale trade
33 Retail trade
34 Banking; credit and investment companies
35 Insurance
36 Real estate
37 Hotels, motels, and lodging places
38 Personal services
39 Business and repair services except auto
40 Auto services and repair
41 Amusement and recreation services
42 Health services, including hospitals
43 Educational services
44 Legal and other professional services
and non-profit organizations
45 Public Administration

1987 SIC Codes
01-09
10
11,12
13
14
15-17
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
371
37 [exc. 371]
38
39
40-42,44-47
481,482,484,489
483
49
50-51
52-59
60-62,67
63-64
65-66
70
72
73,76
75
78-79
80
82
81,83,84,86,87,89
--

-33-

Table 1. Total Factor Productivity (TFP) Growth By Major Sector, 1950-1990
(Average annual growth in percentage points)
Sector
A. Goods-Producing Industries
Agriculture, forestry, and fisheries
Mining
Construction
Manufacturing, durables
Manufacturing, nondurables
Transportation
Communications
Electric, gas, and sanitary services

1950-60

1960-70

1970-80

1980-90

1950-90

1.54
2.22
4.00
1.95
0.40
1.10
2.99
5.35

1.05
3.19
-2.36
1.72
1.59
2.97
2.55
3.47

-2.33
-3.41
-4.48
2.19
1.07
0.13
2.94
2.66

5.52
3.06
0.49
3.12
2.23
0.88
1.46
0.62

1.45
1.27
-0.59
2.25
1.32
1.27
2.49
3.03

B. Service Industries
Wholesale and retail trade
Finance, insurance, and real estate
General services
Government and government enterprises

1.08
1.41
0.12
0.59

0.60
0.14
-0.05
-0.66

-1.01
0.37
0.25
0.15

0.86
-1.53
-0.35
-0.03

0.38
0.10
-0.07
-0.28

Total goods
Total services
Total economy (GDP)

2.12
0.70
1.39

1.50
0.58
0.96

0.25
0.58
0.38

2.04
0.07
0.77

1.48
0.48
0.88

Table 2. Dissimilarity Index (DIOCCUP) of the Distribution of Occupational
Employment by Major Sector, 1950-1990
Sector
A. Goods
Agriculture, forestry, and fisheries
Mining
Construction
Manufacturing, Durables
Manufacturing, Nondurables
Transportation
Communications
Electric, gas, and sanitary services
B. Service Industries
Wholesale and retail trade
Finance, insurance, and real estate
General Services
Government and government enterprises

Average
1980-90 1950-1990

1950-60

1960-70

1970-80

0.000
0.022
0.040
0.100
0.077
0.030
0.032
0.078

0.001
0.025
0.025
0.039
0.050
0.024
0.061
0.169

0.001
0.020
0.005
0.014
0.023
0.014
0.043
0.053

0.017
0.045
0.053
0.096
0.088
0.048
0.128
0.105

0.005
0.028
0.031
0.062
0.060
0.029
0.066
0.101

0.026
0.043
0.061
0.046

0.019
0.117
0.091
0.054

0.029
0.033
0.029
0.042

0.078
0.080
0.047
0.045

0.038
0.068
0.057
0.047

Total Goods
0.063
0.061
0.014
0.110
0.062
Total Services
0.022
0.056
0.026
0.077
0.045
All Industries
0.050
0.056
0.019
0.095
0.055
Note: Computations are based on employment by occupation aggregated for each of the major sectors.

-34-

Table 3. Dissimilarity Index DIACOEFF for Technical Interindustry Coefficients
By Major Sector, 1950-1990
Sector
A. Goods Industries
Agriculture, forestry, and fisheries
Mining
Construction
Manufacturing, Durables
Manufacturing, Nondurables
Transportation
Communications
Electric, gas, and sanitary services

Average
1980-90 1950-1990

1950-60

1960-70

1970-80

0.008
0.041
0.012
0.013
0.022
0.043
0.270
0.048

0.006
0.065
0.004
0.007
0.012
0.067
0.024
0.087

0.004
0.070
0.028
0.009
0.027
0.016
0.051
0.020

0.009
0.092
0.008
0.014
0.025
0.017
0.170
0.147

0.007
0.067
0.013
0.011
0.021
0.036
0.129
0.075

0.015
0.015
0.034
0.054

0.049
0.033
0.047
0.046

0.017
0.010
0.066
0.026

0.010
0.010
0.027
0.061

0.023
0.017
0.043
0.047

Total Goods
0.020
0.017
0.024
0.029
Total Services
0.057
0.046
0.043
0.045
All Industries
0.036
0.027
0.030
0.033
Note: Sectoral figures are based on unweighted averages of industries within the sector.

0.023
0.048
0.031

B. Service Industries
Wholesale and retail trade
Finance, insurance, and real estate
General Services
Government and government

Table 4. Dissimilarity Index DIKCOEFF for Capital Coefficients, 1950-1990
Sector
A. Goods Industries
Agriculture, forestry, and fisheries
Mining
Construction
Manufacturing, Durables
Manufacturing, Nondurables
Transportation
Communications
Electric, gas, and sanitary services
B. Service Industries
Wholesale and retail trade
Finance, insurance, and real estate
General Services

Average
1980-90 1950-1990

1950-60

1960-70

1970-80

0.002
0.016
0.011
0.005
0.009
0.002
0.015
0.003

0.000
0.008
0.016
0.007
0.006
0.009
0.028
0.001

0.001
0.025
0.032
0.009
0.006
0.011
0.045
0.002

0.005
0.038
0.061
0.007
0.009
0.008
0.087
0.003

0.002
0.022
0.030
0.007
0.008
0.007
0.044
0.002

0.045
0.020
0.057

0.019
0.014
0.033

0.014
0.027
0.035

0.024
0.043
0.062

0.026
0.026
0.047

Total Goods
0.008
0.007
0.011
0.014
0.010
Total services (except government)
0.038
0.024
0.029
0.050
0.035
Total economy (except government)
0.020
0.014
0.018
0.028
0.020
Note: Sectoral figures are based on unweighted averages of industries within the sector. Data on
investment by type are not available for the government and government enterprises sectors.

-35-

Table 5. Average Skill Level by Period and Major Sector, 1950-1990
Sector

Change
1980-90 1950-1990

1950-60

1960-70

1970-80

A. Goods
Agriculture, forestry, and fisheries
Mining
Construction
Manufacturing, durables
Manufacturing, nondurables
Transportation
Communications
Electric, gas, and sanitary services

8.05
9.19
9.53
10.28
9.75
9.78
11.42
10.69

9.06
10.41
10.25
11.00
10.48
10.55
11.98
11.19

10.45
11.56
11.21
11.67
11.34
11.44
12.62
11.78

11.45
12.45
12.04
12.39
12.13
12.27
13.31
12.68

4.02
4.21
3.11
2.90
3.05
3.21
2.52
2.79

B. Service Industries
Wholesale and retail trade
Finance, insurance, and real estate
General services
Government and government enterprises

10.62
11.82
11.56
11.50

11.18
12.40
12.34
12.02

11.89
12.95
13.08
12.69

12.51
13.53
13.66
13.37

2.33
2.29
2.72
2.42

Total goods
Total services
Total economy

9.59
11.20
10.36

10.51
11.88
11.25

11.43
12.62
12.13

12.23
13.23
12.86

3.43
2.60
3.23

A. Goods Industries
Agriculture, forestry, and fisheries
Mining
Construction
Manufacturing, durables
Manufacturing, nondurables
Transportation
Communications
Electric, gas, and sanitary services

3.67
3.35
3.67
3.50
2.98
3.16
4.02
3.85

3.64
3.71
4.02
3.71
3.12
3.25
4.26
3.87

3.61
3.98
4.16
3.84
3.34
3.35
4.51
4.07

3.64
4.13
4.22
3.96
3.49
3.32
4.74
4.33

0.01
1.02
0.80
0.65
0.58
0.11
0.93
0.56

B. Service Industries
Wholesale and retail trade
Finance, insurance, and real estate
General services
Government and government enterprises

3.91
4.63
4.32
4.24

3.84
4.96
4.46
4.30

3.88
5.13
4.73
4.46

3.98
5.25
4.85
4.61

0.04
0.90
0.52
0.42

Total goods
Total services
Total economy

3.41
4.18
3.78

3.57
4.26
3.94

3.73
4.44
4.15

3.83
4.57
4.30

0.53
0.43
0.62

1 Mean Years of Education (in Years)

2. Mean Substantive Complexity

Note: Figures are weighted averages of individual industries within each major sector.

-36-

Table 6. Annual Investment in Office, Computing, and Accounting
Equipment
(OCA) per Persons Engaged in Production (PEP), 1950-1990
(1992$, Period Averages)

Sector
A. Goods Industries
Agriculture, forestry, and fisheries
Mining
Construction
Manufacturing, durables
Manufacturing, nondurables
Transportation
Communications
Electric, gas, and sanitary services

1950-60

1960-70

1970-80

1980-90

Ratio of
1980-90 to
1950-60

0.1
14.3
6.8
24.5
49.2
43.7
49.1
47.2

0.3
28.6
6.9
21.5
54.5
36.5
43.6
41.8

2.1
53.3
5.8
30.2
98.3
29.6
51.1
54.5

4.9
392.9
7.7
119.9
345.3
72.7
285.2
628.3

67.4
27.5
1.1
4.9
7.0
1.7
5.8
13.3

B. Service Industries
Wholesale and retail trade
Finance, insurance, and real estate
General services

14.0
140.0
22.9

20.3
162.7
23.4

42.5
339.4
23.0

279.8
1211.0
148.0

20.0
8.7
6.5

Total goods
Total services (except government)
Total economy (except government)

26.4
30.4
28.2

27.7
37.8
32.6

42.0
70.0
57.0

162.1
329.4
262.7

6.1
10.8
9.3

Note: Data on investment in OCA are not available for the government and government enterprises sectors.

0.205
0.174
0.0251
132
All
1960-90

0.007
(1.13)
0.127
0.098
0.0280
93
Goods
1960-90

0.009
(1.22)

-0.012 #
(1.74)

0.205 #
(1.93)

0.199 #
(1.89)

0.131
0.092
0.0281
93
Goods
1960-90

0.011
(1.37)

-0.009
(1.05)

-0.024
(0.62)

0.014 **
(2.63)

Specification
(4)

0.014 *
(2.59)

(3)

0.216
0.178
0.0286
88
All
1970-90

0.012 #
(1.95)

-0.018 *
(2.47)

-0.053
(1.27)

0.338 *
(2.28)

0.011
(1.38)

(5)

0.145
0.078
0.0289
42
Goods
1970-90

0.008
(0.80)

-0.102
(1.21)

0.348 #
(2.00)

0.020
(1.53)

(6)

0.232
0.201
0.0267
88
All
1977-97

0.005
(0.81)

-0.032 **
(3.08)

-0.060
(1.29)

0.171 *
(2.26)

0.010
(1.24)

(7)

Significance levels: # - 10% level; * - 5% level; ** - 1% level.

0.131 #
(1.86)

0.005
(0.35)

(8)

0.187
0.129
0.0292
44
All
1987-97

-0.023 *
(2.10)

-0.016
(0.19)

Note: The full sample consists of pooled cross-section time-series data, with observations on each of 44 industries in 1960-70, 1970-80,
And 1980-90, or in 1977-87 and 1987-97 (sector 45, public administration, is excluded because of a lack of appropriate
Capital stock data). The goods sample consists of 31 industries (industries 1 to 31 in Appendix Table 1).
The coefficients are estimated using use the White procedure for a heteroschedasticity-consistent covariance matrix.
The absolute value of the t-statistic is in parentheses below the coefficient. See the Data Appendix for sources and methods

0.195
0.171
0.0249
132
All
1960-90

0.003
(0.59)

Dummy Variable for
1980-1990 (or 1987-97)

R2
Adjusted R2
Standard Error
Sample Size
Sample
Period

-0.010 #
(1.89)

Dummy Variable for
1970-1980

-0.006
(0.95)

-0.017 **
(3.34)

-0.017 **
(3.47)

Dummy
For Services

0.212 *
(2.24)
-0.039
(1.36)

0.203 *
(2.17)

Ratio of R&D
Expenditures to Sales

0.016 **
(3.59)

(2)

Annual Growth
In OCA

0.015 **
(3.45)

(1)

Constant

Independent
Variables

Table 7. Cross-Industry Regressions of Industry TFP Growth (TFPGRTH) on R&D Intensity and OCA
Investment

-38-

-40-

Table 8. Cross-Industry Regressions of Industry Labor Productivity Growth on R&D
Intensity, Capital Investment, and Skill Change, 1960-1990
Independent
Variables
Constant

(1)
0.017 **
(2.96)

(2)
0.033
(1.47)

(3)
0.031 **
(3.23)

Specification
(4)
(5)
0.030 *
0.038 *
(3.39)
(2.00)

(6)
0.017 **
(2.81)

(7)
0.014 #
(1.74)

Ratio of R&D
Expenditures to Sales

0.164 #
(1.73)

0.182 #
(1.86)

0.174 #
(1.84)

0.184 #
(1.95)

0.178 #
(1.86)

0.174 #
(1.77)

0.170 #
(1.77)

Growth in
OCA per

-0.006
(0.20)

Growth in Total Capital
Less OCA per Worker

0.262 *
(2.50)

Growth in Total Capital
Per Worker

0.235 *
(2.27)

0.237 *
(2.31)

0.239 *
(2.34)

0.252 *
(2.45)

0.244 *
(2.31)

0.251 *
(2.43)

Growth in Substantive
Complexity (SC)

0.181
(1.19)

0.125 #
(1.78)

Growth in Interactive
Skills (IS)

-0.055
(0.44)

Growth in Motor
Skills (MS)

-0.015
(0.09)
0.202 #
(1.89)

Growth in Composite
Skills (CS)
Growth in Mean
Education

0.110
(1.14)

Change in Substantive
Complexity (SC)

0.224
(0.90)

Change in Interactive
Skills (IS)

-0.346
(1.04)

Change in Motor
Skills (MS)

0.006
(0.02)

Change in Mean
Education

0.056
(0.66)

Dummy
For Services

-0.014 **
(2.66)

-0.013 #
(1.93)

-0.011 *
(2.14)

-0.011 *
(2.05)

-0.012 *
(2.13)

-0.015 **
(2.92)

-0.013 *
(2.47)

Dummy Variable for
1970-1980

-0.009 #
(1.47)

-0.009
(1.60)

-0.009
(1.65)

-0.009 *
(1.59)

-0.012 *
(2.12)

-0.009
(1.59)

-0.012 *
(1.98)

-41-

Dummy Variable for
1980-1990
R2
Adjusted R2
Standard Error
Sample Size

0.005
(0.82)

0.006
(0.96)

0.006
(1.00)

0.006
(1.08)

0.009
(0.99)

0.008
(1.23)

0.004
(0.77)

0.217
0.179
0.0252
132

0.236
0.186
0.0251
132

0.234
0.197
0.0249
132

0.237
0.200
0.0249
132

0.223
0.186
0.0251
132

0.226
0.176
0.0253
132

0.218
0.180
0.0252
132

Note: The sample consists of pooled cross-section time-series data, with observations on each of 44 industries in
1960-70, 1970-80 and 1980-90 (sector 45, public administration, is excluded because of a lack of appropriate
stock data).The coefficients are estimated using use the White procedure for a heteroschedasticity-consistent
covariance matrix. The absolute value of the t-statistic is in parentheses below the coefficient. See the Data
for sources and methods
Significance levels: # - 10% level; * - 5% level; ** - 1% level.

-43-

Table 9. Cross-Industry Regressions of Indicators of Structural Change on Computer
Investment
Independent
Variables

DIOCCUP

DIOCCUP

Dependent Variable
DIACOEFF DIACOEFF

DIKCOEFF

DIKCOEFF

Constant

0.048 **
7.29

0.055 **
(8.00)

0.001
(0.13)

-0.02 *
(2.24)

0.016 **
(2.98)

0.008
(1.02)

Ratio of R&D
Expenditures to Sales

0.251
(1.10)

0.214
(0.97)

0.136
(0.59)

0.309
(1.57)

0.206
(1.17)

0.129
(0.71)

Investment in OCA
Per Worker

0.060 **
(3.07)

0.048 *
(2.23)

0.043 **
(5.24)

0.024 **
(2.98)
0.032 #
(1.81)

0.031 #
(1.66)

Initial Level of
OCA per Worker
Dummy Variable

0.008

0.017

0.026 **

for Services

(0.08)

(1.51)

(2.83)

Dummy Variable for
1970-1980

-0.021 *
(2.30)

-0.001
(0.12)

-0.007
(0.89)

R2
Adjusted R

0.112
2

Standard Error
Sample Size
Industries

0.145

0.250

0.271

0.135

0.165

0.091

0.104

0.223

0.227

0.104

0.114

0.0470
88
All

0.0457
88
All

0.0429
88
All

0.0410
88
All

0.0339
88
All

0.0341
88
All

a. The sample consists of pooled cross-section time-series data, with observations on each of 44 industries (excluding
the government sector) in 1970-80 and 1980-90. The coefficients are estimated using the White procedure for a
heteroschedasticity-consistent covariance matrix. The absolute value of the t-statistic is shown in parentheses below
the coefficient estimate. Key:
DIOCCUP: dissimilarity index for occupational coefficients
DIACOEFF: dissimilarity index for technical interindustry coefficients
DIKCOEFF: dissimilarity index for capital
coefficients.
# Significant at the 10% level. * Significant at the 5% level. ** Significant at the 1% level.

Percentage Points, Percent, or Scalar

-1.00

1.00

3.00

5.00

7.00

9.00

11.00

13.00

15.00

17.00

19.00

21.00

23.00

25.00

1952

1954

1956

1958

1960

1962

1972

1974

1976

1978

1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

Percent of Adults with College Degree

1970

Mean Education (Years)

1968

Mean Substantive Complexity

1966

TFP Growth (Percent Per Year)

1964

Figure 1
. Annual TFP Growth (5-Year Running Average), Mean Substantive Complexity (SC),
Mean Education, and Percent of Adults with a College Education, 1947-1997

-44-

1990

1992

1994

1996

-2.00

2.00

6.00

10.00

14.00

18.00

22.00

26.00

30.00

TFP Growth (Percent per Year)

OCA Investment (100s, 1992$) per PEP

1947 1949 1951 1953 1955 1957 1959 1961 1963 1965 1967 1969 1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997

Figure 2. Annual TFP Growth (5-Year Running Average)
And OCA Investment per Worker, 1947-1997

-45-

-1.00

0.00

1.00

2.00

3.00

4.00

5.00

Agri.

Construct.

Durables

Nondurables

Communic.

Utilities

Trade

FIRE

OCA Investment per PEP (average, 1950-1990, in 100s, 1992$)

Transport.

TFP Growth, 1950-1990 (average annual rate, in percent)

Mining

Figure 3 TFP Growth and OCA Investment per Worker

-46-

Services

0.00

2.00

4.00

6.00

8.00

10.00

12.00

Agri.

Mining

Durables

Nondurables

DIOCCUP (average, 1950-1990, in percent)

Construct.

Communic.

Utilities

Trade

OCA Investment per PEP (average 1950-1990, in 100s, 1992$)

Transport.

Figure 4. DIOCCUP and OCA Investment per Worker

-47-

FIRE

Services

0.00

2.00

4.00

6.00

8.00

10.00

12.00

14.00

Agri.

Mining

Durables

Nondurables

DIACOEFF (average 1950-1990, in percent)

Construct.

Communic.

Utilities

Trade

OCA Investment per PEP (average, 1950-1990. 100s, 1992$)

Transport.

Figure 5. DIACOEFF and OCA Investment per Worker

-48-

FIRE

Services

0.00

0.50

1.00

1.50

2.00

2.50

3.00

3.50

4.00

4.50

5.00

Agri.

Mining

Durables

Nondurables

DIKCOEFF (average, 1950-1990, in percent)

Construct.

Communic.

Utilities

Trade

OCA Investment per PEP (average 1950-1990, in 100s, 1992$)

Transport.

Figure 6. DIKCOEFF and OCA Investment per Worker

-49-

FIRE

Services

