NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE TEMPORARY ASSISTANCE FOR NEEDY FAMILIES PROGRAM
Robert A. Moffitt
Working Paper 8749
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8749
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2002

Prepared for the NBER Conference "Means-Tested Programs in the United States," May 11-12, 2000,
Cambridge, Mass. The author would like to thank Daniel Gubits for research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Robert A. Moffitt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program
Robert A. Moffitt
NBER Working Paper No. 8749
February 2002
JEL No. I3

ABSTRACT
The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program was created in 1996 from what
was previously named the Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program. The TANF
program is intended to serve low-income families, primarily those with only a single parent present, as
did the AFDC program. The TANF program is distinguished from AFDC by strong work requirements,
time limits on receipt, options for the provision of noncash assistance, and by a block grant financing
structure. This paper reviews the rules of the TANF program and the research that has been conducted
on it and on the AFDC program.

Robert A. Moffitt
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
moffitt@jhu.edu

The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program was created by
legislation passed by the U.S. Congress and signed by the President in 1996. The Personal
Responsibility and Work Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) created the TANF program out of the
preexisting Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program, which itself was created
by Congress in 1935 as part of the Social Security Act. The PRWORA legislation represented
the most fundamental restructuring of the AFDC program since its inception. The most
important restructured elements are (1) the devolution of major program design elements, and
financing through block grants, to the individual states; (2) the imposition of strict work
requirements in order to qualify for federal aid; and (3) lifetime limits on the number of years of
benefit receipt which could be paid out of federal funds.
This paper reviews the rules and structure of the TANF program and compares them with
the historical AFDC program. In addition, it reviews the caseloads, costs, and participation rates
of the TANF and AFDC programs. Finally, it reviews the research that has been conducted on
both programs. Given the relative youth of the former, relatively little scholarly research has
been conducted on it to date. Consequently, the bulk of the research will be reviewed for the
AFDC program. Some discussion will also be provided of the extent to which the results of the
AFDC research can be expected to apply to the TANF program.
The first section reviews the rules and history of the programs. The second section
reviews the trends in caseloads and expenditures and other program characteristics, followed by a
section on the research results. A final section discusses reforms of the financial incentives in
the program.

I. History, Rules, and Goals
History and Rules of the AFDC Program. Table 1 shows the major pieces of legislation
creating and altering the AFDC program over its history, 1935-1996.1 The program was created
by the Social Security Act of 1935 along with the Old-Age Social Security and Unemployment
Insurance programs. AFDC provided cash financial support to families with “dependent”
children, defined as those who were deprived of the support or care of one natural (i.e.,
biological) parent by reason of death, disability, or absence from the home, and were under the
care of the other parent or another relative. Although the language of the legislation was genderneutral, in practice the vast majority of families of this type consisted of a mother and her
children, or what are today called single-mother families. Although the presence of the father
was possible if he was the single parent or if he was disabled, the overwhelming majority of
participating families were initially, and have continued to be, those where the father is not
present. In 1935 the primary reason for the absence of the father was death, but this was to
change in later years as that absence was more a result of divorce or out-of-wedlock childbearing.
Eligibility also required that families have income and assets below specified levels.
The AFDC program was created as shared federal-state responsibility. The states had a
large role in the program for they were responsible for not only creating and administering their
own AFDC programs but also in setting the level of basic benefits. States subsequently picked
very different benefit levels, with benefits ranging sixfold from the most generous to the least
generous. The federal role was both financial and regulatory. Financially, the federal
1

A short, but more detailed, history of the major developments in the AFDC program
can be found in Garfinkel and McLanahan (1986, Chapter 4). That discussion also includes an
account of the history of income support programs prior to AFDC.
2

government was responsible for providing open-ended matching grants to the states, with
declining match rates at higher state benefit levels. On the regulatory side, the federal
government put many restrictions on the definition of eligibility and allowable resources but also
on the benefit formula. In terms of eligibility, for example, the federal government defined what
family structures were eligible and put restrictions on who could and could not be counted as part
of the assistance unit, and also put restrictions on what income and assets could be counted for
eligibility determination. Regarding the benefit formula, the federal government put restrictions
on allowable deductions for earned income and also for child care and work-related expenses,
effectively constraining the state's ability to set the benefit reduction rate in the program. Thus
the states ended up being primarily responsible for the level of benefits, or what economists call
the “guarantee,” while the federal government effectively set the benefit-reduction rate, which
economists sometimes call simply the “tax rate.” The nominal benefit reduction rate in the
program in 1935 was 100 percent, for benefits were determined by a straightforward subtraction
of income from "needs" (i.e., the guarantee), and there were few deductions for income allowed.2
The definition of "dependent child" as resulting from the absence or disability of a parent
implicitly allowed families to be eligible where the mother (or father) had remarried or was
2

Additional complexities were present because the states actually had the right to
manipulate the benefit formula in ways that altered even the tax rate. For example, states could
impose maximums on the benefit paid to a family, which creates a range of a zero tax rate; could
reduce the difference between the guarantee and net income (defined as income less deductions)
by a defined fraction (called the “ratable reduction”) which effectively reduces the tax rate by that
fraction; and could impose gross income ceilings for eligibility which create a notch in the
budget constraint. They also had discretion in setting allowable deductions, which alters the
effective tax rate as well. See U.S. Congress (1996), Keane and Moffitt (1998, Appendix), and
Meyer and Rosenbaum (2001, Appendix 1) for more details on the formula in different states.
States are allowed even more discretion over the benefit formula under the new TANF program
(see below).
3

cohabiting with a partner who was not a parent of the child. Further, stepparents and cohabitors
were excluded from the definition of the assistance unit for purposes of eligibility and benefit
determination, so their income was not automatically counted against benefits. In principle the
income they provided to the eligible children should be counted as income to the assistance unit,
but rigorously measuring intrahousehold income flows is difficult, so the enforcement of this
principle was minimal. However, in 1935 the rate of remarriage was fairly low and the rate of
cohabitation was even lower so these issues did not attract discussion, and did so only later when
these types of families grew in the general population and in the AFDC recipient population.
A significant expansion of the program took place in 1961 when Congress created the
AFDC-UP (for "unemployed parent") program to include families where both natural parents
were present but where the primary earner was unemployed, with unemployment defined as the
inability to find work in excess of 100 hours per month. The income and asset eligibility
conditions and benefit formulas were identical to those in the basic AFDC program. The AFDCUP program was made optional to the states, with financing at the same rate as in basic AFDC,
and 25 states had created and operated such programs by the end of the decade.
The next major change in the program occurred in 1967 when Congress, concerned with
work incentives in the program, lowered the nominal tax rate on earnings from 100 percent to 67
percent (2/3, to be exact). States were required to deduct $30 and 1/3 of remaining monthly
earnings from total monthly income before calculating the benefit (hence the "30-and-one-third"
rule). The Social Security Admendments in 1967 also created a program called the Work
Incentive (WIN) Program, which required women whose youngest child was older than 6 and
who did not fall into a number of exempt categories (disabled, in school, etc.) to register for
4

some type of work or education activity, ususally some type of job placement program. The
WIN program was never effective, for, while the majority of nonexempt recipients were
registered, states did not provide the funds or exert the effort to set up the necessary activities to
engage more than a small number of registrants. Although there were almost no evaluation
studies of WIN conducted (see below), there was nevertheless a widespread perception that the
job placement operations in place were also quite ineffective.
A number of Supreme Court decisions in the late 1960s and early 1970s also were
important in modifying key features of the program. One outlawed what were called state "manin-the-house" rules, rules which made ineligible for benefits mothers who were living, even on a
temporary basis, with men who were not the natural fathers of the children. The Court judged
these laws to violate the original Social Security Act provision stipulating that eligibility was
based solely on the absence of the natural father. A second, related decision prohibited states
from counting the income of any such cohabiting men against the AFDC benefit without specific
evidence that the men were providing income support to the woman and children; some states
had been automatically including the male's income when calculating benefits. A third decision
outlawed so-called residency requirements that some states had adopted, which required families
who had moved into a state to live there for a few years before eligibility could be established.
The Court judged these laws to violate the equal protection clause of the Constitution and to
impose an unlawful restriction on freedom of residential location.
The growth of the Food Stamp and Medicaid programs in the late 1960s and early 1970s
also affected the AFDC program. Eligibility for the Food Stamp program, although open to all
individuals regardless of family type, was made automatic for AFDC recipients. Thus a close tie
5

between the program was established and participation in the AFDC program constituted a
guaranteed entry to the Food Stamp program. AFDC families were also made categorically
eligible for the Medicaid program, significantly raising the generosity of program benefits.
Unlike the case of Food Stamps, however, non-AFDC recipients faced more difficult eligibility
hurdles for Medicaid and were often ineligible until the 1980s (see the chapter on Medicaid in
this volume). A third program of some importance that grew more in the 1980s is the Earned
Income Tax Credit, whose amounts were required by Congress to be excluded from AFDC
recipient income for the purpose of benefit calculation in order to encourage work.3
Throughout the 1970s a number of welfare reform proposals were considered by Congess
and successive Administrations but were either never proposed to Congress or were proposed
and not passed. The Nixon Administration proposed, with its Family Assistance Program,
replacing AFDC with a program more resembling a negative income tax--with a low marginal
tax rate--and which would have federalized the program and hence removed it from the control
of the states, a reform much discussed in the 1970s in an attempt to eliminate the large cross-state
variation in benefits. The legislation did not pass Congress. The Ford Administration
considered a welfare reform proposal with a number of features but, most notably, a considerable
strengthening in the work requirements of the program; the program was never submitted to
Congress. The Carter Administration submitted to Congress a major welfare reform proposal
which, like the Family Assistance Program, would have federalized the program but which
introduced, for the first time, significant added work requirements. The legislation was not
3

Food Stamp benefits were also excluded from the AFDC benefit calculation, as were
housing subsidies in most states. SSI benefits were excluded but SSI recipients were not allowed
to be covered by AFDC anyway (i.e., they were excluded from the AFDC assistance unit).
6

passed by Congress.
The next major piece of legislation passed by Congress was the Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act of 1981, which had several important features. The tax rate on earnings in
the program was increased to 100 percent, up from the 67 percent provided for in the 1967
Amendments, on the argument that this would concentrate benefits on the lowest income families
and hence those most in need.4 In addition, for the first time Congress required states to count a
portion of stepparent income against the grant regardless of the amount of financial support that
the stepparent might be determined, by some calculation, to have provided to the mother and her
children. Congress also put an upper limit on the gross income that a family could have to be
eligible, thus eliminating the possibility that high levels of deductions could allow such families
onto the rolls. A fourth important feature of the legislation, little noticed at the same but which
became important later, was a provision allowing states to experiment with new AFDC work
provisions that were at variance with federal law and federal regulations, and to seek "waivers" to
test alternative provisions that they might be interested in. The "WIN demonstrations" of the
1980s, as they were called because they were modifications of WIN, allowed states to
experiment with community work programs, work supplementation programs, heightened job
search, and other programs to strengthen the emphasis on work and improve upon their WIN
programs.
Subsequent to 1981 and throughout the early and mid-1980s, states began taking
advantage of the waiver provisions in the 1981 Act and, eventually, virtually all states conducted
4

The recipient was allowed to work for four months with the 30-and-one-third reduction
rule, but further earnings were taxed at the 100 percent rate. Later, the flat $30 exemption
amount was allowed for 12 months.
7

WIN demonstrations. These demonstrations typically tested low-cost programs that required
some type of job search activity, although some also required recipients to simply work--usually
in some community service job like cleaning up a public park--in exchange for their benefits
(“workfare”). A few states were more ambitious and tested more expansive employment
programs that attempted to provide more basic skills training or substantive work experience.
Many of the demonstrations also narrowed the list of conditions allowing a recipient to be
exempt from participating in these programs. The 1980s thus witnessed the beginning of
significant AFDC reform activity initiated at the state and local levels, a new trend in light of the
history of reform activity which had theretofore occurred primarily at the federal level.
The state activity on increased work requirements led to increased Congressional interest
in work and culminated in the passage of the 1988 Family Support Act, whose most important
feature was the creation of the Job Opportunities (JOBS) Program. The JOBS program replaced
WIN and was to require much larger numbers of welfare recipients to engage in work-related
activities, both by reducing the number of exempt recipients as well as mandating that states
engage a minimum fraction of its eligible recipients in some type of acceptable activity (called
“participation” requirements). In addition, and equally important, the legislation strongly
encouraged, and partly required, states to conduct not only low-cost job-search programs that had
been dominant in the WIN demonstrations but also some human-capital, education and training
programs that would increase job skills of AFDC recipients, a major change in orientation.5
However, over the years subsequent to 1988, states failed to implement JOBS programs

5

See U.S. Congress (1994) for a discussion of the JOBS program rules and see Gueron
and Pauly (1991) for a discussion of the shift in employment philosophy that JOBS represented.
8

to any significant degree. They failed to draw down all the federal matching funds made
available to them to subsidize the programs, and they did not put in place the necessary programs
to enroll eligibles on a wide scale. As a result, many states never achieved the participation
requirements in the Act. The most common explanation for this failure was the onset of a
recession in the late 1980s, which put pressure on state budgets and made it difficult to allocate
funds to JOBS, but the administrative difficulty in creating JOBS programs was gradually
realized to have been underestimated and this also played a role. It was also gradually realized
that full implementation of the JOBS program would require a significant increase of
expenditures and hence was unlikely in the short run to generate cost savings.
In an attempt to provide more financial work incentives, the Family Support Act also
required states to offer "transitional" child care and Medicaid benefits, benefits provided to
families who had left the welfare rolls because of employment or increased earnings, for up to 12
months following exit. States were allowed to require copayments for child care and were
required to charge premiums for the second six months of Medicaid benefits. In practice, these
provisions were little used by exiting welfare mothers, for reasons that have never been fully
studied. Some experts speculated that the paperwork burden of continuing to establish
eligibility combined with the relatively short time frame of extended benefits (twelve months),
together with the copayment and premium provisions, discouraged takeup.
Finally, the Family Support Act expanded AFDC-UP, mandating that all states offer the
program. However, the law only required states to offer benefits to unemployed families for six
months out of the year, and many states initially without UP programs elected to meet only this
minimum requirement when creating their program subsequent to the Act.
9

Although the Family Support Act of 1988 was considered at the time to be landmark
legislation which would lead to fundamental changes in the program, its failure to do so has left
it as a fairly minor and transitional piece of legislation in the history of the AFDC program.
Interest in further reforms of the system did not die down after the Act but instead increased in
intensity. For example, the goals of reform started shifting almost immediately from a humancapital, education-and-training emphasis embodied in the Act, to an emphasis on work per se,
regardless of training content. Another notable shift subsequent to the Act was a shift toward
caseload reduction per se as a goal, which had not been a major focus of the Act. In part this
change may have been a result of the rising caseloads and expenditures in AFDC over the late
1980s and early 1990s (see below). Finally, an increased interest in family-structure issues and
nonmarital childbearing occurred in the period subsequent to the Act.
This increased welfare reform activity took place, as it had in the 1980s, mainly at the
state level. With encouragement from the Bush and Clinton administrations, states over the early
1990s increased their initiation of AFDC waiver programs testing alternative features of reform.
An increased emphasis on work requirements, in particular to the exclusion of human capital and
education programs as just noted, was present in almost all state efforts. Most states also began
imposing "sanctions" (i.e., temporary or permanent withdrawal of benefits) on recipients for
failure to comply with work and other requirements. Although such sanctions had been present
in some form previously, they had never been as aggressively enforced. The increased emphasis
on work requirements was often accompanied as well by a reduction of marginal tax rates on
earnings to provide financial incentives to work, for the federal rules still required 100 percent
rates. Many other features also began to be introduced in state waiver programs, including (1)
10

the provision of time limits on benefits, stipulating that recipients could not receive benefits for
more than a certain number of years (2 to 5, for example), at least within a given calendar period;
(2) the imposition of family caps, which specified that AFDC recipients would not receive higher
benefits if they had additional children while on AFDC; and (3) an attempt to reintroduce
residency requirements by formulating "two-tier" programs under which in-migrants were not
denied benefits but rather were given lower benefits than initial residents for some specified
period.
Another new feature of the state waiver programs in this period was an increased
tendency to test programs which contained multiple reform features simultaneously, for example,
simultaneously strengthening work requirements, enforcing sanctions, imposing time limits and
family caps, etc. Prior to this period, the waiver programs formulated by states had tested only
one or two reform features at one time. These reform "packages" were intended to test new
programs which differed in their entirety from the AFDC program, and were intended to have a
cumulative impact which would be greater than the sum of the impact of each reform
individually. More generally, they represented a political desire for a major, wholesale change
in the AFDC program rather than incremental change.6
A final new feature of the waiver programs over this period was an increased tendency to
“test” the new programs on the entire state AFDC caseload, whereas prior to this period the
waiver programs had been tested on the caseload in only one or two counties, cities, or local
offices. These statewide waivers had the effect of essentially replacing the existing AFDC

6

See U.S. DHHS (1997) and Harvey et al. (2000) for a summary of the provisions of the
state waiver programs in this period.
11

program with the reform program for the entire state, at least for the lifetime of the waiver, which
was usually several years. As waivers of this type grew in number--40 states had requested and
been granted waivers by 1995--the waivers gradually ceased to be small-scale experiments and
began to envelope a major portion of the national caseload and hence to gradually eliminate the
AFDC program de facto.7
TANF. Congress subsequently took action in 1996 by enacting PRWORA, which
simultaneously reduced federal authority over the program but also mandated many (but not all)
of the popular state-level waiver features with federal law. Table 2 summarizes the differences
between AFDC and TANF. The PRWORA legislation converted the previous matching grant to
a block grant and removed much of the federal regulatory authority over the design of the
program. Thus states are free to set their benefit levels, as before, but also the tax rate, income
limits, asset requirements, and even the form of assistance (cash or in-kind services). The last
provision is important because it allows states to use TANF dollars to support child care, job
search support, social services, and other types of expenditure; there are no requirements on how
much or little must be spent on cash aid directly. In addition, no federal definition of who is to
be included in the assistance unit is imposed; the AFDC-UP program is abolished and states
cover two-parent families at their own discretion. States are free to impose family caps. In
addition, and importantly, the entitlement nature of the program is abolished and states are not

7

The federal government generally required states to conduct random-assignment
evaluations of their reforms. When states moved to implementing reform programs on the full
state caseload, they usually complied with this requirement by holding out a small group of
“control” families to be administered the old AFDC program. A major problem with these
experiments was that it was difficult to prevent the control families from perceiving, and being
affected by, the overall programmatic change in the state that occurred around them. See below.
12

required to serve all eligibles.8
At the same time, however, the law imposed new federal authority in a few specified
areas. Federal funds are not to be used to pay adults for more than 60 months of TANF benefits
over their lifetimes, although states are allowed an exemption from this requirement for 20
percent of their caseloads. Minors who have dependent children are required to stay in school
and live with their parents in order to receive federal TANF dollars. Aliens are ineligible for five
years after their entry into the U.S. and longer at state option. In addition, while the JOBS
program is abolished, new work requirements are imposed that are require that much greater
fractions of the caseload be involved in them, and which exempt many fewer families (as many
as 50 percent of single mother recipients and 90 percent of two-parent families must comply).
Recipients involved in general education and training cannot be counted toward these
participation requirements. The hours of work per week required are also greatly increased (up
to 30 hours/week for single mothers and more for two-parent families).9
The most dramatic departures from the AFDC program are the time limit and work
requirement provisions. Lifetime time limits are a new concept in U.S. transfer programs and are
based on a quite different philosophy of the aims of public assistance than has been the case

8

While reducing federal regulation, the law did impose specific penalties on the states
for not complying with the mandated provisions of the law. These penalties took the form of
percentage reductions in the block grant allocation for each type of violation.
9

The work participation requirements have been considerably ameliorated thus far by
another provision of the law which reduces those requirements in proportion to the amount of
caseload reduction a state experiences. Because caseloads have fallen dramatically, these
participation requirements have been greatly reduced as well. However, this provision of the
law also gives states an incentive to reduce the caseload because it lowers the level of mandated
work requirements.
13

heretofore. States are allowed certain types of exemptions from the time limits and are also
allowed to grant temporary extensions to individual families, so long as the total number does
not exceed 20 percent of the caseload. The work requirements in the new legislation are much
stronger than in previous law and change the orientation from education and training to work per
se. The law also allows states to impose sanctions on recipients for failure to comply with the
work requirements, sanctions which are much stronger than in past law and which have been
enforced rigorously. The work emphasis of the law is further reinforced by an increase in the
funds made available for child care.10

At the same time, any system of work requirements must

specify some exemptions from them, and states are allowed to exempt families with specified
types of difficulties.
Several other PRWORA provisions are worth noting for their importance. States are
required to maintain expenditures from their own funds at a level at least 75 percent of that prior
to PRWORA (the so-called “maintenance of effort” provisions). This maintains a semblance of
a matching grant system for the time being. A major point of discussion between the federal
government and the states has been over whether these funds can only be spent on recipients
eligible for TANF dollars or more generally spent and, if the latter, whether there are any
categories of expenditure that funds cannot be spent on. Regulations issued in the Spring of
1999 by DHHS interpret the law fairly broadly and allow the funds to be spent on a wide variety
of sources, giving states considerable flexibility as a result.

Another important financing

provision was the creation of a contingency fund for the states to draw on in times of high
10

However, the guarantee of child care that existed under AFDC is abolished. That
guarantee was widely seen by states as a constraint on their ability to increase employment
among recipients.
14

unemployment. The strong performance of the U.S. economy since 1996 has made this
contingency fund of little relevance thus far but it could be important in the future if the economy
turns down. Another provision in PRWORA provides for bonuses to the five states who most
reduce their out-of-wedlock childbearing rates and their abortion rates.
Since the 1996 Act, states have moved forward vigorously to design TANF programs that
are very different from their AFDC programs prior to 1990, not only to comply with the
provisions of the law but also to alter program features that go beyond the minimum required. A
good example is the important case of time limits. Table 3 shows the limits adopted by the states
in the first year after TANF. Only a slight majority of the states--27--have adopted the simple
PRWORA standard of a 60 month lifetime time limit. The rest of the states have adopted some
other type of plan and, in fact, most of these states have adopted time limits that are stricter than
those required by PRWORA, sometimes dramatically so.11 For example, eight states impose not
only a lifetime limit but also a shorter limit over fixed calendar intervals (e.g., no more than 24
months of receipt in every 60 months of calendar time). Eight other states simply impose a
shorter lifetime limit than 60 months; the shortest of these is Connecticut, at 21 months, a very
stringent limit. However, Arizona illustrates a variation that many states have considered--a
lifetime limit only for adults, so that children can continue to receive benefits beyond 60 months
(paid for out of state funds). Six other states besides Arizona have adopted these "reduction"
rather than "termination" policies, which constitute a relaxing of the time limits implicit in

11

However, the large states in the U.S.--who have a disproportionate share of the
caseload--do not have time limits below 60 months (and Michigan has none at all).
15

PRWORA (Gallagher et al., 1998, Table 6).12 The other six states in the table have more
complex provisions which introduce new criteria into the time limit imposed and hence open the
door to individual-specific considerations related to need and job availability.
The states have also embraced work requirements and sanctions vigorously. The most
notable movement has been toward a "Work First" approach in which recipients and new
applicants for benefits are moved as quickly as possible into work of any kind, with an
deemphasis on education and training. States have imposed strong sanctions for failure to
comply with these requirements, usually beginning with an initial partial sanction at first
noncompliance and then graduating to a more severe, full sanction at subsequent noncompliance.
Seven states have imposed a lifetime ban on eligibility if an adult receives a certain number of
sanctions; in Georgia, for example, two sanctions will trigger this prohibition. Many states have
also lowered the age of the youngest child which furnishes exemption from the requirement
down to one year or 6 months, and have otherwise tightened up on exemptions from the
regulations (Gallagher et al., 1996). The work requirements have also been strengthened by
frequent requirements for job search and work registration at the point of application for TANF
benefits that must be complied with before benefit receipt can begin.
With the aim of reinforcing these work requirements, states have generally lowered their
tax rates. Table 4 shows state-by-state changes as of October 1997. While 10 states have kept
the AFDC disregards (i.e., no disregards beyond $90 after 12 months of benefit receipt), the rest

12

It is worth noting at this point that the PRWORA legislation imposes the limit only on
a family in which there is an adult caretaker who has been on welfare for 60 months, regardless
of how long the children have been supported. In principle, children could be put under the care
of a different relative and be eligible for another 60 months of benefits.
16

of the states have lowered their tax rates considerably. Many states have a tax rate of 50%,
while there is a distribution above and below this value as well. A few states have 100%
disregards, implying a tax rate of zero; these states limit benefits by imposing income limits of
one form or another on eligibility (at which point the tax rate is effectively greater than 100%).
States have altered some of the other financial aspects of eligibility and the benefit
formula but not all. Asset limits have generally been raised as have gross income limits, but
benefit levels themselves have for the most part been left the same as they were prior to
PRWORA (Gallagher et al., 1998). The 100-hour rule limiting work in two parent families has
been dropped in the majority of states, who treat two-parent families the same as single-parent
families in regards to work incentives and eligibility. Family caps have been adopted in twentytwo states, and one state (Wisconsin) has adopted a flat benefit that does not vary at all with
family size. There has been significant reduction in the use of the child-support pass through
(the requirement that the welfare recipient receive the first $50 of child support payment from the
father).13 Finally, the majority of states have adopted some type of “diversion” program which
seeks to divert families who have applied for TANF from coming onto the rolls. One type
provides a family with a lump sum cash payment together with a stipulation that they cannot
reapply for a set number of future months. Another provides families with child care, medical,
or transportation services to assist them in cases where they are judged to be only temporarily
needy. A third, common, program requires recipients to engage in a specified period of job
search, sometimes merely by registering with a work agency but often requiring that the applicant

13

Details on state-specific benefit formulas can be found in the Welfare Rules Database
of the Urban Institute (http://anfdata.urban.org/wrd).
17

show evidence of having applied for jobs or having contacted employers. The individual cannot
be considered for assistance until the requirement is met.
Goals of AFDC and TANF. The AFDC and TANF rules implicitly reveal many of the
goals of the programs as they have changed over time. Originally the AFDC program was
intended only to provide cash support for widows and their children, at a time when married
women were commonly expected not to work and to stay at home to raise their children. Over
time, as the general labor force participation rate of women with children rose, and as the
composition of the caseload shifted toward divorced and unmarried mothers, the goals of the
program gradually shifted as well to encouraging and requiring work to accompany the cash
benefit. This shift took a major additional step with the state level welfare reform efforts in the
early 1990s and with the 1996 passage of PRWORA, where the goals of the program were
moved toward the employment goal much more strongly than had been the case in the past.
Another significant shift in goals in the 1990s has been the shift from an educationtraining strategy toward a pure work strategy. There has been a tension between these two
strategies ever since the employment goal began to enter into programmatic discussions in the
late 1960s. The education-training strategy, or what was sometimes called the human capital
strategy, aimed to improve recipient skills and potential wage rates in the labor market, whereas
the pure work strategy emphasized instead work per se, even if the education or training content
was not high. The education-training strategy is more expensive and has an uncertain rate of
return but holds the promise of long-run improvement, whereas the pure work strategy is
relatively inexpensive and promotes employment directly but may do less for long-run earnings
capacity. The education-training, or human capital, strategy was most forcefully embodied in
18

the Family Support Act of 1988 but the 1996 PRWORA strongly reoriented the strategy toward a
pure work goal.
But the PRWORA legislation represented more than simply a redirection of the
employment goal and an increased emphasis on work. A new goal appeared which was to reduce
"dependency," a term much used in public discussions, which is more or less defined as longterm receipt of welfare benefits. Such dependency is presumed by the PRWORA legislation to
have deleterious effects on adults and children, a hypothesis upon which research has a bearing.
The time limits embodied in PRWORA are intended to reduce dependency directly by simply
disallowing long-term receipt, thereby providing only temporary assistance to families. There is
also an implicit hypothesis in the notion of a time limit that welfare recipients are capable of
becoming "self-sufficient” off the rolls, where “self-sufficiency” is meant the attainment of a
reasonable and sustainable level of income that is enough to allow a family not to have to apply
for public support. The time limit provisions implicitly presume that it is possible to become
self-sufficient after five years or less of welfare receipt, another hypothesis that is in principle
possible to test.
Another new goal of welfare programs in the 1990s has been to reduce the rate of
nonmarital childbearing and to encourage marriage. This goal is explicitly stated in the preamble
to the PRWORA legislation but the law itself has very few provisions directly relating to it.14 In
part this is because it is presumed that reductions in dependency will lead to reductions in such
childbearing and an increase in marriage, another hypothesis that can be subjected to test. The
14

Of the four principal goals of the PRWORA legislation given its preamble, only one
relates solely to assisting the poor; the other three relate to increasing marriage and employment
and to reducing nonmarital childbearing.
19

lack of direct provisions in PRWORA on childbearing and marriage is also partly the result of a
lack of confidence by Congress in the efficacy of any specific set of programs aimed at those
outcomes.

II. Caseloads, Expenditures, Participation, and Recipient Characteristics
Expenditure, Caseload and Benefit Trends. The AFDC program experienced uneven
growth of expenditures and caseloads over its lifetime.

While program growth was essentially

comparable to population growth from 1935 through the late 1950s, expenditures and caseloads
began to pick up in the 1960s. Figure 1 shows the growth of real per capita expenditures in the
AFDC program from 1970 to 1995.15

A notable change in AFDC expenditures occurred in the

early 1970s (a continuation of an upward trend which began in the late 1960s) which ran through
about 1977, a period known as the “welfare explosion.” Expenditures subsequently declined in
real terms, until the early 1990s, when they underwent another period of growth, albeit much
smaller in magnitude than that in the 1970s. This period of growth was not sufficient to offset
the long-period decline, however, and by 1995 per capita expenditures on the AFDC program
were at about the same level they were in 1972.
The second line in Figure 1 shows per capita expenditure trends in the TANF program
and for a reconstructed set of expenditures for the AFDC program to restore some measure of
comparability. TANF expenditures cover many types of activities (e.g., jobs programs and
emergency assistance) that were not included in official AFDC expenditures. As the line shows,

15

This figure and all subsequent ones uses the Personal Consumption Expenditure
deflator (base 1996) for conversion to real amounts.
20

expenditures including these additional programs were slightly higher than official AFDC
expenditures but have fallen rapidly in the TANF program. This decline is largely a result of the
decline in the caseload, as discussed next.
The upper line in Figure 2 shows the per capita caseload in the AFDC and TANF
programs. The AFDC caseload grew dramatically in the early 1970s (again, a continuation of a
trend which began in the 1960s) and then gradually declined until 1982 and leveled off for the
rest of the decade. A new surge of growth occurred in the early 1990s, followed by a decline
which began before 1996 but accelerated after it and led to a caseload level by 1999 which had
fallen below its level in 1970. Overall, the pattern of caseload growth generally follows the
pattern of expenditures in Figure 1. Indeed, a decomposition of the per capita expenditure
growth into caseload per capita and expenditures per recipient through 1995 shows that the
former explains essentially all of the expenditure patterns (Moffitt,2001). The same correlation
appears after 1995. Expenditures per recipient changed very little over the entire period.
The lower lines in Figure 2 show trends in the fraction of single mother families who
received AFDC or TANF benefits, and in the fraction of earnings-poor single mother families
who did so.16 Participation rates grew rapidly in the 1970s and then declined somewhat through
the early 1990s. Moffitt (2001) has shown that the fraction of the population that is in single
mother families grew steadily over the period and accelerated during the 1980s and early 1990s;
this growth kept the caseload from falling even more than it did from the decline in participation
rates of single mothers alone. Indeed, the spike in the caseload in the early 1990s is not reflected
16

“Earnings poor” families are those below their poverty threshold on the basis of family
earnings alone. Only single mother families are shown because married families have always
been a minor fraction of the caseload.
21

in participation rates and is instead a result of the continued growth of single mother families.
Starting around 1994, participation rates declined drastically along with the caseload. The
caseload decline was entirely the result of the drop in participation, for, at least through 1999,
there was no dropoff in the number of single mother families (U.S. DHHS, 2001, p.III-50).17
Figure 3 shows trends in real welfare benefits for a family of four over the 1970-1998
period.18 The lower line in the figure shows that for AFDC-TANF, while the upper two lines
show figures for the combined sum of AFDC-TANF, Food Stamps and Medicaid. The higher of
the two latter lines shows the straight sum of the three, while the lower of the two discounts the
Medicaid benefit by an estimate of its cash-equivalent value and also takes into account the
taxation of AFDC-TANF income by the Food Stamp program.
The figure shows that AFDC-TANF benefits by themselves have declined secularly since
1970, and hence cannot provide an explanation for any of the positive or negative fluctuations in
the caseload or in participation rates conditional on single motherhood shown in Figure 2.
Mechanically, the decline in benefits results from a failure of states to raise nominal benefit
levels to keep up with inflation. There has been very little change in this trend during the TANF
program; indeed, the benefit decline has slightly leveled off.
Nevertheless, it is important to note that Food Stamps and Medicaid were not received by
many familes in the late 1960s and came into their own only in the early 1970s, when they
17

The decline in participation was not a result of increases in income which made more
single mothers ineligible. The decline in the participation rate of poor single mothers in Figure 2
suggests this, but when income eligibility is more precisely determined, the data show a decline
in the participation rate of income-eligible families as well (U.S. DHHS, 2001, p.II-21).
18

The figures show the maximum amount paid for a family with no other income, or
what economists commonly call the guarantee.
22

rapidly expanded around the country. AFDC-TANF recipients are automatically eligible for
benefits from both programs. Consequently, a proper comparison of the change in benefits
received by AFDC recipients is more closely approximated by comparing the AFDC benefit
alone in 1970 to the combined benefit in 1975 and after. By that comparison, there was a strong
growth of benefits in the early 1970s, thus providing a possible explanation for the growth in the
caseload and in participation rates over that period. Moreover, the decline in the combined
benefit subsequently has been entirely the result of the decline in AFDC benefits, for Food Stamp
benefits have remained relatively constant in real terms and real Medicaid benefits have grown
slightly. On net, by 1998, the combined benefit was still higher than the AFDC benefit alone in
1970.
The AFDC-TANF benefit decline after 1996 is also somewhat misleading because of the
increase in the fraction of TANF expenditures spent on non-cash services. Figure 4 shows the
distribution of 1999 TANF expenditures by spending category and shows that only 59 percent of
monies were expended on cash aid. The rest was spent on work activities, child care,
administration, and a number of other types of categories (including social services). Indeed,
when the post-TANF expenditures in Figure 1 are divided by the number of cash recipients
shown in Figure 2, it can easily be seen that expenditures per recipient have actually increased
after 1996, rather than fallen. In large part this is simply because the caseload has declined so
drastically that states have used their block grant monies for other, non-cash categories.19
19

There is unfortunately no concrete data on how many of the recipients of the non-cash
expenditures are AFDC-TANF recipients and how many are either former recipients--namely,
those who have left the welfare rolls--or even poor families who have never been on AFDCTANF. This makes the expenditure per recipient calculation potentially misleading, for the
monies are now spread over a large population. Along with the decline in expenditures has
23

Recipient Characteristics. Table 5 shows the trends in a few characteristics of the AFDC
and TANF caseload 1969 to 1999. The percent of the caseload with earnings was only 13
percent in 1979 but dropped further in the 1980s, largely because of 1981 federal legislation
which increased the tax rate on earnings to 100 percent (see Table 1), effectively making many
working families formerly on AFDC ineligible for benefits. The percent with earnings is a much
higher 25 percent by 1999, a reflection of the emphasis of current welfare reform on work.
The age of recipients appears to be slightly increasing and family size is declining, though
most of the decline in the latter occurred in the 1970s. The fraction whose youngest child is less
than 2 has also declined in the 1990s, either because of a general decline in in the population of
families with children in this age range or because mothers with very young children have left the
welfare rolls. Another important trend has been an enormous increase in the 1990s in the
fraction of the caseload composed of child-only cases. These are cases in which benefits are
received by children but the parent, or other adult caretaker, is herself ineligible for benefits.
Such ineligibility can occur if the parent is a non-citizen immigrant but the children are citizens;
if the children are cared for by a non-parent with income above the TANF eligibility level; or if
the parent has been sanctioned for violating one of the many TANF rules (including those for
work requirements) or has reached a TANF time limit and has gone off the rolls. The last
category occurs only in those states with “partial” sanctions--that is, in the case of a violation
only the portion of the benefit designated for the adult is terminated--and in those states where
the time limit is applied only to the adult, not to the children. In child-only families, none of the
work requirements or time limits affect benefits or eligibility because they are assessed only on
probably been a redistribution within the poor population.
24

adults.
The last row of the table shows trends in the fraction of the caseload without a high
school education. This fraction declined seculary as it did for the population as a whole from
rising levels of education. However, it has increased slightly since 1996, possibly a sign that
more educated recipients have left the rolls in the massive caseload decline illustrated earlier.
This would leave the caseload more “disadvantaged” than it had been before.20
The types of single mothers on AFDC also shifted over time, as shown in Figure 5.
Initially most single mothers were widows, but in the 1960s and 1970s the majority were
divorced and separated women. In the 1980s and 1990s, the majority were composed of
unmarried single mothers. These trends have contributed importantly to the perception of
welfare recipients by the general public and have probably increased its unpopularity.21

III. Research on the AFDC Program
This section reviews the research literature on the AFDC program. AFDC has received
more research attention from economists than any other welfare program. AFDC was the most
well-known cash means-tested program in the mind of the general public and policy-makers. Its
benefit structure was also fairly simple and came closest, among all means-tested programs, to
the simple textbook model of such a program with a single guarantee and a single tax rate on

20

The evidence on whether this type of selectivity has occurred is weaker than one would
predict. See Moffitt and Stevens (2001), Moffitt et al. (2001), and Smith (2001), and the
references therein.
21

For a study of how the general public perceives welfare recipients, and how that
perception is affected by the marital status of recipients, see Moffitt (1999b).
25

income. This made it particularly well-suited to the study of work incentives, which has always
been the main interest of economists, beginning with the discussions of a negative income in the
1960s.
Research on the TANF program is considered in a separate section below.22 There is
much less research on TANF and, further, the character of that research is generally quite
different than that on the AFDC program, as will be seen from the review. Nevertheless,
research on AFDC is still quite relevant to the TANF program because academic AFDC research
deals, by and large, with fundamental response issues--the effects of benefits and tax rates on
behavior--and not with the effects of specific subfeatures of AFDC which are not so
generalizable. Consequently, AFDC research is still relevant in the TANF era, albeit in a
generalized sense.
Although the issue of work incentives is by far the major area in which AFDC research
has been conducted, some studies have also been conducted on many other issues as well. The
review below will include the main areas of such research: dynamics and turnover in the
program; employment and training programs; effects of the program on demographic and family
outcomes; and research on the state determination of benefits. The sections below on each of
these topics will first consider the economic models used to analyze them, followed by a review
of the empirical evidence.

Work Incentives

22

That section includes research on the AFDC waivers of the 1990s because those
waivers, while conducted within the AFDC program, are best understood as precursors to TANF.
26

Models. Economists’ research on AFDC, as on most welfare programs, generally has
taken the redistributive goals of the program as given and has tended to focus on the behavioral
incentives and disincentives provided by the program structure and benefit formula. For work
incentives, there is a well-developed model for analyzing these incentives--the static labor supply
model--which has been the workhorse of this literature. The model has endured because it can
capture the simple labor supply effects of a wide range of elementary program alternatives.
The model is illustrated with the familiar income-leisure diagram in Figure 6, where the
non-transfer constraint is shown as ADE with slope -W (the hourly wage rate) and it is assumed
that there is no non-program nonlabor income (N). The benefit formula (allowing positive N) is
B = G - t(WH+N), where H is hours of work, generating the transfer constraint shown as ACD,
with slope -W(1-t). Here t is the marginal tax rate on benefits and the intercept G is the
guarantee level. The introduction of the program where there was none before uncontrovertibly
reduces (or at least does not increase) labor supply because income and substitution effects go in
the same direction. Those initially on constraint AD will move to CD, reducing labor supply, and
a few of those initially above point D will reduce labor supply to go onto the program
(indifference curves not shown).
An increase in G, which shifts up segment CD, reduces hours of work in this model if
leisure is a normal good, but the more important comparative static is that induced by a reduction
in t. The negative income tax, a program originally proposed by Friedman (1962) and promoted
by Lampman (1968), Tobin (1966), Tobin et al. (1967), and many others thereafter, was intended
to provide work incentives by such a reform. Figure 7 shows the effect of a reduction in t from
1.0 to some lesser value by the shift from CD to CD’. It is now a well-known result that the
27

effect of such a reduction is ambiguous in sign. While some of those who are initially on
welfare and not working increase their hours of work (Arrow 1), those in the newly-created
eligible region will reduce their labor supply (Arrow 2) as will some of those at higher income
levels who are initially ineligible (Arrow 3). Whether labor supply on net increases or decreases
depends on the relative numbers of individuals at different points and on the magnitudes of their
responses.23 The ranges of G and t in the AFDC program typically resulted in a program
breakeven point (D or D’) somewhere in the part-time hours range, so the effect of a reduction in
t was thought to increase part-time work both by pulling nonworkers up to that range and
inducing some full-time workers to reduce work to part-time (to obtain benefit supplementation).
This result is a special case of a larger principle that has bedeviled welfare reform,
namely, that any reform that provides a benefit to those on welfare that is not available off
welfare tends to draw families onto the program, thereby increasing the caseload and decreasing
labor supply. Providing benefit supplementation to those who work while on welfare--but not to
those who are off welfare--is one example, but so is providing medical benefits, child care
subsidies, and education and training programs, if those are provided only to those on welfare
and not those off. There is no way within this general class of budget-constraint manipulations
of the welfare formula to avoid these effects entirely, although they may be avoided by making
such benefits universal and hence available to those off welfare as well as on.
With a minor modification, the model also provides a simple theory of welfare
23

The decrease in t has ambiguous effects on work effort but unambiguously increases
the caseload and the participation rate in the program. The early literature on reductions in t
(e.g., Aaron, 1973) emphasized that there is a tradeoff between work incentives and program
costs for this reason. But, in fact, the tradeoff is more unfavorable than this implies because a
reduction in t may not only increase costs, it may also not increase labor supply.
28

participation, which is also a useful tool in analyzing the AFDC program. Denoting V(W', N')
as the indirect utility obtained by an individual on a linear budget segment with slope W' and
rightmost intercept N', we can write the determinants of welfare participation--P, equal to 1 if the
individual participates and 0 if not--as:

P* = V[W(1-t), N(1-t) + G] - V[W,N] - C

(1)

P = 1 iff P*>0; P=0 otherwise

(2)

where C is some implicit cost attached to being a welfare recipient. That cost may be a “stigma”
cost--the individual suffers a utility loss from being on welfare per se--or a time and money cost
arising from the process of applying for the program and complying with its ongoing reporting
and other requirements.

The first two terms in (1) imply that participation propensities are

increasing in G and decreasing in t, and there is a presumption (though not strictly required by
theory) that they are decreasing in W. The basic tradeoff in the model faced in the participation
choice is between the potential benefit, on the one hand, and potential earnings off welfare, on
the other. Welfare costs (C) are needed to explain why participation rates of eligibles are less
than 100 percent--as all data calculations show them to be--for this implies that some families
will be observed to be on segment AD in Figure 1 and do not take advantage of a potential
increase in income by going onto welfare. Note that eqns (1)-(2) also cover the participation
choice between locating above the breakeven point D in Figure 1 and below it, as well as the
choice between segment AD and CD.
Evidence. There have been three major reviews of the literature on the effect of AFDC
29

on labor supply (Danziger et al., 1981; Moffitt, 1992a; Hoynes, 1997) which cover most of the
work on that topic. The studies as a whole confirm that AFDC reduces labor supply, and the
estimates of its effect range from 10 to 50 percent of non-AFDC levels. Mean labor supply in
the absence of AFDC is generally only about 20 hours per week, however (including
nonworkers), so the absolute magnitude of the reduction is not as large as might be expected.24
Probably the major methodological problem with these estimates is the obvious one that they are
not based on any data in which AFDC was literally absent, but rather are extrapolations from
estimated effects of the level of the AFDC benefit down to a benefit level of zero. Benefit-level
estimates (really, effects of G) are obtained from cross-state variation in benefits, which,
although large, does not include zero benefits. These estimates must therefore be treated with
some caution.
This literature also generally estimates income and substitution effects on labor supply,
usually based, at least in part, on variation in G and t across states. This itself is also
problematic because, while there is considerable variation in G, as just noted, the nominal level
of the tax rate is set by the federal government and hence is constant across states. Sometimes
this problem was circumvented by constraining the effect of t to enter through W(1-t), thereby
allowing wage variation to identify the coefficient, or, preferably, from variation in effective tax
rates which arise from a variety of sources. 25 Either approach has problems. In any case,
24

The estimates suffer from a data problem, namely, that they use household surveys
which only contain information on hours of work over an entire year (divided by 52), which
includes both welfare and nonwelfare weeks. Thus the estimates are themselves some average
over weeks in which the individual was on welfare and weeks in which she was not.
25

See n.2 for ways in which states could manipulate the tax rate. These variations only
changed the tax rate over some ranges of the data and hence still require some parametric
30

however, the elasticities estimated in the papers generally fell into acceptable ranges as those are
defined by the general labor supply literature for women and single mothers, with moderately
large and negative income effects and moderately-sized and positive uncompensated substitution
effects. But, as noted in the Models section above, the net effect of changes in t on labor supply
depends on the relative magnitudes of offsetting effects in a positive and negative direction, and
here the evidence suggested that the net effect was reasonably close to zero; that is, that the
positive and negative incentive effects of changes in t essentially cancel out. As noted by
Moffitt (1992a), this finding was consistent with the relative invariance of hours of work among
female heads in time series before and after the 1967 and 1981 changes in the tax rate in the
AFDC program. This major finding greatly reduces the case for a negative income tax, at least
one that is available only by being on AFDC and not off.26
There have been relatively few new studies of AFDC and labor supply since the past
reviews. Three are noted in Table 6. Hoynes (1996) studied the AFDC-UP program and found
it to have significant negative effects on the labor supply of husbands and wives, but that
marginal reductions in t had little effect, consistent with prior work. Keane and Moffitt (1998)
focused on the labor supply effects of participating in multiple programs, including not only

restrictions to obtain general estimates of substitution effects. Some studies, rather than using the
official manipulations of the tax rate, simply used estimated effective tax rates obtained by
regressing benefits on income on a state-by-state basis (see Fraker et al., 1985, and McKinnish et
al., 1999 for such estimates). However, these incorrectly linearized the benefit formla and also
incorporated taxes and work-related expenses which should not be included.
26

The above-cited reviews generally surveyed only nonexperimental, econometric
evidence on this issue. However, the findings from the NIT experiments are consistent with this
result. Generally speaking, comparisons of labor supply across alternative treatment groups
which had the same G but different t showed essentially zero net effects of t on labor supply.
31

AFDC but also Food Stamps, subsidized housing, and the Medicaid program. They showed that
cumulative tax rates were generally greater than 100 percent in this case. Nevertheless, while
their estimated substitution and income elasticities were sizable, the net effect on labor supply of
reducing the marginal tax rates to a level below 100 percent was negligible. Meyer and
Rosenbaum (2001) focused on an attempt to explain the increase in employment rates among
single mothers from 1984-1986. They found that AFDC benefits and tax rates (the latter
affecting potential benefits if working) had expected effects on employment probabilities, but
that the time series increase in single mother employment was less affected by changes in those
parameters and other welfare variables than a change in the generosity of the Earned Income Tax
Credit (EITC) over the period (see the EITC chapter in this volume).27
Simple static models of participation in AFDC also form a part of this literature, generally
estimating some version of equation (1)-(2) above. Again, most of this literature is summarized
by prior reviews. The studies overwhelmingly confirm that participation propensities are
positively affected by G and negatively affected by t, and generally confirm that those
propensities are negatively affected by W and N. Two of the recent studies (Hoynes (1996) and
Keane and Moffitt (1998)) estimated participation equations jointly with labor supply equations
and obtained results consistent with these findings.
Researchers have also sought to use this model to explain the time-series pattern of
caseload and participation rates in different periods shown in Figure 2. Most explanations for

27

Because Meyer and Rosenbaum examined employment rather than hours of work, the
“perverse” effect of a change in t could not occur. They briefly examined effects on hours of
work as a sensitivity test but they noted that the model independent variables were not set up for
that dependent variable.
32

the welfare caseload increase in the late 1960s and early 1970s rely on the gradual expansions of
the Food Stamp and Medicaid programs to more counties in the U.S., which, given the ties of
these programs to AFDC receipt, made the program more attractive. Such an explanation is
consistent with the economic model. However, most observers attribute part of the increase as
well to court decisions relaxing eligibility restrictions and to declines in welfare stigma, although
the latter may be endogenous. The relatively stable caseload trend in the late 1970s and 1980s is
generally attributed to two offsetting and contradictory forces, one an increase in the fraction of
single mother families in the population and the other a decline in the participation rate
conditional on single motherhood. The latter is most often attributed to the decline in the real
benefit level, while the causes of the former are still in considerable dispute. The economic
model is better at explaining changes in participation conditional on single motherhood than
changes in single motherhood, in general. Finally, the increase in caseloads in the early 1990s,
which resulted from a rise in the participation rate conditional on single motherhood more than a
rise in single motherhood, is more difficult to explain with the economic model, for neither
declining wage rates nor increasing benefits can be reasonably tied to most of the growth. Blank
(2001) shows that the majority of the caseload increase over this period arose from increases in
child-only cases and the AFDC-UP caseload, neither of which is easily explainable by the
economic model, whereas the remaining growth of the traditional single-mother AFDC caseload
is reasonably well explained by an expanded model which not only includes benefits but also
demographics, political factors, and other policy variables.28
28

Blank also argues, however, that the growth of the single-mother AFDC caseload over
this period was more a result of an increase in the number of single mothers with income below
the eligibility level than of an increase in takeup conditional on this eligibility. Moffitt (2001)
33

A small literature has also developed on the concept of welfare stigma, which, as
mentioned above, is conceived of as a disutility of welfare participation which lowers
participation rates in the program. Moffitt (1983) introduced the concept to the literature but
considered it to be an exogenous heterogeneous parameter of the individual utility function
which could be used to rationalize the need to estimate a participation equation and not just a
labor supply equation.29 However, other studies have developed the idea of welfare stigma as a
disutility which declines with the number of other families who are on welfare, setting up a social
interactions, or contagion, model which can have multiplier effects once participation rates
exceed a threshold. Besley and Coate (1992a), for example, assumed that the utility of being on
welfare is reduced by some function of the fraction of the population that is not truly needy and is
instead reducing labor supply to go onto welfare. Lindbeck et al. (1999) simply assumed that the
utility of being on welfare is reduced by the number of others who are on welfare, but went on to
analyze the voting equilibria that would set benefit levels that would generate different welfare
caseloads as an equilibrium outcome. In a somewhat different vein, Nechbya (1999) assumed
that the stigma of having nonmarital births (which is a condition for welfare eligibility) is
reduced by the magnitude of the aggregate nonmarital birth rate, and then showed that a change
in welfare benefits can initiate a nontrivial change in that birth rate through multiplier effects.

showed that the caseload increase over this period was half a result of increases in the numbers of
single mothers and half a result of increases in takeup conditional on single motherhood (but not
conditional on income). Moffitt also argued that, over the period 1971-1995, participation rates
so defined fluctuated around a constant mean and hence had no effect on the long run growth of
the caseload, which is instead essentially entirely explained by the growth in single motherhood.
29

If participation rates of eligibles are 100 percent, then all individuals are on the
boundary of their constraints and their observed values of labor supply uniquely determine their
welfare participation status; hence there is no need to estimate a welfare participation equation.
34

Participation Dynamics
A continuing area of research on the AFDC program focuses on participation dynamics,
that is, the study of entry rates, exit rates, and spell distributions of time on AFDC.

Interest in

this issue arises from several sources. One is the recognition that, contrary to the impression
given by the static labor supply model where participation seems to be a one-time, permanent,
decision, turnover rates in the AFDC program are quite high. Another is that attitudes toward
the program, and policy measures to assist recipients, may differ depending upon whether
recipients have only short spells of AFDC receipt or long spells. Short-spell recipients are likely
to be those with stronger labor market skills who use the program for temporary support, while
long-term recipients are likely to be those with the weakest skills. Further, long-term receipt
may reduce skill levels further, as time out of the labor force results in deterioration of skills.
Models. The two building blocks of dynamic participation analysis are an entry rate and
and an exit rate. The standard static labor supply-participation model is easily adapted to entry
and exit in order to generate a conventional economic model of turnover. Supposing that the
relevant population of eligibles is composed of myopic individuals who make decisions only on
the basis of current period values, the decision for women who are off welfare at time !-1 to
enter or not enter the program (designate EN! as an entry dummy variable) and the decision for
women who are on welfare at time !-1 to exit or not exit the program (designate EX! as an exit
dummy) can be formulated as:

EN!* = V[W!(1-t), N!(1-t) + G] - V[W!, N!] - C - F1

(3)

EN! = 1 iff EN!*>0; EN!=0 otherwise

(4)

35

EX!* = V[W!, N!] - V[W!(1-t), N!(1-t) + G] + C - F2

(5)

EX! = 1 iff EX!*>0; EX!=0 otherwise

(6)

where F1 are fixed costs associated with moving onto welfare and F2 are fixed costs associated
with moving off welfare (and possibly into the workforce). Starting with initial positions on or
off welfare, and with G,t, and C fixed, transitions on and off welfare are driven by fluctuations in
private market income opportunities W! and N!, which are assumed to follow some stochastic
process. Individuals leave welfare when good job or other income opportunities arise and enter
welfare when those job or income circumstances deteriorate; benefit levels and tax rates affect
the relative attractiveness of welfare in the decision.
Given that the utility structure of the entry and exit decisions in (3)-(6) is the same as that
in (1), the same comparative statics apply: entry rates are increasing in G and decreasing in t and
W, while exit rates are decreasing in G and increasing in t and W. Since labor supply on welfare
is always less than labor supply off welfare, we can also say that these entry and exit decisions
operate to make labor supply decreasing in G and increasing in t and W.

That work incentives

are implied to increase in t reflects the adverse work incentive effects noted above, and can be
seen in a dynamic context to operate through entry and exit: decreases in marginal tax rates tend
to decrease exit from the rolls and increase entry onto the rolls. Although the fixed costs reduce
transition rates, an individual’s participation will tend to gradually move over time toward
welfare if (3) is more positive than (5) conditional on W! and N! and toward nonwelfare if the
opposite occurs.
If " is the entry probability, # is the exit probability, and p! is the probability of being on
36

welfare at time !, then we have the flow identity

p! = "(1 - p!-1) + (1 - #)p!-1

(7)

= " + (1 - " - #)p!-1

which approaches the equilibrium value

p! = "/("+#)

(8)

Thus participation on welfare will be more likely if " is greater than # and nonwelfare
participation will be more likely if # is greater than ". Unless the fixed costs are large relative
to the utility differences, these participation tendencies will be driven by the relative values of
G,t,W, and N, as before.
In this simple setup, short-term recipients can be thought of as those with higher values of
mean W! and N!, which will generate lower entry rates, higher exit rates, and shorter spell
lengths, and long-term recipients can be thought of as those with lower mean values of those
variables, resulting in higher entry rates, lower exit rates, and longer spell lengths.

A logical

alternative in this model is that short-termers and long-termers have the same means for wages
and nonlabor income, but short-termers have a higher variance, which will lead them to have
higher turnover rates as well. If the variation in wage and nonlabor income from period to
period, which generates turnover in this model, is not exogenous but rather depends on effort,
then it is also possible that short-termers are those who put more effort into job search.
37

Heterogeneity in the distaste for welfare can also generate differences in turnover rates, as those
with greater distaste have a lower reservation wage for going off or failing to enter welfare.
These models can be made more realistic by allowing foresight, particularly if wage
growth is made endogenous and allowed to be affected by whether the individual is on or off
welfare. Current entry and exit decisions will then be affected by expectations of their future
consequences for wages and labor market opportunities. Liquidity constraints are important
because those going onto welfare may be those who are more greatly constrained and who cannot
sustain themselves off welfare after a negative wage shock, and those on welfare may be
discouraged from saving by the asset tests in the program.30
Evidence. The empirical literature on participation dynamics has two strands, one
consisting of simple descriptive work on the distribution of AFDC spells in the population and of
what types of individual characteristics are associated with that distribution, and another
consisting of estimates of entry and exit rate equations. The most influential descriptive work in
the literature is that of Bane and Ellwood (1983,1994) and Ellwood (1986), who used panel data
to estimate distributions of AFDC spell lengths and also distributions of “total time on” AFDC in
a fixed calendar interval. These authors realized upon examination of the data not only that
turnover rates were high but that many of those who exited the AFDC rolls returned in fairly
short order, a finding that has been repeatedly found in subsequent work. This implies that
many women do not have many long spells but nevertheless accumulate a considerable amount
of time on welfare because of their high return rates. Consequently, they may have a high “total
time on” welfare even though they do not have long spells. The data used by Bane and Ellwood
30

See Hubbard et al. (1995).
38

indicated that up to one quarter of all (new) recipients would be on AFDC for more than 10 years
in the subsequent 25-year period, as compared to only 10 percent who would have a spell that
lasted that long.31
In their later work (Bane and Ellwood, 1994), the authors took the existence of high
reentry rates to extend the categorization of welfare recipients to a three-fold classification,
consisting of long-termers, short-termers, and “cyclers.” Long-termers have long spells, shorttermers have only brief periods of AFDC receipt, and cyclers have relatively short spells but
return to the rolls frequently. The authors argued that policy toward the three groups should be
different. In a recent paper, Moffitt (forthcoming) has provided evidence, however, that cyclers
do not appear to have greater labor market skills than long-termers, which is an implication of the
conventional economic model, where high turnover is generated by higher labor market skill.
Moffitt found that the education and wage rates of cyclers were equal to those of long-termers, if
not lower, and that they are a very disadvantaged group of recipients. This suggests that their
cycling on and off for the rolls must be arising from some other kind of behavior, such as an
inability to comply with program rules.
The literature on estimating entry and exit equations is fairly large, and is well
summarized, for the most part, by the previous reviews of research on AFDC referred to earlier.

31

The US Department of Health and Human Services now routinely publishes these total
time on figures. A recent report (U.S. DHHS, 2001, Table IND 10) shows that, in a period later
than Bane and Ellwood considered and for the total recipient population (not just those with a
new spell), one-quarter of recipients were on AFDC more than 5 years in a 10-year period, a
much higher rate of dependence. Gottschalk and Moffitt (1994) examined how total-time-on
had been trending, however, and found no trend from the 1970s to the 1980s. They also
proposed an alternative measure, which was the percentage of income received from AFDC over
a fixed calendar period.
39

Table 7 lists some of the more recent studies that have been conducted, which explore a variety
of issues. On the issue of whether AFDC benefits affect the probability of entry and exit, the
literature confirms prior work that the guarantee generally decreases exit and increases reentry.
None of the studies estimated the effects of the tax rate. Blank and Ruggles (1994) emphasized
the high rates of reentry in the program, and Blank and Ruggles (1996) emphasized that spells of
eligibility are not the same as spells of welfare receipt, and some women enter the rolls after
being eligible for some time and others leave the rolls and remain eligible, usually for unknown
reasons. Fitzgerald (1995) and Hoynes (2000) examined the effects of local labor market
conditions on exit rates, while Harris (1993, 1996) examined the “routes” to exit from the rolls
and reentry to it. The literature on “routes” was initiated to a large exit by Bane and Ellwood
(1983), who found that most exits from AFDC were to marriage. Harris (1993, 1996) and others
found that this was a result of using annual data, and that when monthly data are used, exits are
usually “to” work. The literature on these “routes” on and off welfare and “reasons” for exit are
frought with conceptual problems, for the immediate reasons for entry and exit may not be the
long run reasons. In addition, reasons that particular individuals enter and exit are endogenous to
their unobserved characteristics, and it is difficult, as a result, to draw any implications about
whether government policy should be to encourage certain “routes” off welfare. 32

Employment Programs
In addition to simply providing cash with a specified benefit formula, the AFDC program
32

In a review of the earlier literature in this subarea, Moffitt (1992a, p.26) noted that the
studies needed more theoretical structure and content. This observation would seem still to
hold.
40

has long conducted various types of employment programs for recipients. One type is an
education or training program which attempts to provide labor market skills and hence to
improve the wage rate of the recipient. In policy discussions, these programs are often termed
“human capital” programs. A second type is one which provides assistance in job search, or
assists recipients in locating transportation and child care for employment, or even which instruct
recipients on the kinds of behavior and dress needed at regular jobs. In policy discussions, these
are generally not termed “human capital” programs, but economists’ conception of human capital
should include them because there is some type of investment, or instruction, involved, which
has a future return, however small and short-lived that return might be. A third type is a pure
workfare program which simply requires a recipient to work some minimum number of hours per
week, without the assistance or other guidance from the welfare department (except, in the case
of public service employment, to actually provide the job). Such a program should not be
expected to affect the wage rate and is not a human capital program under any definition. Most
programs have a least some elements of two or more of these ideal types, and it is not always
easy to find any of the types in pure form. Nevertheless, prior to TANF and the pre-PRWORA
waiver programs, AFDC employment programs typically drew mostly on elements from the first
two of these program types, even though variations on the third were present to some degree.
Models. These programs, when viewed as human capital programs that require an
investment of time (in education, training, job search, etc.) and which yield some rate of return in
the form of a higher future wage, can be simply analyzed with the standard investment

41

framework familiar from human capital theory.33

The value to an individual of participating in

the program is the present value of future wage and earnings gains minus the present value of the
time costs and, if any, money costs. Here it is important to know whether the program is
voluntary or mandatory. If it is voluntary, no recipient will participate in the program unless its
net present value is positive, but if it is mandatory, then it is conceivable that the net present
value will be negative for some recipients. If so, this will reduce the value of being on welfare
and should be subtracted from the welfare benefit itself (or the present value of such benefits) to
obtain the value of being on welfare.
There are a number of minor alterations in this familiar model which change things
slightly but not in the main. Future gains in earnings must be multiplied by the probability of
employment if the latter is less than one, and programs which change only that probability and
not wages also have a potentially positive net present value. Second, the rate of return will
depend on whether earnings are raised sufficiently to induce the individual to go off welfare
altogether; if so, incremental earnings gains go untaxed (by the welfare department), but if not,
earnings gains will be taxed at the welfare tax rate t and hence will be reduced. The rhetoric of
most education and training programs is that they are intended to move recipients off welfare
altogether, but the reality is otherwise (see empirical review below). The phrase “welfare trap” is
sometimes used to describe a situation in which a very large rate of return is needed to make the

33

Although traditional human capital theory presumes the effect of investment to affect
the wage rate, a generalized interpretation would allow it to affect employment as well. For
example, an investment in teaching a recipient improved job search techniques may lead to a
better ability of the recipient to find a job at all, which would affect hours of work and not the
wage rate. Although the theoretical discussion here assumes it is the wage rate that is affected,
the same model can be extended to include effects on hours of work.
42

recipient financially better off off welfare--this is particularly likely to occur if there is a notch at
the point of going off welfare where tax rates are over 100 percent. Third, if there are
opportunity costs in the form of foregone earnings--as in the classic education case of human
capital--these foregone earnings will only be W(1-t), not W, and hence will be lower than they
would be for such investment off welfare.34 If the recipient is not working, there is foregone
leisure rather than foregone earnings but the former is not taxed.
Assuming that the opportunity cost is in earnings rather than leisure, the net present
value of the program in a two-period model can be written as:
1
NPV = -W1(1-t)I +

1 + r

{P2 [(W2-W1)(1-t)H2 ]

(9)

+ (1-P2) [(W2-W1)H2 - (G -tW1H2)] }
where W1 is the wage if the recipient does not undergo the program, W2 is the (higher) wage in
period two if she does, I is the amount of time required in period one, H2 is hours worked in
period 2, and P2 is a welfare participation dummy in period two if the recipient undergoes the
program.35 A second equation for the determination of P2 is required but that is omitted for
brevity. The “welfare trap” is illustrated by the last term, which shows that the gain to the
program if the recipient goes off welfare subtracts off the lost benefit relative to the earnings
gain.
The key empirical questions raised by this model are (1) what effect have past programs
34

This point was made long ago by Kesselman (1976). The theoretical literature on the
effect of transfer programs on human capital investment is virtually nonexistent. See Kesselman
and Miller and Sanders (1997).
35

The change in H2 resulting from the increase in the wage is ignored for simplicity.
43

had on the wage rate or earnings and (2) to what degree have they moved recipients off welfare in
subsequent periods.
Moffitt (1996) has noted that there is a third empirical question, which is (3) whether
these programs affect the desirability of being on welfare in the first place, which is commonly
termed an effect on “entry” into the program.36 If the program is voluntary, no recipient can be
made worse off by its presence and the welfare program can only be enhanced in value, which
will increase the caseload by making welfare more attractive. If the program is mandatory, it
may reduce the caseload to the extent that recipients or potential recipients see it as making them
worse off.
Evidence. The main employment programs in the history of the AFDC program--at least
prior to the waiver programs of the 1990s--were the WIN program, the WIN “demonstrations” of
the 1980s, and the JOBS program, all referred to in Section II above in the discussion of the
history of the AFDC program. As noted there, the WIN program was a work-registration
program which provided simple job placement and job search assistance to eligible recipients;
the WIN demonstrations tested new employment programs involving “community work
experience” (close to workfare),” work supplementation,” and heightened job search; and the
JOBS program required states to offer some mix of education, job skills training, job search, on
the job training, work supplementation, and community work experience.37
36

This is a slight misnomer given the high turnover in the program. Recipients who are
already on welfare but who know that they may be engaged in a program subsequently, may also
change their exit decisions given the presence of the program, e.g., whether to accept a job offer
off the rolls or not.
37

“Community work experience” meant workfare because it was usually work at a
publicly-created job in the community such as cleaning up public parks. “Work
44

Neither the WIN demonstrations nor the JOBS program was ever evaluated in a
nationally representative sense, that is, by a random sample of all programs around the country or
by a universal sample of all programs. Instead, there were a series of evaluations of the
programs in selected state and local areas. In both cases, probably enough areas were selected
that a reasonably good sense of the effects of different types of programs were obtained. For the
WIN program, however, there was one major evaluation, which was national in scope (Ketron,
1980). It used a methodology which is now regarded as undesirable (the use of individuals on
waiting lists as a comparison group) and found very modest impacts of the program on recipient
earnings, between $200 and $300 per year on average but larger for public service employment.
The results of the WIN demonstration and JOBS evaluations have been reviewed and
summarized in several other places (Burtless 1995a, 1995b; Devere et al., 2000; Gueron and
Pauly, 1991; Moffitt, 1992a; O’Neill and O’Neill, 1997; Plimpton and Nightingale, 2000; U.S.
General Accounting Office, 1999; see also the chapter by LaLonde in this volume). Both the
WIN demonstration and JOBS evaluations concentrated on answering the first empirical question
noted above, namely, whether there is a positive return to the programs in terms of wage rates
and/or earnings, and devoted some attention as well to the second question--whether caseloads
were reduced. Virtually no attention was paid to the third question (whether there was induced
entry) primarily for methodological reasons, for most of the estimates of program effects were

supplementation” allowed welfare departments to use welfare benefits to subsidize private sector
jobs. See U.S. Congress (1994, Table 10-4) for the programs chosen by the states under the
JOBS programs; these usually were job search, on the job training, and community work
experience, with sometimes some type of education. Although education was required to be one
of the programs offered, states rarely supplied the necessary funds to establish significant
programs of that type.
45

obtained from random assignment trials, and those trials are inherently incapable of estimating
entry effects (Moffitt, 1992b).
The results of the evaluations of the WIN demonstration programs show generally
positive impacts on employment and earnings, with impacts on the latter usually in the range of
$300 to $600 per year. However, some programs had a much smaller impact, close to zero, and
others had larger impacts, occasionally around $900 per year. These impacts are not large
enough to make a major dent in the poverty rate, but are large enough to make the programs
worth considering, especially in light of the view in the 1980s that most employment programs
for welfare recipients had no impact at all. Furthermore, the expenditure on the WIN
demonstration programs was quite small, around $500 per recipient in some cases, because only
a modest amount of services were provided; these were very small scale programs. The earnings
impacts are perhaps larger than one might expect from such a minor investment.38
On the other hand, another finding from the WIN demonstrations was that the reduction
in AFDC participation, caseloads, and in expenditures on AFDC benefits was quite modest. The
employment and earnings impacts either were not enough to move recipients over the breakeven
point, or not enough to prevent recipients from coming back onto the AFDC rolls in sufficient
frequency to keep expenditures from falling.
The evaluations of the JOBS program also have generally yielded positive impacts on
employment and earnings. Evaluations of the California GAIN program, the most well-known
38

The evaluations also showed that most employment impacts arose from increases in
the amount of time employed rather than on the hourly wage rate. This is not too surprising
given that the programs made little investment in human capital. However, it also implies that
the impacts are likely to fade over time, and, indeed, Friedlander and Burtless (1995) showed that
they were gone in most sites after five years.
46

of the early JOBS evaluations, showed positive earnings gains of $636 (about 25 percent) in the
third year after the evaluation began (Riccio et al., 1994). The GAIN evaluation involved six
different counties in California, and the results from an evaluation of one of the counties-Riverside--showed especially large earnings gains (almost 50 percent) for reasons that have never
been completely resolved, partly because the random assignment methodology involved does not
enable any rigorous investigation of mechanisms by which the treatment has an effect.
Speculation has been that the Riverside program was so successful because it offered a
particularly strong “work first” program that emphasized immediate job placement through job
search (though others believe it had a good mix of rapid-employment job search and humancapital education and training); because the labor market in Riverside was relatively weak and
hence control families did not do well; and even that the results were due to a charismatic and
energetic director. Whatever the reason, the Riverside evaluation has come to be one of the
genuine success stories of employment programs in the 1990s.
One of the problems with evaluations which this illustrates is that conducting
experimental tests of a program in only a handful of areas, and allowing each area to offer a
different variation on the general program, essentially prevents learning whether differential
effects that occur across areas are the result of site-specific factors (the economy, charismatic
directors, etc) or of the particular program that was tested in the area. Hotz et al. (2000)
compared different sites in the GAIN evaluation to determine if the different impacts across sites
could be ascribed instead to differences in the types of recipients enrolled in each site; they found
that such differences did not explain the cross-site differences. Greenberg et al. (2001) ran
regressions of the estimated program effects in each of several JOBS sites on characteristics of
47

the area, the sample, and the program, and found it impossible to explain the cross-site
differences. This makes it difficult to use the results for policy because extrapolation to the
nation as a whole or to any other particular area around the country is very problematic.
A JOBS evaluation involving 11 different sites has also yielded results but is still in
progress at this writing.39 A unique aspect of this evaluation was that it tested different program
strategies within the same sites, thus eliminating some of the site effects just described. For the
most part, the variation of interest was whether the program tested a rapid-employment, low-cost
job search program, or a human-capital, high-cost, education and training program. The
distinction is important because the TANF program which replaced AFDC emphasized the
former over the latter, as part of the Work First philosophy (this was also an issue in the
Riverside GAIN program, as just noted). The results to date indicate that, four years after the
evaluation began, positive employment and earnings gains resulted, falling generally in the range
of $300 to $500 per year (Freedman, 2000). Both rapid-employment and human capital
programs were found in this range, although some of the human capital programs yielded results
which were lower. The trend in impacts after three years suggests that the rapid-employment
programs have large initial impacts which fade over time, while the human-capital programs
have impacts that do not decline as fast or may even grow over time, and that the earnings and
employment gains end up by the third year not far different (Bloom and Michalopoulos, 2001).40
39

The evaluation began in the early 1990s, and results from a five-year followup
measuring impacts have not yet been completed.
40

In a study of the earlier GAIN program which followed recipients 9 years after
enrollment, Hotz et al. (2000) found the same pattern when comparing treatment effects in
different counties--those with rapid-employment programs had impacts which faded over time
compared to those emphasizing education, and after 9 years they were statistically no different
48

This has led some observers to conclude that the two strategies yield about the same impacts.41
If the two have the same impacts then, because the human capital strategy is more expensive than
the job-search strategy (up to double by some estimates), the former must necessarily have a
lower rate of return than the latter.
Another important finding from this JOBS evaluation was that, while earnings impacts of
the programs were positive, household income changed very little as a result of the program.
This occurred because the increases in earnings were mostly cancelled out by declines in welfare
benefits.

This implies that recipients would have very little incentive themselves to engage in

these programs, unless they expected greater gains in the future than were measured by the
evaluation. This suggests that the programs would have to be mandatory in order for the welfare
departments to induce recipients to enroll in them.
While the overall sense of the JOBS evaluations is that there are indeed employment and
earnings gains from these programs, both inherent problems and practical problems with the
random-assignment methodology limit what has been learned. Aside from the difficulty of

from each other.
41

A later analysis (Bloom and Michalopoulos, 2001) concluded that “mixed” strategies
were best, rather than a pure rapid-employment or pure human capital strategy. This conclusion
was based largely on comparing pure strategies in this JOBS evaluation with several of the
earlier GAIN evaluations, which were characterized as “mixed” as well--with a dominant
emphasis on one strategy but with elements of the other. The only JOBS evaluation with such a
mixed strategy was tested in one site (Portland) which stood out from the rest and had aboveaverage impacts. Portland was initially known as a rapid-employment program city, but in fact it
offered some education and training to certain recipients. Perhaps more important, it offered
individualized treatments to different types of individuals after assessing their needs. There
were other differences in the program operated in Portland as well, together with differences in
its local economic environment from those in the other cities. Unfortunately, as with the
Riverside GAIN program, it is almost impossible to determine what the true reason for the
difference in impacts in Portland was.
49

incorporating entry effects and separating site effects from treatment effects, as already noted,
many of the programs allowed control group members to start receiving the program after 3 or so
years. Thus impact estimates beyond that period are not true estimates of the program by itself.
In addition, in many of the areas the local program environment continued to change after the
evaluation was initiated, further affecting the outcomes of experimentals and controls.

Family Structure
Models. The suggestion that the AFDC program encourages women to have children
out-of-wedlock has been a staple of popular views of welfare for decades. This popular view is
consistent with the fact AFDC benefits are primarily provided only to single-parent families and
those are virtually all families with a female single parent.

This view has been addressed by a

large volume of research by economists in the last fifteen or so years, and by a smaller volume of
work by demographers in prior years. It has been accompanied by a more expansive
examination of the effects of AFDC on family structure in general, including not only its effects
on whether a women is a single mother, but also on cohabitation, child-bearing, and whether a
woman lives with her parents or other relatives.
Virtually any economic model of marriage, including Beckerian utility-differences, or
gains-to-marriage, models, predicts that the offer of a benefit to an individual contingent entirely
on whether he or she is unmarried and has children will induce behavior which leads to a higher
incidence of such events. One theoretical framework that would predict the opposite is one in
which marriage is entered into voluntarily but that marital dissolution is an exogenous event. In
this case, single motherhood is in part an unlucky random outcome of marriage that should in
50

principle be insured, and AFDC is a form of public insurance which plays that role. The
presence of such insurance should, therefore, encourage individuals to take the risky action,
namely, to enter into marriage, to a greater degree than they would in the absence of insurance.
However, the moral hazard problem is severe, for individuals can clearly exert much control
over becoming a single mother and, further, much single motherhood takes place prior to
marriage. This makes insurance forces unlikely to change the net direction of effect of AFDC.
The precise rules of the AFDC program, and its two-parent counterpart, the AFDC-UP
program, complicate the incentives in several respects (Moffitt et al., 1995). Because eligibility
for AFDC is based on the deprivation of the support of a biological parent, a woman who marries
a man who is not the father of her children, or who cohabits with a man who is similarly not the
biological parent, is eligible for AFDC.

Thus AFDC does not discourage marriage or

cohabitation universally but only if it is with the male who is the children’s actual father. If a
woman does marry or cohabit with a non-biological male, and that male provides financial
support to the children, the income will be counted in full or in part against the grant and it is
possible that the woman in question may end up financially ineligible for the program.
However, at least for cohabitation, enforcing this provision is difficult. On the other hand, the
AFDC-UP program does provide some outlet, for it provides benefits not only to families where
both biological parents are married, but also where they cohabit; eligibility is only based on the
presence of both parents, not on the presence of a legal union. However, the eligibility
provisions in AFDC-UP have been sufficiently strict historically that it is more difficult to
qualify for benefits under it than under AFDC, so the incentives for a woman against joining up
with the father of her children is still quite strong.
51

The literature on the effects of AFDC on marriage has a parallel in models of the effect of
the income tax, and of the Earned Income Tax Credit, in creating marriage disincentives (for the
latter, see the paper by Hotz and Scholtz in this volume). That literature is instructive because it
demonstrates that even if AFDC benefits were provided to married couples (or unmarried
biological parents), there would still be a potential for incentives for or against marriage. If the
unit of taxation is the family, then married couples are more likely to be above the income
eligibility point--assuming both male and female have income--than if they are separate, to take
just one example.

As the taxation literature demonstrates, the only neutral program that does

not distort private incentives is one in which benefits are paid entirely on an individual basis.
But then such a program would violate vertical equity considerations and would also be
complicated by the presence of children. As Hotz and Scholz note, a tax or benefit system
cannot simultaneously be progressive, treat the family as the unit of taxation, and be neutral with
respect to marriage (see also Alm et al., 1999).
Another theoretical observation worth noting in this context is that a universal benefit
system which provides nonzero benefits to all household structures--in particular, to single
individuals--could alter predictions of the effect of AFDC on marriage. If the AFDC system
were altered so as to allow benefits to be paid to both married couples and single individuals,
then some marriages would dissolve so that the single individual--most often the male--could
collect the benefits for which he is newly eligible. In addition, some currently single mothers
and absent fathers would choose not to marry despite the new benefits they could obtain from
that action because the absent father would now also receive increased income. These effects
would have to be counted against the marriage-increasing results of the program change, with
52

unknown, and therefore ambiguous, net effect.
The AFDC program alters incentives for childbearing and living arrangements as well.
With regard to childbearing, the effect is through the route of single motherhood, for childbearing
outside of marriage makes a mother eligible for benefits whereas childbearing inside marriage
generally does not. An additional incentive for childbearing appears in the benefit structure in
states in which benefits are calibrated to family size and higher benefits are paid to larger
families. In this case there is an income gain to having additional children that is not present in
the absence of a government welfare program, and hence distorts choices in that direction.
Living arrangements refer generally to whether a single mother lives with others, either her
parents or a cohabiting male.

The rules governing cohabitation have already been discussed,

and it is only necessary to note that living with parents is governed by the same rules. That is,
living with parents does not alter the basic eligibility condition based on the absence of a
biological parent, and will affect the grant only if the parents provide financial support to the
mother or child. However, because that type of support is more verifiable than support from a
cohabiting male, states are more likely to reduce the benefit in this case.

The less-than-full

taxation of parental support provides an incentive for a woman to live with her parents, as noted
by Hutchens et al. (1989). The fact that support is partly taxed provides a disincentive for a
woman to live with her parents relative to a family-structure-neutral system in which the AFDC
benefit is not affected by this type of family structure. This provides another example of the
tradeoffs noted above that always come up in balancing equity with neutrality in tax and transfer
systems.
Evidence. There has been built up in recent years a fairly large literature on the effect of
53

AFDC benefits on family structure, mostly concerned with the effects of benefits on the
probability of being a single mother. The literature has been reviewed many times, but the most
recent review is by Moffitt (1998), who reviewed 68 separate estimates of the effect of AFDC on
various aspects of marriage, fertility, and single motherhood. His review covered studies
conducted through approximately 1996. The results of his survey are shown in Table 8, which
reports counts of estimates showing insignificant, significant, or a mixture of insignificant and
significant effects of welfare. The results are broken out by race, when possible, and by the
source of variation in benefits used to identify welfare effects--either cross-state variation in
benefit levels, cross-state changes in benefits (i.e., state fixed effects models), within-state
variation assuming some determinant of benefits does not simultaneously directly affect family
structure, or pure time series studies.

Overall, while there is a very slight excess of significant

estimates over insignificant ones across all races, it is quite small. However, the patterns differ
by race and source of benefit variation, with stronger effects appearing for white women, and for
white women using cross-state levels and for black women using cross-state changes in benefits.
The difference in how benefit variation affects family structure between the two races is a result
of a different sorting of single mothers by state for the two races, with white single mothers
tending to be concentrated in high-benefit states but black single mothers tending to be
concentrated in low benefit states.
Nevertheless, the most important implication of the review is that none of the significant
estimates were in the ‘wrong’ direction--all were in the ‘expected’ direction (positive on single
motherhood, negative on marriage, etc). A simple unweighted average of the estimates would,
therefore, reveals a central tendency suggesting the presence of an effect of welfare benefits on
54

family structure.

Moreover, when distinctions are made between the studies by the likely

credibility of the estimates--those controlling for the most other variables, which concentrate on
the most appropriate part of the distribution of women, and use the most careful econometric
methods--effects are sometimes stronger, sometimes substantially so (Moffitt, 1998). Therefore,
while there is still considerable uncertainty in the literature and there remain a large number of
studies reporting insignificant estimates, this reading of the literature leads to the conclusion that
welfare is likely to have some effect on family structure.42
There have been a few newer studies not included in the review just described. One of
particular note is that of Hoffman and Foster (2000), who were able to replicate a study of
Rosenzweig (1999) using Michigan Panel Study of Income Dynamics data, finding significant
effects of welfare on nonmarital fertility albeit only in certain age ranges. Foster and Hoffman
(2001) conducted another study with the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth and found, as
have many prior studies, that welfare impacts are greatly reduced when state fixed effects are
added to the model. Blau et al. (2000) use microdata from the 1970, 1980, and 1990 Censuses
to estimate metropolitan-area fixed effects models of the effect of AFDC benefits on marriage
rates and find them to have no statistically significant effect in their preferred models.
An issue in the literature has been that real AFDC benefits have declined over time while
single motherhood rates have increased, suggesting that benefits could not have caused the rise in
headship. Nechyba (1999) constructs a theoretical model in which social interactions between
42

This is a slight change from the author’s earlier reading of the literature (Moffitt,
1992a). As discussed in Moffitt (1998), the magnitude of the effect is more uncertain than the
existence of an effect. Estimates range from quite small effects to rather large ones. The
difference is not easily explainable by the preferred study characteristics just mentioned, and is
consequently not currently resolved.
55

low income families causes lags in the response to a change in benefits, consistent with the
hypothesis that rising welfare benefits in the late 1960s and early 1970s could have had lagged
effects over the next two decades (a hypothesis also suggested by Murray (1984)). Moffitt
(2000) takes a more direct approach and conducts a time series analysis of the relative
importance of trends in female wages, male wages, and welfare benefits, and finds that a decline
in the wages of less educated males was the main contributor to the rise in female headship, and
that the decline in welfare benefits slowed that rise, thus providing one possible reconciliation
between the cross-sectional and time-series evidence.
The living arrangements literature has examined the effects of welfare on the propensity
of a single mother to live with her parents, and on her propensity to cohabit. Ellwood and Bane
(1985) found that higher AFDC benefits were associated with greater propensities for single
mothers to live independently of parents, while Hutchens et al. (1989) argued that the proper
variable is the relative benefit between living with and without parents--equal to the benefit
penalty imposed for living with parents--and found it to have a statistically significant effect on
the propensity to live independently. Hu (2001) found that the probability that a teenager in a
welfare family leaves the household is inversely related to the size of the benefit reduction
suffered by the parent if the teen were to leave. Moffitt et al. (1998a) found cohabitation rates to
be very high among AFDC recipients, but their econometric model did not turn up any strong
effects of benefits, or state rules governing cohabitation, on the likelihood of cohabiting.
Evenhouse and Reilly (1999), examining the issue with the Survey of Income and Program
Participation,find stronger effects of benefits, however, on the likelihood of cohabiting with a
male who is not the natural parent of the children.
56

State Benefit Determination
Models. A final area of considerable economic research has been on the determinants of
state benefit level and on the effects of federal matching grants on the level of state benefits.
The models used in this literature for state benefit determination are generally drawn straight
from the literature on median voter models of public choice, considering aid to the poor as a
positive argument in that voter’s utility function but with the taxes needed to pay for those
benefits to be a negative argument.

Income effects are generally assumed to be positive, with

higher median voter income leading to greater benefit levels. In the typical model, assuming a
head tax on all voters to finance benefits, the price of benefits is equal to the per capita caseload
times one minus the federal matching rate.

Thus higher caseloads imply that the cost of a dollar

increase in the benefit level are more costly, and a lower matching rate implies the same. Lower
matching rates, assuming they are partially spent on tax relief or other public goods, have some
“leakage” because a dollar of grant does not translate into an extra dollar of welfare expenditure.
For many years the matching rate structure of the federal subsidy formula for AFDC was
progressive, with higher matching rates at low benefit levels than at high benefit levels, thus
indirectly encouraging a reduction in the dispersion of benefit levels across different states.
However, this structure was gradually replaced over the 1970s by a simple constant proportional
matching rate, regardless of the level of the state benefit, in an open-ended match at that rate.
Evidence. One focus of the empirical literature has been to estimate price and income
elasticities for benefits, usually from a regression of benefit levels on state median income and on
a price variable, usually constructed as the caseload times one minus the matching rate, as just
57

discussed.43

There are several econometric issues that arise in such estimation which will not be

discussed in detail here. The first model of this type was conducted by Orr (1976), who found
that the federal matching rate, state per capita income, and other variables measuring the
characteristics of the taxpaying population and the recipient population all had effects on a state's
chosen benefit. Orr concluded that the results were generally supportive of a public choice view
of state benefit determination. A number of additional studies were conducted thereafter and a
range of price and income elasticities obtained. Ribar and Wilhelm (1999) have surveyed the
estimates, and conclude that price elasticities are of the correct sign but weak in significance and
relatively small in magnitude--in the range (-.14, .02)--in contrast to income effects, which are
generally significantly positive and somewhat larger in size--in the range (.11, .82). Chernick
(1998) also reviews the evidence and argues that the price elasticities of changing the matching
rate are somewhat greater than this. Baicker (2001) uses a different estimation strategy and
obtains yet higher price elasticities.
A puzzle that has garnered additional attention are the reasons for the long-term decline
in real AFDC benefits over the 1970s and 1980s. Neither changes in matching rates nor in
income can explain the decline; in fact, real income growth should have led to an increase in
benefits. Several hypotheses have been suggested, including that AFDC benefits were replaced
by Food Stamp and, possibly, Medicaid benefits in the voter’s utility function, or simply that
voters preferences shifted. Shifts in the nature of the caseload, from divorced women to
unmarried mothers, has also been posited to be partly responsible for the trend. Others have
43

There are a number of issues in using aggregate state median income to proxy the
income of the median voter, and also whether median income itself identifies the median
preference voter. See Moffitt et al. (1998b) for a discussion.
58

suggested that the decline in real wages for low-skilled workers led to an increase in the price of
redistribution as well as an increase in “distance” from the median voter, both leading to a
decline in the desire for redistribution. No consensus has emerged in the literature on the
reasons for the change.44

IV. Research on the TANF Program
Research on the TANF program is much smaller in volume than that on AFDC, not only
because TANF has been in existence for a shorter period but also because economists and other
researchers have encountered many difficulties in studying the program which were not present,
at least to the same degree, for the AFDC program.

Estimating the overall impact--that is, the

combined effect of all individual component changes--of the transition from AFDC to TANF, for
example, is hampered by the fact that it was introduced in all states at approximately the same
time. This is a traditional problem in studying the effects of national legislation which
introduces a program simultaneously in all states and areas.45 A second problem is that crossstate variation under TANF is much more complex than it was under AFDC, for in the AFDC
environment most state programs were of the same general type--because they were required to

44

See Orr (1979) and Gramlich (1982) for two early contributions, and Moffitt et al.
(1998b) for a recent one. See Chernick (1998) for some discussions of the issues and a review of
the literature and Moffitt (1999b) for a discussion of the implications of this literature for
explaining the 1996 welfare legislation.
45

As will be noted below, some of the pre-TANF AFDC waiver programs discussed in
Section II above have, however, been used in an attempt to estimate TANF effects. Also, not all
states implemented their TANF programs at exactly the same time.
59

be so by federal regulation--and hence differences could be characterized by differing levels of
only a few simple parameters (the guarantee, tax rate, etc). Under TANF, each state has freedom
under the block grant to develop programs that differ from those in other states in dozens of
ways. States have taken advantage of this freedom to tailor their programs individually in myriad
ways, with the result that there are more than 51 dimensions by which state programs differ,
leaving no degrees of freedom to estimate their effects. A related problem is that each
dimension is itself quite complex and difficult to measure; for example, the way a simple concept
such as time limits is implemented can vary tremendously by the number and types of
exemptions and extensions granted, whether the state allows the “clock” to stop temporarily for
families, and so on. Documentation of these differences across states has also been spotty, at
times, and this has also limited research.
In what follows, the discussion will first consider models of behavior under TANF, and
will then consider evidence on those behaviors as well as any other TANF issues that have been
discussed.
Models. Many of the features of TANF can be understood as variations in parameters
that were present in the simple AFDC models discussed earlier, with equivalent predictions.
Among these are reductions in welfare tax rates which, as noted previously, should increase the
employment rate of women initially on welfare but which has ambiguous effects on overall labor
supply including initial ineligibles. Another is the imposition of family caps, which reduce or
eliminate the increase in benefits ordinarily provided by the presence of additional births; this
represents a simple change in the relationship of the guarantee level to family size, with expected
effects both on welfare participation and the birth rate. A third are the provisions which make
60

minor mothers ineligible for benefits is they live apart from their parents, which, as the living
arrangements literature in AFDC makes clear, should be expected to reduce the incidence of such
living apart.
There are three new features of TANF whose effects are not directly apparent in the
simple AFDC models discussed previously. These are work requirements, time limits, and, to
some extent, the increase in general costs of welfare participation through provisions for
diversion, numerous requirements for continued participation, and informal pressure on women
to leave the welfare rolls. Each of these three will be discussed in turn.
Work requirements can, at one level, be easily incorporated in the standard static labor
supply model, for they can be modeled simply as a requirement that a recipient work some
minimum number of hours. As illustrated in Figure 8, where Hmin is the minium required work
hours, the portion of the welfare constraint CJ is eliminated by the requirement. An individual
initially at C (work requirements are aimed at nonworkers) will move either to J (Arrow 3) or to
segment AK (Arrow 2)--increasing labor supply in either case--or to point A (Arrow 1),
remaining as a nonworker.46 The caseload and participation rate in welfare both fall, as do
expenditures on benefits, and average hours of work rise.

If Hmin falls to the left of the hours

corresponding to point D, the work requirement is equivalent to eliminating welfare completely.
Holding Hmin fixed, this is more likely in low-guarantee states, and has been shown to hold for
some recipients in those states with sufficiently high hourly wage rates and using the official
hours work requirements in PRWORA.
Although work requirements achieve the goals of increased labor supply and reduced
46

The latter is more realistic is N is positive.
61

caseloads, they do so by redefining the underlying goals of the program. Work requirements
achieve work incentives by giving up on the original negative income tax goal of achieving work
incentives at the same time as providing support to those who “cannot” work in a single,
integrated system which provides a guarantee to all families with no questions asked. Welfare
programs with work requirements at their center must instead predefine those who “can” work
and those who “cannot” work; the former are provided with the benefit formula illustrated in
Figure 8 and the latter are simply given G, or possibly G plus a low tax rate as an encouragement
to work even a small numbers of hours. Because making the separation of the population--or
“categorization”--into those who can and cannot work is fraught with practical as well as
conceptual problems, the desirability of work requirements depends upon the magnitude of the
costs incurred by whatever system of categorization is implemented.
There have been two strands of research on these issues. One dates from the late 1960s
and early 1970s, during debates over the negative income tax. Categorical systems were heavily
criticized by economists at that time for a variety of reasons. One was that the administrative
difficulty in assigning recipients to categories is too great, and, more generally, because
economists tend to believe that everyone can work, at least some amount, at some wage and with
some kind of work support; that is, the variation in individual ability is continuous rather than
discrete. Another was that, because true ability to work is partly unobserved by the policy
maker, work requirement systems provide individuals with incentives to switch categories by
altering, to the extent possible, the observable characteristics that the government uses to assign
recipients to different categories. Yet another was that, because work requirements necessarily
involve individual-specific judgements on ability to work, they would result in excessive
62

caseworker discretion and consequent inequitable treatment across individuals.47
The second strand of literature examines the possible optimality of work requirements in
various models of optimal taxation. Akerlof (1978) showed that if individuals can be “tagged”
as nonemployable, they can be given a greater G and lower t than they could under a
noncategorical negative income tax. He, and others in this literature, directly dealt with the
incentive problem to change categories by requiring that an incentive compatibility constraint be
set that would discourage such behavior. Besley and Coate (1992b, 1995) showed that, under a
different optimization criterion, workfare can be used as a screening device to ensure that higherwage individuals do not take advantage of the program. In this rather different justification for
work requirements, all recipients must undergo the cost of complying with work requirements,
but benefits can be higher because high-wage individuals have been screened out. This
literature is continuing with further refinements and special cases.48 For the most part, it assumes
away the implementation problems that the critiques from the late 1960s and early 1970s made
central by assuming perfect tagging. When this assumption is relaxed, and a system of imperfect
tagging is considered, however, it can still be shown that some categorization may be preferred
although, given the chance of error in the grouping, some positive G should be assigned to all

47

See Barth and Greenberg (1971), Browning (1975), Lurie (1975) for examples of these
early critiques of work-requirement systems as compared to a negative income tax. Barth and
Greenberg note that the drawbacks to a system that requires separating the employable and
nonemployable was a principle criticism of the AFDC program as it existed in the 1960s.
48

See Beaudry and Blackorby (1998) and Chone and Laroque (2001) for two recent
contributions, for example.
63

groups, although a smaller one to the ‘untagged’ group than to the ‘tagged’ group.49 Necessarily,
these models assume that some fraction of individuals will bear an unwanted cost because they
either have to comply with work requirements and hence have their utility lowered or they are
screened out when they should be screened in. However, this is regarded as a possibly optimal
second-best solution given that true ability to work, or preferences to work, are unobserved by
the government.
The 1996 legislation has made these issues of renewed importance. PRWORA requires
states to more rigorously enforce work requirements by regularly assessing benefit penalties
(called “sanctions”) on those who do not comply with the requirements, i.e., those who work less
than Hmin. Indeed, to some extent the most important work-related feature in the legislation
was the requirement that states, for the first time, actually enforce the benefit reductions that
Figure 8 portrays. Within the federal guidelines, states now have much more freedom to assess
sanctions than they did under the AFDC program, and many have adopted very stringent sanction
policies.50

The federal government has also tightened up the definition of Hmin, setting specific

values for it such as 20 hours per week for single mothers with children under 6, for example.
States are allowed to exempt families from the work requirement (e.g., women who are ill or

49

See Parsons (1996) for an analysis, albeit in the context of social insurance programs,
of the consequences for these models of assuming “two-sided” error, i.e., that some tagged
individuals can indeed work as well as that some untagged individuals cannot work. See also
Immonen et al. (1998).
50

For example, as noted previously, in Georgia, two violations result in a lifetime ban on
welfare receipt. Lurie (2001, p.4), in a study of implementation of sanctions in local welfare
offices, notes as well that discretion in using sanctions is widespread and inevitable: “While
states decide the amount of the sanctions, the decision to impose or lift a sanction is inevitably at
the discretion of the frontline worker.”
64

incapacitated, elderly, pregnant, or have a children under 1 year), which can be interpreted as the
assignment of families to the “cannot work” status. However, the federal legislation also sets
numerical minimums on the fraction of a state’s recipients that must be engaged in a work
activity and most of these exempt families are not excluded from the denominator of the ratio.
Time limits are a relatively new programmatic feature and have yet to be subjected to
much economic analysis. In one sense time limits require no new models because they simply
eliminate welfare after some point and this necessarily moves the individual to the nonwelfare
constraint in Figure 5, thereby increasing labor supply and decreasing the welfare caseload.
However, the dynamics of this response could be fairly complex if welfare recipients anticipate
the onset of time limits and alter their behavior before hitting the limit. For example, similar to
behavior that has been found for the response to unemployment benefits with a fixed exhaustion
point, welfare recipients may begin to leave welfare prior to the time limit date and their leaving
rates may accelerate as the time limit approaches. In the UI case, this behavior is generally
explained by the randomness of wage offers and the desire to accept an attractive offer when it
arrives even if it does so somewhat in advance of the benefit exhaustion date. The same may
apply for welfare recipients approaching a time limit. A more complex response can occur if
recipients “bank” their benefits by going off the rolls during good (labor market) times and
saving their benefits for bad times (downturn in labor market, unexpected negative income
shock, etc).51 Whatever the model, time limits will tend to increase labor supply and reduce
welfare participation and the caseload.
51

A few states have programs which allow recipients to receive benefits for a maximum
of x years out of every y years, y>x. This would set up cyclical welfare participation response as
well as banking within the y interval.
65

The implementation of time limits in the states has been far from this textbook portrayal.
Many states have made liberal use of exemptions and extensions from time limits, resulting in
many fewer families hitting the limits than anticipated.

In many cases these exemptions and

extensions are granted at the discretion of individual caseworkers and local welfare offices, who
make subjective judgements on whether recipients have made a good faith effort to find work.
Other states have put in place programs funded out of state revenues which will support families
after they exhaust their benefits, although sometimes at a reduced level and sometimes only for
the children. Still other states stop the “clock” from ticking if the recipient works more than a
specified number of hours of work, if the recipient has not been offered a job training slot, or
under other conditions. At this writing, many fewer families have exhausted their benefits than
anticipated for all these reasons as well as because so many families have left the rolls; the latter
could be either because of the favorable economy or from banking behavior. However, despite
these factors, in the long run the time limit will bind on more families if they are kept in place.
Finally, the numerous additional costs and penalties which have been imposed on welfare
participation have resulted in many more “involuntary” terminations under TANF than were
present under AFDC. Indeed, it is no longer clear that a simple voluntary model of welfare
participation--even one with work requirements and time limits added to the model--adequately
describes reality. Diversion programs and related devices to discourage women who apply for
the rules can still be retained in a voluntary model but one in which the cost of application is
much higher than before, discouraging application. The cost of being on welfare even after
applying and being accepted is also raised by the many rules that TANF recipients must obey,
ranging from mandatory attendance at meetings with caseworkers, to compliance with child
66

support enforcement, to requirements for school attendance (minor TANF mothers without a
high degree only), to requirements that children of the TANF mother have regular school
attendace, receive immunization shots, or have health exams. Failure to comply with any of
these rules carries a penalty which may either reduce benefits or even terminate the families from
the rolls. Finally, much anecdotal evidence suggests that welfare departments have exercised
discretion to push women off welfare by using administrative devices to end eligibility.

These

administrative terminations were thought to be present in the AFDC program but are now much
more common. This should probably be modeled as a random involuntary termination rate from
the program.
Evidence on TANF and pre-TANF Waiver Reforms As noted previously, the volume of
research on TANF is necessarily much less than that for the AFDC program. In addition, the
largest volume of data analysis conducted on TANF is descriptive in nature and does not seek to
estimate the effect of the 1996 legislation in a causal sense, i.e., the effect of the legislation on
outcomes relative to what would have happened if the law had not been passed. The descriptive
literature, for example, has demonstrated that poverty rates have mostly fallen since 1996, the
TANF caseload has dropped by over 50 percent since 1994, women who have left the TANF
rolls have employment rates of approximately 60 percent, and there is a lower tail of the single
mother income distribution whose income has fallen since 1996. Separating the PRWORA
contribution to these outcomes from the effects of general trends, the improving economy, and
other programmatic developments (e.g., EITC and Medicaid expansions) is not attempted. The

67

review to follow will instead discuss only on studies that attempt to make causal inferences.52
Studies that have estimated the overall impact of welfare reform in the 1990s--that is, the
effect of all the individual components combined--on the main economic and welfare outcomes
are listed in Table 9.53 The first section of the table lists studies of the pre-1996 waiver reforms,
most of which made use of the variation induced by different state timing of the introduction of
reforms to estimate effects.

With a few exceptions, the studies show waivers to have had

positive effects on most measures of labor supply and negative effects on measures of AFDC
participation, as expected. These studies all control for the state of the economy, usually by
controlling for the unemployment rate, so the estimated effects of welfare reform are all intended
to be net of the strong economy.
Two exceptions to the results are Bartik and Ebert (1999) and Ziliak et al. (2000) who
find very little effect of welfare reform, net of the economy, on the size of the AFDC caseload.
The main difference between these two studies and the others is that these two enter the lagged
AFDC caseload into the regression model. The reduction in the estimated size of the effect of
welfare reform is an indirect sign that states that implemented reforms had above-average
caseloads and that caseloads regressed to the mean thereafter, causing a spuriously-estimated
decline in the caseload in the studies which omit this lag.

A debate has ensued over the

econometric properties of including lagged dependent variables in the models in question, which
52

See Moffitt and Ver Ploeg (2001) for a list of all types of studies that have been
conducted on TANF as of approximately Spring 2001, including descriptive studies.
53

A number of studies are excluded from the table, including those conducted on a single
state but which were not random assignment, and a number of random assigment studies which
were discontinued or which have not produced results (Harvey et al., 2000, has a comprehensive
list).
68

has not yet been resolved.54
Two entries in Table 9 are for experiments which made use of traditional randomassignment methods rather than cross-state variation in the presence of reform. These studies
generally also find positive effects on employment and earnings and negative effects on welfare
participation.55

However, random-assignment methods are not well-suited for major structural

reforms like the pre-1996 welfare waivers--or for TANF itself--because such structural reforms
tend to cause changes in local labor markets and local communities that feed back onto the
control group, and because structural reforms tend to have significant effects on entry into
welfare. Experiments produce biased estimates of total reform effects under these
circumstances.56
The more important policy issue is the effect of TANF, for the welfare waivers fell far
short of the major restructuring which occurred after 1996 and hence cannot be taken as
predictive of the effects of TANF.

Unfortunately, estimating TANF effects is more difficult

than estimating the effects of waivers because the vast majority of the states more or less

54

Klerman and Haider (2001) demonstrate that building up an aggregate caseload model
from a more fundamental set of entry and exit equations will necessarily result in the need for
lags in the aggregate model. However, they argue that the caseload model which results from
this aggregation is easily misspecified because of duration dependence and other properties of the
underlying dynamic model.
55

There have been many more random-assignment studies in this period but those listed
in Table 9 are those which had the main features of PRWORA, namely, time limits, work
requirements, sanctions, and enhanced earnings disregards, and which made these reforms within
the AFDC system rather than outside of it.
56

Another difficulty in the use of experiments for evaluating structural welfare reform is
that the control group is often contaminated by the general atmosphere of reform which changes
the expectations of the eligible population as a whole.
69

implemented TANF at the same time, leaving no cross-state variation in the timing of
introduction to use for estimation. Two studies made use of the fact that four or five states
actually implemented reforms somewhat later than the rest of the states, but this source of
variation is unlikely to be reliable because there may have been unique differences between those
states and the others which were correlated with their late implementation. Most studies have,
instead, used difference-in-difference methods which compare trends in outcomes for low-wage
or less-educated single mothers to trends in outcomes of various other groups (high wage or
highly educated single mothers, or women who are not single mothers) to assess the effect of
welfare reform. As Ellwood (2000) and Schoeni and Blank (2000) note, use of these methods is
particularly problematic when other reforms, such as the EITC, were occurring roughly
simultaneously, and when business cycle and economy-wide trends were occurring which could
affect different groups differently. Ellwood concludes that these difficulties are sufficiently
severe that the separate contributions of welfare reform, the EITC, and the economy cannot be
identified. The only remaining studies in the table (excluding Wallace and Blank (1999), which
uses pure time series variation) are McKernan et al. (2000) and Schoeni and Blank (2000), one of
which finds TANF to have increased employment while the other finds it not to have done so but
to have affected family earnings, income, and AFDC participation. The two studies used
different control groups so this may be the source of the difference. What evidence there is,
therefore, indicates some TANF effects in the expected direction but the small number of studies
and problems in statistical inference make the conclusions rather uncertain.
There have also been a number of studies which have attempted to estimate the separate
effects of different components of pre-1996 waiver reforms or of TANF, such as time limits,
70

work requirements, sanctions, earnings disregards, and the like. Unfortunately, the results from
these studies have been inconsistent with each other, often providing opposite-signed effects,
have generated many insignificant effects, and have generally yielded an uninterpretable set of
findings.57 There are many likely reasons for this pattern, including the enormous proliferation
of different policies across the states and the difficulty in accurately characterizing those
differences with a few simple variables; inherent difficulty in separating the effects of one
component from another when they no doubt strongly interact; differences in the official
characterization of policies from those implemented in practice; and lack of statistical power in
the data to detect reasonable-sized effects. For whatever reason, despite the potential of
PRWORA to yield cross-state variation in policies usable for research, very little is known about
the effects of the separate components of PRWORA.58
There has been some research as well on the impact of pre-1996 waivers and TANF on
demographic outcomes such as marriage, fertility, and living arrangements. The direction of
impact of reform on marriage and fertility is ambiguous at the simplest level, for while a
reduction in the caseload and generosity of a program which mainly supports one-parent families
should have positive effects on marriage and negative effects on child-bearing, an increase in
women’s employment should have the opposite effects, as demonstrated by a large empirical
57

See Bell (2001) for a discussion of the results with caseloads as a dependent variable.

58

In addition, with a few exceptions, there have been no random-assignment evaluations
which have varied each feature of reform individually, while holding all the other features fixed,
even though this is possible in principle in an experiment. It should also be noted that Grogger
(2000, 2001) has attempted to estimate the independent effects of time limits by using age
variation in children combined with assumptions that that variation does not interact identically
with other welfare reform features. The validity of the assumptions needed for these methods to
be valid is unknown.
71

literature on the effect of female wages and labor supply on marriage and fertility. In addition
to these broad factors, TANF allows states to impose family caps (restrictions on additional
benefits from extra births while on welfare) and denies benefits to minor mothers who wish to
live apart from their families, both of which should be expected to have direct effects on family
structure.
The evidence to date on the presence of an effect of welfare reform has a whole on these
outcomes is suggestive of a weak effect, at best. Analyses of pre-1996 waivers are inconsistent,
with some showing a negative effect on nonmarital ferility (Horvath and Peters, 1999) while
others showing no effect (Fitzgerald and Ribar, 2001). Analyses of TANF using difference-indifference methods, comparing either more-educated and less-educated women or high-wage and
low-wage women, show no effect of TANF on marriage but possibly a negative effect on living
independently (Ellwood, 2000; Schoeni and Blank, 2000). Random-assignment evaluations are
particularly problematic for the study of family structure because of the entry-effect problem and
the problems of contamination noted earlier. Of those noted in Table 9, only one (the Delaware
study) showed a significant effect on marriage. The reason that particular experiment showed an
effect and others did not is not clear.
The evidence on the specific effects of family caps and living arrangements restrictions in
the law is quite weak, for the same reason that separating the impacts of the individual
components of welfare reform from another has not been successful in the study of employment
and earnings impacts. Some waiver evaluations, particularly one conducted in New Jersey
(Camasso et al., 1998a, 1998b), have been used to assess the effects of family caps but these
evaluations are problematic because the family cap was bundled in with changes in work
72

requirements, earnings disregards, and other features common in welfare waiver programs. Thus
there is no direct evidence from random-assignment evaluations of family cap effects because
none has varied the presence of the family cap, holding other reform features fixed.
Finally, there has been considerable analysis of the effect of the block grant structure of
TANF on spending on the poor. As noted previously, the shift from a matching to a block grant
should be expected to reduce spending. Predictions of the magnitude of the spending decline
depend directly on the size of the price elasticity of benefits which, as noted before, is not agreed
upon. Ribar and Wilhelm (1999) predict very small reductions while Chernick (1998) predicts
benefit declines in the range of 15 to 30 percent (see also Chernick and McGuire, 1999); Inman
and Rubinfeld (1997) predict spending declines of 40 to 66 percent in low-income states and 0 to
18 percent in high-income states. In addition, there has been considerable speculation that there
will be a “race to the bottom,” as states facing a higher price of benefits become more sensitive to
the influence of cross-state migration in search of higher benefits, leading to a cascading series of
real benefit cuts across the states. Theoretical work supports this intuitive prediction, and
simulations suggest that benefits could be seriously underproduced in such a system relative to
the social optimum (Brueckner, 2000; Wheaton, 2000).
To date, none of these predictions have been capable of testing because the block grant
levels in the 1996 legislation were set at 1994 AFDC levels. Because the AFDC-TANF caseload
has fallen so drastically since 1994, states have generally not been able to spend all of their block
grant funds. Thus the block grant constraint has not become binding and hence one should not
expect either the (extra) spending declines or the race to the bottom predicted in the literature to
have occurred. Further work on this issue must await a rise in spending up to the block grant
73

level.59

V. Reforms: Financial Incentives
Most reform discussions at the current point in the evolution of the AFDC-TANF
program concern whether the provisions of the 1996 welfare law should be modified in some
way, such as changing or removing the time limits, work requirements, rules governing
sanctions, block grant and funding formulas, and the like. There has been no research on the
effects of altering these provisions beyond what has already been discussed in the review of
research on AFDC and TANF; as noted, the research base for forecasting the effects of altering
most of these provisions is exceedingly slim.
One area of discussion where economists have a strong research base is in the area of
additional financial incentives to encourage TANF recipients to work, which is the traditional
area of interest in the economics literature.

Three different types of reforms have been

discussed: (i) reductions in the tax rate on earnings in the TANF program (or what are called
“enhanced earnings disregards” in policy discussions); (ii) earnings or wage subsidies made
available only to those on TANF; and (iii) earnings or wage subsidies made available universally
to the low income population.
59

In fact, TANF spending by the states stopped declining in 1998 and has risen since
then even though the economy was still strong because states began spending their funds on
ancillary services like child care. If this trend continues, it is likely that a relatively modest
recession could force spending up to the block grant level. Other issues debated in the literature
are the adequacy of countercyclical funds to alleviate the potential spending volatility under a
block grant system, and how to reduce inequities in the block grants to high and low income
states.
74

Reductions in the tax rate on earnings have been enacted by many states in their postreform benefit schedules, as noted earlier in this review, as a means to encourage work among
recipients in addition to work requirements. Economic models predict that the effect of
reducing welfare tax rates on labor supply is ambiguous in sign because new recipients are drawn
onto the welfare rolls, whose labor supply is thereby reduced. The majority of the evidence, both
from NIT experimental and nonexperimental studies, indicates that the net effect of such
reductions on labor supply is approximately zero. This should, therefore, be the prediction one
should make for the recent tax-rate reductions enacted by the states.
A recent experiments have addressed the labor supply effects of reduced welfare tax rates
and have shown, instead, that they generally increase earnings and employment (Berlin, 2000;
Blank et al., 2000). However, the majority of these experiments only test the effects of reduced
tax rates on those who are initially on welfare, and, for that group, positive effects on labor
supply should occur regardless. Consequently, while the experimental results are of value
because they confirm, in broad outlines, the predictions of the static labor supply model for how
initial recipients would respond, they do not contradict the literature from prior econometric
studies and the NIT experiments because they do not account for the offsetting labor supply
effects of new entry.60
60

See Blank et al. (2000) for a discussion of entry and how it might be reduced by
imposing barriers such as a waiting period before the financial incentives are allowed (see also
Card et al., 1998). Berlin (2000, p.35) also draws a contrast between the findings of these recent
experiments and those of the NIT experiments, noting that the NIT reduced labor supply whereas
the tax-rate reductions in the new experiments increased labor supply. However, this is not a
proper comparison because the negative labor supply effects in the NIT experiments pertained to
the effect of an NIT versus nothing at all (i.e., the treatment-control group comparison), which is
expected to be negative from simple theory. In fact, as noted previously, the alternative
treatment groups in the NIT experiments which tested alternative welfare tax rates holding the
75

A new element in recent discussions, however, is an emphasis on coupling work
requirements and minimum hours restrictions with tax-rate reductions; the argument is that the
work requirement limits the negative labor supply effects that serve as an offset to the work
incentives of tax-rate reductions and are thus superior to income support programs with tax-rate
reductions but no work requirements. However, this is an incorrect comparison because, as
discussed previously, work requirements achieve their positive effects on labor supply by
eliminating government support for those who do not work, which is the rationale for an income
support program in the first place. Consequently, they must be accompanied by a categorization
of the population into those who can and cannot work. The relative merits of the two
approaches depend on whether the stronger labor supply effects provided by the work
requirement system are countered by the inefficiencies, disincentives, and possible inequities
created by a feasible categorization system.61
The second type of program, offering wage or earnings subsidies to welfare recipients
instead of reducing welfare tax rates, has essentially the same effect if those subsidies are

guarantee fixed found generally a zero net effect on labor supply, consistent with the findings of
complete offset in nonexperimental econometric models. The NIT experiments included not
just recipients but rather a sample of the entire low income population, so that the offsetting,
negative effects of lowering the tax rate were captured by the comparison of outcomes across
alternative treatment groups. This is entirely consistent with a positive effect on labor supply of
those initially on welfare, and therefore the results of the NIT experiments and recent recipientonly experiments are not inconsistent.
61

Some programs with minmium full-time work conditions for receiving the benefits
from the tax-rate reduction--such as the New Hope, SSP, and some treatments in the MFIP
experiment--were voluntary. In that case, the only issue is whether some who might want to
work part-time end up not working at all instead of working full time. The relevance of these
programs to the existing TANF program is minimal because the work requirements implemented
by the states post-PRWORA are all mandatory.
76

permitted only for those who remain on welfare. It is immaterial whether an increase in W(1-t)
comes from an increase in W or a reduction in t.62 The major alternative proposal is instead that
welfare recipients be allowed to carry those subsidies off the welfare rolls and to keep them after
exiting.

The effect of this reform on the budget constraint is shown in Figure 9, where CDE is

the initial constraint and CD’E’ is the constraint after the subsidy is implemented.63 Assuming
that labor supply curves for this population group are forward-bending and that substitution
effects dominate income effects, this change has an unambiguously positive effect on labor
supply relative to the initial welfare program for those initially on the welfare portion of the
constraint. The drawbacks to such subsidies are the same as those for a universal wage or
earnings subsidy, to be considered next.
It is worth noting that this type of program would approach that of a universal subsidy
program if (i) those who carry the subsidy off the program are allowed to keep it indefinitely and
(ii) all eligibles in the population have a finite probability of entering the program within their
lifetimes. If both of these conditions hold, all eligibles, including those initially on segment DE,
will eventually cycle through the program and hence will have the subsidy available to them off
welfare.

62

The two may have different effects around the breakeven level, however, depending on
how the phaseout and cutoff of the earnings or subsidy is handled. A simple graphical analysis
easily demonstrates this (not shown for brevity).
63

Assuming the subsidy is s percent of earnings, the on-welfare portion of the constraint,
segment CD’, has slope W(1+s)(1-t), while the off-welfare portion of the constraint, segment
D’E’, has slope W(1+s). This assumes that the subsidy is included in countable income by the
welfare dependent along with pre-subsidy earnings; if it does not, the on-welfare portion of the
constraint as slope W(1-t+s). The figure assumes t=1.0 but all statements in the text apply as well
for t<1.
77

The third reform is indeed the offer of a universal earnings or wage subsidy to all low
income families. Graphically, this is identical to Figure 9 except that those initially off welfare,
on segment DE, are also eligible. The relative merits of wage-rate and earnings subsidies, on
the one hand, and a negative income or similar income support program with a G and t, on the
other, were debated extensively in the late 1960s and early 1970s (e.g., Barth and Greenberg,
1971; Garfinkel, 1973; Kesselman, 1969, 1973; Zeckhauser, 1971). That literature showed that
there will almost certainly be positive effects on labor supply if an income support program is
completely replaced by a wage or earnings subsidy. This should not be surprising since benefits
are no longer paid to nonworkers under a wage or earnings subsidy, and, from a equity and
distributional point of view, a progressive tax system is replaced by a regressive one. As this
early literature recognized (Kesselman, 1969; Barth and Greenberg, 1971), and has been noted in
this review, replacing an income support program with such a subsidy would require a
categorization of the eligible population which has its own difficulties.
The literature also addressed the relative merits of wage-rate versus earnings subsidies.
In general, the former were shown to be superior but were acknowledged to have implementation
problems created by the need for employers and workers to document hours of work, and the
strong incentives for fraudulent reporting of those hours and for collusion between workers and
employers to overreport hours worked. To date, these difficulties have prevented a wage rate
subsidy from being enacted in the U.S. Earnings subsidies, on the other hand, have the
disadvantage that they must be phased out at some earnings level; at and above that point, labor
supply disincentives are created.64
64

The corresponding issue for welfare reform is how eligibility

See the chapter on the EITC by Hotz and Scholz in this volume for a discussion.
78

for a universal earnings or wage subsidy program aimed at the welfare-eligible population would
be determined, an issue that has not been broached in the literature. If family income is used as
the eligibility criterion, then a notch will be created at that income level where the subsidy is lost,
creating disincentives to go beyond that point and as well as incentives for those with higher
income to reduce labor supply to become eligible. Thus the offsetting effects of earnings
subsidies on labor supply cannot be avoided.65

VI. Summary
Although the 1996 legislation is now five years past, the TANF program must still be
regarded as in a state of transition and not to have fully coalesced into a final form. The
implementation of the program as well as myriad of its provisions, such as the imposition of
stricter work requirements with more rigorously enforced sanctions for noncompliance and the
imposition of time limits, continue to evolve. States are continuing to modify their programs
and attempt to improve them over time, as they search for new ways to deal with the the
difficulties of the population which they aim to serve. The uncertainties created by a possible

65

Once again, some programs have been tested which offer universal earnings subsidies
to low income families but with a minimum hours constraint (eg New Hope). As before, the
increased labor supply effects of this program would have to be balanced by the increased need
for categorization of the population, at least if it were made mandatory. If it is made voluntary
then, as noted previously, the only issue is whether part-time work should not also be subsidized.
It should also be noted that, with a mandatory minimum hours constraint, there is little difference
between a wage or earnings subsidy program and an NIT-like income support program with a
reduced tax rate, for the two only differ in the nature of the budget constraint above the hours
constraint point. If the major labor supply decision is the margin between working at the
constraint point or locating below it off welfare, the two programs would have the same effects.
79

recession, the increasing impact of time limits as more recipients hit those limits over the next
few years, and the possibility of further Congressional action, all have the potential to lead to
further modifications in the program.
While research on the AFDC program is still useful in many ways, and while the models
developed for that program are still applicable to TANF, there are many new features of TANF
whose effects cannot be easily extrapolated from AFDC research results. At the same time,
direct evaluation of the effects of the TANF program, particularly the evaluation of the
independent contributions of its separate individual components, poses many empirical
challenges. While the evidence to date is reasonably strong that the TANF program has
increased employment and earnings and decreased the caseload, on top of what would have
occurred if AFDC had remained in place, the separate effects of work requirements, time limits,
sanctions, family caps, and other individual features are essentially unknown. These continuing
research challenges, as well as those posed by additional modifications in the TANF program as
they occur, will provide a rich research agenda for further research.

80

References
Aaron, H. 1973. “Why Is Welfare So Hard to Reform?” Washington: Brookings Institution.
Akerof, G. 1978. “The Economics of ‘Tagging’ as Applied to the Optimal Income Tax, Welfare
Programs, and Manpower Planning.” American Economic Review 68 (March): 8-19.
Alm, J; S. Dickert-Conlin; and L. Whittington. 1999. "Policy Watch: The Marriage Penalty."
Journal of Economic Perspectives 13 (Summer): 193-204.
Baicker, K. 2001. “Extensive or Intensive Generosity? The Price and Income Effects of Federal
Grants.” NBER WP 8384, July 2001.
Bane, M.J. and D. Ellwood. 1983. “The Dynamics of Dependence: The Routes to SelfSufficiency. Cambridge: Urban Systems Research and Engineering, Inc.
______________________. 1994. “Understanding Welfare Dynamics.” In Welfare Realities:
From Rhetoric to Reform, eds. M.J. Bane and D. Ellwood. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Barth, M. and D. Greenberg. 1971. “Incentive Effects of Some Pure and Mixed Transfer
Systems.” Journal of Human Resources 6 (Spring): 149-170.
Bartik T. and R. Eberts. 1999. “Examining the Effect of Industry Trends and Structure on
Welfare Caseloads.” In Economic Conditions and Welfare Reform,ed.S. Danziger.
Kalamazoo: Upjohn Institute.
Beaudry, P. and C. Blackorby. 1998. “Taxes and Employment Subsidies in Optimal
Redistribution Programs.” Working Paper 6355. Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Bell, S. 2001. “Why Are Caseloads Falling?” Discussion Paper 01-02. Washington: The Urban
Institute.
Berlin, G. 2000. “Encouraging Work, Reducing Poverty: The Impact of Work Incentive
Programs.” New York: Manpower Demonstration Research Program.
Besley, T. and S. Coate. 1992a. “Understanding Welfare Stigma: Taxpayer Resentment and
Statistical Discrimination.” Journal of Public Economics 48 (July): 165-163.
___________________. 1992b. “Workfare Versus Welfare: Incentive Arguments for Work
Requirements in Poverty-Alleviation Programs.” American Economic Review 82 (March): 24981

261.
___________________. 1995. “The Design of Income Maintenance Programmes.” Review of
Economic Studies 62 (April): 187-221.
Blank, R. 2001. “What Causes Public Assistance Caseloads to Grow?” Journal of Human
Resources 36 (Winter): 85-118.
Blank, R.; D. Card; and P. Robins. 2000. “Financial Incentives for Increasing Work and Income
Among Low-Income Families.” In Finding Jobs: Work and Welfare Reform, eds. D. Card and
R. Blank. NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Blank, R. and P. Ruggles. 1994. “Short-Term Recidivism Among Public Assistance Recipients.”
American Economic Review 84 (May): 49-53.
____________________. 1996. “When Do Women Use Aid to Families with Dependent
Children and Food Stamps?” Journal of Human Resources 31 (Winter): 57-89.
Blau, F.; L. Kahn; and J. Waldfogel. 2000. “Understanding Young Women’s Marriage
Decisions: The Role of Labor and Marriage Market Conditions.” Industrial and Labor Relations
Review 53 (July): 624-647.
Bloom, D. and C. Michalopoulos. 2001. “How Welfare and Work Policies Affect Employment
and Income: A Synthesis of Research.” New York: Manpower Demonstration Research
Corporation.
Browning, E. 1975. Redistribution and the Welfare System. Washington: American Enterprise
Institute.
Brueckner, J. 2000. “Welfare Reform and the Race to the Bottom: Theory and Evidence.”
Southern Economic Journal 66 (January): 505-525.
Burke, V. 1996. "New Welfare Law: Comparison of the New Block Grant Program with Aid to
Families with Dependent Children." Report 96-720EPW. Washington: Congressional Research
Service.
Burtless, Gary. 1995a. “Employment Prospects for Welfare Recipients.” In The Work
Alternative: Welfare Reform and the Realities of the Job Market, eds. Demetra Smith
Nightingale and Robert Haveman. Washington: Urban Institute.
____________. 1995b. “What Is the Proper Balance Among Various Types of Welfare-to-Work
Programs?” In Looking Before We Leap: Social Science and Welfare Reform, ed. R. Weaver
and W. Dickens. Washington: Brookings Institution.
82

Camasso, M.; C. Harvey; R. Jagannathan; and M. Killingsworth. 1998a. “A Final Report on the
Impact of New Jersey's Family Development Program: Experimental-Control Analysis.” New
Brunswick: Rutgers University School of Social Work.
___________________________________________________. 1998b.”A Final Report on the
Impact of New Jersey's Family Development Program: Results from a Pre-Post Analysis of
AFDC Case Heads from 1990-1996.” New Brunswick: Rutgers University School of Social
Work.
Card, D.; P. Robins; and W. Lin. 1998. “Would Financial Incentives for Leaving Welfare Lead
Some People to Stay on Welfare Longer? An Experimental Evaluation of ‘Entry Effects’ in the
Self-Sufficiency Project.” Working Paper 6449. Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Chernick, H. 1998. "Fiscal Effects of Block Grants to the Needy: An Interpretation of the
Evidence." International Tax and Public Finance 5: 205-233.
Chernick, H. and T. McGuire. 1999. “The States, Welfare Reform, and the Business Cycle.” In
Economic Conditions and Welfare Reform, ed. S. Danziger. Kalamazoo, Michigan: Upjohn
Institute.
Chone, Ph. and G. Laroque. 2001. “Optimal Incentives for Labor Force Participation.” INSEE
Working Paper 2001-25.
Council of Economic Advisors. 1997. "Explaining the Decline in Welfare Receipt, 1993-1996."
Washington.
_________________________. 1999. " The Effects of Welfare Policy and the Economic
Expansion on Welfare Caseloads: An Update." Washington.
Danziger, S.; R. Haveman; and R. Plotnick. 1981. “How Income Transfers Affect Work,
Savings, and the Income Distribution.” 19 (September): 975-1028.
Devere, C.; G. Falk; and V. Burke. 2000. “Welfare Reform Research: What Have We Learned
Since the Family Support Act of 1988?” Wash: Congressional Research Service.
Ellwood, D. 1986. “Targeting the ‘Would-Be Long-Term Recipient: Who Should Be Served.”
Princeton: Mathematica Policy Research.
__________. 2000. "The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit and Social Policy Reforms on
Work, Marriage, and Living Arrangements." National Tax Journal 53, Pt 2 (December): 10631105.

83

Ellwood, D. and M.J. Bane. 1985."The Impact of AFDC on Family Structure and Living
Arrangements." In Research in Labor Economics, ed. R.Ehrenberg, Vol.7. Greenwich: JAI
Press.
Evenhouse, E. and S. Reilly. 1999. "Pop-Swapping? Welfare and Children's Living
Arrangements." Mimeo, Vanderbilt.
Fein, D.; D. Long; J. Behrens; and W. Lee. 2001. “The ABC Evaluation: Turning the Corner:
Delaware’s A Better Chance Welfare Reform Program at Four Years.” Cambridge: Abt
Associates.
Figlio, D. and J. Ziliak. 1999. "Welfare Reform, the Business Cycle, and the Decline in AFDC
Caseloads." In Economic Conditions and Welfare Reform,ed.S. Danziger. Kalamazoo: Upjohn
Institute.
Fitzgerald, J. 1995. “Local Labor Markets and Local Area Effects on Welfare Duration.” Journal
of Policy Analysis and Management 14 (Winter): 43-67.
Fitzgerald, J. and D. Ribar. 2001. “The Impact of Welfare Waivers on Female Headship
Decisions.” Mimeo. Washington: George Washington University.
Foster, E. M. and S. Hoffman. 2001. “The Young and the Not Quite So Young: Age Variation in
the Impact of AFDC Benefits on Nonmarital Childbearing.” In Out of Wedlock: Causes and
Consequences of Nonmarital Childbearing, eds. L. Wu and B. Wolfe. NY: Russell Sage
Foundation.
Fraker, T.; R. Moffitt; and D. Wolf. 1985. “Effective Tax Rates and Guarantees in the AFDC
Program, 1967-1982.” Journal of Human Resources 20 (Spring): 251-263.
Freedman, S. 2000. “Four-Year Impacts of Ten Programs on Employment Stability and Earnings
Growth.” New York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation.
Friedlander, D. and G. Burtless. 1995. Five Years After: The Long-Term Effects of Welfare-toWork Programs. NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Friedman, M.1962. Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gallagher, L.J.; M. Gallagher; K. Perese; S. Schreiber; and K. Watson.1998. One Year After
Federal Welfare Reform: A Description of State Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
(TANF) Decisions as of October 1997. Washington: Urban Institute.
Garfinkel, I. 1973. “A Skeptical Note on ‘The Optimality’ of Wage Subsidy Programs.”
American Economic Review 63 (June): 447-453.
84

Garfinkel, I. and S. McLanahan. 1986. Single Mothers and Their Children. Washington: Urban
Institute Press.
Gottschalk, P. and R. Moffitt. 1994. “Welfare Dependence: Concepts, Measures, and Trends.”
American Economic Review 84 (May): 38-42.
Gramlich, E. 1982. “An Econometric Examination of the New Federalism.” Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity 2: 327-370.
Greenberg, D.; R. Meyer; C. Michalopoulos; and M. Wiseman. 2001. “Explaining Variation in
the Effects of Welfare-to-Work Programs.” Discussion Paper 1225-01. Madison: Institute for
Research on Poverty.
Grogger, J. 2000. “Time Limits and Welfare Use.” Working Paper 7709. Cambridge: National
Bureau of Economic Research.
_________. 2001. “The Effects of Time Limits and Other Policy Changes on Welfare Use,
Work, and Income Among Female-Headed Families.” Working Paper 8153. Cambridge:
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gueron, J. and M. Pauly. 1991. From Welfare to Work. New York: Russell Sage.
Harris, K. 1993. “Work and Welfare Among Single Mothers in Poverty.” American Journal of
Sociology 99 (September): 317-352.
_______ . 1996. “Life After Welfare: Women, Work, and Repeat Dependency.” American
Sociological Review 61 (June): 407-426.
Harvey, C.; M. Camasso; and R. Jagannathan. 2000. "Welfare Reform Evaluation Under Section
1115." Journal of Economic Perspectives 14 (Fall): 165-188.
Hoffman, S. and E. M. Foster. 2000. “AFDC Benefits and Nonmarital Births to Young Women.”
Journal of Human Resources 35 (Spring): 376-391.
Horvath, A. and H. Peters. 1999. “Welfare Waivers and Non-Marital Childbearing.” Mimeo.
Ithaca: Cornell University.
Hotz, V. J.; G. Imbens; and J. Klerman. 2000. “The Long-Term Gains from GAIN: A ReAnalysis of the Impacts of the California GAIN Program.” WP 8007, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Hoynes, H. 1996. “Welfare Transfers in Two-Parent Families: Labor Supply and Welfare
Participation under AFDC-UP.” Econometrica 64 (March): 295-332.
85

________. 1997. “Work, Welfare, and Family Structure: What Have We Learned?” In Fiscal
Policy: Lessons from Economic Research, ed. A. Auerbach. Cambridge: MIT Press.
________. 2000. “Local Labor Markets and Welfare Spells: Do Demand Conditions Matter?”
Review of Economics and Statistics 82 (August): 351-368.
Hoynes, H. and T. MaCurdy. 1994. “Has the Decline in Benefits Shortened Welfare Spells?”
American Economic Review 84 (May): 43-48.
Hu, W. 2001. “Welfare and Family Stability.” Journal of Human Resources 36 (Spring): 274303.
Hubbard, G.; J. Skinner; and S. Zeldes. 1995. “Precautionary Saving and Social Insurance.”
Journal of Political Economy 103 (April): 360-399.
Hutchens, R.; G. Jakubson; and S. Schwartz.1989. "AFDC and the Formation of Subfamilies."
Journal of Human Resources 24 (Fall): 599-628.
Immonen, R; R. Kanbur; M. Keen; and M. Tuomala. 1998. “Tagging and Taxing: The Optimal
Use of Categorical and Income Information in Designing Tax/Transfer Schemes.” Economica 65
(May): 179-192.
Inman, R. and D. Rubinfeld. 1997. “Rethinking Federalism.” Journal of Economic Perspectives
11 (Fall): 43-64.
Keane, M. and R. Moffitt. 1998. "A Structural Model of Multiple Welfare Program Participation
and Labor Supply." International Economic Review 39 (August): 553-589.
Kesselman, J.R. 1969. “Labor-Supply Efffects of Income, Income-Work, and Wage Subsidies.”
Journal of Human Resources 4 (Summer): 275-292.
_____________. 1973. “Incentive Effects of Transfer Systems Once Again.” Journal of Human
Resources 8 (Winter): 119-129.
_____________. 1976. “Tax Effects on Job Search, Training, and Work Effort.” Journal of
Public Economics 6 (October): 255-272.
Ketron,Inc. 1980. “The Long-Term Impact of WIN II: A Longitudinal Evaluation of the
Employment Experiences of Participants in the Work Incentive Program.” Wayne,
Pennsylvania.
Klerman, J. and S. Haider. 2001. “A Stock-Flow Analysis of the Welfare Caseload.” Santa
Monica: Rand Corporation.
86

Lampman, R. 1968. “Expanding the American System of Transfers to Do More for the Poor.”
U.S. Congress, Joint Economic Committee. Washington: Government Printing Office.
Lindbeck, A.;S. Nyberg; and J. Weibull. 1999. "Social Norms, the Welfare State, and Voting."
Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (February): 1-35.
Lurie, I., ed. 1975. Integrating Income Maintenance Programs. NY: Academic Press.
_________. 2001. “Changing Welfare Offices.” Policy Brief No. 9. Washington: Brookings
Institution.
McKernan, S.-M.; R. Lerman; N. Pindus; and J. Valente. 2000. “The Relationship Between
Metropolitan and Non-Metropolitan Locations, Changing Welfare Policies, and the Employment
of Single Mothers.” Mimeo, Urban Institute.
McKinnish, T.; S. Sanders; and J. Smith. 1999. “Estimates of Effective Guarantees and Tax
Rates in the AFDC Program for the Post-OBRA Period.” Journal of Human Resources 34
(Spring): 312-345.
Meyer, B. and D.Rosenbaum. 2001. “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the Labor
Supply of Single Mothers.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (August): 1063-1114.
Miller, R. and S. Sanders. 1997. “Human Capital Development and Welfare Participation.”
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 46 (June): 1-43.
Moffitt, R. 1983. “An Economic Model of Welfare Stigma.” American Economic Review 73
(December): 1023-1035.
_________ 1992a. "Incentive Effects of the U.S. Welfare System: A Review." Journal of
Economic Literature 30 (March): 1-61.
_________. 1992b. “Evaluation Methods for Program Entry Effects.”. In Evaluating Welfare and
Training Programs, eds. C. Manski and I. Garfinkel. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
_________. 1996. “The Effect of Employment and Training Programs on Entry and Exit from
theWelfare Caseload.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 15 (Winter): 32-50.
_________. 1998. "The Effect of Welfare on Marriage and Fertility." In Welfare, the Family,
and Reproductive Behavior, ed. R. Moffitt. Washington: National Academy Press.
________. 1999a. "The Effect of Pre-PRWORA Waivers on AFDC Caseloads and Female
Earnings, Income, and Labor Force Behavior." In Economic Conditions and Welfare
Reform,ed.S. Danziger. Kalamazoo: Upjohn Institute.
87

________. 1999b. “Explaining Welfare Reform: Public Choice and the Labor Market.”
International Tax and Public Finance 6: 289-316.
________. 2000. "Welfare Benefits and Female Headship in U.S. Time Series." American
Economic Review 90 (May): 373-377.
________. 2001. "Demographic Change and Public Assistance Expenditures." In Demographic
Change and Fiscal Policy, eds. A. Auerbach and R. Lee. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
________. Forthcoming. “Experienced-Based Measures of Heterogeneity in the Welfare
Caseload.” In Data Collection and Research Issues for Studies of Welfare Populations, eds. C.
Citro, R. Moffitt, and S. Ver Ploeg. Washington: National Academy Press.
Moffitt, R.; A. Cherlin; L. Burton; and L. Chase-Lansdale. 2001. “Disadvantage Among
Families Remaining on Welfare.” Paper prepared for the Chicago-Northwestern Joint Center for
Poverty Research.
Moffitt, R.; R. Reville; and A. Winkler. 1995. “State AFDC Rules Regarding the Treatment of
Cohabitors: 1993.” Social Security Bulletin 57: 26-33.
_______________________________. 1998a. “Beyond Single Mothers: Cohabitation and
Marriage in the AFDC Program.” Demography 35 (August): 259-278.
Moffitt, R.; D. Ribar; and M. Wilhelm. 1998b. "The Decline of Welfare Benefits in the U.S.: The
Role of Wage Inequality." Journal of Public Economics 68 (June): 421-452.
Moffitt, R. and L.Pavetti. 2000. “Time Limits.” In Finding Jobs: Work and Welfare Reform, eds.
D. Card and R. Blank. NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Moffitt, R. and D. Stevens. 2001. “Changing Caseloads: Macro Influences and Micro
Composition .” Economic Policy Review. New York: Federal Reserve Bank.
Moffitt, R. and S Ver Ploeg, eds. 2001. Evaluating Welfare Reform in an Era of Transition.
Washington: National Academy Press.
Mueser, P.; J. Hotchkiss; C. King; P. Rokicki; and D. Stevens. 2000. “The Welfare Caseload,
Economic Growth and Welfare-to-Work Policies: An Analysis of Five Urban Areas.” Mimeo,
University of Missouri.
Murray, C. 1984. Losing Ground. NY: Basic Books.
Nechyba, T. 1999. “Social Approval, Values, and AFDC: A Re-Examination of the Illegitimacy
88

Debate.” Working Paper 7240. Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Oellerich, D. 2001. “Welfare Reform: Program Entrants and Recipients.” Mimeographed.
Washington: Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, Department of
Health and Human Services.
O’Neill, J. and M. A. Hill. 2001. “Gaining Ground? Measuring the Impact of Welfare Reform
on Welfare and Work.” NY: Manhattan Institute.
O'Neill, D. and J. O'Neill. 1997. Lessons for Welfare Reform: An Analysis of the AFDC
Caseload and Past Welfare-to-Work Programs. Kalamazoo: Upjohn Institute.
Orr, L. 1976. "Income Transfers as a Public Good." American Economic Review 66 (June): 990994.
______. 1979. “Food Stamps for AFDC Families: Income Supplementation or Fiscal Relief.”
Mimeographed. Washington: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Parsons, D. 1996. “Imperfect ‘Tagging’ in Social Insurance Programs.” Journal of Public
Economics 62 (October): 183-207.
Plimpton, L. and D. Nightingale. 2000. “Welfare Employment Programs: Impacts and CostEffectiveness of Employment and Training Activities.” In Improving the Odds: Increasing the
Effectiveness of Publicly Funded Training, eds. B. Barnow and C. King. Washington: Urban
Institute.
Ribar, D. and M. Wilhelm. 1999. "The Demand for Welfare Generosity." Review of Economics
and Statistics 81 (February): 96-108.
Riccio, J; D. Friedlander; and S. Freedman. 1994. “GAIN: Benefits, Costs, and Three-Year
Impacts of a Welfare-to-Work Program.” New York: Manpower Demonstration Research
Corporation.
Rosenzweig, Mark. 1999. "Welfare, Marital Prospects, and Nonmarital Childbearing." Journal
of Political Economy 107 (December), Part 2: S3-S32.
Schoeni, R. and R. Blank. 2000. "What Has Welfare Reform Accomplished? Impacts on Welfare
Participation, Employment, Income, Poverty, and Family Structure." Working Paper 7627.
Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Smith, S. 2001. “Background on the Composition of the TANF Caseload Since Welfare
Reform.” Washington: Brookings Institution.

89

Tobin, J. 1966. “On the Economic Status of the Negro.” Daedalus (Fall): 89-895.
Tobin, J.; J. Pechman; and P. Mieszkowski. 1967. “Is a Negative Income Tax Practical?” Yale
Law Journal 77 (November): 1-27.
U.S. Congress, Committee on Ways and Means. 1994. Background Material and Data on
Programs Within the Jurisdiction of the Committee on Ways and Means. Washington:
Government Printing Office.
U.S. Congress, Committee on Ways and Means. 1996. Background Material and Data on
Programs Within the Jurisdiction of the Committee on Ways and Means. Washington:
Government Printing Office.
U.S. Congress, Committee on Ways and Means. 1998. Background Material and Data on
Programs Within the Jurisdiction of the Committee on Ways and Means. Washington:
Government Printing Office.
U.S. Congress, Committee on Ways and Means. 2000. Background Material and Data on
Programs Within the Jurisdiction of the Committee on Ways and Means. Washington:
Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 2000. Statistical Abstract of the U.S.:
1996. Washington:Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 1995. Report to Congress on Out-of-Wedlock
Childbearing. Washington: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 1997. Setting the Baseline: A Report on State
Welfare Waivers. Washington: Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 1998. Temporary Assistance for Needy
Families Program: First Annual Report to Congress. Washington: Administration for Children
and Families.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 1999. Characteristics and Financial
Circumstances of TANF Recipients: Fiscal Year 1998. Washington: Administration for Children
and Families, Office of Planning, Research, and Evaluation.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2000. Temporary Assistance for Needy
Families Program: Third Annual Report to Congress. Washington: Administration for Children
and Families.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2001. Indicators of Welfare Dependence:
90

Annual Report to Congress 2001. Washington: Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning
and Evaluation.
U.S. General Accounting Office. 1999. “Welfare Reform: Assessing the Effectiveness of Various
Welfare-to-Work Approaches.” Wash: Government Printing Office.
Wallace, G. and R. Blank. 1999. "What Goes Up Must Come Down?" In Economic Conditions
and Welfare Reform,ed.S. Danziger. Kalamazoo: Upjohn Institute.
Wheaton, W. 2000. “Decentralized Welfare: Will There Be Underprovision?” Journal of Urban
Economics 48 (November): 536-555.
Zeckhauser, R. 1971. “Optimal Mechanisms for Income Transfer.” American Economic Review
61 (June): 324-334.
Ziliak, J.; D.Figlio; E. Davis; and L. Connelly. 2000. "Accounting for the Decline in AFDC
Caseloads: Welfare Reform or Economic Growth?" Journal of Human Resources 35 (Summer):
570-586.

91

92

Table 1
Major Legislation in the AFDC and TANF Programs

Date

Title of Legislation

Main Provisions

1935

Social Security Act

Created the AFDC program for lowincome children without a parent present
in household

1961

Amendments to the Social
Security Act

Created AFDC-UP program for children
in two-parent families where primary
earner is unemployed

1967

Amendments to the Social
Security Act

Lowered the benefit reduction rate to 2/3;
created the Work Incentive (WIN)
program

1981

Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act of 1981

Increased the benefit reduction rate to 1;
imposed a gross income limit; counted
income of stepparents; allowed waiver
authority

1988

Family Support Act of 1988

Created the JOBS program for education,
skills training, job search assistance, and
other work activities; created transitional
child care and Medicaid programs;
mandated AFDC-UP in all states

1996

Personal Responsibility and
Work Reconciliation Act

Abolished the AFDC program and created
the TANF program

Table 2
Comparison of the AFDC and TANF Programs

Item

AFDC

TANF

Financing

Matching grant

Block grant

Eligibility

Children deprived of support of
one parent or children in lowincome two-parent families
(AFDC-UP)

Children in low-income families
as designated by state; AFDC-UP
abolished. Minor mothers must
live with parents; minor mothers
must also attend school

Immigrants

Illegal aliens ineligible

Aliens ineligible for five years
after entry and longer at state
option

Form of Aid

Almost exclusively cash
payment

States free to use funds for
services and non-cash benefits

Benefit Levels

At state option

Same

Entitlement Status

Federal government required to
pay matched share of all
recipients

No individual entitlement

Income Limits

Family income cannot exceed
gross income limits

No provision

Asset Limits

Federal limits

No provision

Treatment of Earnings
disregards

After 4 months of work, only a
lump sum $90 deduction plus
child care expenses; and
nothing after 12 months

No provision

Table 2, continued

Item

AFDC

TANF

Time Limits

None

Federal funds cannot be used for
payments to adults for more than
60 months lifetime (20 percent of
caseload exempt)

JOBS program

States must offer a program
that meets federal law

JOBS program abolished

Work Requirements

Parents without a child under 3
required to participate in JOBS

Exemptions from work
requirements are narrowed and
types of qualified activities are
narrowed and prespecified
(generally excludes education and
classroom training) and must be
20 hours/week rising to 30/week
for single mothers

Work Requirement
Participation
Requirements

JOBS participation
requirements

Participation for work
requirements rise to 50% by FY
2002

Child Care

Guaranteed for all JOBS
participants

No guarantee but states are given
increased child care funds

Sanctions

General provisions

Specific provisions mandating
sanctions for failure to comply
with work requirements, child
support enforcement, schooling
attendence, and other activities

Child Support

States required to allow first
$50 of child support received
by mother to not reduce benefit

No provision

Source: Burke (1996)

Table 3
State Time Limits, August 1998

States

Time Limits

27 States

60 Months

8 States

Intermittent, e.g., 24 out of 60 months;
Lifetime of 60 Months

8 States

Less than 60 Months Lifetime

Arizona, Indiana

(1) 24 out of 60 months; lifetime of 60 for
adults only; (2) 60 months lifetime

California

For applicants: 18 months but can be extended to 24
months if extension will lead to employment or 60
months if no job available and adults participate in
community service. For recipients: 24 months but
can be extended to 60 months if no job available
and adults participate in community service

Illinois

(1) No limit if family has earned income and works
20 hours per week
(2) 24 months for families with no child under age
13 and has no earnings
(3) 60 months for all other families

Iowa

Individualized; lifetime of 60

Massachusetts

24 out of 60 months; no lifetime limit

Michigan

No time limit; will use state funds after 60 months

Texas

12,24, and 36 months lifetime for adults only, time
period depends on employability of head of
household

Source: U.S. DHHS (1998).

Table 4
Monthly Earnings Disregards in TANF as of October, 1997

State

Flat Disregard

Percent of the Remainder

Alabama

0

20

Alaska

$150

0

Arizona

$90

33

Arkansas

20%

50

California

$225

50

Colorado

AFDC

AFDC

Connecticut

0

100a

Delaware

AFDC

AFDC

D.C.

AFDC

AFDC

Florida

$200

50

Georgia

AFDC

AFDC

Hawaii

$200

36

Idaho

0

40

Illinois

0

67

Indiana

AFDC

AFDC

Iowa

20%

50

Kansas

$90

40

Kentucky

AFDC

AFDC

Louisiana

$120 - $1,020

0

Maine

differs by county

differs by county

Maryland

0

26

Massachusetts

$120

50

Table 4 (continued)

State

Flat Disregard

Percent of the Remainder

Michigan

$200

20

Minnesota

0

36

Mississippi

$90

0

Missouri

AFDC

AFDC

Montana

$200

25

Nebraska

0

20

Nevada

0

$90 or 20b

New Hampshire

0

50

New Mexico

$150

50

New Jersey

0

50

New York

90

42

North Carolina

AFDC

AFDC

North Dakota

0

27c

Ohio

$250

50

Oklahoma

$120

50

Oregon

0

50

Pennsylvania

0

50

Rhode Island

$170

50

South Carolina

AFDC

AFDC

South Dakota

$90

20

Tennessee

$150

0

Texas

AFDC

AFDC

Utah

$100

50

Table 4 (continued)

State

Flat Disregard

Percent of the Remainder

Vermont

$150

25

Virginia

0

100d

Washington

0

50

West Virginia

0

40 on average (varies)

Wisconsin

0

0

Wyoming

$200-$400

0

Notes:
Source: Gallagher et al. (1998, Table 14)
In cases where the disregards change with the length of the spell, those for the longest spell are
shown
AFDC=$90 after 12 months
a

Disregard is 100% as long as earnings are below poverty line; benefit goes to zero above

b

Disregard is $90 or 20%, whichever is greater

c

There is an additional disregard that varies with earnings and family size

d

Disregard is 100% as long as net income is below poverty line; disregard is 0 if net income is
above poverty line but earnings are below poverty line; and benefits goes to zero if earnings are
above poverty line

Table 5
Selected Characteristics of AFDC and TANF Families,
1969-1999

1969

1979

1988

1999

Pct With Earnings

--

12.8

8.4

25.2

Age (Median)

--

--

29.0

31.2

Pct With Less than HS
Education

76.7

57.8

47.2

48.9

Family Size

4.0

3.0

3.0

2.8

Pct whose youngest child
is less than 2

--

--

43.1

32.3

10.1

14.6

9.6

29.1

Pct child-only families

Sources:
First, fourth, and sixth rows: U.S. DHHS (2001, Table TANF 7).
Second and fifth rows: Oellerich (2001, Table 3).
Third row: for 1969, 1979, and 1988, U.S. Congress (1998, Table 7-19); for 1999, U.S. DHHS
(1999, Table 17); figures shown here represent the originals inflated by the fraction non-missing.

Table 6
Recent Studies of the Effect of AFDC on Labor Supply
Data

Population

Hoynes (1996)

Survey of Income
and Program
Participation, 19831986

Low Asset Married
Couples

Keane and Moffitt
(1998)

Survey of Income
and Program
Participation, 1984

Meyer and
Rosenbaum (2001)

Current Population
Survey, 1984-1996

Dependent
Variable

Welfare
Variables

Results

Labor Supply and
Participation in the
AFDC-UP Program

AFDC Guarantee
and Tax Rate
evaluated at
specific labor
supply points

AFDC-UP has
sizable negative
effect on labor
supply; marginal
changes in G and t
have little effect

Low Asset Single
Mothers

Labor Supply and
Participation in
AFDC, Food
Stamps, and
Subsidized
Housing

Guarantees and Tax
Rates in AFDC,
Food Stamps, and
Subsidized
Housing evaluated
at specific labor
supply points

Sub elast is 1.82
and total income
elast is -.21;
marginal changes
in t have no effect
on labor supply

Single Mothers

Probability of
Working

AFDC and Food
Stamp Guarantee
and expected
benefits if work

Guarantees reduce
employment
probability and
benefits if work
increase it

Table 7
Recent Studies of Participation Dynamics in the AFDC Program
Study

Data

Population

Dependent
Variable

Welfare
Variables

Results

Blank and Ruggles
(1994)

Survey of Income
and Program
Participation, 1986
and 1987 panels

Single Mothers
who have been on
AFDC and have
left

Probability of
returning to AFDC

AFDC Guarantee

Guarantee
positively affects
reentry rate

Blank and Ruggles
(1996)

Survey of Income
and Program
Participation, 1986
and 1987 panels

Single Mothers

Probability of
exiting AFDC and
probability of
becoming ineligible
for AFDC

AFDC Guarantee

Guarantee nas a
negative effect on
exit; many women
are still eligible
after the exit

Fitzgerald (1995)

Survey of Income
and Program
Participation, 1984
and 1985 panels

Single mothers on
AFDC

Probability of
exiting AFDC

AFDC Guarantee

Guarantee
negatively affects
exit rate

Harris (1993)

Michigan PSID,
1984-1986

Single Mothers
who are on AFDC

Probability of
exiting AFDC

AFDC Guarantee

Guarantee is
insignificant; twothirds of exits are
for employment

Harris (1996)

Michigan PSID,
1983-1988

Single Mothers
who have exited
AFDC

Probability of
Returning to AFDC

AFDC Guarantee

Guarantee is
insignificant; other
variables do matter

Table 7 (continued)

Study

Data

Population

Dependent
Variable

Welfare
Variables

Results

Hoynes (2000)

California
administrative data
on AFDC
recipients, 19871992

California welfare
recipients

Probability of
exiting AFDC and
probability of
reentry

None

Local labor market
variables affect
transition rates

Hoynes and
MaCurdy (1994)

Michigan PSID,
1968-1989

Single mothers who
received AFDC

Probability of
Exiting AFDC

AFDC Guarantee

Guarantee explains
changes in length
of welfare spells in
some periods but
not others

Table 8
Counts of Estimates of Effect of Welfare on
Marriage and Fertility

All Races
Insig.

All Types

White

Sig. Mixed

Insig

Nonwhite or Black

Sig. Mixed Insig.

Sig. Mixed

8

5

1

8

13

5

10

12

6

Cross-State Levels

6

3

1

2

9

4

7

6

3

Cross-State Changes

1

2

-

4

4

-

1

5

2

Within-State

1

-

-

1

-

-

1

-

-

Time-Series

-

-

-

1

-

1

1

1

1

By Type:

Source: Moffitt (1998, Table 1).

Table 9
Studies of the Overall Effect of Welfare Reform on Labor Supply,
Earnings, Income, and AFDC-TANF Participation
Study

Program(s)
Studied

Dependent
Variable

Source of
Program Variation

Estimated Effect
of Welfare Reform

Bartik and Eberts (1999)

All state waiver
programs

AFDC caseload

Cross-state variation in
timing of waiver
introduction

Essentially zero

Blank (2001)

All state waiver
programs

AFDC caseload

Cross-state variation in
timing of waiver
introduction

Negative

Bloom and Michalopoulos
(2001)

Waiver programs in
Connecticut, Florida,
and Vermont

Employment, earnings,
income, AFDC
participation

Randomized
assignment on
population of AFDC
recipients

Positive effect on
employment and
earnings, no effect on
income, small or zero
effects on AFDC
participation

Council of Economic
Advisors (1997)

All state waiver
programs

AFDC caseload

Cross-state variation in
timing of waiver
introduction

Negative

Pre-1996 Waiver Programs

Table 9 (continued)
Study

Program(s)
Studied

Dependent
Variable

Source of
Program Variation

Estimated Effect
of Welfare Reform

Fein et al. (2001)

Waiver program in
Delaware

Employment, earnings,
income, AFDC
participation

Randomized
assignment on
population of AFDC
recipients

Positive effect on
employment and
earnings, no effect on
income or AFDC
participation

Figlio and Ziliak (1999),
Ziliak et al. (2000)

All state waiver
programs

AFDC caseload

Cross-state variation in
timing of waiver
introduction

Essentially zero

Moffitt (1999a)

All state waiver
programs

AFDC participation
rate, labor supply and
earnings of less
educated women

Cross-state variation in
timing of waiver
introduction

No effect on
employment or
earnings; positive
effect on weeks and
hours worked; negative
effect on AFDC
participation rate

Mueser et al. (2000)

Waiver programs in
five urban areas

AFDC entry and exit
rates, employment rate
of welfare leavers

Cross-state variation in
timing of waiver
introduction

Negative effect on
entry rate, positive
effect on exit rate,
positive but small
effect on employment
rate of leavers

Table 9 (continued)

Study

Program(s)
Studied

Dependent
Variable

Source of
Program Variation

Estimated Effect
of Welfare Reform

O’Neill and Hill (2001)

All state waiver
programs

Employment, AFDC
participation

Cross-state variation in
timing of waiver
introduction

Positive on
employment, negative
on AFDC participation

Schoeni and Blank (2000)

All state waiver
programs

Labor supply,
earnings,income,
AFDC participation

Cross-state variation in
timing of waiver
introduction combined
with difference-indifference using higheducated control group

Positive effects on
labor supply, earnings,
income; negative
effects on AFDC
participation

Wallace and Blank (1999)

All state waiver
programs

AFDC caseload

Cross-state variation in
timing of waiver
introduction

Negative

Ziliak et al. (2000)

All state waiver
programs

AFDC caseload

Cross-state variation in
timing of waiver
introduction

Zero (or positive)

Table 9 (continued)
Study

Program(s)
Studied

Dependent
Variable

Source of
Program Variation

Estimated Effect
of Welfare Reform

TANF
Council of Economic
Advisors (1999)

AFDC-TANF caseload

Cross-state variation in
timing of TANF
implementation

Negative

--

Ellwood (2000)

--a

Employment, earnings

Difference-indifference with highwage control group

Cannot separate effect
of EITC and welfare
reform

McKernan et al. (2000)

--a

Employment

Difference-indifference with
childless women
control group

Positive

O’Neill and Hill (2001)

--a

Employment, AFDCTANF participation

Cross-state variation in
timing of TANF
implementation

Positive on
employment, negative
on AFDC-TANF
participation

a

Table 9 (continued)
Study

Dependent
Variable

Source of
Program Variation

Estimated Effect
of Welfare Reform

Schoeni and Blank (2000)

--a

Labor supply,
earnings,income,
AFDC-TANF
participation

Difference-indifference with higheducated control group

No effect on labor
supply or individual
earnings, positive
effect on family
earnings and income,
negative effect on
AFDC-TANF
participation

Wallace and Blank (1999)

--a

AFDC caseload

1996+ year dummy

Negative

Notes:
a

Program(s)
Studied

All TANF.

Figure 1 : AFDC and TANF Real Expenditures per Capita, 1970-1999
140

Expenditures (1996 dollars)

120

100

80

60

40
AFDC Series

AFDC-TANF Series

20

0
1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Year
Sources: U.S. DHHS (2001, Table TANF 3); U.S. Congress (2000, Table 7-15); U.S. Department of Commerce (2000, Table No. 2,
Population).

2005

Figure 2: AFDC and TANF Caseload per Capita and Participation Rates per
Capita, 1970-1999
80.0%

6.0%

70.0%
5.0%

4.0%
50.0%

3.0%

40.0%

30.0%
2.0%
20.0%
1.0%

Caseload per Capita

AFDC Participation Rate of Single Mothers

10.0%

AFDC Participation Rate of Poor Single Mothers
0.0%
1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

0.0%
2005

Year
Sources: U.S. DHHS (2001, Table TANF 1); U.S. Department of Commerce (2000, Table No. 2, Population); author tabulations from the
Current Population Survey.

Participation Rate

Caseload per Capita

60.0%

Figure 3: Real Monthly AFDC-TANF, Food Stamp, and Medicaid Benefits, 19701998
1800
1600

Benefits (1996 dollars)

1400
1200
1000
800
600
400

Maximum AFDC-TANF Benefit for a Family of Four
Straight Sum of Maximum AFDC-TANF, Food Stamp, and Medicaid Benefit for a Family of Four
Modified Sum of Maximum AFDC-TANF, Food Stamp, and Medicaid Benefit for a Family of Four

200
0
1965

1970

1975

1980

1985
Year

Source: Welfare Benefits Data File, http://www.econ.jhu.edu/People/Moffitt/DataSets.html.

1990

1995

2000

TANF Expenditures by Spending Category, FY99

14%

0.1%
2%

8%

9%

59%

8%

Source: U.S. DHHS (2000, Chart 2.4).

CASH AND WORK BASED ASSISTANCE
WORK ACTIVITIES
CHILD CARE
ADMINISTRATION
SYSTEMS
TRANSITIONAL SERVICES
OTHER EXPENDITURES

Figure 5
Basis of AFDC Eligibility, 1942-1994
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%

Other
Incapacitated
Widowed
Divorced/separated
Not Married

50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
1942

1948

1953

1961

1967

1973
Year

Source: U.S. DHHS (1995, p.63).

1979

1983

1988

1992

Income

Slope = –w
E
Slope = –w (1 – t)
D

C

B

G
A
0

Hours worked

Figure 6. Budget Constraint with a Means-Tested Transfer Program

Income
3
D′
1

2
D

Hours worked

Figure 7. Effect of Change on t on Labor Supply

C

0

Income
K′
D

3
J
K

C

2
1

A

Hours worked

Hmin

Figure 8. Effect of Work Requirements on Labor Supply

Income

E′

E

D

D′

C

0

Hours worked

Figure 9. Effect of Earnings Subsidy on Budget Constraint

