                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      WHEN DOES THE MARKET MATTER?
        STOCK PRICES AND THE INVESTMENT OF EQUITY-DEPENDENT FIRMS


                                             Malcolm Baker
                                             Jeremy C. Stein
                                             Jeffrey Wurgler


                                          Working Paper 8750
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8750


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2002




We thank Eric Nierenberg for research assistance. Thanks also to Heitor Almeida, Steve Kaplan, Eli Ofek,
Lasse Pedersen, David Scharfstein, Andrei Shleifer, Tuomo Vuolteenaho and seminar participants at
Harvard, Dartmouth and NYU for helpful comments. Financial support from the Division of Research of the
Harvard Graduate School of Business Administration (Baker and Wurgler) and from the National Science
Foundation (Stein) is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Malcolm Baker, Jeremy C. Stein and Jeffrey Wurgler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
When Does the Market Matter? Stock Prices and the Investment of
Equity-Dependent Firms
Malcolm Baker, Jeremy C. Stein and Jeffrey Wurgler
NBER Working Paper No. 8750
February 2002
JEL No. E22, G31, G32



                                               ABSTRACT


         We use a simple model of corporate investment to determine when investment will be sensitive
to non-fundamental movements in stock prices. The key cross-sectional prediction of the model is that
stock prices will have a stronger impact on the investment of firms that are "equity dependent" - firms
that need external equity to finance their marginal investments. Using an index of equity dependence
based on the work of Kaplan and Zingales (1997), we find strong support for this prediction. In
particular, firms that rank in the top quintile of the KZ index have investment that is almost three times
as sensitive to stock prices as firms in the bottom quintile. We also verify several other predictions of the
model.




Malcolm Baker                        Jeremy C. Stein                       Jeffrey Wurgler
Harvard Business School              Department of Economics               NYU Stern School of Business
mbaker@hbs.edu                       Harvard University                    jwurgler@stern.nyu.edu
                                     Littauer 209
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     and NBER
                                     jeremy_stein@harvard.edu
I.     Introduction

       Corporate investment and the stock market are positively correlated, both in the time

series and in the cross-section. The traditional explanation for this relationship is that stock

prices rationally reflect the marginal product of capital. This is the usual interpretation given to

the relationship between investment and Tobin’s Q, for example, as in Tobin (1969) and von

Furstenberg (1977).

       Keynes (1936) suggests a very different explanation. He argues that stock prices contain

an important element of irrationality. As a result, the effective cost of external equity sometimes

diverges from the cost of other forms of capital. This affects the pattern of equity issues and in

turn corporate investment. This “equity financing channel” has been developed in work by

Bosworth (1975), Fischer and Merton (1984), Morck, Shleifer and Vishny (1990), Blanchard,

Rhee and Summers (1993) and Stein (1996).

       It has proven difficult to determine the relative merits of these explanations. This is partly

because the equity financing channel has not been articulated in a form that can be empirically

distinguished from the traditional view. Empirical tests have had to focus on indirect

implications of the two views, or else have had to impose structural assumptions on the data. For

example, researchers taking the former approach have examined whether the stock market

forecasts investment over and above other measures of the marginal product of capital, such as

profitability or cash flow. If it does not, they argue, then the stock market is probably connected

to investment only insofar as it reflects fundamentals.

       This empirical strategy has yielded mixed results. Barro (1990, p. 130) attributes an

important independent role to the stock market: “Even in the presence of cash flow variables,

such as contemporaneous and lagged values of after-tax corporate profits, the stock market




                                                 1
variable retains significant predictive power for investment.” In contrast, Morck, Shleifer and

Vishny (1990, p. 199) conclude from their analysis of firm-level data that “the market may not

be a complete sideshow, but nor is it very central.” And Blanchard, Rhee and Summers (1993, p.

132) summarize their study of the aggregate data by stating that “market valuation appears to

play a limited role, given fundamentals, in the determination of investment decisions.”

       Another empirical strategy is to try to measure inefficiency directly as the difference

between market prices and a structural model of efficient prices, and then test whether

investment is sensitive to this measure of inefficiency. In a study of aggregate Japanese data,

Chirinko and Schaller (2001) find evidence for an equity financing channel using this approach.

As they point out, however, their conclusions depend on several structural assumptions.

       In this paper we take a new approach. We return to the theory to derive several cross-

sectional predictions that are unique to a specific equity financing channel. In particular, the

model in Stein (1996) implies that firms that are in need of external equity finance will have

investment that is especially sensitive to the non-fundamental component of stock prices.

Intuitively, a firm with no debt and a stockpile of cash can insulate its investment decisions from

irrational gyrations in its stock price. But an “equity-dependent” firm that needs equity to fund its

marginal investments will be less likely to proceed if it has to issue undervalued shares. The

theory thus identifies a specific equity financing channel that suggests when the market matters

in the cross-section and, at the same time, why it matters.

       We test several implications of this financing channel. To get started, we need a proxy for

the concept of equity dependence. This concept requires some financing friction, or combination

of frictions, which makes certain firms more reliant on outside equity at the margin. Standard

corporate-finance considerations suggest that equity-dependent firms will tend to be young, and




                                                 2
to have high leverage, low cash balances and cash flows, high cash flow volatility (and hence

low incremental debt capacity) and strong investment opportunities.1 One off-the-shelf measure

which satisfies most of these criteria is an index based on the work of Kaplan and Zingales

(1997). This “KZ index” has already been adapted for use in large-sample empirical work by

Lamont, Polk and Saa-Requejo (2001), so we can follow their methodology. By taking this

approach, as opposed to building our own measure of equity dependence from scratch, we hope

to minimize any concerns about data mining.

         Next, we rank firms according to this proxy for equity dependence, and test in a variety

of ways whether those that are classified as most likely to be equity dependent have the strongest

correlation between stock prices and subsequent investment. We find strong support for this

prediction. In our baseline specification, firms that rank in the top quintile of the sample in terms

of the KZ index have a sensitivity of investment to stock prices that is almost three times as large

as firms that rank in the bottom quintile.2 Put differently, our results suggest that the investment

of equity-dependent firms is in some circumstances more sensitive to Q than to cash flow. This is

noteworthy because it is generally believed that the cash flow effect uniformly dominates the Q

effect in investment equations.

         We also examine whether these results for investment reflect the specific equity financing

mechanism outlined in the model. This involves a test of whether the firms who are the most

likely to be equity dependent also have the strongest correlation between stock prices and the

1
  Morck, Shleifer and Vishny (1990) look for a financing channel using firm size as their only proxy for equity
dependence. They argue that the “hypothesis predicts that the influence of the stock market should be particularly
great for smaller firms, which rely to a greater extent on external financing” (p. 182). However, they find little
evidence that the investment of smaller firms is especially sensitive to stock prices, and conclude that there is little
support for the hypothesis. As we show, the use of a more fully developed measure of equity dependence leads to
quite different conclusions.
2
  The result that investment is more sensitive to Q for high-KZ firms actually shows up in Kaplan and Zingales’
(1997) small 49-firm sample. However, their focus is on a different question – how investment-cash flow
sensitivities vary with financial constraints – and they never discuss or interpret this particular finding.


                                                           3
volume of new equity issues. We find support for this hypothesis as well: Firms with high values

of the KZ index also have equity issuance behavior that is more responsive to stock prices than

their low-KZ counterparts.

       Our results offer support for a specific equity financing channel in corporate investment.

They also complement other evidence that the cost of external equity has an important,

independent effect on corporate financing and investment decisions. For example, Ritter (1991),

Ikenberry, Lakonishok, and Vermaelen (1995), Loughran and Ritter (1995), Speiss and Affleck-

Graves (1995), and Baker and Wurgler (2000) find evidence that equity financing patterns

depend on the cost of equity, and Baker and Wurgler (2002) use these results to motivate an

alternative view of capital structure. Shleifer and Vishny (2001) argue that the cost of equity is a

strong determinant of merger activity, explaining the form of financing in mergers as well as

merger waves themselves. Whereas the capital structure findings could be viewed as financial

phenomena without significant real effects, however, our results point to a specific channel

through which market inefficiency may affect the real economy.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we develop several

testable hypotheses in the context of a simple model. The model provides some guidance as to

how to measure equity dependence in practice, and provides a framework for thinking about

competing hypotheses. In Section III, we describe the data, and in Section IV, we present the

empirical results. Section V concludes.




                                                 4
II.            Hypothesis development

               A. A simple model

               We use a simplified version of the model in Stein (1996) to develop several testable

hypotheses about equity dependence and investment. For starters, consider a firm that can invest

K at time 0, which yields a gross return of f(K) at time 1, where f(⋅) is an increasing, concave

function. The efficient-market discount rate is r, so the net present value of this investment is

    f (K )
             − K . The first-best level of investment Kfb is therefore given by       ( ) = 1.
                                                                                    f ′ K fb
    1+ r                                                                              1+ r



               The firm also has financing considerations. Its equity may be mispriced by a percentage δ

relative to the efficient-market value, either overpriced (δ > 0) or underpriced (δ < 0), while its

debt is fairly priced.3 The firm can issue equity e subject to the constraints that 0 ≤ e ≤ emax. In

other words, it cannot repurchase equity, and there is an upper bound on how much it can issue.

Financing and investment are linked by a leverage constraint, e + W − K (1 − D ) ≥ 0 , where W is

the firm’s pre-existing wealth (such as cash on hand, or untapped debt capacity) and D is the

fractional debt capacity of the new assets. This constraint implies that the firm’s debt ratio can

fall below D but cannot exceed it.4


3
  The model interprets δ as an irrational variation in the cost of external equity, but one could also view it as a
rational gap between the cost of external and internal equity that reflects adverse-selection problems (Myers and
Majluf (1984)). Moreover, some authors have argued that adverse-selection problems are mitigated in good times,
which are generally associated with high stock prices (Lucas and McDonald (1990), Choe, Masulis and Nanda
(1993), Bayless and Chaplinsky (1996)). Such an interpretation of δ can lead to similar empirical predictions. Our
own view is that the first story – based on market inefficiencies – is a more compelling way of thinking about the
connection between equity issues and stock prices, and more consistent with the evidence from surveys and long-run
stock returns following equity issues. However, we note that none of our tests seek to discriminate between these
stories. In fact, both of them are based on the same idea: managers try to time the market by selling stock when they
think it is overvalued, and by sitting out when they think it is undervalued. The only difference is whether investors
fully account for this motive.
4
  These constraints simplify the exposition, but they can be dispensed with in a fuller model. For example, both
repurchases and equity issues could be bounded endogenously by assuming that there are price-pressure effects that
increase with the size of the repurchase or issue. The simple form of the leverage constraint can also be generalized
by having costs of financial distress that increase continuously whenever the debt ratio exceeds D . These
generalizations are considered in Stein (1996).



                                                          5
       Putting all this together, the firm’s optimization problem is given by:

               f (K )
       max            − K + δe ,                                                                      (1)
        e,K    1+ r

       subject to

       e + W − K (1 − D ) ≥ 0 and                                                                     (2)

       0 ≤ e ≤ emax.                                                                                  (3)

Proposition 1 summarizes the solution to this problem.



Proposition 1: Assume that emax > Kfb(1- D ). Then the possible outcomes are as follows:

i)     If δ > 0, then K = Kfb and e = emax: An overvalued firm invests at the first-best level and

       issues as much equity as possible.

ii)    If δ < 0 and W – Kfb(1- D ) ≥ 0, then K = Kfb and e = 0: An undervalued firm with

       sufficient wealth W invests at the first-best level and avoids issuing equity.

iii)   If δ < 0 and W – Kfb(1- D ) < 0, then K < Kfb: An undervalued firm with insufficient

       wealth underinvests. This case admits two subcases.

       a) Define Kec by        ( ) = 1 − δ (1 − D ) . If W – Kec(1- D ) < 0, it follows that K = Kec and e
                             f ′ K ec
                               1+ r



              = Kec(1- D ) – W > 0: The firm issues equity, and both investment and the size of the

              equity issue are functions of the degree of undervaluation δ and debt capacity D .

       b) If W – Kec(1- D ) ≥ 0, then K =         W
                                                 1− D
                                                         and e = 0: The firm does not issue equity and

              invests as much as it can subject to its wealth W and the leverage constraint.



       The proposition makes clear when investment depends on the non-fundamental

component of stock prices. This happens only when two necessary conditions are satisfied: when


                                                        6
the stock is undervalued, and when available wealth is so low that the firm would have to issue

undervalued equity to invest at the first-best level.5 We therefore define a firm as “equity

dependent” if W < Kfb(1- D ). The basic message of Proposition 1 is that for equity-dependent

firms, market inefficiency can act like a financial constraint, discouraging investment when stock

prices are too low.



         B. Testable hypotheses

         We boil Proposition 1 down to three empirical hypotheses. In each case, the null

hypothesis is the joint statement that stock prices reflect the net present value of investment and

that financing is frictionless – i.e., the benchmark Tobin’s Q mechanism. The hypotheses that

follow from the proposition, by contrast, maintain that stock prices have a non-fundamental

component and that debt capacity can be a constraint.



         Hypothesis 1: Define a firm as equity dependent if W < Kfb(1- D ). Equity-dependent

firms display a higher sensitivity of investment to stock price than non-equity-dependent firms.



         Hypothesis 1 is the primary focus of our empirical tests. As we state it, the hypothesis is

not conditioned on whether firms are over- or undervalued. It effectively averages over region

(i), where δ > 0, and where equity dependence does not affect investment, and regions (ii) and

(iii), where δ < 0, and where equity dependence does matter for investment. Observe also that

5
  The conclusion that investment is sensitive to stock prices only when δ < 0 is a result of the one-sided nature of the
leverage constraint. One could also impose the constraint that an equity issue not cause leverage to fall below some
critical value, in which case investment may vary with stock prices even when δ > 0. The model of Shleifer and
Vishny (2001) implicitly embodies such a feature—they assume that overvalued firms wishing to issue equity
cannot simply park the proceeds in T-bills, and must do something concrete, like acquiring another firm, to justify
the issue. Hence overvaluation leads to more investment in the form of mergers.



                                                           7
for the undervalued, equity-dependent firms in (iii.a), the magnitude of the sensitivity of

investment to δ is governed by (1– D ), so that for a given starting value of K, firms with less

debt capacity have investment that reacts more strongly to stock prices. The intuition is simple.

When a firm has little wealth relative to its investment opportunities, it is forced to issue

undervalued equity at the margin to keep the leverage constraint satisfied. This tends to

discourage investment. And the lower is D , the more equity must be issued for each marginal

dollar of investment, hence the stronger is the negative effect on investment.

       Proposition 1 also suggests various hypotheses that condition on δ – which we outline

next – but the unconditional statement in Hypothesis 1 is more straightforward to test

empirically, so we make it the focus of our empirical efforts.



       Hypothesis 2: When δ < 0, Hypothesis 1 holds more strongly: Equity-dependent firms

display a particularly high sensitivity of investment to stock price when δ < 0.



       Hypothesis 2 compares the undervalued, non-equity-dependent firms in (ii) to the

undervalued, equity-dependent firms in (iii), especially (iii.a). It is a more direct implication of

the idea that equity dependence matters for investment only when equity is undervalued – in the

model, when equity is overvalued, all firms invest at the first-best level regardless of the degree

of overvaluation. Therefore, conditioning on undervaluation should reveal a stronger effect of

equity dependence.

       Hypothesis 2 is trickier to test than Hypothesis 1, however, because it requires us to

proxy for the absolute level of over or undervaluation. This is further complicated by the fact that

what really matters are managers’ perceptions of misvaluation. A variety of evidence suggests



                                                 8
that managers are not particularly objective when it comes to assessing whether their firms are

fairly valued; indeed, they tend to be biased toward the view that their firms are chronically

undervalued.6 Thus, while we take a stab at testing Hypothesis 2, we view it more in terms of an

auxiliary test of the model.



           Hypothesis 3: When δ < 0, equity-dependent firms display a higher sensitivity of equity

issuance to stock price than non-equity dependent firms.7



           Hypothesis 3 reflects the fact that in region (iii.a), the investment and equity issues of

equity-dependent firms are tied together by the binding leverage constraint, and so both are

sensitive to undervaluation. In contrast, the non-equity-dependent firms in region (ii) avoid

issuing equity regardless of the degree of undervaluation. If this hypothesis can be confirmed in

the data, it will provide additional evidence that our specific equity financing channel is driving

any patterns in investment. Unfortunately, testing this hypothesis again requires a proxy for

undervaluation, so again we view the results as somewhat provisional.

           Note that our hypotheses involve simple comparisons between firms that are equity

dependent and those that are not – that is, comparisons across the regions in Proposition 1. We

can also ask what happens within region (iii.a) as firms become “more” equity dependent, i.e. as

W falls further and further below Kfb(1- D ). The answer to this question depends on the form of

the production function. Define the “degree” of equity dependence as Φ = Kfb(1- D ) – W, and the


6
    Heaton’s (1998) model is built on just this sort of managerial overconfidence.
7
  Note that, unlike in Hypothesis 2, we cannot predict that the relationship between equity issues and stock prices
will be stronger in the undervaluation region than in the overvaluation region. Unlike with investment, the model (or
a reasonable variant on it) allows for equity issues to be sensitive to stock prices even when they are overvalued.




                                                            9
percentage sensitivity of investment to stock prices as S =                    1
                                                                               K
                                                                                   ⋅ dK
                                                                                     dδ
                                                                                        . (This measure of the

sensitivity matches our empirical implementation, where we scale investment by existing assets.)

It is straightforward to show that a sufficient condition for            dS
                                                                         dΦ
                                                                              to be positive in region (iii.a) –

and hence for the sensitivity S to become ever greater as W declines relative to Kfb(1- D ) – is that

Kf ′′′(K ) + f ′′(K ) < 0 .8

        When this condition is satisfied, there is a globally monotonic relationship between Φ

and the sensitivity of investment and equity issuance to the non-fundamental component of stock

prices. When it is not satisfied, we are left with the weaker prediction that S must increase as Φ

moves from negative to positive values, but need not be monotonic in Φ beyond that point. To be

clear, our three hypotheses are based on this weaker prediction. This situation is reminiscent of

the discussion by Kaplan and Zingales (1997, 2000) and Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (2000)

as to whether the sensitivity of investment to cash flow is monotonic in the degree of a different

kind of financial constraint. Nevertheless, even if the sufficient condition is not satisfied, the

hypotheses show that the theory is testable as long as we can plausibly identify some firms that

are not dependent on equity at all – i.e., firms for which Φ < 0 – since the theory unambiguously

predicts that the sensitivity of investment and equity issuance to stock prices will rise over at

least this first part of the range of measured equity dependence. Whether these sensitivities

continue to increase over the whole range is an empirical question, however, and not one for

which the theory leaves us with strong priors.




8
 Among the functions that satisfy this condition are the quadratic, and anything of the form f(K) = K/(K+A), where
A > 2K. Note that in our setup, S depends on Φ within region (iii.a) only through D and not through W, since
dK dW is zero in this region. Nevertheless, the sufficient condition stated in the text continues to apply even in a
modified version of the model where dK dW > 0 in the region of interest.



                                                        10
           C. Determining equity dependence in practice

           Our theory defines an equity-dependent firm as one in which W < Kfb(1- D ). This

definition indicates that a firm is more likely to be dependent on equity when W is low (which

translates into low profitability, cash balances, or previously untapped debt capacity), when Kfb is

high (growth opportunities are good), and when the incremental debt capacity of new assets D

is low.9 Therefore, a sensible empirical measure of equity dependence should probably be:

negatively related to operating cash flow; positively related to proxies for growth opportunities;

positively related to actual leverage, net of cash on hand; and negatively related to the debt

capacity of assets. Firm age may also be a factor, to the extent that young firms without

established reputations may have a harder time raising bond-market finance (Diamond (1991)).

           These observations motivate our interest in the empirical work of Kaplan and Zingales

(1997), who do an in-depth study of the financial constraints faced by a sample of 49

manufacturing firms. Using both subjective and objective criteria, they rank these firms on an

ordinal scale, from least- to most-obviously financially constrained. Most useful for our

purposes, they then estimate an ordered logit regression which relates their ranking to five simple

Compustat variables. The regression attaches positive weight to Q and leverage, and negative

weight to operating cash flow, cash balances, and dividends. Thus, the parameters of this

regression allow one to easily create a synthetic “KZ index” of financial constraints for a large

sample of firms, as is done in Lamont, Polk and Saa-Requejo (2001).

           The KZ index has some very attractive features from our perspective. It is an objective,

off-the-shelf index that has already gained substantial currency as an indicator of financial

constraints. By using it, as opposed to building our own measure from scratch, we hope to avoid


9
    These first two factors closely parallel the notion of “financial dependence” in Rajan and Zingales (1998).



                                                            11
any criticism of data mining. Moreover, relative to what is suggested by our theory, the KZ index

seems at first glance to load up on each of the five included variables in the “right” way.

       The index also has some disadvantages as a measure of equity dependence, however.

Most importantly, our theoretical definition of equity dependence requires a measure of

investment opportunities Kfb that is distinct from mispricing δ. Of the five variables in the KZ

index, both low dividends and high values of Q can be thought of as proxies for strong

investment opportunities. But in the case of Q, much research has argued that this ratio

(effectively, the market-to-book ratio) reflects mispricing δ as much as it reflects investment

opportunities Kfb. This dual role is particularly problematic from our perspective, since our

model has opposite predictions for the effects of Kfb and δ.

       In light of this ambiguity, our baseline specifications use a modified four-variable version

of the KZ index that omits Q. We stress here, though, that we do this more for conceptual

cleanness than because it has any real effect on the empirical results. As we demonstrate in our

robustness tests, we obtain very similar estimates if we work instead with the five-variable

version of the KZ index that includes Q.

       Another disadvantage of the KZ index is that it does not include every characteristic that

could identify equity dependence. Firm age is a noteworthy omission. And given the important

role that available debt capacity plays in our model, we would have preferred to include leverage

relative to the firm’s debt capacity, not simply the raw debt level. In some of our auxiliary tests,

we supplement the KZ index with two more variables, firm age and the volatility of industry

cash flow (a proxy for debt capacity), in an effort to further zero in on equity-dependent firms.

       The definitional shortcomings partly stem from the fact that Kaplan and Zingales (1997)

set out to measure financial constraints generally, not equity dependence. Though related, these



                                                12
concepts are not exactly the same. For example, one can imagine a high-KZ firm whose

investment is sensitive to debt-market conditions, but that would not issue equity at any price.

An important part of our empirical work is therefore to confirm that high-KZ firms actually do

raise significantly more outside equity when stock prices go up.



           D. Competing hypotheses

            Our null hypothesis throughout the empirical section is that the stock market is efficient

and that financing is frictionless. This leads to the benchmark Q specification, in which the

coefficient of investment on Q reflects technological adjustment costs.10 The full statement of

our null hypothesis is therefore that any cross-sectional differences in the sensitivity of

investment to Q reflect cross-sectional differences in technological adjustment costs. This theory

is silent about the sensitivity of equity issuance to Q.

           Another competing hypothesis is that any patterns we may find in the investment-Q

sensitivity are due to cross-sectional differences in measurement error. In particular, the effects

predicted by our model would also show up if measurement error were more pronounced for

firms that are less equity dependent. However, an important point to note is that such a pattern

with respect to measurement error is precisely the reverse of that which has for many years been

discussed in the large literature on liquidity constraints. For example, in his discussion of

Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988), Poterba (1988) argues that their results “could be

explained on this view because Q is measured with more error for smaller firms, which tend to

be lower-dividend firms” (p. 202). Erickson and Whited (2000) and Alti (2001) further develop

this point; the latter builds a formal model to show why measurement error in Q is likely to be


10
     This model is treated in surveys of the investment literature by Chirinko (1993) and Hubbard (1998).



                                                           13
greater for young, faster-growing, low-dividend firms. Clearly, if these arguments are correct,

our approach stands on safe ground. The KZ index scores low-dividend, high-growth firms as

more likely to be equity dependent. If these attributes lead to more measurement error in Q, our

tests will be biased toward being excessively conservative.

       Nevertheless, it is possible to concoct measurement-error stories that go in the opposite

direction. One way to partially address such stories, as well as the adjustment-costs null

hypothesis, is by “unpacking” the KZ index. The definition of equity dependence leads to

specific predictions for how each of the four components of the modified KZ index should affect

the sensitivity of investment to stock prices. If these predictions hold up in the data, advocates of

the competing hypotheses would then have to explain why technological adjustment costs, or

measurement error in Q, should be positively correlated with some of these variables and

negatively correlated with others. Our further tests that look at how the sensitivity of investment

to stock prices varies with firm age and debt capacity can be thought of in a similar spirit.



III.   Data

       We study a large, unbalanced panel of Compustat firms that covers 1980 through 1999.

The panel excludes financial firms (i.e., firms with a one-digit SIC of six), and firm-years with a

book value under $10 million, but otherwise includes all observations with data on investment,

financing, equity dependence, and other investment determinants, as described below. The full

sample includes 51,982 observations, for an average of 2,599 observations per year.




                                                 14
         A. Investment

         We consider four measures of investment. Our baseline measure is CAPXit/Ait-1, the ratio

of capital expenditures in year t (Compustat Annual Item 128) to start-of-year book assets (Item

6).11 In addition, we look at (CAPXit+RDit)/Ait-1, which includes research and development

expenses (Item 46), and at (CAPXit+RDit+SGAit)/Ait-1, which further includes selling, general and

administrative expenses (Item 189). Finally, we also examine the percentage change in book

assets over the year, ∆Ait/Ait-1. To reduce the influence of outliers, we Winsorize each of these

variables at the 1st and 99th percentile.12

         Panel A of Table 1 shows summary statistics for investment. The reported minimum and

maximum values, like the other statistics, are post-Winsorization.



         B. Financing

         We consider two measures of external financing activity. To measure equity issuance we

use eit/Ait-1, the ratio of external equity issues to start-of-year book assets. External equity issues

are constructed as the change in book equity minus the change in retained earnings (∆Item

60+∆Item 74-∆Item 36). Total external finance is measured as (eit+dit)/Ait-1, which includes both

equity and debt issues. Debt issues are constructed as the total change in assets minus the change



11
   We scale our measures of investment and cash flow by book assets. This contrasts with some of the literature (e.g.
Fazarri, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988) and Kaplan and Zingales (1997)), where the denominator is net plant,
property, and equipment (PP&E). Our approach matches our sample, which includes smaller and non-manufacturing
firms with modest fixed assets, and our measures of investment, which include intangible assets. Nevertheless, we
show in our robustness tests below that scaling by PP&E leads to very similar results.
12
   We have conducted a variety of tests to determine whether our particular treatment of outliers makes any
difference. As it turns out, all that matters is that we do something to tamp down the most extreme realizations of Q,
which in the raw data attains a maximum value of 52.5. An alternative to Winsorizing is to replace the book value
of equity in Q with 0.9 times the book value plus 0.1 times the market value, thereby bounding the transformed
value of Q below 10. This procedure gives virtually identical results to those we report. (We thank Tuomo
Vuolteenaho for suggesting this procedure.)



                                                         15
in book equity (∆Item 6-∆Item 60-∆Item 74). These variables are also Winsorized at the 1st and

99th percentile.

        Panel B of Table 1 shows summary statistics for financing. These mean values are

sensitive to major financing events such as acquisitions and divestitures, despite the

Winsorization and the restriction on minimum book assets. The medians look more familiar. The

medians are also stable across the 1980s and 1990s (not reported).



        C. Equity dependence

        Following Lamont, Polk and Saa-Requejo (2001), we construct the five-variable KZ

index for each firm-year as the following linear combination:

                                            CFit            DIVit         C
         KZ it (five variable) = −1.002            − 39.368        − 1.315 it + 3.139 LEVit + 0.283Qit (4)
                                            Ait −1          Ait −1        Ait −1

where CFit/Ait-1 is cash flow (Item 14+Item 18) over lagged assets; DIVit/Ait-1 is cash dividends

(Item 21+Item 19) over assets; Cit/Ait-1 is cash balances (Item 1) over assets; LEVit is leverage

((Item 9+Item 34)/(Item 9+Item 34+Item 216)); and Q is the market value of equity (price times

shares outstanding from CRSP) plus assets minus the book value of equity (Item 60+Item 74) all

over assets.13 We Winsorize the ingredients of the index before constructing it.

        For reasons discussed above, our baseline specifications use a four-variable version of

this index which omits Q. Henceforth, when we refer to the “KZ index,” we mean this modified

version, unless otherwise specified. We denote this version simply by KZit:

                          CFit            DIVit         C
         KZ it = −1.002          − 39.368        − 1.315 it + 3.139 LEVit                                       (5)
                          Ait −1          Ait −1        Ait −1


13
  As with investment, we scale the components of the KZ index by assets rather than net plant, property, and
equipment (Item 8), because our sample includes small and non-manufacturing firms. Although assets produce
fewer outliers in the raw KZ index, the results are similar with either denominator, as we show in robustness tests.



                                                        16
       In some of our additional tests, we consider two other variables that may help to pinpoint

equity-dependent firms. AGEit is the number of years since the firm’s IPO, defined as the current

year minus the first year Compustat reports a non-missing market value of equity. As discussed

above, this variable may be useful as a proxy for reputation and access to lending markets.

Industryσ(CF/A)i is the industry average standard deviation of cash flows. We calculate the

standard deviation of cash flows across the subset of firm-year observations for each industry

using the industry definitions in Fama and French (1997). This measure may help to capture

variation in debt capacity that is missed by the KZ index.

       Panel A of Table 2 shows summary statistics for the KZ index, its four ingredients, and

the other two equity-dependence proxies. By multiplying the coefficients in equation (5) by the

standard deviation of the components, one can see that the KZ index is especially sensitive to

variation in dividends and leverage.



       D. Other investment determinants

       Following Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988) and many others, our baseline

investment equation includes year fixed effects, firm fixed effects, start-of-year Q, and

contemporaneous cash flow. Q and cash flow are as defined above.



IV.    Empirical results

       A. Hypothesis 1: Investment

       We begin with a simple test of Hypothesis 1, which predicts that the investment of

equity-dependent firms is more sensitive to their stock prices than that of non-equity-dependent




                                                17
firms. We assign each firm to a quintile according to its median value of KZit over the full sample

period.14 For each KZ quintile, we then estimate the following investment equation:

         CAPX it                        CF
                 = ai + at + bQit −1 + c it + uit .                                                               (6)
          Ait −1                        Ait −1

Hypothesis 1 predicts that the stock-price-sensitivity coefficient b will generally increase as KZ

increases.

         Figure 1 and Panel A of Table 3 show that there is indeed a strong relationship between

KZ and the effect of stock prices on investment. The coefficient b rises from 0.010 in the first

quintile to 0.028 in the fifth quintile. Thus, the firms that are most likely to be equity dependent

according to the KZ index have a sensitivity of investment to stock prices that is almost three

times as large as firms that are unlikely to be equity dependent.

         The pattern of b coefficients is our main result, but as an aside it is also interesting to

look at the pattern of c coefficients in Panel A of Table 3. Consistent with the small-sample

results of Kaplan and Zingales (1997), we find no discernible pattern in this coefficient across

the KZ quintiles. It is almost the same in quintile 1 (0.122) as in quintile 5 (0.154), and bounces

around non-monotonically in between. This particular result, however, is sensitive to the nature

of the specification. If we keep everything else the same and lag the cash-flow term one year (so

that we are using CFit-1/Ait-2 instead of CFit/Ait-1) the cash-flow coefficient c now shows a

pronounced increasing pattern, going from 0.044 in quintile 1 to 0.138 in quintile 5 (not




14
   Our results are not sensitive to the technique used to classify firm-year observations. In our robustness checks
below, we experiment with two alternatives. In the first, we allow a firm’s KZ quintile to vary from year to year, so,
for example, if its leverage increases, it may move to a higher quintile. In the second, we assign firms to quintiles
based on their median values of the index over five-year sub-periods, rather than over the full sample period. Both
of these alternatives lead to very similar results.



                                                         18
reported). The pattern of b coefficients, on the other hand, is essentially unaffected by this

variation: it now goes from 0.012 to 0.030 across the five quintiles (not reported).15

        To get a better understanding of economic magnitudes, note from Table 2 that the

standard deviation of Q in our sample is 0.91. Thus in the highest KZ quintile, the impact of a

one-standard-deviation shock to Q is to alter the ratio of capital expenditures to assets by 0.025

(0.028 x 0.91 = 0.025). When compared to either the median or the standard deviation of this

investment ratio (0.0598 and 0.0780, respectively), this effect is clearly substantial. As another

benchmark, note that the standard deviation of the cash-flow-to-assets ratio is 0.117, so that in

the highest KZ quintile, a one-standard-deviation shock to cash flow moves the investment ratio

by 0.018 (0.154 x 0.117 = 0.018). Thus among the firms most likely to be equity dependent,

stock prices have a slightly larger effect on investment than does cash flow. This contrasts with a

general belief that cash flow uniformly dominates Q in these sorts of investment equations.

        Turning to statistical, as opposed to economic significance, there are a couple of ways to

evaluate the precision of our results. First, and most simply, we can do a t-test of the difference

between our quintile-1 and quintile-5 b coefficients. Based on the standard errors from our

regressions, (which are heteroskedasticity-robust, and clustered at the firm level in an effort to

deal with potential serial correlation) the t-statistic is 4.43, which is highly significant.

        An alternative approach, in the spirit of Fama and MacBeth (1973), can be used if one is

very concerned about serial correlation at the firm level and does not trust the cluster adjustment

to deliver proper standard errors. This approach is illustrated in Figure 2. Using the same


15
  We use the specification with a contemporaneous cash-flow term as our baseline for two reasons. First, this
seems to be the convention in the literature. Second, we are interested in having the cash-flow term be as good a
control as possible for fundamentals, not in making structural inferences with respect to it. This suggests that we
should use the most recent cash-flow information available. In contrast, if the goal were to test whether cash flow
has a causal impact on investment controlling for investment prospects, this approach might be less palatable,
precisely because of contemporaneous cash flow’s informativeness about future profitability.



                                                        19
methodology as before, we now divide the firms up into twenty KZ-index groups, instead of five.

For each group, we estimate the b coefficient of investment on stock prices, just as we did

previously. We then regress these twenty b estimates against their respective ordinal KZ-index

rankings. In other words, we treat each b coefficient simply as a data point, without making any

assumptions about the precision with which it is estimated. This twenty-data-point regression

yields a point estimate of 0.0012 and a t-statistic of 6.44.16 This estimate is roughly consistent

with the effect of KZ that we found in the quintile regressions.



         B. Robustness of Hypothesis 1 results

         In Table 4 and Panel A of Table 5, we explore the robustness of our basic findings for

investment. In Table 4, we continue to focus on capital expenditures as our measure of

investment, but modify several other aspects of the specification. In each case, we report results

that can be directly compared with those in Panel A of Table 3 – i.e., we report the b coefficient

for each of the five KZ quintiles. Recall that in our baseline specification, this coefficient rises

from 0.010 to 0.028 as we move from the bottom to the top quintile.

         The first modification is to revert to the original five-variable KZ index used in Lamont,

Polk and Saa-Requejo (2001), which includes Q. In this case, the b coefficient goes from 0.009

in quintile 1 to 0.023 in quintile 5, which differs little from our baseline result. Second, going

back to our baseline four-variable version of the index, we try classifying firms based on their 5-

year median value of KZ, as opposed to their median over the entire sample period. This again

leads to results almost identical to the base case. Next, we push this time-varying classification

logic one step further, and re-classify firms every year — specifically, a firm is assigned to a KZ

16
  Intuitively, with this method we infer that the b coefficients are precisely estimated by virtue of the fact that most
of them cluster very close to the fitted regression line in Figure 2.



                                                          20
quintile in any given year t based on its value of the index in year t-2. Again, the estimates here

are similar to those in the base case.

        We consider two more variations. One is to scale everything by property, plant and

equipment (PP&E), as opposed to by assets. This actually strengthens the results somewhat, with

b more than quadrupling from 0.008 in the first quintile to 0.034 in the fifth quintile. Lastly, we

add the lagged value of the capital-expenditure ratio to the right-hand-side. This brings down the

b coefficients just slightly, but preserves their relative proportions.

        In Panel A of Table 5, we consider how our basic results carry over to the three other

measures of investment. To do this in a compact fashion, we pool the observations and run a

series of interactive specifications of the form:

         I it                                           CFit
               = ai + at + bQit −1 + cQit −1 ⋅ KZ i + d        + uit                             (7)
        Ait −1                                          Ait −1

where Iit denotes one of the four measures of investment, and KZi is the sample-median value of

the KZ index for firm i. The coefficient of interest in this case is c, which is predicted to be

positive. As can be seen, all four measures of investment yield qualitatively similar results.



        C. Hypothesis 2: Investment and valuation

        Hypothesis 2 predicts that the investment of undervalued equity-dependent firms is

particularly sensitive to their stock prices. This is a more precise statement of the basic idea of

the model, which is that undervaluation can induce a financial constraint on equity-dependent

firms. This hypothesis is more difficult to test than Hypothesis 1, unfortunately, because it

requires us to find some proxy for misvaluation (or, specifically, a proxy for perceived

mispricing).




                                                        21
       One useful proxy for misvaluation may be the level of Q itself. Several authors have

interpreted the market-to-book ratio as a proxy for mispricing (Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny

(1994), La Porta (1996), and La Porta, Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1997)). While this

interpretation remains controversial, there is rather clear support for the use of market-to-book as

a proxy for perceived mispricing. This is suggested by several empirical studies. First, managers

state in surveys that mispricing is an important factor in the decision to issue equity (Graham and

Harvey (2001)), and managers actually do tend to issue equity when the market-to-book ratio is

high (Marsh (1982), Korajczyk, Lucas, and McDonald (1991), Pagano, Panetta, and Zingales

(1998), and others). Also, managers tend to be net sellers in their personal account when their

firm’s market-to-book ratio is high (Jenter (2001)). Put together, these results suggest that a

sensible approach to testing Hypothesis 2 would use market-to-book, or Q, as a proxy for

perceived mispricing.

       We therefore split the full sample into two subsamples, one containing low valuation

firm-years (Q < 2.00) and another containing high valuation firm-years (Q > 2.00). The choice of

2.00 is admittedly arbitrary, but it seems necessary to set the breakpoint above unity to reflect

such facts as intangible assets, inflation, and the aforementioned tendency among managers to

view their firms as chronically undervalued.

       Using our baseline specification, with capital expenditures as the investment measure, the

coefficients in panels B and C of Table 3 (which are plotted in Figure 3) show the sensitivity of

investment to stock prices in each of these subsamples. The results are generally consistent with

Hypothesis 2. In the low valuation sample, the sensitivity of investment to stock prices is

strongly increasing in the KZ index, whereas the effect is small or nonexistent in the high

valuation sample. Thus it appears that our results for the full sample are almost entirely driven by




                                                22
the low valuation firms, as predicted by the model. Panel C of Table 3 also shows that the

sensitivity of investment to stock prices is lower in general in the high valuation sample. This is

consistent with another feature of the model, that investment is a fixed constant when δ > 0 – or,

said more realistically, that investment is sensitive to stock prices in this region only to the extent

that they reflect investment opportunities as opposed to perceived mispricing.

       Panels B and C of Table 5 repeat the same sample-split exercise, but vary the measure of

investment in the pooled interactive specification. The basic picture in Figure 3 emerges in every

case: the sensitivity of investment to stock prices increases strongly with the KZ index among

low valuation firms, but much less so among high valuation firms.

       Although the results of the valuation splits are consistent with Hypothesis 2, we are

hesitant to make them our central focus. The reason is a twist on the Poterba (1988)

measurement-error critique. It is possible that Q is a poorer proxy for investment opportunities

when it is high, so measurement error could also lead to the sort of differences that we observe in

the valuation splits. This is why we view Hypothesis 1 as the most straightforward test of the

model, and Figure 1 (and the associated variations and robustness tests that we have presented)

as the most compelling empirical result. Nevertheless, it is reassuring that the results are at least

consistent with Hypothesis 2.



       D. Decomposing KZ and the effect of other equity-dependence indicators

       One hypothesis that we have maintained, not derived, is that the KZ index is a useful

measure of equity dependence. One way to examine this hypothesis is by decomposing our

previous results, checking how each of the four components of our KZ index is affecting the

stock-price sensitivity. If each component works in the way suggested by our model, we can be



                                                  23
more confident that the index is measuring equity dependence, as opposed to a confounding

pattern of measurement errors or technological adjustment costs.

       To perform the KZ index decomposition, we again pool all observations, and run the

following interactive specification, which is analogous to that in Table 5:

         I it                                  CF      DIV     C         
               = ai + at + bQit −1 + Qit −1 ⋅ c1  + c2     + c3 + c4 LEV 
        Ait −1                                 A       A      A         

                  CF      DIV      C           CF                                               (8)
               + d1  + d2     + d 3 + d 4 LEV  + e it + uit
                  A        A       A              Ait−1

where the un-subscripted versions of the variables CF/A, DIV/A, C/A, and LEV refer to sample-

median values for firm i. We run this regression for each of four measures of investment. The

theoretical definition of equity dependence makes predictions for the signs of the interactions: c1

should be negative, as should c2 and c3. In contrast, c4 should be positive.

       Panel A of Table 6 shows that the predictions for c1, c2, c3 and c4 are largely borne out.

The sharpest results are for c4, the interaction on the leverage term. Across all four definitions of

investment, c4 is always significantly positive, indicating a strong tendency for levered firms to

have investment that is more sensitive to stock prices. The results for c1, c2 and c3 are somewhat

weaker, but overall consistent with the theory — in nine out of twelve possible cases the

coefficients have the predicted sign, and in seven of these they are statistically significant.

       In Panel B we consider two other potential proxies for equity dependence that are not

included in the KZ index: firm age and industry cash flow volatility. We re-estimate equation (8)

augmented with these variables and their interactions with Q, denoting the interaction

coefficients as c5 and c6, respectively. We predict that c5 will be negative, on the premise that

younger firms are more likely to be dependent on equity. And we predict that c6 will be positive,

since higher cash flow volatility implies lower debt capacity, which again contributes to equity


                                                       24
dependence. The results in Panel B strongly support these predictions. Both c5 and c6 have the

expected sign for all measures of investment, and are highly significant in virtually all cases.

        This exercise indicates that the earlier results for the composite KZ index reflect

generally helpful contributions from each of its four components: cash flow, dividends, cash on

hand, and leverage, with leverage playing the strongest and most consistent role. The results also

cast doubt on generic measurement-error or adjustment-cost explanations: One would have to

argue that measurement error or adjustment costs are simultaneously increasing in some of these

variables and decreasing in certain others, in just the way that the KZ index is defined.

        Overall, the results provide a detailed picture of the type of firm that is likely to have a

high sensitivity of investment to stock prices: a young, non-dividend-paying firm, with low cash

flow and cash balances, and with high leverage relative to the debt capacity of its assets. This

picture fits the theoretical definition of equity dependence rather well.



        E. Hypothesis 3: Financing and valuation

        Our last hypothesis is that equity issuance by undervalued, equity-dependent firms is

particularly sensitive to their stock prices. If so, this would be further evidence that our earlier

results for investment are coming through the specific equity financing channel in the model. We

test this hypothesis within the same regression framework as before, simply changing the

dependent variable from investment to financing.

        In the first three rows of Table 7, the financing variable is equity issues over assets,

eit/Ait-1. The first row indicates that for all firms, the sensitivity of equity issuance to stock prices

rises from 0.019 in the first KZ quintile to 0.057 in the fifth quintile. Thus, averaging across all




                                                   25
valuation levels, firms classified as most likely to be equity dependent have equity issuance that

is much more closely tied to their stock prices. This is the same pattern as for investment.

        Hypothesis 3 makes the more specific prediction that this same kind of pattern should

hold among undervalued firms.17 To test this we again split the sample according to whether Q is

above or below 2.00. The second row of Table 7 shows the results. As predicted, low-valued

firms that score high on the KZ index have equity issues that are especially sensitive to stock

prices. In the top quintile of the low valuation sample the sensitivity is 0.076, which is

substantially greater than the bottom quintile figure of 0.027.

        The model does not imply that equity-dependent firms finance 100% of their marginal

investment with equity issues, of course. According to Proposition 1, in the relevant region of the

parameter space (iii.a) the leverage constraint is binding, so at the margin new equity and debt

are raised in proportions (1- D ) and D respectively. This suggests the testable prediction that

equity-dependent firms should also be raising a significant amount of debt on the margin.

        We examine this prediction using a total external finance variable that includes both

equity and debt issues, (eit+dit)/Ait-1. The results are in the fourth row of Table 7. They show that

for firms in KZ quintile 5, the sensitivity of total external finance to stock prices is 0.110,

whereas for equity issues alone it is 0.057. In other words, for high-KZ firms, a marginal

increase in the stock price leads to almost exactly equal increases in equity and debt finance.

(The sensitivity of debt issuance to stock prices is 0.110 – 0.057 = 0.053.) This seems consistent

with the model’s prediction that equity-dependent firms issue equity and debt in lock step.



17
   It should be noted again, however, that the model does not predict the absence of such a pattern among overvalued
firms. Unlike in the case of investment, the model is less clear-cut with respect to its predictions for the equity-
issuance behavior of overvalued firms. See footnote 7.




                                                        26
       The results here generally support Hypothesis 3 and reinforce the case that the earlier

findings for investment are substantially driven by the specific equity financing channel outlined

in the model. As predicted by the model, equity issues are especially sensitive to stock prices

among low-valued, high-KZ firms, and debt issues appear to move roughly in lock step as these

equity issues create debt capacity on the margin.



V.     Conclusion

       A great deal of research has been devoted to understanding why stock prices are

correlated with investment. The traditional view, embodied in the Q theory of investment,

emphasizes the role of stock prices as indicators of investment opportunities. An alternative view

posits the existence of some equity financing channel in which the cost of external equity has an

independent effect on investment. Empirical attempts to determine the relative merits of these

two views have not been very successful, however. One reason why is that the equity financing

channel is usually not articulated in a form that yields distinct empirical predictions.

       In this paper, we use a version of the Stein (1996) model to develop a specific, testable

version of the equity financing channel. The main cross-sectional prediction of the model is that

firms that need external equity to finance their legitimate investment opportunities – “equity-

dependent firms” – will have investment that is especially sensitive to the non-fundamental

component of stock prices. This prediction reflects, in part, the idea that undervaluation increases

the effective cost of external equity and therefore deters investment by equity-dependent firms.

The model also offers other predictions that are distinct from the Q theory.

       We test the model using a version of the index developed by Kaplan and Zingales (1997)

to identify equity-dependent firms. The main empirical result is that firms that rank in the top




                                                 27
quintile of the KZ index have investment that is almost three times as sensitive to Q as firms in

the bottom quintile. We also find support for several other implications of the model. For

example, the effect of equity dependence is much stronger in a sample of firms that is more

likely to be undervalued. In addition, equity issues by equity-dependent firms are also more

sensitive to stock prices, consistent with the mechanism in the model.

       The results complement other recent research on how the cost of external equity –

particularly the component that is irrational, or perceived as such by managers – drives patterns

in equity issues, capital structure, or merger activity. But they are of perhaps greater economic

importance than those findings pertaining purely to financing patterns, because they suggest how

stock market inefficiency may affect the real economy.

       If one takes our model literally, it might be tempting to conclude that the investment

behavior of equity-dependent firms must necessarily be less efficient on average than that of

non-equity-dependent firms. After all, according to the model, non-fundamental movements in

stock prices introduce volatility into the investment of the equity-dependent firms, thereby

moving them away from the first best. But we caution readers against rushing to this sort of

welfare conclusion, because it is quite sensitive to the perhaps unrealistic assumption that, absent

financial constraints, managers always act in the best interests of their stockholders.

       Consider the following embellishment of the model. Everything else is as before, except

that unconstrained managers are subject to an agency problem that leads them to prefer

excessively smooth investment in the face of changes in fundamentals. If one layers on top of

this agency problem our equity-financing channel, the same basic positive implications emerge:

all else equal, the investment of equity-dependent firms will respond more to stock prices than

that of non-equity-dependent firms. But the normative implications of the model will be very




                                                 28
different. Since the non-equity-dependent firms are now underreacting to stock prices, the

investment of the equity-dependent firms may be closer to efficient on average.18 In other words,

starting from a second-best situation, the distortion inherent in the equity-financing channel may

help to alleviate the distortion coming from managers’ tendency to smooth investment.




18
   Indeed, researchers commonly associate a greater sensitivity of investment to stock prices with a higher degree of
efficiency. See, e.g., Scharfstein (1998) and Rajan, Servaes and Zingales (2000) for examples in the context of
internal capital markets.



                                                        29
References

Alti, Aydogan, 2001, “How sensitive is investment to cash flow when financing is frictionless?,”
    Carnegie-Mellon University working paper.

Baker, Malcolm and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2000, “The equity share in new issues and aggregate stock
   returns,” Journal of Finance 55, 2219-2257.

Baker, Malcolm and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2002, “Market timing and capital structure,” Journal of
   Finance (forthcoming).

Barro, Robert J., 1990, “The stock market and investment,” Review of Financial Studies 3, 115-
   132.

Bayless, Mark, and Susan Chaplinsky, 1996, “Is there a window of opportunity for seasoned
   equity issuance?” Journal of Finance 51, 253-278.

Blanchard, Olivier, Chanyong Rhee, and Lawrence Summers, 1990, “The stock market, profit,
   and investment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 115-136.

Bosworth, Barry, 1975, “The stock market and the economy,” Brookings Papers on Economic
   Activity 2:1975, 257-290.

Chirinko, Robert S., 1993, “Business fixed investment spending: Modeling strategies, empirical
   results, and policy implications,” Journal of Economic Literature 31, 1875-1911.

Chirinko, Robert S., and Huntley Schaller, 2001, “Business fixed investment and ‘bubbles’: The
   Japanese case,” American Economic Review 91, 663-680.

Choe, Hyuk, Ronald W. Masulis, and Vikram Nanda, 1993, “Common stock offerings across the
   business cycle: Theory and evidence,” Journal of Empirical Finance 1, 3-31.

Diamond, Douglas W., 1991, “Monitoring and reputation: The choice between bank loans and
   directly placed debt,” Journal of Political Economy 99, 689-721.

Erickson, Timothy, and Toni M. Whited, 2000, “Measurement error and the relationship between
    investment and q,” Journal of Political Economy 108, 1027-1057.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1997, “Industry costs of equity,” Journal of Financial
   Economics 43, 153-193.

Fama, Eugene F., and James D. MacBeth, 1973, “Risk, return and equilibrium: Empirical tests,”
   Journal of Political Economy 81, 607-636.

Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen, 1988, “Financing constraints and
   corporate investment,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:1988, 141-195.




                                              30
Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen, 2000, “Investment-cash flow
   sensitivities are useful: A comment on Kaplan and Zingales,” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 115, 707-712.

Fischer, Stanley, and Robert C. Merton, 1984, “Macroeconomics and finance: The role of the
    stock market,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 21, 57-108.

Graham, John R., and Campbell R. Harvey, 2001, “The theory and practice of corporate finance:
   Evidence from the field,” Journal of Financial Economics 60, 187-244.

Heaton, J. B., 1999, “Managerial optimism and corporate finance,” University of Chicago
   working paper.

Hubbard, R. Glenn, 1998, “Capital-market imperfections and investment,” Journal of Economic
   Literature 36, 193-225.

Ikenberry, David, Josef Lakonishok, and Theo Vermaelen, 1995, “Market underreaction to open
   market share repurchases,” Journal of Financial Economics 39, 181-208.

Jenter, Dirk, 2001, “Market Timing and Managerial Portfolio Decisions,” Harvard University
    working paper.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Luigi Zingales, 1997, “Do investment-cash flow sensitivities provide
   useful measures of financing constraints?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 169-215.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Luigi Zingales, 2000, “Investment-cash flow sensitivities are not valid
   measures of financing constraints,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115, 695-705.

Keynes, John Maynard, 1936, The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money,
   London: Macmillan.

Korajczyk, Robert, Deborah Lucas, and Robert McDonald, 1991, “The effects of information
   releases on the pricing and timing of equity issues,” Review of Financial Studies 4, 685-708.

La Porta, Rafael, 1996, “Expectations and the cross-section of stock returns,” Journal of Finance
   51, 1715-1742.

La Porta, Rafael, Josef Lakonishok, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1997, “Good news for
   value stocks: Further evidence on market efficiency,” Journal of Finance 52, 859-874.

Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1994, “Contrarian investment,
   extrapolation, and risk,” Journal of Finance 49, 1541-1578.

Lamont, Owen, Christopher Polk, and Jesus Saa-Requejo, 2001, “Financial constraints and stock
   returns,” Review of Financial Studies 14, 529-554.

Loughran, Tim, and Jay Ritter, 1995, “The new issues puzzle,” Journal of Finance 50, 23-51.




                                               31
Lucas, Deborah, and Robert McDonald, 1990, “Equity issues and stock price dynamics,” Journal
   of Finance 45, 1019-1043.

Marsh, Paul, 1982, “The choice between equity and debt: An empirical study,” Journal of
   Finance 37, 121-44.

Morck, Randall, Robert Vishny, and Andrei Shleifer, 1990, “The stock market and investment: Is
  the market a sideshow?,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2:1990, 157-215.

Myers, Stewart C., and Nicholas S. Majluf, 1984, “Corporate financing and investment decisions
  when firms have information that investors do not have,” Journal of Financial Economics
  13, 187-221.

Pagano, Marco, Fabio Panetta, and Luigi Zingales, 1998, “Why do companies go public? An
   empirical analysis,” Journal of Finance 53, 27-64.

Poterba, James, 1988, “Comments on Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen,” Brookings Papers on
   Economic Activity 1:1988, 200-204.

Rajan, Raghuram G., Henri Servaes, and Luigi Zingales, 2000, “The cost of diversity: The
   diversification discount and inefficient investment,” Journal of Finance 55, 35-80.

Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales, 1998, “Financial dependence and growth,” American
   Economic Review 88, 559-586.

Ritter, Jay, 1991, “The long-run performance of initial public offerings,” Journal of Finance 42,
    365-394.

Scharfstein, David S., 1998, “The dark side of internal capital markets II: Evidence from
   diversified conglomerates,” NBER working paper 6352.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny, 2001, “Stock market driven acquisitions,” Harvard
   University working paper.

Speiss, D. Katherine, and John Affleck-Graves, 1995, “Underperformance in long-run stock
   returns following seasoned equity offerings,” Journal of Financial Economics 38, 243-267.

Stein, Jeremy C., 1996, “Rational capital budgeting in an irrational world,” Journal of Business
    69, 429-455.

Tobin, James, 1969, “A general equilibrium approach to monetary theory,” Journal of Money,
   Credit, and Banking 1, 15-29.

Von Furstenberg, George M., 1977, “Corporate investment: Does market valuation matter in the
   aggregate?,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2:1977, 347-397.




                                               32
Figure 1. Equity dependence and investment. Plot of the sensitivity of investment to market value by equity
dependence quintile. We sort firms into five quintiles according to the firm median Kaplan and Zingales (1997)
index of financial constraints (excluding Q from the index) over the period from 1980 to 1999, performing separate
regressions for each quintile. Year and firm fixed effects are included.
                                   CAPX it                        CF
                                           = ai + at + bQit −1 + c it + uit
                                    Ait −1                        Ait −1
We plot estimates of b. Investment is defined as capital expenditures over assets. Q is defined as the market value of
equity plus assets minus the book value of equity over assets. Cash flow is defined as operating cash flow over
assets.


                     0.030




                     0.025




                     0.020
  Sensitivity to Q




                     0.015




                     0.010




                     0.005




                     0.000
                             1           2                     3                   4                    5
                                                        KZ Index Quintile




                                                         33
Figure 2. Equity dependence and investment. Plot of the sensitivity of investment to market value by equity
dependence group. We sort firms into twenty groups according to the firm median Kaplan and Zingales (1997)
index of financial constraints (excluding Q from the index) over the period from 1980 to 1999, performing separate
regressions for each group. Year and firm fixed effects are included.
                                         CAPX it                        CF
                                                 = ai + at + bQit −1 + c it + uit
                                          Ait −1                        Ait −1
We plot estimates of b. Investment is defined as capital expenditures over assets. Q is defined as the market value of
equity plus assets minus the book value of equity over assets. Cash flow is defined as operating cash flow over
assets. We report the slope estimate and the t-statistic from an OLS regression of the b estimates on KZ index group.


Q coefficients (slope = 0.0012 [6.44])

                     0.040




                     0.035




                     0.030




                     0.025
  Sensitivity to Q




                     0.020



                     0.015




                     0.010




                     0.005




                     0.000
                             0   2   4       6         8         10         12      14      16         18        20
                                                           KZ Index Group




                                                            34
Figure 3. Equity dependence and investment, by valuation level. Plot of the sensitivity of investment to market
value by equity dependence quintile and valuation level. We sort firms into five quintiles according to the firm
median Kaplan and Zingales (1997) index of financial constraints (excluding Q from the index) over the period from
1980 to 1999. Within each quintile, we sort firms by valuation level according to whether Q is below or above 2.00.
We then perform separate regressions for each of these ten groups. Year and firm fixed effects are included.
                                    CAPX it                        CF
                                            = ai + at + bQit −1 + c it + uit
                                     Ait −1                        Ait −1
We plot estimates of b. Investment is defined as capital expenditures over assets. Q is defined as the market value of
equity plus assets minus the book value of equity over assets. Cash flow is defined as operating cash flow over
assets. Panel A shows results for firms with Q below 2.00. Panel B shows results for firms with Q above 2.00.


A. Low valuation firms
                     0 .0 6 0




                     0 .0 5 0




                     0 .0 4 0
  Sensitivity to Q




                     0 .0 3 0




                     0 .0 2 0




                     0 .0 1 0




                     0 .0 0 0
                                1       2                          3               4                    5
                                                        K Z In d e x Q u in tile



B. High valuation firms
                     0 .0 6 0




                     0 .0 5 0




                     0 .0 4 0
  Sensitivity to Q




                     0 .0 3 0




                     0 .0 2 0




                     0 .0 1 0




                     0 .0 0 0
                                1       2                          3               4                    5
                                                        K Z In d e x Q u in tile




                                                         35
Table 1. Summary statistics of investment and financing. In Panel A, investment is alternately defined as capital
expenditures (Item 128) over assets (Item 6); capital expenditures plus research and development expenses (Item 46)
over assets; capital expenditures plus research and development expenses plus selling, general, and administrative
expenses (Item 189) over assets; and growth in assets. In Panel B, financing is defined separately as equity issues
(∆Item 60+∆Item 74-∆Item 36) (i.e. the change in book equity minus the change in retained earnings) over assets,
and equity issues plus debt issues (∆Item 6-∆Item 60-∆Item 74) over assets. All variables are Winsorized at the 1st
and 99th percentiles.


                                                 Full Sample                                   Subsample Means
                            N       Mean           SD     Median          Min        Max      1980-89     1990-99
                                                          Panel A: Investment
CAPXt/At-1 %           51,982         8.20        7.80         5.98       0.18      44.70         8.76        7.77
  +RDt/At-1            51,982       11.37       10.41          8.42       0.24      58.14        10.90       11.72
  +RDt+SGA t/At-1      51,982       40.02       28.85         34.17       1.62     143.48        39.06       40.74
∆A t/At-1 %            51,982       11.08       28.10          6.38     -44.16     154.09        10.20       11.76
                                                          Panel B: Financing
e t/At-1 %             51,982         4.38      14.63          0.64     -16.31      93.73         2.95        5.48
  +dt/At-1             51,982       10.47       27.62          3.99     -34.74     164.53         8.35       12.09




                                                         36
Table 2. Summary statistics of equity dependence and other investment determinants. Equity dependence is
defined using the Kaplan and Zingales (1997) index of financial constraints (excluding Q from the index). This
modified version of the index has four components: cash flow (Item 14+Item 18) over assets; cash dividends (Item
21+Item 19) over assets; cash balances (Item 1) over assets; and leverage ((Item 9+Item 34)/(Item 9+Item 34+Item
216)). We also consider two additional measures of equity dependence, firm age and the industry standard deviation
of cash flow over assets between 1980 and 1999. Industry definitions follow Fama and French (1997). Age is equal
to the current year minus the IPO year, which is defined as the first year Compustat reports a non-missing market
value of equity. Q is defined as the market value of equity (price times shares outstanding from CRSP) plus assets
minus the book value of equity (Item 60+Item 74) over assets. All variables are Winsorized at the 1st and 99th
percentiles except for firm age and the industry standard deviation of cash flow.


                                                 Full Sample                                  Subsample Means
                            N       Mean          SD     Median          Min        Max      1980-89     1990-99
                                             Panel A: Equity Dependence Variables (t-2)
KZ Index               51,982        0.12        1.82          0.27    -10.57        3.69        0.12        0.11
CFt-2/At-3 %           51,982       10.65       19.07          9.08    -40.18     137.26        10.50       10.76
DIVt-2/At-3 %          51,982        1.66        2.83          0.67      0.00      20.18         1.86        1.52
Ct-2/At-3 %            51,982       14.00       26.03          5.05      0.01     185.73        11.00       16.28
LEVt-2 %               51,982       35.31       25.64        34.26       0.00     124.13        35.74       34.98
AGEt-2                 51,982       14.99       10.33        12.00       1.00      49.00        14.76       15.17
Industry σ(CF/A)       51,982      138.20      211.05        60.16      10.94     863.50      136.96       139.14
                                               Panel B: Other Investment Determinants
Qt-1                   51,982        1.46        0.91          1.16      0.53        6.07        1.26        1.60
CFt/At-1 %             51,982        8.19       11.70          9.18    -42.78      36.57         9.24        7.39




                                                        37
Table 3. Equity dependence and investment, full sample and by valuation level. Regressions of investment on
market value and cash flow by equity dependence quintile. We sort firms into five quintiles according to the firm
median Kaplan and Zingales (1997) index of financial constraints (excluding Q from the index), performing separate
regressions for each group. Year and firm fixed effects are included.
                                    CAPX it                        CF
                                            = ai + at + bQit −1 + c it + uit
                                     Ait −1                        Ait −1
We report estimates of b and c. Investment is defined as capital expenditures over assets. Q is defined as the market
value of equity plus assets minus the book value of equity over assets. Cash flow is defined as operating cash flow
over assets. Panel A shows results for the full sample. We then sort firms within each quintile based on their values
of Q in the prior year. Panel B shows results for firms with Q below 2.00. Panel C shows results for firms with Q
above 2.00. T-statistics use heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered by firm, with all five regressions in a
panel estimated simultaneously.


                                               Qt-1                                CFt/At-1
KZ index                   N                  b             [t-stat]                  c         [t-stat]              R2
                                                           Panel A: All firms
Quintile 1            10,398              0.010              [7.52]             0.122            [8.51]             0.56
         2            10,407              0.015              [9.76]             0.133            [9.80]             0.55
         3            10,385              0.022              [9.55]             0.126            [8.52]             0.52
         4            10,402              0.027              [9.27]             0.143           [10.97]             0.54
         5            10,390              0.028              [7.21]             0.154           [11.62]             0.53
                                                      Panel B: Low valuation firms
Quintile 1             7,286              0.020              [5.50]             0.133            [7.72]             0.56
         2             8,396              0.032              [9.94]             0.157            [9.70]             0.56
         3             9,148              0.034              [9.84]             0.144            [9.41]             0.50
         4             9,426              0.050             [11.88]             0.146           [10.67]             0.53
         5             9,619              0.047              [9.21]             0.164           [11.74]             0.52
                                                      Panel C: High valuation firms
Quintile 1             3,112              0.009              [4.55]             0.102            [4.10]             0.58
         2             2,011              0.011              [3.84]             0.080            [3.22]             0.57
         3             1,237              0.015              [3.88]             0.041            [1.12]             0.61
         4               976              0.010              [2.19]             0.049            [1.51]             0.66
         5               771              0.014              [2.64]             0.048            [1.50]             0.69




                                                           38
Table 4. Robustness: Equity dependence and investment. Regressions of investment on market value and cash flow by equity dependence quintile. We sort
firms into five quintiles according to various modifications of the Kaplan and Zingales (1997) index of financial constraints, performing separate regressions for
each group. Year and firm fixed effects are included.
                                                          CAPX it                        CF
                                                                  = ai + at + bQit −1 + c it + uit
                                                           Ait −1                        Ait −1
We report estimates of b. Investment is defined as capital expenditures over assets. Q is defined as the market value of equity plus assets minus the book value of
equity over assets. Cash flow is defined as operating cash flow over assets. The first row is our baseline specification, which classifies firms according to their
median four-variable KZ index (excluding Q); the second row uses the firm median five-variable KZ index (including Q); the third row uses a five-year median
KZ index (excluding Q); and the fourth row uses an annual KZ index (measured at time t-2) excluding Q. The fifth row scales variables by fixed assets instead of
total assets. The sixth row includes lagged investment as an independent variable. T-statistics use heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered by firm,
with all five regressions in a row estimated simultaneously.


                                    Bottom Quintile                2                       3                      4              Top Quintile       Top – Bottom
                                         b    [t-stat]         b       [t-stat]        b       [t-stat]      b        [t-stat]      b    [t-stat]     ∆b    [t-stat]
1. KZ (base case)                    0.010     [7.52]      0.015        [9.76]    0.022         [9.55]    0.027        [9.27]    0.028    [7.21]    0.018    [4.43]
2. KZ (five-variable)                0.009     [6.05]      0.016        [9.92]    0.018         [9.11]    0.023        [9.92]    0.023    [7.93]    0.014    [4.37]
3. KZ (five-year median)             0.009     [6.97]      0.016        [9.49]    0.019         [9.19]    0.027        [9.54]    0.029    [7.57]    0.019    [4.79]
4. KZ (annual)                       0.009     [5.97]      0.015        [7.64]    0.022         [7.45]    0.029        [8.01]    0.029    [6.84]    0.020    [4.40]
5. PP&E Scaling                      0.008     [7.12]      0.012        [8.65]    0.022        [10.61]    0.028        [9.24]    0.034    [9.37]    0.026    [6.81]
6. Lagged CAPX/A added               0.007     [6.25]      0.011        [7.60]    0.017         [8.43]    0.020        [7.71]    0.024    [6.68]    0.017    [4.50]




                                                                                  39
Table 5. Equity dependence and investment, full sample and by valuation level. Regressions of investment on market value, market value interacted with
equity dependence, and cash flow. Year and firm fixed effects are included.
                                                     I it                                          CF
                                                           = ai + at + bQit −1 + cQit −1 ⋅ KZ i + d it + uit
                                                    Ait −1                                         Ait −1
Investment is alternately defined as capital expenditures over assets; capital expenditures plus research and development expenses over assets; capital
expenditures plus research and development expenses plus selling, general, and administrative expenses over assets; and growth in assets. Q is defined as the
market value of equity plus assets minus the book value of equity over assets. The measure of equity dependence is the firm median Kaplan and Zingales (1997)
index of financial constraints (excluding Q from the index), standardized to have unit variance. Cash flow is defined as operating cash flow over assets. Panel A
shows results for the full sample. Panel B shows results for firms with Q below 2.00. Panel C shows results for firms with Q above 2.00. T-statistics use
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered by firm.


                                                    Qt-1                              Qt-1· KZ                            CFt/At-1
                                 N                 b           [t-stat]                c              [t-stat]             d           [t-stat]               R2
                                                                                 Panel A: All firms
CAPX/A                      51,982             0.019           [19.12]             0.007               [6.08]          0.137           [22.04]              0.54
 +RD/A                      51,982             0.026           [18.95]             0.008               [5.83]          0.122           [14.19]              0.64
 +RD+SGA/A                  51,982             0.045           [16.13]             0.012               [3.10]          0.279           [15.72]              0.81
∆A/A                        51,982             0.074           [17.96]             0.037               [9.66]          1.149           [39.03]              0.31
                                                                           Panel B: Low valuation firms
CAPX/A                      43,875             0.036           [20.57]             0.013               [4.33]          0.151           [21.99]              0.53
 +RD/A                      43,875             0.041           [19.93]             0.016               [4.54]          0.152           [17.33]              0.59
 +RD+SGA/A                  43,875             0.058           [12.98]             0.025               [3.29]          0.346           [18.97]              0.82
∆A/A                        43,875             0.096           [14.30]             0.048               [4.09]          1.256           [39.00]              0.29
                                                                           Panel A: High valuation firms
CAPX/A                       8,107             0.011             [7.08]            0.000               [0.07]          0.067            [4.99]              0.63
 +RD/A                       8,107             0.018             [8.05]            0.002               [0.98]          0.010            [0.48]              0.71
 +RD+SGA/A                   8,107             0.037             [7.47]            0.001               [0.23]          0.096            [2.05]              0.77
∆A/A                         8,107             0.073             [7.91]            0.030               [5.08]          0.839           [10.76]              0.30




                                                                              40
Table 6. Equity dependence decomposition. Regressions of investment on market value, market value interacted with the components of equity dependence,
the components of equity dependence, and cash flow. Year and firm fixed effects are included.
                      I it                                  CF       DIV       C                                          CF 
                            = ai + at + bQit −1 + Qit −1 ⋅ c1   + c2      + c3    + c 4 LEVi + c5 log(AGEi ,t −1 ) + c6σ      +
                     Ait −1                                 A i       A i      Ai                                         A 
                                CF       DIV      C                                           CF    CFit
                               d1 A + d 2 A + d 3 A + d 4 LEVi + d 5 log(AGEi ,t −1 ) + d 6σ  A  + e A + u it
                                   i         i      i                                                 it

We report c. Investment is alternately defined as capital expenditures over assets; capital expenditures plus research and development expenses over assets;
capital expenditures plus research and development expenses plus selling, general, and administrative expenses over assets; and growth in assets. Q is defined as
the market value of equity plus assets minus the book value of equity over assets. Panel A decomposes the effect of the Kaplan and Zingales (1997) index
(excluding Q) into its four components: firm median operating cash flow over assets; firm median dividends over assets; firm median cash balance over assets;
and firm median leverage. Panel B adds two additional measures of equity dependence, firm age and the industry standard deviation of cash flow over assets
between 1980 and 1999. All components of equity dependence are standardized to have unit variance. The first row indicates the sign the variable takes in the
Kaplan and Zingales (1997) index. The second row indicates the predicted sign for c. T-statistics use heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered by firm.


                             CFt-2/At-3             DIVt-2/At-3              Ct-2/At-2               LEVt-2               log(AGEt-2)          Industry σ (CF/A)
                               c1    [t-stat]         c2     [t-stat]         c3     [t-stat]        c4      [t-stat]        c5    [t-stat]         c6     [t-stat]
KZ Index                       −                       −                      −                       +
Prediction                     −                       −                      −                       +                      −                       +
                                                                               Panel A: KZ index variables
CAPX/A                     0.003      [2.26]      -0.003     [-3.17]     -0.005      [-5.11]      0.006       [4.11]
 +RD/A                    -0.002     [-0.90]      -0.003     [-2.30]     -0.004      [-2.66]      0.006       [3.27]
 +RD+SGA/A                -0.017     [-4.22]      0.005       [1.52]      0.000          [0.09]   0.019       [5.35]
∆A/A                      -0.018     [-2.99]      -0.017     [-6.21]     -0.002      [-0.32]      0.021       [3.89]
                                                                   Panel B: Additional measures of equity dependence
CAPX/A                     0.003      [2.57]      -0.002     [-2.05]     -0.005      [-5.63]      0.004       [2.87]    -0.004      [-4.87]      0.007      [4.92]
 +RD/A                    -0.001     [-0.72]      -0.002     [-1.43]     -0.005      [-2.99]      0.004       [2.31]    -0.004      [-3.37]      0.007      [4.12]
 +RD+SGA/A                -0.016     [-3.99]      0.007       [2.54]     -0.001      [-0.46]      0.019       [4.99]    -0.008      [-3.03]      0.004      [1.63]
∆A/A                      -0.017     [-2.87]      -0.014     [-4.69]     -0.003      [-0.66]      0.019       [3.36]    -0.013      [-3.78]      0.011      [2.88]




                                                                               41
Table 7. Equity dependence and financing. Regressions of financing on market value and cash flow, by equity dependence quintile and valuation level. We
sort firms into five quintiles according to the firm median Kaplan and Zingales (1997) index of financial constraints (excluding Q), performing separate
regressions for each group. Year and firm fixed effects are included.
                                                                                                     CFit
                                                           Financingit =    ai + at + bQit −1 + c           + uit
                                                                                                     Ait −1
We report estimates of b. Financing is alternately defined as equity issues over assets and as equity plus debt issues over assets. Q is defined as the market value
of equity plus assets minus the book value of equity over assets. Cash flow is defined as operating cash flow over assets. The first row shows results for equity
issues for the full sample; the second row considers equity issues by firms with Q below 2.00; the third row considers equity issues by firms with Q above 2.00;
the fourth row shows results for total external finance (equity plus debt) for the full sample. T-statistics use heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered by
firm, with all five regressions in a row estimated simultaneously.


                                     Bottom Quintile                 2                       3                          4              Top Quintile       Top – Bottom
                                          b     [t-stat]         b       [t-stat]        b       [t-stat]           b       [t-stat]      b    [t-stat]     ∆b    [t-stat]
External Equity – All Firms           0.019      [4.61]     0.046         [8.83]    0.038         [6.70]      0.050          [7.51]    0.057    [6.75]    0.038    [4.06]
External Equity – Low Value           0.027      [3.77]     0.037         [5.46]    0.057         [7.95]      0.057          [8.17]    0.076    [8.09]    0.049    [4.13]
External Equity – High Value          0.014      [2.12]     0.046         [4.17]    0.031         [2.14]      0.051          [2.77]    0.055    [2.28]    0.041    [1.66]
External Equity Plus Debt – All       0.034      [5.16]     0.071         [8.51]    0.082         [8.87]      0.096          [8.47]    0.110    [6.86]    0.076    [4.38]




                                                                                    42
