                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              DOES FUNCTION FOLLOW ORGANIZATIONAL FORM?
     EVIDENCE FROM THE LENDING PRACTICES OF LARGE AND SMALL BANKS


                                           Allen N. Berger
                                           Nathan H. Miller
                                          Mitchell A. Petersen
                                          Raghuram G. Rajan
                                           Jeremy C. Stein


                                          Working Paper 8752
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8752


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2002




Research support from the following sources is gratefully acknowledged: the National Science Foundation
(Rajan, Stein), and the George J. Stigler Center for Study of the State and Economy (Rajan). Thanks also to
seminar participants at Yale University and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and to Abhijit Banerjee,
Michael Kremer and Christopher Udry for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the
Federal Reserve Board.


© 2002 by Allen N. Berger, Nathan H. Miller, Mitchell A. Petersen, Raghuram G. Rajan and Jeremy C.
Stein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Function Follow Organizational Form?
Evidence From the Lending Practices of Large and Small Banks
Allen N. Berger, Nathan H. Miller, Mitchell A. Petersen,
Raghuram G. Rajan and Jeremy C. Stein
NBER Working Paper No. 8752
February 2002
JEL No. D21, D23, G21



                                               ABSTRACT


        Theories based on incomplete contracting suggest that small organizations may do better than
large organizations in activities that require the processing of soft information. We explore this idea in
the context of bank lending to small firms, an activity that is typically thought of as relying heavily on soft
information. We find that large banks are less willing than small banks to lend to informationally
“difficult” credits, such as firms that do not keep formal financial records. Moreover, controlling for the
endogeneity of bank-firm matching, large banks lend at a greater distance, interact more impersonally
with their borrowers, have shorter and less exclusive relationships, and do not alleviate credit constraints
as effectively. All of this is consistent with small banks being better able to collect and act on soft
information than large banks.



Allen N. Berger                           Nathan H. Miller                  Mitchell A. Petersen
Board of Governors of the                 Board of Governors of the         Northwestern University
Federal Reserve System                    Federal Reserve System            Kellogg Graduate School
Division of Research and Statistics       20th and C Streets, NW            of Management
Mail Stop 153                             Washington, DC 20551              2001 Sheridan Road
20th and Constitution Avenue, NW                                            Evanston, IL 60208
Washington, DC 20551


Raghuram G. Rajan                         Jeremy C. Stein
University of Chicago                     Harvard University
1101 East 58th Street                     Department of Economics
Chicago, IL 60637                         Littauer 209
and NBER                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                          and NBER
                                          jeremy_stein@harvard.edu
                                          617-496-6455
       I. Introduction

       One of the most enduring questions in economics was posed by Coase (1937):

What determines the boundaries of the firm? The question is perhaps most often framed

in terms of vertical integration—i.e., when can it make sense for upstream and

downstream activities to be combined under the roof of a single firm? But one can also

ask about the circumstances under which horizontal integration creates value. A good

present-day illustration of this version of the question comes from the commercial

banking industry, where ongoing consolidation raises the issue of whether the resulting

large banks will behave differently than the small banks that they are displacing.

       A partial answer to Coase’s question comes from the work on transaction-cost

economics of Williamson (1975, 1979, 1985) and Klein, Crawford and Alchian (1978).

These authors focus on the hold-up problems that can accompany market transactions,

and argue that such problems can be mitigated by having the firm, rather than the market,

mediate trade. While this approach is helpful in identifying the advantages of integration

(i.e., a reduction in market hold-up problems), it is less clear on the disadvantages. As

such, it is somewhat of a one-sided theory—unless one invokes factors outside the model,

like unspecified “costs of bureaucracy,” it has the awkward implication that efficiency

would be best served by placing all of the economy’s assets inside a single firm.

       The disadvantages of integration emerge much more clearly in the property-rights

approach of Grossman and Hart (1986), Hart and Moore (1990), and Hart (1995),

henceforth GHM. At its most general level, the central insight of the GHM paradigm is

that, in a world of incomplete contracts, agents’ ex ante incentives are shaped by the

extent to which they have control or authority over physical assets. Thus, for example, if




                                             1
firm A acquires firm B, the manager who was previously CEO of firm B may become

discouraged now that he is subordinate to the CEO of firm A, and no longer has full

control rights over B’s assets. As a result, this manager’s ex ante (non-contractible)

investment may be reduced; herein lies the potential cost of integration.

        The GHM property-rights paradigm is an extremely powerful conceptual tool, and

it has had enormous influence on the subsequent development of the theory of the firm.

But it has proved challenging to construct sharp, decisive empirical tests of the theory.

As discussed in Whinston (2001), this is in part due to the fact that the predictions of

property-rights models can be very sensitive to specific assumptions, such as the nature

of the non-contractible investments that need to be made ex ante. A further difficulty is

that because the GHM paradigm focuses on ownership over physical assets as the

exclusive source of power and incentives in the firm, it abstracts from other

considerations that might be present in a richer, more empirically realistic model.1

        One strategy for dealing with these problems is to not take the original GHM

models too literally as a basis for empirical testing, and to work instead with “second-

generation” models that build on the basic GHM insights, but that are more tailored to

delivering clear-cut comparative static predictions, either for a specific type of

investment, or in a particular institutional setting. This strategy is followed by Baker and

Hubbard (2000a, 2000b, 2001), whose work centers on the trucking industry, and the

question of whether drivers should own the trucks they operate, as well as by Simester

and Wernerfelt (2000), who look at the ownership of tools in the carpentry industry.


1
  Such considerations include: differentially informed agents as in Aghion and Tirole (1997); incentive
structures as in Holmstrom and Milgrom (1994) and Holmstrom (1999); or access to critical resources as in
Rajan and Zingales (1998, 2001).



                                                    2
         In this paper, we take a broadly similar approach. In contrast to the above-

mentioned authors, however, our focus is not on how differences in technology influence

the ownership of assets. Instead, it is on how the nature of an organization affects both

the way that it does business, and the kinds of activities that it can efficiently undertake.2

In particular, we attempt to understand whether small organizations are better at carrying

out certain specific tasks than large organizations.

         Our starting point is the model in Stein (2002). This model adopts the basic GHM

insight that the allocation of control affects incentives, but does so in a setting that is

more specific, and thus yields sharper empirical predictions. The predictions have to do

with the differing incentives that are created in large and small firms for the production

and use of various kinds of information. The model implies that small firms are at a

comparative advantage in evaluating investment projects when the information about

these projects is naturally “soft,” and cannot be credibly communicated from one agent in

the firm to another. In contrast, large firms do relatively well when information about

investment projects can be easily “hardened” and passed along within the hierarchy.

         A natural industry to apply this model to is banking, where information is critical

to the activity of lending. The model suggests that large banks will tend to shy away from

small-business lending, because this is an activity that relies especially heavily on the

production of soft information, something that is not their strong suit. For example,

consider a loan officer trying to decide whether or not to extend credit to a small start-up


2
  In this regard, our work is similar in spirit to Mullainathan and Scharfstein (2001). They document how
producers of a particular chemical that are integrated with the downstream users of the chemical have
investment behavior that differs—in terms of responsiveness to industry price and capacity conditions—
from those producers that are stand-alones. The common idea is that one can learn something useful by
examining in detail how different types of organizations behave when faced with similar tasks. This is a
quite different approach than the standard one of trying to explain organizational form (e.g., integration vs.
non-integration) based on a variety of industry characteristics.


                                                      3
company that does not have audited accounting statements. The best the loan officer may

be able to do is to spend time with the company president in an effort to determine

whether she is honest, prudent and hardworking—i.e., the classic candidate for a

“character loan.” However, given that this information is soft and cannot be verifiably

documented in a report that the loan officer can pass on to his superiors, the model

predicts (as is explained in more detail below) that his incentives to produce high-quality

information are weak when he works inside a large bank.

       By contrast, when dealing with a larger company that has a well-documented

track record, the decision of whether or not to extend credit can be based more heavily on

verifiable information, such as the company’s income statements, balance sheet, and

credit rating. In this case, the model suggests that a large bank will have no problem—

indeed, it may do better—at providing incentives for information production.

       To test this theory, we make use of a unique data set on small business lending.

The data set contains information not only about the small firms in the sample, but also

about their primary bank lenders and the nature of the relationship between the two. It

thus allows us to investigate a number of hypotheses about how the “technology” of

lending depends on variables such as bank size. If, as the theory suggests, large banks

are at a comparative disadvantage in the production and use of soft information, one

would expect this to influence their methods of lending.

       We develop six basic pieces of evidence to support this case. First, and most

simply, we find that bigger banks are more apt to lend to firms that are larger or that have

better accounting records (a good example of hard information). Second, controlling for

firm and market characteristics, we find that the physical distance between a firm and the




                                             4
branch office that it deals with is increasing with the size of the bank. This is consistent

with the notion that large banks rely less on the sort of soft information that is typically

available through personal contact and observation. Third and relatedly, we find that

firms do business with large banks in more impersonal ways—i.e., they meet less often

face-to-face with their banker, and instead communicate more by mail or phone.

       Of course a firm chooses the bank from which it borrows. That is, the match

between a firm and its bank is to some extent endogenous, and is likely to be related to

firm characteristics. Indeed, our first finding—that bigger banks match up with firms

with better accounting records—is evidence of just this endogeneity. This suggests that

we need to proceed carefully if, as in our second and third findings, we want to use bank

size as a right-hand-side variable to explain certain aspects of the lending relationship.

For example, perhaps large banks deal with their customers more impersonally not

because they are any less well-suited to personal interaction per se, but because they tend

to match with a different type of customer for whom such interaction is less appropriate.

        In effort to deal with this potential endogeneity problem, we try instrumenting for

bank size with two variables: i) the median size of all banks (weighted by number of

branches) in the market where the firm borrows; and ii) a regulatory variable which

measures how permissive the firm’s state has been with respect to branching. Intuitively,

if a firm borrows from a large bank because it is located in a market where there are only

large banks (say because regulation has not artificially constrained bank size), this does

not reflect an endogenous choice on the part of the firm, but rather an exogenous,

geographically-imposed limitation. We find that when we take this instrumental-variables




                                             5
(IV) approach, the estimated effect of bank size on distance and on the extent of

impersonal communication is even larger than when we do not correct for endogeneity.

       Our fourth and fifth findings are that bank-firm relationships tend to be stronger—

both more long-lived and more exclusive—when the firm in question borrows from a

small bank. These findings also emerge both with and without using IV, but again are

more pronounced when an IV approach is employed. They are exactly what one would

expect based on the theory, given that the soft information produced by small banks is

more likely than hard information to be specific to a given banker and borrower, and

hence non-transferable. In other words, the theory suggests that small-bank lending

should fit more closely with the kind of model in Rajan (1992), where accumulated soft

information binds a borrower to its bank over time.

       The sixth and final part of our empirical work is to test whether bank size affects

the availability of credit to small businesses. If small firms need lenders that are willing

to go deeper and acquire soft information, then we would expect those that are forced to

go to large banks to be particularly credit constrained. One measure of the degree to

which a firm is rationed by financial institutions is the amount of expensive trade credit it

relies on (Petersen and Rajan (1994), Fisman and Love (2000)). We find that all else

equal, a firm that borrows from a larger bank is more prone to repay its trade credit late.

       Interestingly, this last result holds only when we instrument for bank size. When

firms are forced to borrow from large banks because there are no small banks around,

they seem to face credit constraints—this is what the IV version of the regression tells us.

At the same time, an ordinary regression of credit constraints on bank size reveals an




                                              6
offsetting effect due to the endogeneity bias: those firms that are by nature the most

difficult credits tend to match with smaller banks, as the theory would suggest.

        Our findings relate to a sizeable empirical literature on the banking industry,

which we discuss in more detail below. For now, the only point to be made is that while

there are many papers that document the reluctance of large banks to make small-

business loans, there are only a handful that try, as we do, to examine lending practices

directly and to understand how and why large banks’ practices differ in such a way as to

make them less effective at small-business lending.3 Of course, the hope is that by

shedding light on the specific underlying mechanism, we can draw inferences that

generalize beyond the banking industry. It is easy to think of a number of other settings

where our principal conclusion—that there can be an organizational diseconomy of scale

in activities requiring a lot of soft information—would appear to be of some relevance.

        The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section II briefly reviews the theory

that we seek to test, and fleshes out our main hypotheses more fully.                     Section III

introduces our data set. Section IV describes our empirical results. Section V discusses

how our results fit with some of the related banking literature, and Section VI concludes.



        II. Hypothesis Development

        A. Overview of the Theory

        The logic of Stein’s (2002) model can be sketched with a simple example.

Imagine a loan officer in Little Rock who is responsible for deciding which small-


3
 On the reluctance of large banks to lend to small businesses, see, e.g., Nakamura (1994), Berger,
Kashyap and Scalise (1995), Keeton (1995), Berger and Udell (1996), Peek and Rosengren (1996, 1998),
Berger et al (1998), Brickley, Linck and Smith (2000), and Sapienza (2002). Berger, Demsetz and Strahan
(1999) provide a survey and more complete references.


                                                   7
business loans are worth making. The quality of the loan officer’s judgement will depend

on how good a job he has done in producing soft information, which in turn will be a

function of his incentives. In the limiting case of a very small bank, the loan officer is

also the president of the bank, and as such has the authority to allocate the bank’s funds

as he sees fit. Given that he can count on having some capital to work with, he knows

that his research efforts will not be wasted, and hence his incentives to do research are

relatively strong. In other words, the decentralization inherent in having a small bank

rewards an agent who develops expertise by ensuring that he will have some capital

which he can use to lever that expertise.

         In contrast, if the Little Rock loan officer is part of a large multi-branch hierarchy,

the following problem arises. Suppose that he spends a lot of effort learning about

prospects in his area. But then somebody higher up in the organization decides that

overall lending opportunities are better in Tulsa, and sharply cuts the capital allocation

for Little Rock.       In this case, because he doesn’t get a chance to act on the soft

information that he has produced, and because he is unable to credibly pass it on, the

Little Rock loan officer’s research effort goes to waste.4 Ex ante, this implies that the

loan officer does less research in a hierarchical setting. Here the authority to allocate

capital is separated from expertise–i.e., the Little Rock loan officer may be left with no

capital to work with–which dilutes the incentives to become an expert. This can be




4
  More generally, the problem may not be simply one of credibly transmitting raw information to the
decisionmaker. To avoid problems of overload, the agent at the top of a large organization may need to see
the information in a form that allows for easy comparability across projects. This requirement might result
in information being discarded, even if it is in principle communicable.


                                                     8
thought of as a specific manifestation of the key GHM idea that taking control away from

an agent tends to weaken his incentives.5

         To further bring out the intuition of the model with soft information, consider this

question: All else equal, will a large banking organization be better at making small-

business loans if it set up as single legal entity, or as a multi-bank holding company, with

a number of legally distinct subsidiaries? Several authors (e.g., Keeton (1995), and

DeYoung, Goldberg and White (1997)) hypothesize that the multi-bank holding company

structure is particularly inimical to small-business lending, because it adds extra layers of

bureaucracy. However, Stein (2002) argues that just the opposite may be the case. To the

extent that this structure makes it harder to move capital across the different subsidiaries,

it can act as a partial precommitment by the CEO to run a decentralized operation—i.e.,

to not reduce individual agents’ capital allocations. This should improve their incentives

to gather soft information, and thereby benefit small-business lending.

         The model works very differently when the information produced by agents can

be hardened and passed on to their superiors, as might be the case with the output from a

credit-scoring model. Now, large banks may actually generate more investigative effort

than small banks. This is because with hard information, agents can become advocates

for their units–if a Little Rock loan officer working inside a large bank produces

verifiable evidence showing that lending opportunities in his area are strong, he can

increase the amount of capital that he is allocated. Here, separating authority from


5
 Aghion and Tirole (1997) also argue that agents’ incentives may be blunted when they are in a hierarchy.
A critical distinction is that in Stein (2002), a hierarchical structure need not weaken incentives–indeed, it
only does so when information is soft. In contrast, in Aghion and Tirole, agents are always discouraged
when they do not have authority. Thus the models have quite different empirical implications: the Aghion-
Tirole model does not say anything about why large banks might be at more of a disadvantage with small-
business loans than with credit cards or mortgages.



                                                      9
expertise actually improves research incentives, as lower-level managers struggle to

produce enough information to convince their superiors that they should get a larger

share of the bank’s overall capital budget.6

         Although the explicit distinction between soft and hard information that Stein

(2002) emphasizes is not typically drawn in the applied banking literature, it does

correspond closely to the oft-discussed dichotomy between “relationship” lending and

“transactions-based” lending.7 Moreover, it is a common informal hypothesis in this line

of work that large banks will be at an organizational disadvantage when it comes to

relationship lending, but will do better with respect to transactions-based lending. For

example, Berger, Demsetz and Strahan (1999) argue that “because of Williamson (1967,

1988) type organizational diseconomies…large complex financial institutions….would

reduce services…to those customers who rely on relationships.” (pp. 165-166)



         B. Testable Implications

         B.1. The choice of bank

         The most basic implication of the theory is that small banks have a comparative

advantage in making loans based on soft information, while large banks have a




6
 See also Rajan and Zingales (1998), where withholding ownership spurs effort by encouraging
competition for power.
7
 Berger and Udell (2002) define relationship lending as a situation where the bank bases its decisions
primarily on information gathered through continuous contact over time with the firm, its owner and other
members of the local community. They also identify three types of transactions-based lending, each one
having to do with a specific type of objective, readily-observable data: i) financial-statement lending; ii)
asset-based lending; and iii) lending based on credit-scoring models.



                                                     10
comparative advantage in making loans based on hard information.8 This suggests that,

ceteris paribus, firms about which there is more hard information should tend to borrow

from larger banks. One potential proxy for whether there is hard information about a firm

is its size—large firms are likely to generate hard information themselves to facilitate

control over their operations. So we might expect large firms to borrow from large banks.

Of course, there may be other reasons why large firms and large banks go together.

However, our data set also tells us whether a given firm keeps formal accounting records.

This could serve as a proxy for hard information, and we would therefore predict firms

with records to be more likely to borrow from larger banks.



        B.2. The endogeneity of bank size and our instrumenting strategy

        All the hypotheses that follow relate bank size to various aspects of the bank-firm

lending relationship. In other words, we want to use bank size as a right-hand-side

variable to explain the nature of the lending technology. But since firms can to some

degree choose their banks—as we have just emphasized—there is an obvious

endogeneity problem to worry about. In particular, some firm characteristic that we have

not controlled for may explain both why the firm chooses a bank of a certain size, as well

as the aspect of the relationship we are interested in. For example, an entrepreneur with

an MBA degree may be better able to get a hearing from similarly-trained loan officer in

a large bank. This entrepreneur may also find it easier to generate periodic spreadsheet

reports for the bank that obviate the need for a personal visit. Thus he may be more apt to


8
  Other factors outside the model are likely to increase large banks’ comparative advantage on the hard-
information dimension. For example, they may also enjoy scale economies in information technology, and
in access to the historical data on loan defaults needed to build a good credit-scoring model.



                                                   11
borrow at a distance, and to communicate with the bank impersonally. In this case, we

would see large banks lending impersonally and at a distance, but this would not

necessarily reflect a causal consequence of bank size.

       To address this potential bias, we need one or more instruments which are

correlated with a firm’s propensity for being matched with a bank of a particular size, but

which are uncorrelated with characteristics of the firm that might influence the nature of

the lending relationship. In our baseline specifications, we use two instruments: i) the log

of the median size of all the banks in the Metropolitan Statistical Area or rural county in

which the firm is located (weighted by the number of branches); and ii) the fraction of the

previous ten years during which the firm’s state was neither a unit banking or limited

branching state. The idea is that if a firm is located in a state where regulation has not

constrained bank size, and hence where large banks dominate its market, the firm will be

forced—independent of its own characteristics—to go to a large bank. We can then

examine how this forced match shapes the bank-firm relationship.

       Although our median-bank-size instrument varies at the level of the city or rural

county, and our regulatory instrument varies only at the state level, the two are closely

linked, with a univariate correlation of 0.472. Not surprisingly, states that have been

permissive with respect to branching tend to have larger banks across all of their

individual markets. In spite of this commonality, however, one might argue that the

state-level regulatory variable is a purer instrument. Perhaps within a given state, some

markets have certain attributes that tend to attract both banks of a certain size and firms




                                            12
with particular characteristics. For example, a vibrant big-city economy might draw both

large banks and MBA-trained entrepreneurs.9

           An alternative estimation strategy that helps to address this critique is to dispense

with the median-bank-size variable, and to use the regulatory variable as the only

instrument for bank size. This approach, which we experiment with below, is more

conservative, but also considerably less powerful, because it makes use only of across-

state variation, and loses the within-state across-market variation. Nevertheless, it leads

to point estimates that are remarkably similar to those from our baseline instrumenting

technique, although the standard errors are of course somewhat higher.



           B.3. The effect of bank size on distance and mode of interaction

           Being close to one’s customers is likely to facilitate a loan officer’s collection of

soft information, but to have little impact on his ability to gather hard information.10

What we have in mind here is that one important way to for the loan officer to gather soft

information is through face-to-face interaction with a potential borrower. Hard

information, on the other hand, can by definition be easily summarized in a report, and

hence can be faxed or emailed anywhere, so that distance is essentially irrelevant.

           Now think of a firm that wants to borrow. If it is forced to choose among large

banks (because, say, no small banks are around), we would expect the firm to not limit

itself to those that are close, knowing that any large bank is unlikely to invest in acquiring

soft information, and that its lending technology is therefore more distant-independent.


9
    We thank Abhijit Banerjee for raising this point.
10
  Coval and Moskowitz (2001) demonstrate the importance of physical distance for information-gathering,
documenting that money managers do better when investing in the stocks of nearby companies.


                                                        13
We would also expect the mode of communication between the firm and the bank to be

more impersonal. By contrast, if only small banks are around and the firm is

informationally opaque, we would expect it to pick a nearby bank, given that the latter’s

information acquisition is sensitive to the “shoe-leather” costs of personal visits. We

would also expect the contact between the firm and bank to be more personal in nature.



       B.4. The effect of bank size on relationship length and exclusivity

       If our findings about distance and mode of interaction do reflect the fact that small

banks are better at using soft information, we should see this manifested in two further

ways. First, small banks should sustain longer relationships with their borrowers. The

soft information that a small bank has gathered over time should give it a comparative

advantage over others in providing its client firm with good lending terms. Moreover,

because this soft information is not easily transferable by the firm, the banker may have a

certain degree of market power (see Sharpe (1990) and Rajan (1992)), which would

further tie the firm to it. If, on the other hand, a firm’s relationship with a large bank is

based on hard information, which is easily communicated to potential new lenders, the

additional benefits of staying with the same lender, or the switching costs of moving to a

new one, are likely to be lower. So the length of time that a firm and its bank have dealt

with each other should be decreasing in bank size.

       A second implication, which follows from similar reasoning, is that the likelihood

that a relationship between a firm and its bank is an exclusive one—i.e., that the bank is

the firm’s only lender—should also be decreasing in bank size. In other words, their




                                             14
greater reliance on soft information suggests that smaller banks should form both longer

and more exclusive relationships with their customers.



       B.5. The effect of bank size on credit availability

       Since we argue that small banks form stronger, more information-intensive bonds

with their borrowers, we might also expect them to do a better job of easing these firms’

credit constraints. If we can document evidence consistent with this prediction, we will

have identified an important “real” effect of bank size that would seem to be particularly

difficult to explain away with alternative stories.

       To form an operational measure of credit constraints, we follow Petersen and

Rajan (1994), and look at the fraction of a firm’s trade credit that is paid late. As Petersen

and Rajan argue, stretching one’s trade credit is a very expensive way to obtain finance,

and a firm is likely to do so only when it is rationed by institutional lenders. So the final

prediction of our theory is that firms should repay a higher fraction of their trade credit

late if they borrow from larger banks. This is perhaps the test where it is most critical to

correct for the endogeneity of the firm’s choice of bank. If our theory is correct, one

would expect particularly difficult credit risks (e.g., opaque risky firms) to choose small

banks. Without instrumenting for bank size, the test would therefore be biased against

finding that small banks improve credit availability.



       III. Data

       A. Sources

       Our primary data source is the Federal Reserve’s 1993 National Survey of Small

Business Finance (NSSBF), which covers the financing practices of a stratified random


                                              15
sample of firms.11 To be in the sample, a firm must be a for-profit with fewer than 500

employees. Consequently, the firms in our sample are really quite small, with a mean

book value of assets of $3.0 million, and a median of $680 thousand.

         The survey’s focus on small firms is ideal for our purposes, for several reasons.

First, many of the firms in our sample (about 43 percent) do not have formal financial

records. This makes it plausible that soft information might have a relatively important

role to play in evaluating their creditworthiness. Second, these firms secure most of their

external finance from debt markets, and a predominant share of this comes from banks.12

Thus there is at least the possibility that being matched with the “wrong” kind of bank

could have a meaningful effect on their overall access to finance. A third advantage of

examining such small firms is that the decision of whether to borrow from a large or

small bank will probably not be driven by regulatory lending limits in most cases.13

         Although the survey includes a complete inventory of all of a firm’s current loans

and lenders, we focus on its most recent loan, and only if that loan is from a bank. This

allows us to focus on a fairly static banking environment, and also helps to ensure that we

measure the firm’s characteristics, as well of those of its bank, at roughly the time the

loan was originated. In particular, each observation in our sample is based on a firm that


11
  The survey was actually conducted in 1994 and 1995 based on a sample of firms that were in existence at
the end of 1993. Some of the information collected—e.g., on the most recent loan the firm has—actually
comes from the calendar year 1994.
12
    Between 65% and 90% of NSSBF firms’ outside finance comes from debt (depending on whether
“other equity” is classified as inside or outside equity—see Berger and Udell (1998), Table 1). Banks are
the source of 68% of the outside, non-trade credit debt.
13
  The median loan request in our sample is $125,000, and 90% of the loan requests are for less than $2M.
This compares to average bank assets of $954M; 90% of the banks have assets larger than $162M. Thus the
90th percentile of the loan size distribution is only 1.2% of the 10th percentile of the bank asset distribution.
Since banks typically can lend up to 10 percent of their capital to any one firm, regulatory lending limits
are unlikely to be breached.



                                                       16
secured a loan from its bank between 1990 and 1994; 88 percent of these loans were

originated in either 1993 or 1994.

         Each firm is then matched with the specific bank from which it borrows. For the

banks, we use the Consolidated Report of Condition and Income (a.k.a. the Call Reports)

to obtain balance-sheet variables such as bank assets. We also use the FDIC Summary of

Deposits to determine the locations of individual bank branches. Our baseline sample

includes 1,131 firms for which we have data on the most recent lender.



         B. Variable Definitions

         In the analysis that follows, we work with the following basic variables. First, we

have five variables which can be thought of as proxies for the nature of the relationship

between the firm and its bank: 1) Distance is the number of miles between the firm and

the bank branch or office from which the most recent loan was granted; 2) Impersonal

Relationship is a dummy which equals one if the firm primarily communicates with the

bank by phone or mail, and which equals zero if the communication is face-to-face; 3)

Relationship Length is the number of years that the bank has been providing services to

the firm; 4) Single Lender is a dummy which equals one if the bank making the most

recent loan is the firm’s only lender; and 5) Trade Credit Paid Late is the fraction of its

trade credit that the firm reports paying when it is past due. 14

         Next, there are six variables which capture bank and banking-market

characteristics: 1) Bank Size is the assets of the firm’s bank, expressed in billions of


14
   The survey asks for the proportion of trade credit that is paid late and codes the variables from 1 (none)
to 5 (almost all or all). For ease of interpretation, we recode this variable to be between zero and one, where
1 is recoded to be zero and 5 is recoded to be one.



                                                      17
dollars; 2) Number of Branches in Market is the number of branches that the firm’s bank

has in the MSA or non-MSA rural county in which the firm is located; 3) Bank Age is the

number of years the bank has been in existence; 4) Median Bank Size is the median

assets across all banks (weighted by branches) in the firm’s market; 5) Open Market is

the fraction of the ten years prior to our sample period (i.e., 1983-1992) during which the

firm’s state was neither a unit banking or limited branching state; and 6) Market

Herfindahl is the banking-market Herfindahl index for this market. Bank Size will be the

key right-hand-side variable of interest in most of our regressions, and both Median Bank

Size and Open Market will be used as instruments for Bank Size.

       Finally, there are eight variables that measure firm and contract characteristics: 1)

Firm Size is the firm’s assets, in millions; 2) Firm Age is the number of years the firm

has been in existence; 3) Loan Amount is the size of the most recent loan, in millions; 4)

Line of Credit is a dummy which takes on the value one if the most recent loan is a line

of credit; 5) Loan Collateralized is a dummy which takes on the value one if the most

recent loan is secured; 6) Checking Account is a dummy which takes on the value one if

the firm also has a checking account with the bank that made its most recent loan; 7)

Firm in MSA is a dummy which takes on the value one if the firm is located in an MSA;

and 8) Records is a dummy which takes on the value one if the firm’s respondent to the

NSSBF survey said “yes” when asked if he or she had documentation such as financial

statements or accounting records to help in answering the survey questions.


       C. Summary Statistics by Bank Size Class

       Table 1 presents summary statistics for many of the variables, looking at both the

full sample (in Panel A), and at subsamples based on bank size (in Panel B). Although



                                            18
the firms in our sample are small (less than 500 employees), we still see a significant

range of firm and loan sizes.15 The range of bank sizes is even larger, increasing from

$163M in assets at the 25th percentile of the distribution to $7.69B in assets at the 75th

percentile.16 Although these banks are selected because a small firm has borrowed from

them, they are not exclusively small banks. In fact, they appear to be somewhat larger

than is typical in a comprehensive sample of banks. For example, the 25th percentile of

bank assets in our sample ($163M) corresponds to roughly the 80th percentile of the size

distribution of all banks in 1993 (as reported in Kashyap and Stein (2000), Table 1).

         As Panel B of Table 1 makes clear, there is a strong univariate correlation

between bank size and many of the other variables. For example, mean loan size

increases from $180 thousand in the smallest class of banks (those with assets below

$100 million) to $2.40 million in the largest size class (those with assets above $10

billion). Firm size increases similarly. The fraction of firms with financial records goes

from 47.4 percent in the smallest class of banks to 65.4 percent in the largest class.

         The aspects of lending relationships that we are interested in also vary across

bank size classes in the manner predicted by the theory. The average distance between a

firm and its bank rises from 14.9 miles for the smallest class of banks to 71.4 miles for

15
   The NSSBF does not use an equal-probability sample design but does include a weighting scheme that
can be used to make the survey nationally representative. The weights adjust the data based on the firm’s
MSA status, size class, organization type as well as on the owner’s race. We choose not to employ the
weights in the analysis presented here. Our hypotheses regarding distance, method of communication, etc.,
apply with equal force to all observations, and so we weight all observations equally. Our regression results
are, however, robust to the weighting procedure. A few notable differences do appear in the variable
means. When weighted, average distance drops from 26.053 miles to 11.755 miles, average firm size drops
from $3.003 million to $0.951 million, and average loan amount drops from $1.001 million to $0.285
million. All of this is consistent with the NSSBF’s design, which under-samples the very smallest firms.
16
   The size measures for firms and banks are highly skewed. We take natural logs of all size measures
before doing our regressions. This leads to more symmetric distributions. For similar reasons, we also use
log transforms of Distance, Relationship Length, Number of Branches in Market, Bank Age and Firm Age
in the regressions. In all cases, the transformed variables have means and medians that are quite similar.



                                                     19
the largest. Relatedly, the incidence of impersonal communication increases from 16.8

percent among the smallest banks to 40.6 percent among the largest banks.                              Mean

relationship length is 9.4 years in the smallest class of banks, and 7.4 years in the largest

class. The incidence of exclusive relationships is 61.6 percent among the smallest banks,

and 41.0 percent among the largest banks.



         IV. Regression Results

         A. The Choice of Bank

         We want to start by understanding what determines the size of the bank from

which a firm borrows. In column 1 of Table 2, we use OLS to regress Ln(Bank Size)

against the firm and contract characteristics: Ln(Firm Size); Ln(1 + Firm Age); Ln(Loan

Amount); Line of Credit; Loan Collateralized; Checking Account; Firm in MSA; and

Records. The regression also includes dummies—not shown in the table—for the firm’s

industry (construction, retail or services) as well as for the year in which the most recent

loan was made.

         As expected, bank size is strongly correlated with both the size of the firm in

question and the size of the loan. If the size of the firm and the size of the loan both

double, the regression tells us that bank assets increase by about 40 percent.17 But

perhaps the most interesting result from this regression is the coefficient on Records,

which is 0.240, and is significant at the five percent level. Controlling for firm size, firms

that have financial records borrow from banks that are roughly 24 percent larger. This is


17
  Previous work has documented that large banks allocate a lesser fraction of their overall portfolio to the
category of “small-business lending.” However, we are not aware of any previous evidence that directly
demonstrates—as we do—that within this general category, large banks systematically avoid the very
smallest of the small firms.


                                                     20
consistent with the idea that all else equal, larger banks are at a comparative advantage in

lending to firms for which hard information is more readily available.

         As discussed above, in our subsequent regressions we will use Ln(Bank Size) as

an explanatory variable, and we will employ Ln(Median Bank Size) and Open Market as

instruments for Ln(Bank Size). In column 2 of Table 2, we display the first-stage

regression that underlies this instrumenting procedure. In particular, we keep Ln(Bank

Size) on the left, and add to the specification of column 1 the following bank and

banking-market variables: Ln(Median Bank Size); Open Market; Ln(1 + Number of

Branches); Ln(1 + Bank Age); and Market Herfindahl.                         All of the right-hand-side

variables in column 2 of Table 2 will be controls in future regressions, except Ln(Median

Bank Size) and Open Market, which will serve as the instruments for Ln(Bank Size).

The main point to draw from this regression is that both Ln(Median Bank Size) and Open

Market appear sufficiently correlated with Ln(Bank Size) to be viable instruments. They

attract economically large coefficients, and are highly statistically significant, with t-stats

of 6.9 and 3.0 respectively.18



         B. The Distance Between Firms and Their Banks

         Table 3 examines the link between bank size and distance. In column 1, we run

an OLS regression in which the dependent variable is Ln(1 + Distance). The explanatory

variables include the bank and banking-market characteristics (Ln(Bank Size);



18
  We also considered using as instruments two other regulatory variables: i) the fraction of the previous ten
years that the firm’s state allowed interstate bank-holding-company expansion; and ii) the proportion of the
nation’s banking assets that, on average over the last ten years, were allowed to compete in the firm’s state.
However, both of these variables were insignificant when added to the first-stage regression, and
contributed essentially no explanatory power.


                                                     21
Ln(1 + Number of Branches); Ln(1 + Bank Age); and Market Herfindahl) as well as the

firm and contract characteristics (Ln(Firm Size); Ln(1 + Firm Age); Ln(Loan Amount);

Line of Credit; Loan Collateralized; Checking Account; Firm in MSA; and Records). In

column 2, we run the same basic regression by IV, using Ln(Median Bank Size) and

Open Market as instruments for Ln(Bank Size). These regressions, and all those that

follow, also continue to include suppressed dummies for the firm’s industry and the year

the most recent loan was made.

         Consistent with our theoretical prediction, firms that are customers of larger banks

borrow at substantially greater distances. Both the OLS and the IV coefficients are

statistically significant at the one-percent level, and the IV coefficient is larger in

magnitude, 0.296 versus 0.184. According to the IV estimate, increasing bank size from

$163M in assets (the 25th percentile) to $7.69B in assets (the 75th percentile) raises the

predicted distance between a firm and its lender by 114 percent.

         It is also worth briefly discussing some of the other controls in the regression and

their importance. First, and not surprisingly, we find that the number of branches that the

firm’s lender has in the market is an important determinant of distance. Since larger

banks naturally have more branches than small banks, it is especially important that we

control for the number of branches in our tests.19 One way to think about this control is

that what the regression is really telling us is that the distance between a firm and its bank

is positively related to the size of the bank outside of the firm’s local market. In other

words, if the bank adds branches outside of the firm’s market, distance goes up, but if the


19
  In an OLS regression without this control, we still find that Ln(Bank Size) has a statistically significant
effect on Ln(1 + Distance), but the coefficient is quite a bit smaller—it drops from 0.184 to 0.048 (t-stat =
2.4). In an IV regression without the control, the coefficient on Ln(Bank Size) is insignificantly small.



                                                      22
bank adds branches inside the firm’s market, distance goes down, for the obvious

mechanical reasons.20

        We also find that older firms tend to be closer to their banks. At first, this seems

puzzling because older firms might be expected to have better-established reputations

(Diamond (1991)), which should facilitate borrowing at a distance. The answer to the

puzzle may be that firm age proxies for when the relationship was started.21 Cyrnak and

Hannan (2000) and Petersen and Rajan (2002) find that the distance between firms and

their banks has been growing over time, partly because of the greater availability of hard

information. So older firms may be closer to their banks because they started their

relationships at a time when little hard public information was available about them.

Finally, firms that have checking accounts with their banks are closer to them. This

replicates a finding in Petersen and Rajan (2002), and may be explained by the greater

necessity of making physical trips to the bank when one has a checking account with it.

        A couple of other points deserve mention. The literature on bank consolidation

has raised the question of whether banking mergers disrupt borrower-lender relationships,

especially those that rely on soft information. Thus when we find that larger banks are

more likely to lend at a distance, we want to be sure that our bank size result is not due

only to the effect of mergers. To test this, we rerun our basic specification, adding two

controls for bank mergers (in regressions not reported in the tables). These variables are

individually insignificant and make no material difference to our principal conclusions.


20
  We have verified this statement by re-running the basic OLS and IV regressions in Table 3, replacing
Ln(Bank Size) with the log of one plus the number of branches that the bank has outside the market in
question. In both cases, this variable also attracts a strongly significant positive coefficient.
21
  Indeed, if we add Ln(1 + Relationship Length) to the regression, the coefficient on Ln(1 + Firm Age)
falls.



                                                    23
In a similar spirit, we also add two controls for bank health; again our results are

unaffected.22

        A last issue is that any given bank in our sample can be either a stand-alone bank

or part of a multi-bank holding company. Our measure of bank size does not include the

assets of other banks that are part of the same multi-bank holding company. Moreover, 65

percent of our sample firms borrow from banks that are part of multi-bank holding

companies.

        As discussed in Section II, the effects of being part of a holding-company

structure are theoretically ambiguous. On the one hand, it can be argued that putting a

bank inside a larger holding company increases the bureaucracy its loan officers have to

deal with, which might make lending based on soft information more difficult. On the

other hand, the model of Stein (2002) implies that if decisions within the holding

company can be credibly decentralized to the bank level, then the size of the holding

company outside of the specific bank in question should not matter much.

        To examine this issue, we include two additional explanatory variables in our

regressions: i) a dummy for whether the bank is part of a multi-bank holding company;

and ii) the log of assets of the other banks in the multi-bank holding company, if any

exist. (This variation is not reported in the tables.) Interestingly, we find that, keeping the

assets of the firm’s own bank constant, neither of these two holding-company variables

has an economically or statistically significant effect on the distance between a firm and

its bank. Moreover, parallel results apply for all of the other specifications that we

22
   As added controls, we include a dummy variable for each of the following: whether a bank was the
surviving bank in a merger in the last three years; whether the bank changed top-tier holding companies in
the last three years; whether the bank’s equity to asset ratio was in the bottom 10 percent of our sample;
and whether the bank’s ratio of non-performing loans to all loans was in the top 10 percent of our sample.



                                                   24
examine below—i.e., those which seek to explain the mode of communication, the length

and exclusivity of relationships, and the extent of credit constraints. In each case, the size

of the bank that the firm borrows from matters, but the size of the rest of the bank’s

holding company generally does not.23

           This pattern suggests that it is not simply the absolute size of an organization that

is crucial, but also the degree of credible decentralization that can be achieved. If lending

decisions (especially to small firms) are made at the bank level, then it is the size of the

bank rather than the size of the rest of the holding company that will be important in

shaping the lending technology.



           C. The Mode of Conducting Business: Personal vs. Impersonal

           In Table 4, we investigate the link between bank size and the mode of

communication. The right-hand-side variables are exactly the same as in Table 3, and the

left-hand-side variable is now Impersonal Relationship. Also, given the dichotomous

nature of the Impersonal Relationship variable, we run the regressions by logit, instead of

by OLS.24 In column 1, we use Ln(Bank Size) directly in the logit regression, and in

column 2 we instrument for Ln(Bank Size) by replacing it with its fitted value from the

first-stage regression in column 2 of Table 2.

           Both the ordinary logit and the IV version yield strong, statistically significant

estimates for the influence of bank size on the mode of communication, though as before

the IV estimate is noticeably bigger. Based on the IV coefficient, an increase in bank size


23
  Even in the few specifications where the size of the rest of the holding company attracts a statistically
significant coefficient, this coefficient is an order of magnitude smaller than that for own bank size.
24
     Though our results are virtually identical if we use OLS instead.



                                                        25
from the 25th to the 75th percentile raises the probability of impersonal communication

from 15 percent to 38 percent.25

         As with distance, the number of branches that the firm’s bank has in the local

market also affects the way in which the firm and the bank interact. In this case, having

more in-market branches leads to significantly less impersonal communication, as would

be expected.

         Impersonal communication and physical distance are clearly related—it is more

difficult to visit a distant bank in person. As a more stringent test, we can ask if there is

an effect of bank size on the mode of communication, even after controlling for distance.

In an unreported regression, we find that when we add Ln(1 + Distance) to the right-

hand-side of the IV specification, the coefficient on Ln(Bank Size) drops from 0.324 to

0.160. Although this still represents an economically interesting magnitude, the point

estimate is no longer statistically significant.26

         With respect to the firm characteristics, we find strong evidence that larger firms

are more likely to communicate impersonally with their bankers, which is not surprising.

At the same time, controlling for size, older firms are less likely to communicate

impersonally. This is at least in part driven by the earlier finding that older firms are

physically closer to their banks. There may also be a vintage effect at work, whereby

managers of older firms started off their careers interacting with their bankers face-to-

face, and have not changed their ways, even as the technology of banking has evolved.



25
  To do this calculation, and the similar ones that follow, we set all the other right-hand-side variables in
the regression to their mean values, and simply vary Ln(Bank Size) as indicated.
26
  In the un-instrumented logit specification, adding Ln(1 + Distance) drops the coefficient on Ln(Bank
Size) from 0.196 to 0.096, but in this case the coefficient remains significant at the 10 percent level.



                                                      26
We also find that firms that have checking accounts with the bank are more inclined to

meet with their banker face-to-face.27



        D. The Effect of Bank Size on Relationship Length and Exclusivity

        Table 5 looks at the effect of bank size on relationship length. The structure is

identical to that of Table 3, except that the dependent variable is now Ln(1 + Relationship

Length). As can be seen, relationships are significantly shorter when the firm borrows

from a larger bank. According to the IV specification in column 2 of Table 5, an increase

in bank size from the 25th to the 75th percentile cuts the predicted length of a relationship

almost in half, shrinking it from 8.8 to 4.5 years.

        It should be noted that the estimated coefficient on Ln(Bank Size) is nearly three

times higher in column 2, where we use IV, as compared to column 1, where we use

OLS. Indeed, the theory suggests that it ought to be particularly important to deal with

the endogeneity of bank size here, since firms may be more prone to switch to small

banks—thereby setting the relationship-length clock back to zero—if they get into

trouble and become the sort of “difficult” credits for whom soft information is especially

important. This would obviously make it hard to find an OLS association between small

banks and longstanding relationships. 28

        Table 6 analyzes the exclusivity of banking relationships, putting Single Lender

on the left-hand side of the regressions. As in Table 4, the regressions are run with logit,


27
 Adding Ln(1 + Distance) to the regression makes the coefficients on Ln(1 + Firm Age) and Checking
Account decline, suggesting that these terms are indeed serving in part as distance proxies.
28
  Based on a Hausman (1978) test, we can explicitly reject the hypothesis that bank size is exogenous in
this regression (t-statistic = 2.5).




                                                    27
given the dichotomous nature of the dependent variable. According to the IV

specification, the effect of bank size on exclusivity is extremely strong: an increase in

bank size from the 25th to the 75th percentile reduces the probability of an exclusive

relationship by almost 50 percentage points, from 74 percent to 27 percent.

       Again, we see the importance of instrumenting, as the coefficient on Ln(Bank

Size) goes from –0.096 in the ordinary logit to –0.526 in the instrumented version. And

again, this makes perfect sense in light of the theory. Petersen and Rajan (1994) show

that troubled firms are more likely to have multiple relationships—presumably as they

cast around for someone willing to accommodate their needs—and our theory suggests

that troubled firms should also be more prone to match with small banks. Hence we

would expect the non-instrumented coefficient to be significantly biased towards zero.

       At this juncture, it may be useful to ask whether the effects of bank size on

distance and on the mode of interaction work only indirectly through the kind of

relationship that is formed (long and exclusive with small banks, short and non-exclusive

with large banks), or whether there is a direct effect also. One way to test this is to

include both Ln(1 + Relationship Length) and Single Lender as additional controls in the

regressions of Tables 3 and Table 4, where the dependent variables are Ln(1 + Distance)

and Impersonal Relationship, respectively. In both cases, the coefficients on Ln(Bank

Size) continue to be strongly statistically significant and only slightly diminished in

magnitude, suggesting that bank size indeed has an important independent effect.



       E. Bank Size and Credit Availability

       We now turn to our final test. Thus far, we have argued that soft information is

likely to be important in evaluating the creditworthiness of small firms, and that small


                                              28
banks have a comparative advantage in acquiring and acting on such soft information,

which is why they can form stronger relationships with the firms in our sample. But do

these stronger relationships translate into more financing? In other words, do they have

meaningful real effects?

         The problem in measuring the availability of credit is that we cannot simply look

at the amount of debt on a firm’s balance sheet, for that will reflect both demand and

supply considerations. But we can use an alternative approach, due to Petersen and Rajan

(1994). The idea is that if banks (or any other intermediary) limit the credit extended to a

firm, the firm will be forced to borrow from a more expensive source. Holding

investment opportunities constant, the amount borrowed from the more expensive

sources should measure the degree of credit rationing by banks.

         Petersen and Rajan (1994, 1995) point to stretched trade credit as an extremely

costly source of marginal finance, and argue that the fractional share of a firm’s trade

credit that is paid late may provide a reliable measure of the extent to which the firm is

rationed.29 Older and larger firms, which are presumably less constrained by banks, pay

less of their trade credit late. Similarly, firms that have long-term relationships with their

banks also pay less of their trade credit late.

         In Table 7, we repeat our basic specification, putting Trade Credit Paid Late on

the left-hand-side. Given that this variable is bounded between zero and one, we run the

regressions with a two-sided Tobit procedure.30 It should also be noted that the number


29
  For example, firms in the retail business often use the 2-10-net-30 rule (Smith (1987)). According to this
rule, there is a discount of 2 percent if the amount due is paid within 10 days; otherwise payment must be
made within 30 days. Foregoing the 2 percent discount is therefore equivalent to borrowing at an annual
rate of 43.5 percent, which is significantly higher than the highest interest rate that firms in our sample pay.
30
  Again, however, we get essentially identical results—both with and without instrumenting—if we use
ordinary least squares instead of Tobit.


                                                       29
of observations in Table 7 is reduced from 1,131 to 546, because we do not have the

trade-credit data for all of the firms in our sample.

       It is in these regressions that instrumenting for bank size is most important.

Ln(Bank Size) attracts a small and statistically insignificant coefficient in column 1,

when we enter it directly in the regression. But when we instrument for it in column 2

with Ln(Median Bank Size), the coefficient becomes statistically significant and

economically large. In particular, the IV estimate implies that an increase in bank size

from the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile raises the fraction of trade credit that is paid

late by 17 percentage points, from 26 percent to 43 percent. The bottom line is that firms

that are forced to borrow from large banks appear to be substantially more credit

constrained than those that can borrow from small banks.

       When we test formally whether bank size is exogenous in this model, we reject

the hypothesis, with a p-value of 0.06. This is seen in the Hausman (1978) test in column

3 of Table 7. The sign of the endogeneity bias, however, is again interesting. The

endogenous portion of bank size (i.e., the residual from the first-stage regression in

column 2 of Table 2) is negatively correlated with Trade Credit Paid Late. Put simply, to

the extent that they can choose, firms that are more credit rationed pair up with smaller

banks. This endogenous pattern of firm-bank matching fits with both the theory, and

with all of the other evidence that we have documented so far. Given that small banks

are better at building relationships based on soft personal information, we should expect

those firms that are having a hard time raising finance to be especially likely to turn to

small banks for help.




                                              30
         F. Robustness: Instrumenting With Only the State-Level Regulatory Variable

         As noted above, it is possible to raise questions about the validity of one of our

instruments, Ln(Median Bank Size): one can hypothesize that some markets have certain

attributes that tend to attract both banks of a certain size and firms with particular

characteristics. So as an alternative, we try dropping Ln(Median Bank Size) and using

the state-level regulatory variable Open Market as our only instrument.

         On the one hand, Open Market is sufficiently correlated with Ln(Bank Size) that

it would appear to be a workable instrument on its own—the univariate correlation

between the two variables is 0.227.31 On the other hand, it is a weaker instrument than

Ln(Median Bank Size), which has a correlation of 0.490 with Ln(Bank Size). Thus this

approach, while more conservative, also sacrifices considerable power.

         Comfortingly, the results that we get when using Open Market as the only

instrument are generally very close to those obtained with the two instruments together.32

Moreover, if we are willing to adopt the identifying assumption that Open Market is

exogenous, we can for each of our left-hand-side variables conduct a specification test of

the hypothesis that Ln(Median Bank Size) is exogenous as well. This hypothesis is never




31
  In a multiple regression analogous to that in column 2 of Table 2, with Ln(Bank Size) on the left, but
Ln(Median Bank Size) dropped, Open Market attracts a point estimate of 0.878 and a t-stat of 6.58.
32
   In the Distance regression, we report in Table 3 an IV coefficient of 0.296 on Ln(Bank Size); this
coefficient changes to 0.362 when we use Open Market as our only instrument. With Impersonal
Relationship, the IV coefficient on Ln(Bank Size) goes from 0.324 to 0.207, with Relationship Length it
goes from –0.150 to –0.189, with Single Lender it goes from –0.526 to –0.485, and with Trade Credit Paid
Late it goes from 0.044 to 0.028. In spite of the increased standard errors, the estimates for Distance,
Relationship Length and Single Lender continue to be highly statistically significant (with p-values of
0.002, 0.002 and 0.017 respectively). The estimates for Impersonal Relationship and Trade Credit Paid
Late, however, are no longer significant.



                                                     31
rejected, which lends further support to the notion that Ln(Median Bank Size) is a

legitimate instrument.33



         IV. Connection to the Banking Literature

         Our findings complement those from a substantial existing empirical literature on

banks’ small-business lending practices. Although we cannot provide a full survey of

this earlier work, we can sketch some of its broad contours, in an effort to show how

what we have done fits in. A first category of research has employed regulatory data on

banks (such as the Call Reports and the Summary of Deposits used in this paper), without

being able to match these data to information on the small businesses doing the

borrowing. These studies typically find that large banks allocate far lower proportions of

their assets to small-business loans than do small banks (e.g., Berger, Kashyap, and

Scalise (1995)), and that ratios of small-business loans to assets tend to decline after large

banks are involved in mergers and acquisitions (e.g., Peek and Rosengren (1998), Strahan

and Weston (1996, 1998), and Berger, Saunders, Scalise, and Udell (1998)).34

         A second category of work has examined data on small businesses (such as the

NSSBF survey that we use) but again, without being able to match these data to

information on the banks doing the lending. These studies find that stronger bank-

borrower relationships are generally associated with better treatment for borrowers, in

terms of lower interest rates and reduced collateral requirements (Berger and Udell

33
  In each case, we implement the test by taking the residuals from the second-stage equation and regressing
them on the exogenous variables and the two instruments. The sample size times the resulting R2 is
distributed as a Chi-squared with one degree of freedom (Hausman (1983)). As an example, in the case of
the Distance model, the test statistic is 0.68, with a p-value of 0.41.
34
  Recent research suggests that these effects of mergers may be offset to a degree by increases in supply
from other banks in the local market (e.g., Berger, Saunders, Scalise, and Udell (1998)).


                                                    32
(1995)), increased credit availability (Petersen and Rajan, (1994, 1995), Cole (1998)),

and greater protection against interest-rate shocks (Berlin and Mester (1998)). While all

of these results help make the case that the soft information embedded in a banking

relationship is valuable, none of them can speak to the question of what kind of bank is

best able to generate and act on soft information.

         Finally, a handful of studies have used regulatory data on banks that are matched

to their small-business borrowers, as in this paper. It has been found that large banks

more often lend to larger, older, more financially secure firms (Haynes, Ou, and Berney

(1999)), and to firms that borrow from multiple banks (Berger, Klapper, and Udell

(2001)). Also, banks in markets that are dominated by large banks charge lower interest

rates (Berger, Rosen, and Udell (2001)). All of these pieces of evidence fit with the idea

that, within the general class of small-business loans, large banks systematically try to

pick off the largest, safest and easiest-to-evaluate credits.35 But it seems fair to say that

none of them gets at the underlying mechanism that creates this pattern of behavior.

         To our knowledge, only one previous paper has tried to directly examine how

lending practices themselves differ between large and small banks. Cole, Goldberg and

White (1999) use survey data to look at the loan approval process across banks of

different sizes. They find that for large banks (over $1 billion in assets), approvals are

based primarily on standard criteria obtained from financial statements—a so-called

“cookie cutter” approach. In contrast, hard financial numbers have less explanatory



35
  Consistent with these findings, a study combining bank data with loan-contract data (but no information
on the small businesses) found that large banks charge relatively low interest rates and have low collateral
requirements for small-business loans (Berger and Udell (1996)).




                                                     33
power (in an R2 sense) for the approval decisions of small banks. This is consistent with

the idea that small banks base their decisions more heavily on soft information, and ties

in nicely with our results.



       V. Conclusions

       While there has been much theoretical work by economists on the Coasian topic

of organizations and their boundaries, there has been far less empirical work. Moreover, a

particularly under-explored set of empirical issues has to do with the ways in which an

organization’s form affects its ability to carry out different types of functions. The goal of

this paper has been to take some first steps towards addressing these issues.

       Our analysis is based on the premise that in small organizations, the center of

decision-making authority is likely to be close to the point of information collection.

According to Stein (2002), this creates strong incentives for soft-information production

in small organizations. In contrast, large organizations have a tougher time incentivizing

their employees to produce soft information, but tend to do well with respect to the

creation of hard information. Large organizations also benefit from having broader

internal capital markets—i.e., conditional on having acquired some hard information,

they have more scope for actively reallocating resources based on this information. The

bottom line is that one might expect small organizations to have a comparative advantage

over large ones in activities that require the processing of a lot of soft information, and

for the reverse to be true in activities that rely mostly on hard information.

       In an effort to test this theory, we examine how banks of different sizes approach

the task of small-business lending. We find that large banks lend primarily to larger




                                              34
firms with good accounting records, while small banks lend to more difficult credits. We

also find that correcting for the endogeneity of the bank-firm match, large banks lend at a

greater distance, interact more impersonally with their borrowers, have shorter and less

exclusive relationships, and are not as effective at alleviating credit constraints. These

effects are both statistically significant and economically large in magnitude, and they are

all consistent with the hypothesis that small banks have a comparative advantage in

lending based on soft information.

       From a policy perspective, our results suggest that bank consolidation may raise

meaningful concerns for small firms. Moreover, the key issue may be not so much about

banks having market power in the traditional Herfindahl-index sense; rather, one may

want to focus on the degree to which firms have choice over the size of the bank they do

business with.   For it is when they have no choice and therefore have to borrow from

large banks that our sample firms appear most prone to being credit constrained.

       A similar policy-related observation can be made about the appeal to developing

countries of encouraging entry by large multinational banks.         Having such foreign

banking giants set up shop in a developing economy no doubt has a number of significant

benefits. For example, they are probably more likely to be stable and financially sound.

They may also be less likely to engage in the sort of corrupt related-lending practices

documented by LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Zamarripa (2001). Without denying the

importance of these factors, our analysis points to a potential tradeoff. If large foreign

banks substantially crowd out smaller domestic ones, this could have a harmful effect on

the supply of loans to informationally opaque small businesses.




                                            35
        Finally, our results suggest that the standard practice in many countries of setting

up large bureaucratic organizations to provide subsidized credit to small businesses (or

alternatively, of forcing large banks to do so), may not be very effective. It may make

more sense to target subsidies through smaller financial intermediaries, who can better

incorporate soft information into their credit decisions.

        While our analysis has focused on the banking industry, there are reasons to

believe that the conclusions might generalize to a variety of other settings. Small-

business lending is not unique in its reliance on soft information. Other relationship-

based activities such as investment banking, consulting, and law also make heavy use of

soft information. So too do certain kinds of research and new product development.36

Even some governmental activities, such as law enforcement, may require the creation

and efficient use of substantial amounts of soft information. Our results suggest that, in

all of these cases, organizational structure may play a crucial role in determining how

effectively the job at hand is carried out. It would be nice to study some of these other

activities in detail, to see if this hypothesis is borne out more broadly in the data.

        We have also found preliminary evidence—from the holding-company-level

data—which seems to indicate that credible decentralization of decision-making can

offset the effects of raw organizational size. This raises the possibility that a large

organization might, at least to a degree, be able to enjoy the best of both worlds if it sets

up an internal structure that achieves the right level of decentralization. Again, this is a

conjecture that would greatly benefit from further empirical investigation.



36
  For example, when a company decides whether or not to allocate resources to a small group of scientists
working on a new technology, it may have to do so based not on hard documented data about the potential
payoffs to investment, but instead on a veteran supervisor’s informed gut feeling.


                                                   36
                                           References

Aghion, Philippe, and Jean Tirole, 1997, Formal and real authority in organizations,
      Journal of Political Economy 105, 1-29.

Baker, George P., and Thomas Hubbard, 2000a, Make versus buy in trucking: Asset
       ownership, job design and information, Working Paper, Harvard Business School.

Baker, George P., and Thomas Hubbard, 2000b, Contractibility and asset ownership: On-
       board computers and governance in US trucking, Working Paper #7634, National
       Bureau of Economic Research.

Baker, George P., and Thomas Hubbard, 2001, Empirical strategies in contract
       economics: Information and the boundary of the firm, American Economic
       Review Papers and Proceedings 91, 189-194.

Berger, Allen N., Rebecca S. Demsetz, and Philip E. Strahan, 1999, The consolidation of
       the financial services industry: Causes, consequences, and implications for the
       future, Journal of Banking and Finance 23, 135-194.

Berger, Allen N., Anil K Kashyap, and Joseph M. Scalise, 1995, The transformation of
       the U.S. banking industry: What a long, strange trip it’s been, Brookings Papers
       on Economic Activity, 55-218.

Berger, Allen N., Leora F. Klapper, and Gregory F. Udell, 2001, The ability of banks to
       lend to informationally opaque small businesses, Journal of Banking and Finance
       25, 2127-2167.

Berger, Allen N., Richard Rosen, and Gregory F. Udell, 2001, The effect of market size
       structure on competition: The case of small business lending, Working Paper,
       Federal Reserve Board.

Berger, Allen N., Anthony Saunders, Joseph M. Scalise, and Gregory F. Udell, 1998, The
       effects of bank mergers and acquisitions on small business lending, Journal of
       Financial Economics 50, 187-229.

Berger, Allen N., and Gregory F. Udell, 1995, Relationship lending and lines of credit in
       small firm finance, Journal of Business 68, 351-382.

Berger, Allen N., and Gregory F. Udell, 1996, Universal banking and the future of small
       business lending, in A. Saunders and I. Walter eds.: Financial System Design:
       The Case for Universal Banking ( Irwin, Burr Ridge IL).

Berger, Allen N. and Gregory F. Udell, 1998, The economics of small business finance:
       The roles of private equity and debt markets in the financial growth cycle, Journal
       of Banking and Finance 22, 613-673.



                                            37
Berger, Allen N., and Gregory F. Udell, 2002, Small business credit availability and
       relationship lending: The importance of bank organizational structure, Economic
       Journal, forthcoming.

Berlin, Mitchell, and Loretta Mester, 1998, On the profitability and cost of relationship
        lending, Journal of Banking and Finance 22, 873-97.

Brickley, James A., James S. Linck and Clifford W. Smith, 2000, Boundaries of the firm:
       Evidence from the banking industry, Working Paper, Rochester University.

Coase, Ronald, H., 1937, The nature of the firm, Economica 4, 386-405.

Cole, Rebel A., 1998, The importance of relationships to the availability of credit,
       Journal of Banking and Finance 22, 959-77.

Cole, Rebel A., Lawrence G. Goldberg, and Lawrence J. White, 1999, Cookie-cutter vs.
       character: The microstructure of small business lending by large and small banks,
       in J.L. Blanton, A. Williams and S.L.W. Rhine eds.: Business Access to Capital
       and Credit (Federal Reserve System Research Conference), 362-389.

Coval, Joshua and Tobias Moskowitz, 2001, The geography of investment: informed
       trading and asset prices, Journal of Political Economy 4, 811-841.

Cyrnak, A., and T.H. Hannan, 2000, Non-local lending to small businesses, Working
      Paper, Federal Reserve Board.

DeYoung, Robert, Lawrence G. Goldberg, and Lawrence J. White, 1997, Youth,
     adolescence and maturity of banks: Credit availability to small business in an era
     of banking consolidation, Working Paper, New York University.

Diamond, Douglas W., 1991, Monitoring and reputation: The choice between bank loans
      and directly placed debt, Journal of Political Economy 99, 689-721.

Fisman, Raymond J. and Inessa Love, 2000, Trade credit, financial intermediary
      development and industry growth, Working Paper, Columbia University.

Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart, 1986, The costs and benefits of ownership: A
      theory of vertical and lateral integration, Journal of Political Economy 94, 691-
      719.

Hart, Oliver D., 1995, Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure (Oxford University
       Press, Oxford).

Hart, Oliver D., and John Moore, 1990, Property rights and the nature of the firm,
       Journal of Political Economy 98, 1119-1158.



                                             38
Hausman, Jerry A., 1978, Specification tests in econometrics, Econometrica, 46, 1251-
     1271.

Hausman, Jerry A., 1983, Specification and estimation of simultaneous equation models,
     in Zvi Griliches and Michael Intriligator, ed.: The Handbook of Econometrics
     (North-Holland, New York), 391-448.

Haynes, G.W., C. Ou, and R. Berney, 1999, Small business borrowing from large and
      small banks, in J.L. Blanton, A. Williams, and S.L.W. Rhine, ed.: Business Access
      to Capital and Credit (Federal Reserve System Research Conference), 287-327.

Holmstrom, Bengt, 1999, The firm as a subeconomy, Journal of Law Economics and
      Organization, 15, 74-102.

Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom, 1994, The firm as an incentive system, American
      Economic Review 84, 972-91.

Kashyap, Anil K and Jeremy C. Stein, 2000, What do a million observations on banks
      say about the transmission of monetary policy?, American Economic Review 90,
      407-28.

Klein, Benjamin; Robert G. Crawford, and Armen A. Alchian, 1978, Vertical integration,
       appropriable rents, and the competitive contracting process, Journal of Law and
       Economics 21, 297-326.

Keeton, William R., 1995, Multi-office bank lending to small businesses: Some new
      evidence, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Review 81, 63-75.

LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de Silanes and Guillermo Zamarripa, 2001, Related
       lending, Working Paper, Harvard University.

Mullainathan, Sendhil and David Scharfstein, 2001, Do firm boundaries matter?,
       American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 91, 195-199.

Nakamura, Leonard I., 1994, Small borrowers and the survival of the small bank: Is
     mouse bank mighty or Mickey?, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Business
     Review, November/December, 3-15.

Peek, Joe, and Eric S. Rosengren, 1996, Small business credit availability: How
       important is size of lender?, in A. Saunders and I. Walter, ed.: Financial System
       Design: The Case for Universal Banking (Irwin, Burr Ridge IL).

Peek, Joe and Eric S. Rosengren, 1998, Bank consolidation and small business lending:
       It’s not just bank size that matters, Journal of Banking and Finance 22, 799-819.




                                           39
Petersen, Mitchell A., and Raghuram G. Rajan, 1994, The benefits of firm-creditor
       relationships: Evidence from small-business data, Journal of Finance 49, 3-37.

Petersen, Mitchell A., and Raghuram G. Rajan, 1995, The effect of credit market
       competition on lending relationships, Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 407-
       443.

Petersen, Mitchell A., and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2002, Does distance still matter? The
       information revolution in small business lending, Journal of Finance,
       forthcoming.

Rajan, Raghuram G., 1992, Insiders and outsiders: The choice between informed and
       arm’s-length debt, Journal of Finance 47, 1367-1399.

Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales, 1998, Power in a theory of the firm, Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 113, 387-432.

Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales, 2001, The firm as a dedicated hierarchy: A
       theory of the origins and growth of firms, Quarterly Journal of Economics 166,
       805-851.

Sapienza, Paola, 2002, The effects of banking mergers on loan contracts, Journal of
       Finance, forthcoming.

Sharpe, Steven A., 1990, Asymmetric information, bank lending and implicit contracts: A
       stylized model of customer relationships, Journal of Finance 45, 1069-1087.

Smith, Janet K., 1987, Trade credit and information asymmetries, Journal of Finance 42,
       863-872.

Stein, Jeremy C., 2002, Information production and capital allocation: Decentralized vs.
        hierarchical firms, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Strahan, Philip E., and James P. Weston, 1996, Small business lending and bank
       consolidation: Is there cause for concern?, Federal Reserve Bank of New York
       Current Issues in Economics and Finance 2, 1-6.

Strahan, Philip E., and James P. Weston, 1998, Small business lending and the changing
       structure of the banking industry, Journal of Banking and Finance 22, 821-45.

Simester, Duncan and Birger Wernerfelt, 2000, Determinants of asset ownership: A study
       of the carpentry trade, Working Paper, MIT.

Whinston, Michael D. 2001, Assessing the property rights and transaction-cost theories
      of firm scope, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 91, 184-188.




                                           40
Williamson, Oliver E., 1967, The economics of defense contracting: incentives and
       performance, in R. McKean, ed: Issues in Defense Economics (Columbia
       University Press, New York).

Williamson, Oliver E., 1975, Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust
       Implications (Collier Macmillan, New York).

Williamson, Oliver E., 1979, Transaction-cost economics: The governance of contractual
       relations, Journal of Law and Economics, 22, 233-61.

Williamson, Oliver E., 1985, The Economics Institutions of Capitalism (Free Press, New
       York).

Williamson, Oliver E., 1988, Corporate finance and corporate governance, Journal of
       Finance 43, 567-591.




                                          41
                                       Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                          Panel A: Full Sample
 Panel A contains summary statistics for the variables used in all subsequent estimation. Distance is the
 distance between a firm and the bank branch or office it uses most often. Impersonal Relationship equals
 one if the firm interacts with its bank most often by phone or mail and zero if the interaction is in person.
 Relationship Length is the number of years the bank and the firm have been interacting (through lending,
 deposit, or service activities). Single Lender is a dummy variable which equals one if the firm has a single
 lender. Trade Credit Paid Late is the fraction of its trade credit the firm reports paying when it is past due.
 Bank Size is the assets of the bank from which the firm has its most recent loan. Number of Branches in
 Market is the number of branches which the firm’s bank has in its market (MSA or county). Median Bank
 Size is the size of the median bank in the firm’s market (MSA or county) weighted by branches. Open
 Market is the fraction of the previous ten years during which there were no restrictions on within-state
 branching in the firm’s state. Firm Size is the assets of the firm. Loan Amount is the size of the most recent
 loan. Records is a dummy variable which equals one if the person answering the income statement and
 balance sheet questions for the firm had documentation such as financial statements or accounting records
 to help answer the questions. There are 1,131 observations in the sample.

Variable
                                        Mean           Std Dev           25%            50%             75%

Lending Methods
 Distance (miles)                      26.053         136.992            1.000           3.000       10.000
 Impersonal Relationship                 0.294           0.456           0.000           0.000         1.000
 Relationship Length (yrs)               8.750           7.508           3.000           6.000       12.000
 Single Lender (1 = yes)                 0.499           0.500           0.000           0.000         1.000
 Trade Credit Paid Late                  0.352           0.208           0.250           0.250         0.500
Bank Characteristics
 Bank Size ($B)                          8.883         23.147            0.163           0.956         7.685
  # of Branches in Market              21.486          45.494            1.000           5.000       25.000
  Bank Age (yrs)                       75.263          43.914          39.000           80.000      106.000
  Median Bank Size ($B)                  6.159         13.426            0.196           1.203         6.077
  Open Market                            0.446           0.266           0.000           0.400         0.800
Firm Characteristics
 Firm Age                                1.842           8.865           8.000          13.000       22.000
 Firm Size ($M)                          3.003           7.136           0.150           0.680         2.850
 Loan Amount ($M)                        1.001           3.750           0.030           0.125         0.600
 Records (1 = yes)                       0.570           0.495           0.000           1.000         1.000




                                                       42
                                       Panel B: Means by Bank Size

 Panel B contains the means of selected variables across four categories of bank size (less than $100M,
 $100M-1B, $1B-10B, and over $10B in assets). Regressions estimating how the lending method variables
 depend upon bank size as well as on other firm and bank characteristics are contained in later tables.


Variable                                 < 100M          100M-1B           1B-10B            10B+
Lending Methods
   Distance (miles)                     14.947             9.488          19.302           71.363
   Impersonal Relationship                0.168            0.216            0.375            0.406
   Relationship Length (yrs)              9.384            9.261            8.762            7.389
   Single Lender (1=yes)                  0.616            0.496            0.497            0.410
   Trade Credit Paid Late                 0.325            0.374            0.340            0.349
Bank Characteristics
   Bank Size ($B)                         0.058            0.386            4.346          36.167
   # of Branches in Market                1.442            5.158          24.140           60.487
   Bank Age (years)                     49.111           67.858           86.543           92.679
   Median Bank Size ($B)                  2.765            4.401            5.304          12.964
   Open Market                            0.305            0.413            0.497            0.544
Firm Characteristics
   Firm Age (years)                     13.763           15.037           15.595           14.346
   Firm Size ($M)                         0.704            1.752            3.860            5.695
   Loan Amount ($M)                       0.180            0.375            1.198            2.402
   Records (1 = yes)                      0.474            0.562            0.576            0.654
Number of Observations                     190              379              328              234




                                                  43
                                 Table 2: Determinants of Bank Size

The dependent variable is Ln(Bank Size). Bank Size is expressed in $1000s and Firm Size and Loan Size
are expressed in dollars before taking logs. Ln(Median Bank Size) is the log of the median bank assets in
the firm’s market (MSA or county) weighted by branches. Open Market is the fraction of the previous ten
years during which there were no restrictions on within-state branching in the firm’s state. We use
Ln(Median Bank Size) and Open Market to instrument for Ln(Bank Size) in the models which follow. Each
regression contains dummy variables for whether the loan is a line of credit, whether it is collateralized, and
whether the firm has a checking account from the bank. Records is a dummy variable which equals one if
the person answering the income statement and balance sheet questions for the firm had documentation
such as financial statements or accounting records to help answer the questions. Each regression also
includes dummies for the firm’s industry (construction, retail, or services) and the year in which the loan
was secured (1992-1994). Number of observations is 1,131. Significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels
denoted by *, **, and *** respectively.

            Independent Variables                                          Models
                                                               1: OLS                 2: OLS
            Bank and Market Characteristics
               Ln(Median Bank Size)                                                    0.222***
                                                                                      (0.032)
                 Open Market                                                           0.438***
                                                                                      (0.145)
                 Ln(1 + # of Branches)                                                 0.594***
                                                                                      (0.039)
                 Market Herfindahl                                                    -0.226
                                                                                      (0.541)
                 Ln(1 + Bank Age)                                                      0.523***
                                                                                      (0.051)
            Firm and Contract Characteristics
               Ln(Firm Size)                                      0.125**              0.099**
                                                                 (0.051)              (0.040)
                 Ln(1 + Firm Age)                                -0.172*              -0.224***
                                                                 (0.094)              (0.073)
                 Ln(Loan Amount)                                  0.277***             0.198***
                                                                 (0.051)              (0.040)
                 Line of Credit (1 = yes)                         0.197                0.110
                                                                 (0.141)              (0.110)
                 Loan Collateralized (1 = yes)                   -0.313**             -0.059
                                                                 (0.134)              (0.105)
                 Checking Account (1 = yes)                      -0.467**             -0.869***
                                                                 (0.210)              (0.166)
                 Firm in MSA (1 = yes)                            1.220***             0.040
                                                                 (0.140)              (0.151)
                 Records (1 = yes)                                0.240**              0.178*
                                                                 (0.121)              (0.094)
            Adjusted R2                                           0.218                0.526




                                                      44
                             Table 3: Distance Between the Firm and its Bank

The dependent variable is the log of one plus the distance (in miles) between the firm and the bank branch
or office which it uses most often. Ln(Bank Size) is the log of bank assets. Bank Size is expressed in
$1000s and Firm Size and Loan Size are expressed in dollars before taking logs. In column 2, we report
instrumental-variable estimates where the instruments for Ln(Bank Size) are Ln(Median Bank Size), the
log of the median assets of banks in the area where the firm is located, and Open Market, the fraction of the
previous ten years during which there were no restrictions on within-state branching in the firm’s state.
The number of branches in the market includes only branches of the bank from which the firm borrows.
Each regression contains dummy variables for whether the loan is a line of credit, whether it is
collateralized, and whether the firm has a checking account from the bank. Records is a dummy variable
which equals one if the person answering the income statement and balance sheet questions for the firm had
documentation such as financial statements or accounting records to help answer the questions. Each
regression also includes dummies for the firm’s industry (construction, retail, or services) and the year in
which the loan was secured (1992-1994). Number of observations is 1,131. Significance at the 10%, 5%
and 1% levels denoted by *, **, and *** respectively.

             Independent Variables                                        Models
                                                                    1: OLS       2: IV
             Bank and Market Characteristics
              Ln(Bank Size)                                         0.184***        0.296***
                                                                   (0.021)         (0.078)
                Ln(1 + # of Branches)                              -0.385***       -0.467***
                                                                   (0.031)         (0.063)
                Market Herfindahl                                  -0.352          -0.455
                                                                   (0.392)         (0.403)
                Ln(1 + Bank Age)                                    0.002          -0.049
                                                                   (0.038)         (0.052)
             Firm and Contract Characteristics
               Ln(Firm Size)                                        0.028           0.018
                                                                   (0.030)         (0.031)
               Ln(1 + Firm Age)                                    -0.216***       -0.189***
                                                                   (0.054)         (0.058)
               Ln(Loan Amount)                                      0.076**         0.049
                                                                   (0.030)         (0.035)
               Line of Credit (1 = yes)                             0.121           0.107
                                                                   (0.082)         (0.083)
               Loan Collateralized (1 = yes)                        0.049           0.066
                                                                   (0.078)         (0.079)
               Checking Account (1 = yes)                          -0.870***       -0.758***
                                                                   (0.125)         (0.147)
               Firm in MSA (1 = yes)                                0.255**         0.200*
                                                                   (0.105)         (0.112)
               Records (1 = yes)                                   -0.026          -0.046
                                                                   (0.070)         (0.072)
            Adjusted R2                                             0.269           0.235




                                                     45
            Table 4: Impersonal Communication Between the Firm and its Bank
The dependent variable is one if the bank and firm communicate impersonally (by phone or mail) and zero
if they communicate in person. A logit model was estimated. Ln(Bank Size) is the log of bank assets. Bank
Size is expressed in $1000s and Firm Size and Loan Size are expressed in dollars before taking logs. In
column 2, we report instrumental-variable estimates where Ln(Bank Size) is replaced with its predicted
value based on Ln(Median Bank Size), the log of the median assets of banks in the area where the firm is
located, and Open Market, the fraction of the previous ten years during which there were no restrictions on
within-state branching in the firm’s state (see Table 2, column 2). The number of branches in the market
includes only branches of the bank from which the firm borrows. Each regression contains dummy
variables for whether the loan is a line of credit, whether it is collateralized, and whether the firm has a
checking account from the bank. Records is a dummy variable which equals one if the person answering
the income statement and balance sheet questions for the firm had documentation such as financial
statements or accounting records to help answer the questions. Each regression also includes dummies for
the firm’s industry (construction, retail, or services) and the year in which the loan was secured (1992-
1994). Number of observations is 1,131. Significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels denoted by *, **, and
*** respectively.

           Independent Variables                                          Models
                                                                 1: logit      2: logit/IV
           Bank and Market Characteristics
              Ln(Bank Size)                                       0.196***          0.324**
                                                                 (0.046)           (0.165)
               Ln(1 + # of Branches)                             -0.267***         -0.365***
                                                                 (0.064)           (0.131)
               Market Herfindahl                                 -0.808            -0.883
                                                                 (0.907)           (0.916)
               Ln(1 + Bank Age)                                  -0.132            -0.179
                                                                 (0.082)           (0.108)
           Firm and Contract Characteristics
              Ln(Firm Size)                                       0.259***          0.248***
                                                                 (0.070)           (0.070)
               Ln(1 + Firm Age)                                  -0.329***         -0.290**
                                                                 (0.119)           (0.124)
               Ln(Loan Amount)                                    0.082             0.049
                                                                 (0.066)           (0.075)
               Line of Credit (1 = yes)                           0.659***          0.642***
                                                                 (0.191)           (0.190)
               Loan Collateralized (1 = yes)                      0.215             0.245
                                                                 (0.170)           (0.170)
               Checking Account (1 = yes)                        -1.128***         -0.982***
                                                                 (0.266)           (0.302)
               Firm in MSA (1 = yes)                              0.687***          0.608**
                                                                 (0.245)           (0.255)
               Records (1 = yes)                                 -0.109            -0.115
                                                                 (0.153)           (0.154)
            Pseudo R2                                             0.179             0.168




                                                    46
                 Table 5: Relationship Length Between the Firm and its Bank
The dependent variable is log of one plus the length of the relationship between the firm and its bank (in
years). Ln(Bank Size) is the log of bank assets. Bank Size is expressed in $1000s and Firm Size and Loan
Size are expressed in dollars before taking logs. In column 2, we report instrumental-variable estimates
where the instruments for Ln(Bank Size) are Ln(Median Bank Size), the log of the median assets of banks
in the area where the firm is located, and Open Market, the fraction of the previous ten years during which
there were no restrictions on within-state branching in the firm’s state. The number of branches in the
market includes only branches of the bank from which the firm borrows. Each regression contains dummy
variables for whether the loan is a line of credit, whether it is collateralized, and whether the firm has a
checking account from the bank. Records is a dummy variable which equals one if the person answering
the income statement and balance sheet questions for the firm had documentation such as financial
statements or accounting records to help answer the questions. Each regression also includes dummies for
the firm’s industry (construction, retail, or services) and the year in which the loan was secured (1992-
1994). Number of observations is 1,131. Significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels denoted by *, **, and
*** respectively.

           Independent Variables                                          Models
                                                                 1: OLS              2: IV
           Bank and Market Characteristics
              Ln(Bank Size)                                      -0.048***        -0.150***
                                                                 (0.012)          (0.044)
               Ln(1 + # of Branches)                              0.051***         0.125***
                                                                 (0.017)          (0.035)
               Market Herfindahl                                  0.313            0.408*
                                                                 (0.215)          (0.225)
               Ln(1 + Bank Age)                                   0.108***         0.155***
                                                                 (0.021)          (0.029)
           Firm and Contract Characteristics
              Ln(Firm Size)                                       0.022            0.031*
                                                                 (0.016)          (0.017)
               Ln(1 + Firm Age)                                   0.607***         0.582***
                                                                 (0.030)          (0.032)
               Ln(Loan Amount)                                   -0.045***        -0.020
                                                                 (0.016)          (0.020)
               Line of Credit (1 = yes)                           0.000            0.012
                                                                 (0.045)          (0.046)
               Loan Collateralized (1 = yes)                     -0.056           -0.072
                                                                 (0.043)          (0.044)
               Checking Account (1 = yes)                         0.446***         0.343***
                                                                 (0.068)          (0.082)
               Firm in MSA (1 = yes)                             -0.165***        -0.115**
                                                                 (0.057)          (0.063)
               Records (1 = yes)                                 -0.049           -0.031
                                                                 (0.038)          (0.040)
            Adjusted R2                                           0.366            0.348




                                                    47
               Table 6: Exclusive Relationship Between the Firm and its Bank
The dependent variable is one if the bank is the firm’s only lender, and zero otherwise. A logit model was
estimated. Ln(Bank Size) is the log of bank assets. Bank Size is expressed in $1000s and Firm Size and
Loan Size are expressed in dollars before taking logs. In column 2, we report instrumental-variable
estimates where Ln(Bank Size) is replaced with its predicted value based on Ln(Median Bank Size), the log
of the median assets of banks in the area where the firm is located, and Open Market, the fraction of the
previous ten years during which there were no restrictions on within-state branching in the firm’s state (see
Table 2, column 2). The number of branches in the market includes only branches of the bank from which
the firm borrows. Each regression contains dummy variables for whether the loan is a line of credit,
whether it is collateralized, and whether the firm has a checking account from the bank. Records is a
dummy variable which equals one if the person answering the income statement and balance sheet
questions for the firm had documentation such as financial statements or accounting records to help answer
the questions. Each regression also includes dummies for the firm’s industry (construction, retail, or
services) and the year in which the loan was secured (1992-1994). Number of observations is 1,131.
Significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels denoted by *, **, and *** respectively.

           Independent Variables                                          Models
                                                                 1: logit      2: logit/IV
           Bank and Market Characteristics
              Ln(Bank size)                                      -0.096**          -0.526***
                                                                 (0.040)           (0.144)
               Ln(1 + # of Branches)                              0.075             0.388***
                                                                 (0.057)           (0.116)
               Market Herfindahl                                 -0.637            -0.242
                                                                 (0.721)           (0.732)
               Ln(1 + Bank Age)                                   0.115             0.308**
                                                                 (0.071)           (0.095)
           Firm and Contract Characteristics
              Ln(Firm Size)                                      -0.318***         -0.283***
                                                                 (0.057)           (0.058)
               Ln(1 + Firm Age)                                   0.246**           0.143
                                                                 (0.102)           (0.107)
               Ln(Loan Amount)                                    0.112**           0.219***
                                                                 (0.056)           (0.065)
               Line of Credit (1 = yes)                          -0.078            -0.027
                                                                 (0.150)           (0.152)
               Loan Collateralized (1 = yes)                     -0.351**          -0.419***
                                                                 (0.142)           (0.145)
               Checking Account (1 = yes)                         0.517**           0.087
                                                                 (0.235)           (0.271)
               Firm in MSA (1 = yes)                             -0.098             0.110
                                                                 (0.192)           (0.204)
               Records (1 = yes)                                 -0.120            -0.044
                                                                 (0.128)           (0.131)
            Pseudo R2                                             0.062             0.067




                                                     48
                           Table 7: Fraction of Trade Credit Paid Late
The dependent variable is the fraction of trade credit the firm pays late. A tobit model was estimated.
Ln(Bank Size) is the log of bank assets. Bank Size is expressed in $1000s and Firm Size and Loan Size are
expressed in dollars before taking logs. In column 2, we report instrumental-variable estimates where
Ln(Bank Size) is replaced with its predicted value based on Ln(Median Bank Size), the log of the median
assets of banks in the area where the firm is located, and Open Market, the fraction of the previous ten
years during which there were no restrictions on within-state branching in the firm’s state (see Table 2,
column 2). The number of branches in the market includes only branches of the bank from which the firm
borrows. Each regression contains dummy variables for whether the loan is a line of credit, whether it is
collateralized, and whether the firm has a checking account from the bank. Records is a dummy variable
which equals one if the respondent to the survey had documentation to help answer the questions. Bank
Size Residual is the residual from the first-stage bank-size regression (Table 2, column 2) and is used to
conduct a test of whether bank size is exogenous. Each regression also includes dummies for the firm’s
industry (construction, retail, or services) and the year in which the loan was secured (1992-1994). Number
of observations is 546. Significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels denoted by *, **, and *** respectively.

      Independent Variables                                             Models
                                                         1: tobit      2: tobit/IV      3: tobit
      Bank and Market Characteristics
         Ln(Bank Size)                                    0.006           0.044**        0.044**
                                                         (0.006)         (0.021)        (0.021)
           Ln(1 + # of Branches)                         -0.017**        -0.044***      -0.044***
                                                         (0.008)         (0.017)        (0.017)
           Market Herfindahl                              0.024          -0.016         -0.016
                                                         (0.112)         (0.114)        (0.114)
           Ln(1 + Bank Age)                               0.007          -0.010         -0.010
                                                         (0.010)         (0.014)        (0.014)
           Bank Size Residual (Hausman test)                                            -0.041*
                                                                                        (0.023)
      Firm and Contract Characteristics
         Ln(Firm Size)                                   -0.002         -0.005          -0.005
                                                         (0.009)        (0.009)         (0.009)
           Ln(1 + Firm Age)                               0.022          0.032**         0.032**
                                                         (0.015)        (0.016)         (0.016)
           Ln(Loan Amount)                               -0.008         -0.017*         -0.017*
                                                         (0.009)        (0.010)         (0.010)
           Line of Credit (1 = yes)                       0.003          0.000           0.000
                                                         (0.023)        (0.023)         (0.023)
           Loan Collateralized (1 = yes)                  0.042*         0.050**         0.050**
                                                         (0.022)        (0.022)         (0.022)
           Checking Account (1 = yes)                    -0.003          0.036           0.036
                                                         (0.039)        (0.045)         (0.045)
           Firm in MSA (1 = yes)                          0.066**        0.047           0.047
                                                         (0.030)        (0.031)         (0.031)
           Records (1 = yes)                              0.028          0.022           0.022
                                                         (0.020)        (0.020)         (0.020)
      Log Likelihood                                     12.425         14.090          14.180



                                                    49
