                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           WHY HAS THE EMPLOYMENT-PRODUCTIVITY TRADEOFF AMONG
                 INDUSTRIALIZED COUNTRIES BEEN SO STRONG?


                                              Paul Beaudry
                                             Fabrice Collard


                                          Working Paper 8754
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8754


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2002




This paper was written while Beaudry was visiting GREMAQ, Toulouse. Ideas presented in this paper have
been influenced by work between the first author and David Green. We want to thank Susanto Basu, Franck
Portier, Javier Ortega, Gilles Saint-Paul and participants at the NBER EF meetings (Chicago) , EUI seminar
(Florence, Italy) and CREI seminar (Barcelona, Spain) for helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Paul Beaudry and Fabrice Collard. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Why has the Employment-Productivity Tradeoff among
Industrialized Countries been so strong?
Paul Beaudry and Fabrice Collard
NBER Working Paper No. 8754
February 2002
JEL No. O33, O41



                                              ABSTRACT


         This paper is motivated by a set of cross-country observations on labor productivity growth
among industrial countries over the period 1960-1997. In particular, we show that over this period, the
speed of convergence among industrialized countries has decreased substantially while the negative effect
of a country's own employment growth (or labor force growth) on labor productivity has increased
dramatically. The main contribution of the paper is to show how these observations are consistent with
the view that industrialized countries have been undergoing a particularly drastic technological revolution
over the recent past. In effect, we show how the process of endogenous technological adoption, following
the diffusion of a general purpose technology, can explain these observations by causing the emergence
of an AK accumulation phase where demographic factors temporarily become an major determinant of
labor productivity growth. Our estimation of the model implies that the AK phase has been in effect since
the early to mid-seventies, but that this phase may now be coming to an end. An important contribution
of the paper is to analyze growth experiences across advanced industrialized countries within an open
economy framework and to evaluate the explanation by estimating a multicountry dynamic general
model.




Paul Beaudry                                                     Fabrice Collard
Department of Economics                                          CNRS-GREMAQ and IDEI
University of British Columbia                                   Université de Toulouse I
997-1873 East Mall                                               Manufacture des tabacs, batiment F
Vancouver, B.C.                                                  21 allée de Brienne
Canada, V6T 1Z1                                                  31000 Toulouse
and NBER                                                         France
paulbe@interchange.ubc.ca                                        fabrice.collard@univ-tlse1.fr
1        Introduction

Neoclassical growth theory predicts that, along a transitional path, countries with higher
rates of labor force growth should exhibit less labor productivity growth due to the need to
use scarce capital to equip new workers. Moreover, the same theoretical framework suggests
that, as countries become more integrated over time — i.e. in the presence of globalization
— such a demographic related determinant of productivity growth should diminish, while
the speed of convergence should increase due to the equalizing forces of international capital
flows. However, as we will show, the data for major industrial countries since 1960 point
towards the opposite pattern, that is, the tradeoff between labor productivity growth and
labor force growth (or employment growth) appears to have increased over the recent past
and the speed of convergence has decreased substantially. The object of the paper is to shed
light on these observations.1

        The primary motivation for our analysis is a series of cross–country regression regarding
the determinants of labor productivity growth. As we will show, there has been a rather
drastic change in the main observable determinants in labor productivity growth over the
period 1960–97. In particular, over the first half of this period, the experience of industrial
countries indicated only a small negative — generally insignificant — link between labor force
growth (or employment growth) and the growth of output–per–worker. This observation is
rather unsurprising and consistent with the view that rich industrialized countries may be well
integrated and therefore country specific demographic factors, such as labor force growth, are
not necessarily expected to be a very important determinant of labor productivity growth.
However, over time, this relationship has radically changed. In effect, over the more recent
period, we show that labor force growth has come to exhibit a very large and systematic
negative link with labor productivity. We find such relationship to be surprisingly robust to
instrument variable strategies, to the inclusion of additional regressors, and to the choice of
countries. Moreover, we show that the speed of convergence among these countries decreased
substantially over the period, with convergence virtually becoming an irrelevant force over
the recent past.

        This paper proposes a technology based explanation to the above observations. In par-
ticular, we argue that this pattern may likely be the cross–country expression of a process
    1
     Many economists that have compared economic performance across major industrialized countries since the
mid–seventies have noticed that most countries line up as either successes in employment growth or successes
in labor productivity growth, but not both. At a qualitative level, such an observation is not puzzling since it
is consistent with standard growth theory. However, we will show that a more quantitative look at the data
reveals a quite intriguing and puzzling pattern.


                                                       1
of endogenous technological adoption following the arrival of new means of production. In
a sense, our explanation can be seen as providing evidence to the view that industrialized
countries have been recently undergoing a major technological revolution of the kind empha-
sized, among others, by Caselli (1999), Basu and Weil (1998) and Zeira (1998). To make
our point, we extend a standard neo–classical growth model along two dimensions. First,
we allow for radical technological change in the form of the arrival and dissemination of an
alternative means of production.2 This type of technological change is meant to capture
ideas emphasized in the General Purpose Technology (GPT) literature. 3 Secondly, we allow
countries to be linked through international capital market as to make the model relevant for
the set of advanced industrialized countries under study.4

       Using this model, we show why countries with different rates of labor force growth would
adjust differently to a major technological change.5 In particular, the model illustrates how
the arrival of an alternative production process temporarily creates an AK type accumula-
tion phase which triggers a large negative tradeoff between employment growth and labor
productivity growth. The AK phase arises endogenously in our model as the result of de-
centralized decisions regarding the appropriate speed by which to adopt the new technology.
In particular, because of the AK structure, slower capital deepening is experienced by high
population growth countries since there is no counterbalancing force to trigger an inflow of
capital. The central aspect of the paper is to show that the model can quantitatively replicate
the observed changes in the cross–country regressions.

       Our main conclusion from fitting the model to the data are that (i) over the period 1960–
1997 advanced industrialized countries appear to have transited from a technology where
accumulable factors accounted for approximately a 50% share of income to a new means of
production where they represent more than 60% of income, (ii) industrialized countries have
adjusted at different speeds to this technological change due in large part to differences in
their rates of labor force growth. In particular, we find that countries with high rates of
labor force growth have not been able to take advantage as quickly of the new opportunities
associated with capital deepening, but that this disadvantage may now have come to an end.
   2
      In this paper we are pursuing a technology based explanation to the set of observations. A potentially
relevant alternative explanation is the increase globalization of the economy. In future work we plan to explore
this possibility and compare its merits with the technology based explanation developed here.
    3
      See for example Bresnahan and Trajtenberg (1995).
    4
      We do not assume that international capital mobility is perfect. Instead, we introduce a friction in the
form of an intermediation cost which increases with the size of capital flows.
    5
      A similar idea is pursued in Beaudry and Green (2001), but there the focus is on the effects of technological
change on changes in the returns to education across countries.




                                                        2
    The remaining sections of the paper are structured as follows. In Section 2, we discuss a
series of cross–country regressions linking output–per–worker to labor force growth and initial
levels of output–per–worker. In Section 3, we present our baseline growth model where we
allow technological change to arrive in both the form of labor augmenting progress and in the
form of an increased access to a alternative means of producing goods. Throughout section 3,
we allow for only one accumulable factor which we refer to as capital. However, this capital
stock should be thought as an aggregate of human and physical capital. We then derive the
main theoretical implications of the model and provide a quantitative evaluation. In section
4, we extend the model to explicitly distinguish between human and physical capital, and
we show how such an extended model helps explain the data. Finally, a last section offers
concluding comments.



2      Labor Productivity Growth and Demographics: Some In-
      triguing Observations

In this section, we report a set of cross–country regressions relating growth in output–per–
worker to labor force growth and the initial level of output–per–worker. We focus exclusively
on the experiences of the 18 richest industrialized countries (as defined by their level of GDP–
per–capita in 1960) since it is a set of countries for which assuming common access to frontier
technological opportunities appears most plausible. The 18 countries forming our sample are
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Iceland, Italy,
Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom
and the United States.6 The data are taken from the OECD statistical compendium 1999,
unless indicated otherwise.7

    The main observation that we want to highlight is the extent to which the role of initial
conditions and labor force growth in explaining labor productivity growth has changed over
the 1960–1997 period. To see this more clearly, we begin by reporting estimates associated
with a series of very simple rolling regressions. Our basic regression consists of regressing the
growth in output–per–worker8 on the growth in labor force and the initial level of output–
   6
     Our sample consists of the set of industrial countries where the level of per–capita–income in 1960 was
greater that 48% of the US level. We found it natural to cut the sample at this point since it is where there was
a rather large break in the data. For example, the next richest industrialized countries had per–capita–incomes
below one third of the US level in 1960.
   7
     The data on GDP in US$, which is needed to calculate comparable initial levels of output–per–worker,
are taken from the Heston and Summers data set.
   8
     Output–per–worker is measured as GDP divided by total employment. However, our findings are robust
to the use of private output per private employee as a measure of output–per–worker.


                                                       3
per–worker, with each variable measured in relation to the given window. We chose a size of
window of 19 years since it corresponds to half of our sample length. Nevertheless, in order
to check the robustness of our results, we also explored window sizes between 15 to 25 years,
all of which led to similar conclusions.

       We estimated the relationship using ordinary least squares (OLS) and weighted least
squares (WLS). In the latter case, the weights used in estimation correspond to the square
root of the active population.9 Note that the main difference between our results by OLS and
WLS are due to reducing the weight of Luxembourg and Iceland. Figures 1 and 2 plot the
estimates of this relationship across the different windows. Figure 1 reports the estimated
speed of convergence across the different windows, that is, it reports the estimated effect of
the initial level of output–per–worker on the growth in output–per–worker for each window.
The two different lines on the graph correspond to the estimates using OLS and WLS. Note
that the years on the X–axis in these figures correspond to the initial year of the window, that
is, it begins in 1960 — for the 1960–1978 window — and ends in 1979 with the 1979–1997
window. Finally, all growth rates are calculated in yearly rates.10

                                               Figure 1: Estimated Speed of Convergence
                                    −0.005
                                                OLS
                                                WLS
                                     −0.01


                                    −0.015
                 percent per year




                                     −0.02


                                    −0.025


                                     −0.03


                                    −0.035


                                     −0.04
                                        1960   1962   1964   1966   1968 1970 1972     1974   1976   1978   1980
                                                                      Beginning year




       Figure 1 indicates that initially (over the windows starting in the early 60s), industrial
countries exhibited rapid convergence, with a significant speed of convergence of around 3.5%
   9
    Our measure of active population corresponds to all individuals aged between 15 and 64.
  10
    For windows starting after 1971, the rates of growth for West Germany were calculated using the yearly
average up to 1991, in order to avoid any effect related to the German reunification.


                                                                        4
Figure 2: Estimated Effect of 1% Labor Force Growth on Yearly Labor Productivity Growth
                                  0.1
                                                                                                 OLS
                                   0                                                             WLS


                                 −0.1

                                 −0.2
              percent per year




                                 −0.3

                                 −0.4

                                 −0.5

                                 −0.6

                                 −0.7

                                 −0.8
                                   1960   1962   1964   1966   1968 1970 1972     1974   1976   1978   1980
                                                                 Beginning year


per year. However, over the sample period, this speed of convergence decreased substantially.
In effect, in the latter period — for example the 1979–97 window — our estimates of the
speed of convergence is divided by almost 3 relative to the 1960–1978 period, with the effect
becoming statistically insignificant towards the end of the period. Although, by itself, this
observation may not be very surprising, when juxtaposed with the changing effect of labor
force growth, it becomes quite intriguing. Figure 2 plots the estimated effect of labor force
growth on the growth of output–per–worker. In contrast to figure 1, we see the importance
of this effect increase over time. In particular, our estimates of the effect starts near zero
(for the 1960–1978 window) and gradually increases in importance as it reaches an estimate
greater than -0.5 over time. Note that an estimate of -0.5 implies that a country with a
growth in labor force of 1% experienced on average a growth in output–per–worker of 0.5%
per–year less than a country with a zero growth in labor force (holding constant the initial
level of labor productivity). To get a more precise idea of the magnitude and significance of
the effects at the beginning and the end of the sample, table 1 reports the OLS and WLS
estimates of these effects for the first and last window. In both cases, note that the estimates
of the first and last window are found to be statistically different from each other at the 1%
confidence level.

   In order to further emphasize the magnitude of the change, in figure 3 we plot the ratio
of these two coefficients for both estimated cases (OLS and WLS), that is, the ratio of the



                                                                    5
           Table 1: Cross-Country Regressions for Growth of Output-per-capita
                                  Init.Y /N % ∆ LF       Init.Y /N % ∆ LF
                        Window          1960-1978               1979-97
             (1),OLS                -0.031     -0.234      -0.013     -0.503
                                                (0.007)       (0.175)          (0.014)          (0.212)
            (2), WLS                            -0.034        -0.013           -0.007           -0.669
                                                (0.007)       (0.240)          (0.005)          (0.139)

             Note: Standard errors between parenthesis. Weights used in WLS is the
             square root of the countries’ active population.



effect of labor force growth relative to the speed of convergence. Within a standard Solow
growth model, this ratio can be interpreted as an estimate of the long–run effect on the
level of labor productivity of a 1% difference in the growth of labor force. As can be seen
from the figure, this ratio was quite close to zero — less than 8% in the early period, —
but increased to more than 40% (!!) in the later part of the sample. Although we are not
claiming that this ratio appropriately reflects the long–run effect of labor force growth, we
nevertheless believe that the change in this ratio summarizes our claim that the link between
labor force growth and labor productivity growth has became surprisingly strong over the
recent past. Before exploring the reason for the pattern presented in figures 1–3, we first

               Figure 3: Implied Long–Run Effect of -1% Labor Force Growth
                        100
                                 OLS
                                 WLS
                         80



                         60
              Percent




                         40



                         20



                         0



                        −20
                         1960   1962   1964   1966   1968 1970 1972     1974    1976     1978     1980
                                                       Beginning year


need to further establish its robustness. In particular, we want to claim that the pattern


                                                          6
presented in these figures likely reflects a change in the causal structure running from labor
force growth and initial conditions to labor productivity growth. Hence, to make such a claim
plausible, we need to discuss potential issues related to the endogeneity of regressors and the
omission of variables.11 To this end, we explored several changes in specification, sample and
alternative instrumental variable strategies. Tables 1 through 3 report a small subset of cases
we considered.12 For these cases, we report the estimate for the first window covering the
period 1960–78, and the estimates associated with the last window 1979–1997. Furthermore,
we report the OLS and WLS estimates for our sample of 18 countries. As will be shown, we
found the pattern of increased importance of labor force growth (or employment growth) and
decreased importance of convergence be to very robust.



       The first issue we want to address is whether the pattern we are documenting could
simply be capturing the indirect effects of certain labor market policies which may have
favored labor productivity at the cost of increasing unemployment.13 If this were the whole
story, it would have nothing to do with the type of interaction between technological adoption
and demographically driven employment growth which we believe has been important. 14 To
see whether this could be the case, we include as an additional regressor the change in the
countries unemployment rate over the corresponding period. The corresponding estimates are
reported in panel 1 of table 2. As can be seen, the inclusion of the change in unemployment
does not change the pattern we are emphasizing. We still observe the decrease in the speed
of convergence and a similar increase in the importance of labor force growth in affecting
labor productivity. In fact, our point estimates for both these variables are almost unaffected
by the inclusion of the change in the rate of unemployment, both in terms of significance
  11
    To understand the issues involved, it is helpful to keep in mind the following regression equation for labor
productivity growth
                     µ      ¶                   µ      ¶
                       Yi,t                       Yi,t
                  ∆n          = α0,t + α1,t log          + α2,t ∆n LFi,t + α3,t Xi,t+n + ²i,t+n
                       Li,t                       Li,t

Where ∆n zt = (log(zt+n ) − log(zt ))/n, Yi,t /Li,t is labor productivity in country i at time t, n is the size of
the window, LF is the size of the labor force, and X is a vector or other factors affecting labor productivity
growth.
   In our basic specification we did not include any Xi,t variables. The omission of relevant X is not a problem
as long as they are not correlated with our two regressors of interest. However, since this may not be the case,
in what follows we examine how the introduction of Xs affect our observations.
   12
      Besides the cases we report, we also verified the robustness of our results with respect to controlling for
changes in education attainment, the importance of immigration and the age composition of the labor force.
   13
      See Blanchard (1997) for a discussion along these lines.
   14
      Many economists argue that high labor productivity growth in Europe may have been caused mainly by
institutions that have restricted employment. Our view is that this interpretation of the European experience
is much too restrictive in that it does not recognize that demographic factors may have been an even more
important factor for high labor productivity growth than what can be accounted for by the increase in
unemployment.


                                                        7
and magnitude for the whole sample. Moreover, our estimates of the effect of a change in
unemployment on labor productivity are not found to be statistically significant in either the
earlier or later sample. Hence, the pattern we are emphasizing does not appear to be driven
simply by the behavior of unemployment: something more akin to an increased tradeoff
between employment growth and productivity growth appears to be at work.

       To further clarify this last point, in panel B of table 2 we use the growth in employment
instead of the growth in the labor force as a regressor in addition to the initial level of
output–per–worker. In panel C of table 2, we further include the change in the rate of
unemployment. The estimates in panel B are very similar to those of table 1, suggesting
that it is demographic factors, through their effect on employment, which have increased in
importance. Furthermore, in panel C we see that the change in the rate of unemployment is
not a significant predictor of labor productivity growth once the effect of employment growth
is taken into account. In other words, the data suggest that there has been an increase in
the tradeoff between employment growth and productivity growth over this period regardless
of the reason for the increased employment. Hence, the results from table 2 suggest that it
is demographic factors that have played the dominant role in the process we are describing,
not changes in unemployment — although we recognize that the later may have been a
contributing factor.

       The second issue we want to address is the robustness of our results to the inclusion of
investment rates (in log form) as an additional regressor.15 Our investment rate variable was
constructed as the average of the ratio of real investment in structures and equipment as a
fraction of real GDP. In table 3, we report our estimates of convergence speed and the effects
of labor force growth when the window–specific average rate of investment is included as an
additional regressor. As can be seen from table 3, the inclusion of the rate of investment
again leaves virtually unaltered our basic observations.

       The third issue we choose to highlight is the extent to which the patterns in figures 1 and
2 may be driven by a particular set of countries, in this case, the predominantly anglo–saxon
countries — i.e. the US, the UK, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand. To explore this
issue, we ran our rolling regressions including a dummy variable for the five predominantly
anglo–saxon countries (where the effect of the dummy variable is allowed to vary over time).
The results of this estimation are reported in panel A of table 4. In panel B, we report
the first and last window of the WLS estimate for the case where we exclude all 5 Anglo–
  15
    Although not reported, we also verified the robustness of our results with respect to the inclusion of
changes in education attainment.



                                                    8
Table 2: Cross-Country Regressions: Controlling for the Change in the Unemployment Rate
                                              Panel A
                              Y                                 Y
                        Init. N    % ∆ LF       ∆ Ur      Init. N    % ∆ LF    ∆ Ur
               Window              1960-78                           1979-97
   (1), OLS             -0.031      -0.166       .223      -.011      -0.480   .706
                            (0.007)       (0.181)        (1.073)   (0.015)     (0.232)      (1.297)
   (2), WLS                 -0.039        0.085          -2.071    -0.005      -0.614        0.442
                            (0.006)       (0.244)        (1.509)   (0.006)     (0.153)       (.502)
                                                         Panel B
                                  Y                                      Y
                            Init. N   % ∆ Empl.           ∆ Ur     Init. N   % ∆ Empl.       ∆ Ur
               Window                  1960-78                                1979-97
   (3), OLS                 -0.031      -0.237             —       -0.011      -0.477         —
                            (0.007)       (0.175)                  (0.014)     (0.194)
   (4), WLS                 -0.035        0.042            —       -0.005      -0.627         —
                            (0.008)       (0.250)                  (0.006)     (0.115)
                                                         Panel C
   (5), OLS                 -0.035        -0.166          .230     -0.011      -0.461       -0.197
                            (0.007)       (0.183)        (1.229)   (0.015)     (0.230)      (1.402)
   (6), WLS                 -0.039        0.020           -.998    -0.005      -0.612       -0.229
                            (0.011)       (0.258)        (1.711)   (0.006)     (0.152)       (.588)

              Note: Standard errors between parenthesis. Weights used in WLS is the
              square root of the countries’ active population.




           Table 3: Cross-Country Regressions: Controlling for Investment Rate
                                  Y              I              Y              I
                            Init. N % ∆ LF       Y        Init. N  % ∆ LF      Y
                  Window            1960-78                        1979-97
      (1), OLS              -0.032   -0.231    0.001      -0.007     -0.638  0.020
                                (0.008)    (0.182)       (0.008)   (0.007)   (0.222)     (0.013)
      (2), WLS                  -0.028      0.009         0.018    -0.003    -0.746      0.009
                                (0.007)    (0.223)       (1.865)   (0.006)   (0.151)     (0.008)
      Note: Standard errors between parenthesis.




                                                     9
        Table 4: Cross-Country Regressions: Controlling for Anglo-saxon Countries
                                              Panel A
                                 Y                                Y
                           Init. N  % ∆ LF Dummy            Init. N  % ∆ LF Dummy
                Window               1960-78                          1979-97
   (1), OLS                 -0.029   -0.195    -0.006       -0.013    -0.482   -0.002
                                (0.008)     (0.185)       (0.004)     (0.015)    (0.224)      (0.004)
  (2), WLS                      -0.024      0.057         -0.006      -0.007     -0.668       -0.002
                                (0.006)     (0.181)       (.004)      (0.006)    (0.152)      (0.004)
                                                         Panel B
                 Window                     1960-78                              1979-97
  (1), WLS     13-countries     -0.041      -0.088          —         -0.024     -0.771         —
                                (0.012)     (0.370)                   (0.014)    (0.224)
  (2), WLS     14-countries     -0.058      0.242           —         -0.006     -0.832         —
                                (0.013)     (0.441)                   (0.008)    (0.156)

    Note: standard errors between parenthesis. The 13 country sample excludes: US,Canada, Australia,
    New Zealand and the UK. The 14 country sample excludes: US, Canada, Australia and New
    Zealand. Weights used in WLS is the square root of the countries’ active population.



saxon countries from our sample, which leaves us with a sample of 13 countries, and the
case where we exclude only the non–european economies of Canada, Australia, New Zealand
and the US, leaving us with 14 countries. As can be seen in the table, the effects we have
been emphasizing are not driven solely by the anglo–saxon countries, since they appear in
both restricted sub–samples. In fact, for our non–anglo–saxon sub–sample, the increased
importance of labor force growth is estimated to be at least as important with the coefficient
on labor force growth reaching close to -0.8 in the 1979–1997 window.

   As a last robustness check, we explore two instrumental variable strategies aimed at
addressing the possible endogeneity labor force growth. In the first case, we instrument labor
force growth by the growth in the active population over each given window, which is a time
varying instrument. In the second case, we instrument the labor force growth in each window
by the growth in active population observed in the period 1960–1978, which is a non–time–
varying instrument. The first procedure has the potential of mitigating potential biases that
could be due to the endogeneity of participation decision. The second procedure, by using
a time–invariant instrument, has the potential of minimizing simultaneity biases due to the
endogeneity of the population growth itself — for example, biases that could be induced by
the endogeneity of immigration. As can be seen in table 5, the resulting estimates for the
window 1979–1997 using these two instrumental variable strategy suggests an even stronger
increase in the effect of labor force growth than that found in table 1 (although less precise).



                                                    10
               Table 5: Cross-Country Regressions: Instrumental Variable Estimation
                                                     Y                     Y
                                               Init. N   % ∆ LF      Init. N   % ∆ LF
                              Window                 1960-78               1979-97
             (1), IV    Time–Varying Inst.      -0.036    -.032      -0.011     -.584
                                                         (0.008)    (0.220)        (0.015)    (0.275)
             (2), IV    Non–Time–Varying Inst.           -0.036      -.032         -0.000     -1.361
                                                         (0.008)    (0.222)        (0.018)    (0.640)

               Note: Standard errors between parenthesis. In the time-varying case, we instrument
               labor force by the countries’ growth in active population over the given window. In the
               non-time-varying case, we instrument labor force growth by the countries’ growth in
               active population over the period 1960–78 for all windows.



Hence, it is unlikely that the pattern we are highlighting is being driven by the endogeneity
of labor force growth.

         Together, the results reported in tables 2 through 5 suggest that there has been a major
change in the determinants of labor productivity growth across industrial countries, whereby
the speed of converge has decreased and the effect of labor force growth has increased sub-
stantially.



3          An International Growth Model with Endogenous Techno-
          logical Choice

The pattern presented in figures 1 and 2 indicates a change in the determinants of labor
productivity growth over the period 1960–1997, with a decrease in the speed of convergence
and an increase in the importance of demographically driven employment growth. In this
section, we propose a technology based explanation to these observations. In particular, our
goal is to show that such a pattern may reflect the process by which industrialized countries
have adjusted to a major technological change.

         The type of major technological change we envision is one corresponding to the arrival
and dissemination of a new production process, where the extent and speed of adoption are
endogenously determined by country–specific market forces. In this sense, the model we
develop shares features with the literature on General Purpose Technologies (GPT), and is
a particular case of the class of endogenous technological choice model which have featured
prominently in recent explanations of inequality trends.16 One important feature of our
    16
         See for example, Acemoglu (1999), Basu and Weil (1998), Beaudry and Green (1998,2000), Caselli


                                                         11
modelling approach is to propose an explanation to cross–country growth observation which
does not treat individual countries as autonomous entities but instead considers them as a
set of interlinked economies.17 This appears most relevant for the set of countries we are
considering.



    Our approach in this section is as follows. We first set out a baseline model where there
are only two factors of production: a broad measure of capital and unskilled labor. We then
use this model to show how the arrival of an alternative production process can generate
the type of patterns depicted in figures 1 and 2. We begin by a theoretical analysis which
highlights the qualitative properties of the model. We then complement this analysis by a
quantitative evaluation, which consists of an estimation and simulation strategy aimed at
examining whether the model can quantitatively reproduce the patterns of figures 1 and 2.
Since our quantitative exercise consists of evaluating a dynamic general equilibrium model of
18 interlinked economies, the model is kept as simple as possible to render the task feasible.
As we shall show, the main technological feature that allows to explain the pattern depicted
in figures 1 and 2 consists of the arrival and dissemination of a new production process with
the property that it uses accumulable factors more intensively; whether this greater intensity
involves greater intensive use of human capital, physical capital or both.


3.1     Theoretical Analysis

3.1.1    Technology


We consider a set of economies, indexed by i = 1, . . . , N , which all produce the same ho-
mogenous good, that can be either consumed or invested. All firms have access to the same
technological possibilities. Initially, firms in all the countries produce output using a tradi-
tional and well–established production process which depends on capital K i,t and efficient
units of unskilled labor θt Li,t according to the following constant returns to scale production
function.
                                        α
                                Yi,t = Ki,t (θt Li,t )1−α with α ∈ (0, 1)

(1999)and Zeira (1998). The model of endogenous technological choice most closely related to the current
paper is probably that of Zeira (1998). Note that from a theoretical perspective, most models of endogenous
technological choice are simple reinterpretations of models of international trade.
  17
     Ventura (1998) also proposes an explanation of international growth patterns within a framework of
interlinked economies. In ongoing work, we are examining the extent to which a model along the lines of
Ventura’s can explain the observations presented in figures 1 and 2.




                                                    12
Throughout this section, we will refer to capital generically and interpret it as representing
an aggregate of human and physical capital.18

       In the above production function, we allow for factor augmenting technological change
through growth in θt , which is assumed to evolve as

                                                θt = (1 + γ) θt−1

where γ is the exogenous growth rate of θ.

       As already stated, we want to also allow for radical technological change in the form of
the arrival and dissemination of a new production process. This radical technological change
takes the form of the arrival of an alternative modern production process which depends on
the same two factors but exhibits less decreasing returns to the accumulable factor, K, as
follows.
                                         β
                              Yi,t = Φt Ki,t (θt Li,t )1−β with 0 < α < β < 1

We interpret this alternative production process — or alternative form of work organization
— as a General Purpose Technology that over time becomes a relevant means of production
as φ becomes sufficiently high. In effect, we can consider that initially Φ = 0 and hence this
technology is not operative. Conversely, as soon as Φ > 0, the firm faces a menu of available
technologies to produce the same good. It therefore has to choose not only the amount of
total factor it will use to achieve the production of output, but also how to allocate it between
the two available technologies. In other words, technology adoption is an endogenous decision
of the firm. Hence, with a T and M superscript denoting respectively the traditional and
modern means of production, the problem of a firm amounts to solving the following problem.

                                                              T      M
                                    max
                                     τ ,Lτ ,K τ ;τ =T,M }
                                                            Yi,t + Yi,t − Wi,t Li,t − zi,t Ki,t
                      {Li,t ,Ki,t ,Yi,t  i,t i,t


s.t

                                      α
                          T
                        Yi,t    T
                             = Ki,t (θt LTi,t )1−α
                          M        M       β      1−β
                        Yi,t = Φt Ki,t (θt LM
                                            i,t )

                        Li,t = LTi,t + LM
                                        i,t
  18
    Throughout this section, we rely on a broad definition of capital which amounts to interpret it as an
aggregate of both human and physical capital. Since there is a large class of models where an explicit modelling
of human and physical capital leads to a reduced–form in which human and physical capital actually act as an
aggregate (see for example Barro and Sala–i–Martin (1995)), the approach is not overly restrictive. However,
since the appropriateness of such an interpretation may not be entirely transparent and in order to check the
robustness of our results, in the following section we extent the model to explicitly distinguish between human
capital — which is traded domestically — and physical capital — which is traded on an international market.


                                                            13
                                       T      M
                               Ki,t = Ki,t + Ki,t
                                                     τ
                               Li,t > 0, Ki,t > 0, Yi,t > 0, Lτi,t > 0, Ki,t
                                                                         τ
                                                                             > 0; τ = {T, M }

where Wi,t , the price of unskilled labor in economy i, and zi,t , the corresponding rental price
of capital, are taken as given by the firm. To understand the implications of technological
adoption, it is helpful to conceptually view the firm’s decision problem as divided into two
phases. First, for given levels of K and L, the firm must decide on what technology, or mix of
technologies, to adopt. Second, given the resulting optimal technological adoption decision,
the firm can decide on the optimal level for K and L. The following proposition characterizes
the first stage of this decision process, that is, the optimal technological adoption decision.


Proposition 1 For given levels of K and L, the firm’s technological adoption decision takes
the following form:


            Ki,t
   i. if   θt Li,t   < ΩTt then only the traditional technology is adopted;
                      Ki,t
  ii. if ΩTt <       θt Li,t   < ΩM
                                  t then both the modern technology and the traditional technology are
        in use;
            Ki,t
 iii. if   θt Li,t   > ΩM
                        t then only the modern technology is adopted.



where
                                                  1
                                                       µ ¶ β µ     ¶ 1−β
                                                        α β−α 1 − α β−α
                                        ΩTt      α−β
                                              = Φt
                                                        β      1−β
and
                                                  1
                                                       µ ¶ α µ     ¶ 1−α
                                                        α β−α 1 − α β−α
                                       ΩM
                                        t
                                                 α−β
                                              = Φt
                                                        β      1−β


Proof: See appendix A.1.

                                                                          K
   Proposition 1 indicates that if the capital–labor ratio,               θL ,   is sufficiently low relative to
Φt , then it is optimal to only use the traditional technology. Alternatively, if it is sufficiently
                                                                                        K
high, then is it optimal to use only the modern technology. Finally, if                 θL   is in the right ratio
relative to Φt , then it is optimal to use both technologies simultaneously. As we shall show,
equilibrium forces will cause the last regime to be operative over an extended period of time.
We will refer to this latter regime, where both technologies are operative, as the adoption
phase.



                                                          14
   A conceptually important implication that results from the adoption decision is summa-
rized in the following proposition.


Proposition 2 During the adoption phase, aggregate technology is of the form AK + BθL.


Proof: See appendix A.2.

   In other words, proposition 2 indicates that the adoption phase corresponds to aggregate
technology with an AK type structure— more precisely an AK + BθL structure. In effect,
                                 K
during this phase, a change in   θL       implies a reallocation of capital and labor between the
two technologies, thereby avoiding the effects of decreasing returns. These two propositions
are illustrated in figure 4, which reports the output–per–worker as a function of capital–
per–worker, both for the traditional and modern technologies. The thick line corresponds to
the aggregate technology implied by the optimal adoption regime. As can be seen from this
figure, the linear part of the technology only arises for capital–labor ratios between k and k.



                                      Figure 4: Technology
 Y
 θL
      6


                                                                                  YM
                                                                                  θLM




                                                                                 YT
                                                                                 θLT




                                                                                       -
          |           {z              }
          k                           k                                           K
                Adoption phase                                                    θL




   The firm’s complete decision problem gives rise to a demand function for labor and a

                                                  15
demand function for capital, and thereby characterizes the demand side of the market. On
the supply side, we assume that the market for unskilled labor is a domestic market with the
supply determined entirely by domestic households. In contrast, we assume that households
supply capital to an international market and that it is financial intermediaries that allocate
the internationally available capital to domestic firms. Hence, to complete the description of
the economy, we need to specify the objectives and the behavior of households and financial
intermediaries.


3.1.2   Household


For simplicity, households are assumed to live for one period and have a bequest motive that
leads to savings. Moreover, in each period there is the birth of a new cohort of households.
In the theoretical section of the paper, we could let households live for an arbitrary number
of periods instead of assuming they live only for one period. However, for the quantitative
analysis, it is helpful to adopt the metaphor of one period lived households with bequest
motives in order to generate simple savings behavior. To this end, we let households have
preferences over current consumption and have a bequest motive directed towards their re-
placement cohort. In economy i, the relative size of the new cohort is such that the rate
of population growth for this economy is ηi . Note that in the model, labor force growth,
employment growth and population growth are interchangeable terms.

   In the one period of life, a household supplies one unit of labor to the market and therefore
receives the real wage, wi,t , to compensate for her work. She also receives profits from financial
intermediaries, πi,t , and a bequest, bi,t , left by generation t − 1 to members of generation t.
These revenues are then used to consume, ci,t and save si,t . Therefore, the household faces a
budget constraint of the form
                                                                         bi,t
                                 ci,t + si,t = wi,t + πi,t +                                  (3.1)
                                                                       1 + ηi
Savings will be transmitted to the next cohort in the form of a bequest after the application
of the international real interest rate rt+1 , and we therefore have

                                         bi,t+1 = si,t (1 + rt+1 )                            (3.2)

The household decides on how much to consume, save and leave to the next cohort so as to
maximize her utility
                                       max               U (ci,t ) + V (bi,t+1 )
                                 {ci,t ,si,t ,bi,t+1 }

subject to (3.1) and (3.2).

                                                          16
3.2    Financial intermediaries


Financial intermediaries make profits by borrowing capital from the international market, at
rate rt , and renting it to firms at a net rate of zi,t − δ, where δ is the rate of depreciation of
capital. In the absence of any transaction costs, competition between financial intermediaries
would drive the price of capital to firms to rt + δ. However, we assume that intermediation
involves a cost νi,t . In particular, we view this intermediation cost as a type of adjustment
cost which increases with the size of new capital flows.19 Furthermore, we assume that the
marginal intermediation cost is taken as exogenous from the view point of an intermediary
and hence, competition assures that the cost of capital to domestic firms is given by:

                                               zi,t = rt + δ + νi,t

With an adjustment cost interpretation in mind, we assume that the marginal intermediation
cost, νi,t , takes the following form
                                   (
                                          0³                        ´ if Ki,t 6 Ki,t−1
                               νi,t =          Ki,t −Ki,t−1
                                          ν       Ki,t−1              if Ki,t > Ki,t−1

where Ki,t is the aggregate flow of capital to country i and where ν(·) is an increasing function.
Note that given this form for the marginal intermediation costs, the total cost associated with
intermediation in country i is20
                                              Z    Ki,t        µ                ¶
                                                                   x − Ki,t−1
                                     Υi,t =                ν                        dx
                                                  Ki,t−1             Ki,t−1


3.3    Equilibrium


An equilibrium for this economy consists of a sequence of prices {rt , wi,t , zi,t ; i = 1, . . . , N }∞
                                                                                                       t=0
                  T , K M , LT , LM , s ; i = 1, . . . , N }∞ such that,
and allocations {Ki,t  i,t   i,t  i,t i,t                   t=0
  19
     The assumption that there are frictions limiting international capital movements is consistent with the
evidence reviewed in Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000).
  20
     The profits of financial intermediaries made in country i are νi,t Ki,t minus the total intermediation costs.
Indeed, we can actually think of the intermediary as solving the following program taking K i,t−1 as given:
                                                            Z Ki,t    µ            ¶
                                                                        x − Ki,t−1
                             max zi,t Ki,t − (rt + δ)Ki,t −         ν                dx
                              Ki,t                           Ki,t−1       Ki,t−1

An alternative interpretation of the model is one where firms face a capital adjustment cost, but where firms act
myopically by only internalizing the current adjustment cost when deciding on current investment. Although
it may be desirable to have firms or financial intermediaries completely internalize the costs associated with
changing the stock of capital, such a modification greatly increase the complexity of the model without any
apparent gains in insight.


                                                               17
   i. given {wi,t , zi,t }∞       T      M      T      M ∞
                          t=0 , {Ki,t , Ki,t , Li,t , Li,t }t=0 solves the firms problem.

   ii. given {wi,t , rt }∞            ∞
                         t=0 , {si,t }t=0 solves the consumers problem.

  iii. there exist no unexploited gains from trade in capital intermediation, that is, z i,t =
                  ³              ´
                    Ki,t −Ki,t−1
       rt + δ + ν      Ki,t−1

  iv. The markets for labor and capital clear, that is,

                              LTi,t + LM                   t
                                       i,t = Li,0 (1 + ηi ) , for t > 0 and i = 1, . . . , N
                              N
                              X                              N
                                                             X
                                      T          M
                                    (Ki,t   +   Ki,t )   =         Li,t−1 si,t−1 , for t > 0
                              i=1                            i=1



3.4    Basic properties


In order to highlight how the arrival of an alternative production process leads to departure
from the standard Solow growth model, we first want to emphasize some basic properties
of our model that relates to the determinants of cross–sectional outcomes in the absence of
technological choice. In particular, as stated in proposition 3, in the absence of technologi-
cal choice, our international model shares two central properties with the traditional Solow
growth model: these are convergence and the presence of a negative effect of labor force
growth on productivity growth.21


Proposition 3 In the absence of the alternative technology (Φt = 0), cross-country growth in
output-per-worker will exhibit


   i. a negative relationship with the initial level of output-per-worker, that is, it will exhibit
       convergence;

   ii. a negative relationship with the rate of labor force growth ηi , where the magnitude of
       this effect is smaller than α


Proof: See appendix A.3.

   The main equilibrium forces underlying proposition 3 can be seen from the allocation
                                                                             ³        ´
                                                                               Ki,t α−1
condition for capital which equates the marginal product of capital, zi,t = α θt Li,t   , to
  21
     It is well known that an international version of the Solow model with adjustment costs to capital generates
the properties of convergence and the negative effects of population growth on labor productivity growth. See
for example Barro-Sala-i-Martin (1995).


                                                              18
the rental cost of capital inclusive of intermediation costs. In equilibrium, this relationship
is given by
                                              µ            ¶ α−1 Ã           k
                                                                                    !α−1
                                    k             Yi,t−1     α        1 + γi,t
                        rt + δ + ν(γi,t )=α
                                                  Li,t−1             θt (1 + ηi )
       k = (K
where γi,t    i,t − Ki,t−1 )/Ki,t−1 denotes the rate of growth of capital. In effect, the

above equation can be seen as determining the cross-sectional distribution of growth rates of
capital for a given world interest rate. From this relationship, it is easy to see that the rate
of growth of capital for a country is a decreasing function of its initial level of output-per-
worker. This allocation rule for capital thereby causes output growth in the model to exhibit
convergence, that is, higher initial labor productivity is associated with lower subsequent
growth in output–per–worker. Moreover, from the above relationship, we can see that the
rate of growth of capital will be positively related to labor force growth. However, this latter
effect will not be sufficiently strong to offset the direct negative effect of labor force growth
on capital deepening. Hence, in our model, labor productivity grows more slowly in a high
population growth economy even though international capital mobility allows such a country
to attract more capital.

   We are now in a position to examine how the introduction of an alternative technology
affects the equilibrium properties of the model. To this end, it is helpful to consider the
behavior of the model in the case where all economies are in the adoption phase, that is, in
the situation where they are simultaneously using both technologies.


Proposition 4 In the presence of the alternative technology, if all economies are in the adoption
phase, then cross–country growth in output-per-worker over such a period


   i. will not exhibit convergence, that is, there will not be a negative relationship between
      the initial level of output–per–worker and the growth in output–per–worker.

  ii. will exhibit a negative relationship with the rate of labor force growth of a magnitude
      greater than α.


Proof: See appendix A.4.

   Proposition 4 indicates that the process of technological adoption following the dissem-
ination of a new technology has the potential to significantly change the determinants of
cross–country growth in labor productivity. In particular, proposition 4 highlights that when


                                                    19
countries are in the adoption phase, there will no longer be forces directly favoring conver-
gence of labor productivity, while there will be strong forces causing divergence in labor
productivity due to difference in labor force growth. Hence, after the dissemination of a
new general purpose technology, we are likely to observe a period of time where the speed
of convergence decreases substantially and where the magnitude of the negative relationship
between labor–force growth increases from something smaller than α to something greater
than α. These effects, which would be consistent with the observations in 1 and 2, should
arise as more and more countries start transiting towards the new technology and thereby
begin reflecting the properties emphasized in proposition 4. An interesting aspect of this
proposition is that it gives quantitative insight with respect to how the introduction of a
new technology may affect the negative relationship between labor force growth and labor
productivity growth. For example, considering capital to be an aggregate of both human
and physical capital, the results of Mankiw, Romer and Weil (1992) suggest that α is greater
that 0.5 and possibly of the order of 0.7. Therefore, proposition 4 can be interpreted as
stating that the process of technological transition could cause the tradeoff between labor
productivity growth and labor force growth to increase from somewhere between zero and
0.5 to a magnitude greater than 0.6 or 0.7, which is precisely that observed in figures 1 and
2.22

       In order to understand proposition 4, it is helpful to distinguish two mechanisms driving
the result. The first mechanism relates to how the introduction of a new technology affects
each country’s production possibility set. The second mechanism relates to how capital flows
are determined when countries are in the adoption phase. It is the combination of both these
mechanism which lie behind proposition 4.

       In terms of the production possibility set, the introduction of a new technology has
important implications. When firms have a choice between two technologies, the optimal
adoption rule will lead them to convexify the possibility set and thereby cause the emergence
of a linear segment in the aggregate production technology, that is, it causes the emergence of
an AK + BθL type structure as indicated in proposition 2. To see this, consider again figure
4 where we graph the two (traditional and modern) underlying technologies in intensive form
(i.e. Y /θL as a function of K/θL). Given these two technologies, there is a range of capital
labor ratios, K/θL ∈ [k; k], where it is optimal to use both production processes. Over this
range, the marginal product of capital will not exhibit decreasing returns since this is avoided
  22
    Since proposition 4 is mainly a qualitative statement, it does not tell us if the arrival of a new technology
could actually reproduce the size and the timing of the changes observed in figures 1 and 2. It is for this
reason that we also provide a quantitative evaluation of the model.



                                                       20
by reallocating factors between two techniques of production. Note that an improvement in
the modern technology (through a change in Φt ) causes that AK + BθL segment to shift
to the left as it pivots upwards. It is interesting to note that, if a country were in autarky,
and the new technology gradually improved in terms of increases in Φt , then the economy
would appear to leave a Solow regime with diminishing returns, and enter an AK type regime.
Furthermore, during such a transition, an increase in Φt would cause the price of unskilled
labor to decrease, while simultaneously leading to an increase in the returns to factors that
can be accumulated.

   In the case of internationally linked economies, the introduction of the new technology
affects cross–sectional growth properties through its effect on the allocation of capital. If
countries are in the adoption phase — in the AK + BθL segment — then the marginal
product of capital is equal to A in all these countries and the allocation of capital is driven
by the equation                     µ                   ¶
                                        Ki,t − Ki,t−1
                       rt + δ + ν                           = A ∀i = 1, . . . , N
                                           Ki,t−1
therefore leading to
                             k
                            γi,t = ν −1 (A − rt − δ) ∀i = 1, . . . , N

Hence, in this phase, the growth rate of capital is equalized across country and thereby
independent of both the country’s initial level of labor productivity (within the relevant
range) and the countries labor force growth. Accordingly, capital labor ratios grow slower
in higher labor force growth countries by a proportionality factor of -1, and are no longer
driven by forces of convergence. This slower growth in capital labor ratio causes slower labor
productivity growth in proportion to the income share of capital. Since the income share
of capital along the technological transition is greater or equal to α (the share of capital
in the traditional technology), this explains why such a technological transition can cause
the tradeoff between employment growth and labor productivity growth to increase to the
magnitude greater of α. For example, if intermediation costs are very small, cross–sectional
growth in labor productivity would exhibit no substantial tradeoff with labor force growth
before the introduction of the new technology then, during the transition period, it would
exhibit a tradeoff greater than α, and finally, when (and if) the set of countries exit this
phase, there will be a return to a situation where there is no significant tradeoff between
labor force growth and labor productivity growth.




                                                  21
3.5   Quantitative Analysis


Our theoretical analysis suggests that the patterns highlighted in figures 1 and 2 may reflect a
technological transition which created a temporary AK accumulation phase, that is, a phase
where the aggregate production technology has an AK + BθL structure. In this section, we
explore the plausibility of this explanation by examining whether our model, once quantified,
can in effect reproduced the trends observed in figures 1 and 2. To this end, we begin
by parameterizing our model, estimating the unknown parameters and then evaluating its
performance.



Basic methodology: Since the model is to be evaluated on quantitative grounds, we have
to specify functional forms for the utility function and the marginal intermediation cost. The
utility function is assumed to take the form

                                U (c) + V (b) = log(c) + ψ log(b)

and the marginal intermediation cost is kept as simple as possible

                                           ν(x) = ν.x

Finally, we assume that Φt evolves over time as

                                        Φt+1 = (1 + ϕ)Φt

with Φ0 > 0 given. ϕ represents the rate of growth of the relative productivity in the modern
technology. When ϕ = 0, then total factor productivity in the modern technology does
not increase faster than in the traditional technology. This will be taken as our benchmark
experiment (experiment I). If we now assume that ϕ > 0, then Φt grows at a constant rate
and therefore complements the growth in labor efficiency at a constant pace.

   This leaves us with 9 parameters to set: α, β, δ, ν, ψ, γ, ϕ, Φ0 and θ0 . Not all the parameters
will be estimated, for identification sakes, δ is set such that capital depreciates at an annual
rate of 6% (δ = 0.06). All other 8 parameters will be estimated: Θ = {α, β, ν, ψ, γ, ϕ, Φ 0 , θ0 }.

   Our estimation strategy is based on a moment estimation method. The deep parameters
are obtained in order to minimize the discrepancy between a set of moments obtained from
the data and those obtained using the model. More specifically, we select the deep parameters
of the model in order to replicate parameters from rolling regressions, as displayed in figure 1
and 2. Hence, our world economy will consist of the 18 countries (N = 18) considered in the

                                                22
  empirical study (see section 2). The initial distribution of revenues — in terms of output–
  per–capita — and labor force growth — {ηi ; i = 1 . . . , N } — are taken from the data. Since
  we are to replicate the magnitude and evolution of the effects of both labor force growth
  and initial conditions on productivity growth, we will attempt to replicate the 40 estimates
  (2×20) related to the rolling regressions over the period 1960–97 with a window size of 19.
  Hence the estimation procedure exhibits a degree of over–identification of 32. 23



         Given a set of moments (see the following section for the choice of the moments) and a
  set of policy functions for the variables of interest, we adopt the following indirect inference
  method to estimate parameters:


Step 1: Estimate a q-dimensional vector of moments (here q=40), m ∈ M ⊂ R q , from the data.
           Hereafter, m
                      b T denotes the estimated moments obtained from section 2.

Step 2: From the theoretical model, and given a vector of structural parameters, Θ, a path
                                                       ¡Y ¢
        for output–per–worker and labor force, denoted gL i,t (Θ), L̃i,t (Θ), i = 1, . . . , N , is
           performed in each country.

Step 3: From these simulations, we estimate the moments m̃(Θ), by running the same rolling
           regressions as in the data.

Step 4: An estimate Θ̃ for Θ minimizes the quadratic form:

                                            b T − m̃(Θ))0 WT (m
                                    J(Θ) = (m                 b T − m̃(Θ))

           where WT is a symmetric nonnegative matrix defining the metric.


         Steps 2 to 4 are conducted repeatedly until convergence — i.e. until a value of Θ that
  minimizes the objective function is obtained. From a practical point of view, the matrix W T
  is the inverse of the variance matrix of the empirical moments, which we form by feeding the
  diagonal with the variance of each estimated moment.

         Two cases will be under study. In the first case, which will be labelled as experiment
  I, we set ϕ = 0, therefore assuming that Φt is constant over time. The second experiment,
    23
      In the model, labor force growth and population growth are identical. However, in the data they are not.
  Hence it is necessary to decide what is the more appropriate empirical counterpart to η i in the model. We
  believe that labor force growth is the better empirical counterpart and therefore we perform the quantitative
  exercise by comparing theoretical regressions using ηi as a regressor with empirical regressions using labor
  force growth as a regressor. Note that when using labor force growth as a regressor, we instrument it with
  population growth as to minimize biases due to the potential endogeneity of participation decisions.


                                                       23
labelled as experiment II, relaxes the last assumption therefore assuming that productivity
in the modern means of production increases faster than in the traditional technology. Table
6 reports the results.

                                      Table 6: Estimation results

                              Experiment I       Experiment II       Experiment III
                      α            0.48613             0.43433              0.46111
                      β            0.65140             0.60673             –
                      ν            0.79581             1.07861              1.20023
                      ψ            8.27543             8.23692              8.27543
                      γ            0.00000             0.00016              0.00000
                      Φ0           0.57800             0.36160             –
                      θ0          14.52487             8.90931             14.52487
                      ϕ            –                   0.00431             –
                      J(Θ)         7.50700             3.80182             15.47780




       A first interesting fact that emerges from table 6 is that the estimated value for α is
reasonable in size, as we find a value close to 0.5 for both experiment under consideration.
The value for β is much above α as it lies between 0.60 and 0.65 in both experiment I
and II, therefore supporting our view that the patterns highlighted in figures 1 and 2 may
reflect the arrival of new means of production that exhibit lower diminishing returns to scale
with respect to factors that can be accumulated.24 Another result worth noting is that the
model does not need additional source of growth other than the labor force growth and the
introduction of the modern technology to replicate the data, as γ, the rate of growth of labor
augmenting progress θt , is estimated to be essentially 0 in experiment I.25

       Figure 5 graphs the estimates from rolling regression obtained from the data (dark line)
and the model (grey line). As can be seen from this figure, the moments generated by
the model lie within the 1–standard deviation confidence interval associated to the empir-
ical moments (dashed line). Therefore, our theoretical framework is capable of replicating
statistically the empirical estimates from the rolling regressions (recall that the level of over–
identification is 33 in expriment I and 31 in experiment II).

       It is worth noting that the existence of an exogenous process affecting Φ t — which implies
  24
     Note that this result was obtained without imposing β > α during the estimation.
  25
     Note that this actually does not reflect a problem of identification since the algorithm was feeded with
different initial values for γ, and always get to the same value. In case of identification problems, γ would
have been stuck at its initial level.



                                                     24
                           Figure 5: Rolling regressions

                                  (a) Experiment I
          Convergence parameter                        Labor Force Growth Parameter
   0             Model
                                              −0.1
                 Data
−0.01            1 s.e. bands                 −0.2
                                              −0.3
−0.02                                         −0.4
                                              −0.5
−0.03                                         −0.6
                                              −0.7
−0.04
   1960   1965    1970     1975     1980        1960       1965   1970     1975       1980
                                  (b) Experiment II
          Convergence parameter                        Labor Force Growth Parameter
   0             Model
                                              −0.1
                 Data
−0.01            1 s.e. bands                 −0.2
                                              −0.3
−0.02                                         −0.4
                                              −0.5
−0.03                                         −0.6
                                              −0.7
−0.04
   1960   1965    1970     1975     1980        1960       1965   1970     1975       1980




                                        25
that the new technology becomes increasingly attractive over time– enhances the ability of
the model to replicate the rolling regressions. It is worth noting that under experiment II,
the gap between α and β is slightly higher relative to experiment I, implying that the relative
returns to factors that can be accumulated in the modern technology are marginally higher
than in experiment I. This is accompanied by an increase in the marginal intermediation
cost parameter, which rises from 0.80 to 1.10, implying for instance, that, assuming a rate
of growth of capital of 3%, the marginal intermediation costs increases from 2.39% in the
first experiment to 3.24% in the second. Note that preferences are left unaffected by the
introduction of a time varying Φt , as ψ — the weight attached to bequest in the utility
function — is only marginally affected across the two experiments. In order to gauge the
empirical relevance of such numbers, we report in table 7 the average annual rate of growth of
world capital and the associated real interest rate. The numbers reported in the table indicate
that the estimated parameters for the technology are quite consistent with the actual evidence
on capital accumulation in the end of the twentieth century. Finally, in table 7, we also report
the cross-country variance of z (that is, the cross-country variance of the marginal product
of capital)26 as well as its average absolute deviation. Interestingly, the model produces
differences in the marginal product of capital that appear of reasonable magnitude.

                                          Table 7: Basic statistics

                                  Experiment I       Experiment II       Experiment III
                      γk             3.61%              3.02%               3.26%
                      r              2.42%              0.76%               0.16%
                      σz             0.88%              1.24%               1.32%
                      E|z − z|       0.69%              0.97%               1.03%


      In order to illustrate the functioning of the model, figure 6 illustrates a particular counter-
factual where we shut down the adjustment costs (that is, we take the limit case as ν tends
to 0), and we track the evolution of labor–productivity of the 18 economies over time as they
adopt the new technology.27 Note that because ν is taken to zero, in the first (traditional)
and third (modern) phases of the dynamics, the economies do not differ in there level of
output-per-worker since capital mobility equalizes labor productivity across countries. As
can be seen from the figure, as soon as they reach a high enough level of capital stock,
the economies enter the adoption phase. The rate of growth of capital they experiment
is equalized as they are in a zone where there are no decreasing returns to accumulation
(AK + BθL zone). This figure illustrates more particularly the first item of proposition 4.
 26
      We calculated this variance for each year, and took the average over the entire period.
 27
      Note that productivity has been normalized by its initial level in this graph.


                                                       26
In effect, when all economies are in the first phase, they converge to the same path. In
contrast, when the economies enter the AK phase, the convergence process is stopped, as
reflected by the divergent evolution of labor productivity. Note that even in this limit case
where international capital mobility is becoming perfect, our model suggests that the set of
countries would take about 15 years to go through the transition phase when α = 0.486 and
β = 0.651. The last experiment we conduct (experiment III) is aimed at illustrating that


           Figure 6: Evolution of productivity without intermediation costs (ν = 0)



                     2.2 Traditional              AK phase                   Modern
                                Technology                               Technology
                            2
          (Y/L)t / (Y/L)0




                     1.8


                     1.6


                     1.4


                     1.2


                            1
                                      5      10       15        20      25        30         35
                                                              Time
                   Note: Each line corresponds to the evolution of productivity of a given country,
                   each country being characterized by a different rate of population growth.


we actually need to depart the standard growth model to explain the data. In particular, in
experiment III we investigate what happens when only the traditional technology is available.
The model is therefore estimated imposing Φt = 0 for all t > 0, implying that neither β nor
ϕ are identifiable.28 As can be seen from the fourth column of table 6, the value of the
objective function is significantly and negatively affected by this assumption. In fact, as can
be seen from figure 7 the model is unable to account for the variations in the parameters of
the rolling regressions. Nevertheless, as predicted by proposition 3, the model generates a
negative covariance between the rate of growth of labor and productivity growth on the one
  28
    Due to identification problems, we estimated the model of experiment III with θ0 and ψ set to their
estimated level in experiment I.


                                                             27
side, and a negative covariance between the initial conditions and productivity growth on the
other side. But, the time pattern of these coefficients is flat. Therefore, it clearly appears

                                   Figure 7: Rolling regressions

                                           (a) Experiment III
                 Convergence parameter                              Labor Force Growth Parameter
        0                Model
                                                          −0.1
                         Data
    −0.01                1 s.e. bands                     −0.2
                                                          −0.3
    −0.02                                                 −0.4
                                                          −0.5
    −0.03                                                 −0.6
                                                          −0.7
    −0.04
       1960     1965     1970      1975       1980           1960        1965   1970    1975       1980


that the introduction of the modern technology is crucial to mimic the time varying pattern
of the effects of labor force growth on productivity growth, and the convergence parameter.



4     An Extended Model with Human and Physical Capital Ac-
      cumulation

4.1     The theoretical model

4.1.1       Technology


Let us again consider a set of economies, indexed by i = 1, . . . , N , which all produce the
same homogenous good, that can be either consumed or invested. Each firm in each country
has access to the same technological possibilities. Initially, firms in all the countries produce
output using the traditional production process which now depends on physical capital K i,t ,
human capital Hi,t and efficient units of unskilled labor θt Li,t according to the following
production function.
                                           αk αh
                                   Yi,t = Ki,t Hi,t (θt Li,t )1−αk −αh

with αk ∈ (0, 1), αh ∈ (0, 1) and αk + αh < 1

     As in the model of the previous section, we allow for factor augmenting technological

                                                   28
change through growth in θt , which is assumed to evolve as

                                                         θt = (1 + γ) θt−1

where γ is the exogenous growth rate of θ.

      As already stated, the model takes into account the possibility of a more radical techno-
logical change in the form of the arrival and dissemination of a new production process, which
takes the form of an alternative modern production process which depends on the same three
factors but exhibits less decreasing returns to the accumulable factors K and H.

                                                      βk βh
                                           Yi,t = Φt Ki,t Hi,t (θt Li,t )1−βk −βh

with βk ∈ (0, 1), βh ∈ (0, 1) and 0 < αk + αh < βk + βh < 1

      With a T and M superscript denoting respectively the traditional and modern means of
production, the problem of a firm amounts to solve

                                                                  T      M
                                max
                                 τ ,Lτ ,K τ ,H τ ;τ =T,M }
                                                                Yi,t + Yi,t − Wi,t Li,t − zi,t Ki,t − qi,t Hi,t
            {Li,t ,Ki,t ,Hi,t ,Yi,t  i,t i,t  i,t


s.t
                               αk          αh
                   T
                 Yi,t    T
                      = Ki,t         T
                                    Hi,t        (θt LTi,t )1−αk −αh
                   M        M        βk    M     βh              1−βk −βh
                 Yi,t = Φt Ki,t           Hi,t        (θt LM
                                                           i,t )

                 Li,t = LTi,t + LM
                                 i,t
                         T      M
                 Ki,t = Ki,t + Ki,t
                         T      M
                 Hi,t = Hi,t + Hi,t
                                                 τ
                 Li,t > 0, Ki,t > 0, Hi,t > 0, Yi,t > 0, Lτi,t > 0, Ki,t
                                                                     τ      τ
                                                                         , Hi,t > 0; τ = {T, M }

where Wi,t ,the price of unskilled labor in economy i, and zi,t , the corresponding rental price
of capital, and qi,t the price of human capital are taken as given by the firm.


4.1.2     Household


Like in our benchmark model, household are assumed to live for one period, and in each
period there is the birth of a new cohort of households. Household have preferences over
current consumption and have a bequest motive directed towards their replacement cohort.
In economy i, the relative size of the new cohort is such that the rate of population growth
for this economy is ηi .

                                                                  29
    At time t, each household receives from the previous generation a transfer in the form of
physical capital, denoted si,t−1 , and a transfer in the form of human capital, denoted xi,t−1 .
Furthermore, the household receives its share of profits from financial intermediaries, which
is denoted πi,t . The household supplies inelastically to the domestic market both its unskilled
labor and its human capital as to receive total wage income equal to w i,t + xi,t−1 qi,t ; where
Wi,t is the price of unskilled labor and qi,t is the rental price of human capital. The household
supplies its inherited physical capital to the international capital market as to receive total
physical capital income si,t−1 (1 + rt ). The household uses its total revenues to consume, ci,t
and save for each member of its replacement cohort, where savings can be in the form of
either human capital (xi,t ) or physical capital (si,t ). Therefore, the household faces a budget
constraint that takes the following form.

                   ci,t + (si,t + xi,t )(1 + ηi ) = wi,t + qi,t xi,t−1 + (1 + rt )si,t−1 + πi,t                       (4.3)

The total value of the bequest left by a household at time t is expressed as follows.

                                  bi,t+1 = (si,t (1 + rt+1 ) + qi,t+1 xi,t )(1 + ηi )                                 (4.4)

The household decides on how much to consume and save as to maximize her utility

                                                max                  U (ci,t ) + V (bi,t+1 )
                                       {ci,t ,si,t ,xi,t ,bi,t+1 }

subject to (4.3) and (4.4).


4.1.3     Equilibrium


The behavior of financial intermediaries is essentially the same as the one described in the
previous section. Therefore, an equilibrium for this economy consists of a sequence of prices
{rt , wi,t , zi,t , qi,t ; i = 1, . . . , N }∞                     T      M      T      M      T      M
                                             t=0 and allocations {Ki,t , Ki,t , Li,t , Li,t , Hi,t , Hi,t , si,t , xi,t ; i =
1, . . . , N }∞
              t=0 such that,



    i. given {wi,t , zi,t , qi,t }∞       T      M      T      M      T      M ∞
                                  t=0 , {Ki,t , Ki,t , Li,t , Li,t , Hi,t , Hi,t }t=0 solves the firms problem.


   ii. given {wi,t , qi,t , rt }∞                   ∞
                                t=0 , {si,t , xi,t }t=0 solves the consumers problem.


  iii. there exist no unexploited gains from trade in capital intermediation, that is, z i,t =
                  ³              ´
                    Ki,t −Ki,t−1
       rt + δ + ν      Ki,t−1




                                                                     30
  iv. The markets for labor, human and physical capital clear, that is,

                         LTi,t + LM                   t
                                  i,t = Li,0 (1 + ηi ) , for t > 0 and i = 1, . . . , N
                          T      M
                         Hi,t + Hi,t = Li,t xi,t−1 , for t > 0 and i = 1, . . . , N
                         N
                         X                       N
                                                 X
                                 T      M
                               (Ki,t + Ki,t )=         Li,t si,t−1 , for t > 0
                         i=1                     i=1



4.2   Quantitative analysis


In this section we assess the potential quantitative gains pertaining to the disaggregation of
capital between human and physical capital. The quantitative evaluation of the model relies
on the same methodology as the one used in the previous section. In particular, we maintain
the same assumptions on the specification of utility and marginal intermediation cost. Table
8 reports the estimation results for our two benchmark experiments: experiment I assumes
a constant Φt and experiment II assumes a growing Φt .

                                   Table 8: Estimation results

                                     Experiment I         Experiment II
                            αk            0.38103               0.37448
                            βk            0.42939               0.37448
                            αh            0.21649               0.15267
                            βh            0.27341               0.26669
                            ν             1.84987               2.24889
                            ψ             8.54395               8.49798
                            γ             0.00000               0.04612
                            Ψ0            0.78832               0.74907
                            θ0            8.97477               6.31667
                            ϕ             –                     0.00295
                            J(Θ)          5.55070               3.47295


   As should be expected, the objective function is lower than in our previous model, as
disaggregation of capital between human and physical capital adds two parameters to the
model αh and βh and therefore brings in additional flexibility in the model and potential
informational in the estimation. The model still supports our view that the empirical facts
may reflect the arrival of new means of production exhibiting lower diminishing returns to
scale with respect to factors that can be accumulated. Indeed, in the two experiments, we
obtain a value for αk + αh lying between 0.50 and 0.60, while βk + βh lies within the interval
0.65–0.70. Note for instance, that under experiment I, not only does the sum α k +αh < βk +βh

                                                  31
but we also get αh < βh , reflecting the fact that the new means of production display
less diminishing returns to human capital. It is also worth noting that the value of α k
and βk are about the same29 and more remarkably are both about 0.40 which corresponds
approximately to the share of capital in value added in industrialized economies. Also note
that disaggregating capital does not affect the value of ψ — the preference parameter —
which remains close to the estimated value obtained in our benchmark model. It is however
worth reporting that the marginal intermediation costs has risen compared to the previous
model, in which case the intermediation costs affected the aggregate accumulable factor,
while it now only affects physical capital. One final aspect to note from Table 8 is that, in
Experiment II, the nature of the technological change inferred by imposing our model on the
data is essentially a “skilled biased technological change”, that is, our estimates suggests that
the main characteristic of the new technology is its greater human capital intensity.                   30   In
effect, our estimate of βk in Experiment II is identical to our estimate of αk .

    Figure 8 reports the rolling regression obtained from the data (dark line) and the model
(grey line). As can be seen from this figure, the model replicates both the pattern and the level
of the parameters of the rolling regressions. In particular, the model can account remarkably
well for the diminishing convergence parameter across the sample. Further, it appears that,
compared to our benchmark model, splitting capital between human and physical capital
enhances the ability of the theoretical model to mimic the increasing effect of labor force
growth on labor productivity growth, and it is particularly consistent with Jorgensen and Yip
(1999) estimate the growth in physical capital among G7 countries, which average between 4
and 6% over the period 1960–95. It should however be noted that this is obtained at a higher
real interest rate and a higher cross-country variance of z, as reflected in table 9.

                                          Table 9: Basic statistics

                                            Experiment I      Experiment II
                               γk              4.57%             6.71%
                               r              10.11%             8.44%
                               σz              2.46%             3.12%
                               E|z − z|        1.92%             2.43%


    To gauge the timing of events, figure 9 reports the number of countries in each phase
(traditional, adoption, modern production process) over time, therefore illustrating the dy-
  29
     In this version of the model we imposed αk 6 βk during the estimation phase in order to assure convergence
of our estimation method.
  30
     Such an observation is consistent with the view that recent technological change across industrialized
countries has been mostly skill-biased. See for example: Berman, Bound and Machin (1998).


                                                      32
                           Figure 8: Rolling regressions

                                  (a) Experiment I
          Convergence parameter                        Labor Force Growth Parameter
   0             Model
                                              −0.1
                 Data
−0.01            1 s.e. bands                 −0.2
                                              −0.3
−0.02                                         −0.4
                                              −0.5
−0.03                                         −0.6
                                              −0.7
−0.04
   1960   1965    1970     1975     1980        1960       1965   1970     1975       1980
                                  (b) Experiment II
          Convergence parameter                        Labor Force Growth Parameter
   0             Model
                                              −0.1
                 Data
−0.01            1 s.e. bands                 −0.2
                                              −0.3
−0.02                                         −0.4
                                              −0.5
−0.03                                         −0.6
                                              −0.7
−0.04
   1960   1965    1970     1975     1980        1960       1965   1970     1975       1980




                                        33
namics of the adoption process across countries. As can be seen, the adoption process starts

                                                             Figure 9: Adoption Dynamics

                                        Experiment I                                                                  Experiment II
                  18                                                                            18

                  16                                                                            16

                  14                                                                            14

                  12                                                                            12
 # of countries




                                                                               # of countries
                  10      Traditional                                                           10      Traditional
                          Adoption                                                                      Adoption
                          Modern                                                                        Modern
                  8                                                                              8

                  6                                                                              6

                  4                                                                              4

                  2                                                                              2

                   0                                                                             0
                  1960   1965     1970    1975     1980   1985   1990   1995                    1960   1965     1970     1975     1980   1985   1990   1995
                                                 Year                                                                           Year




sooner in experiment I, as the first country enters the adoption phase in 1972, whereas un-
der experiment II, the first country to adopt the modern technology waited until 1976. In
both cases, most economies enter the adoption phase in the 80s and no country has totally
abandoned the traditional technology by the end of the sample.



5                      Conclusion

Over the last quarter of a century, economic performance across major industrialized countries
has been characterized by some country having good performance in terms of labor produc-
tivity growth while other having had good performance in terms of employment growth. Very
few countries have had good performance on both fronts over long periods. 31 The object of
this paper has been to shed light regarding the apparent increasing tradeoff between pro-
ductivity and employment growth observed since the mid-seventies. Our answer is that this
tradeoff has emerged as the result of these countries undergoing a major technological change.
In particular, we have shown how the endogenous adoption of a new production process can
induce an AK accumulation phase where the negative tradeoff between employment growth
and productivity growth becomes greatly amplified for a temporary period. Our estimates of
      31
     Among the very advanced countries, only Luxembourg has performed remarkably well on both front.
Ireland is another possible exception, but in the early part of our sample, it was so far behind the set of
advance industrialized countries that it appears to us to deserve an more idiosyncratic explanation. For
example, the reduction of corporate taxation in Ireland (which in our model can have huge effects) may key
to understanding the dramatic catchup experienced in Ireland.



                                                                               34
this process suggests that it has been in effect for the last 20 to 25 years, and that only now
may it becoming to an end. Obviously, if it is coming to an end, it suggests that countries
with high rates of population growth may perform relatively better in terms of labor pro-
ductivity growth in the near future than in the recent past. The US experience since 1996
provides some preliminary evidence to this effect whereby, as documented by Jorgensen and
Stiroh (2000), labor productivity growth has recently picked up due to an increase in the
speed of capital deepening.




                                              35
References

[1]. Acemoglu, Daron, Changes in Unemployment and Wage Inequality: An Alternative The-
    ory and Some Evidence, American Economic Review, December 1999, 1259–1278.

[2]. Barro, Robert J., and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, Economic Growth, Cambridge, MA: MIT
    Press 1995.

[3]. Basu, Susanto and David Weil Appropriate Technology and Growth, Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, 113(4), November 1998: 1025-54.

[4]. Beaudry, Paul and David Green, What is Driving US and Canadian Wages: Endogenous
    Technical Change or Endogenous Choice of Technique?, N.B.E.R. working Paper 6853,
    December 1998.

[5]. Beaudry, Paul and David Green, The Changing Structure of Wages in the US and Ger-
    many: What Explains the Difference?, N.B.E.R. working Paper 7697, May 2000.

[6]. Berman, Eli, John Bound and Stephen Machin, Implications of Skilled-biased Technolog-
    ical Change: International Evidence, Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1998,
    1245-1280.

[7]. Olivier Blanchard, The Medium Run, Brookings Paper on Economic Activity, 1997.

[8]. Bresnahan, Timothy and Manuel Trajtenberg General Purpose Technologies: Engines of
    Growth?, Journal of Econometrics, 65 (1995), pp. 83-108.

[9]. Caselli, Francesco, Technological Revolutions, American Economic Review, March 1999,
    78-102.

[10]. Dale W. Jorgensen and Eric Yip Whatever Happened to Productivity Growth, mimeo
    Harvard University, June 1999.

[11]. Dale W. Jorgensen and Kevin J. Stiroh, Raising the speed limit: US Economic Growth
    in the Information Age, OECD ECO/WKP 2000-34, 2000.

[12]. Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer and David Weil, A Contribution to the Empirics of
    Economic Growth, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107 (May), 1992, 407-437.

[13]. Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroe-
    conomics: Is There a Common Cause?, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, Ben
    Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff (eds).


                                           36
[14]. Solow, Robert, A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth, Quaterly Journal of
    Economics, 70, 1956, 65-94.

[15]. Ventura, Jaume, Growth and Interdependence, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112,
    (1997), pp. 57–84.

[16]. Zeira, Joseph, Workers, Machines and Economic Growth, Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics, 113(4), 1998, 1091-1118.




                                           37
A     Proof of propositions

A.1    Proof of Proposition 1

                                 T , K M , LT , LM are in use and satisfy
During the adoption phase, both Ki,t  i,t   i,t  i,t

                                                    T      M
                                            Ki,t = Ki,t + Ki,t                        (A.5)
                                             Li,t = LTi,t + LM
                                                             i,t                      (A.6)


    During this phase, the first order conditions associated to the firm problem imply
                             M           µ ¶ α µ          ¶ 1−α
                          Ki,t         1
                                          α β−α 1 − α β−α
                                     α−β
                                  = Φt                          ≡ ΓMt                  (A.7)
                         θt L M
                              i,t         β         1 − β

and
                     T                 µ ¶ β µ     ¶ 1−β
                    Ki,t          1
                                        α β−α 1 − α β−α          α(1 − β) M
                                 α−β
                              = Φt                       ≡ ΓTt =         Γ            (A.8)
                   θt LTi,t             β      1−β               β(1 − α) t

                                            T and K M yields
    Using the above equations to solve for Ki,t    i,t




                                T          α(1 − β) M           α(1 − β)
                               Ki,t =               Γ θt Li,t −          Ki,t         (A.9)
                                            β−α t                β−α
                               M           β(1 − α)        α(1 − β) M
                              Ki,t   =              Ki,t −          Γ θt Li,t        (A.10)
                                            β−α              β−α t

    then we have


                                                                      T and L
 (i) When only the traditional technology is at work, we have Ki,t = Ki,t            T
                                                                              i,t = Li,t .

      For such a situation to be optimal, the first order conditions imply
                                             Ki,t           α(1 − β) M
                                                    6 ΓTt =         Γ
                                            θt Li,t         β(1 − α) t
      or, using the definition of ΓTt
                                                         µ ¶ β µ     ¶ 1−β
                                        Ki,t        1
                                                          α β−α 1 − α β−α
                                               6 Φtα−β
                                       θt Li,t            β      1−β
                                                                  M and L = LM . For
 (ii) When only the modern technology is at work, we have Ki,t = Ki,t    i,t i,t
      such a situation to be optimal, the first order conditions imply
                                                     Ki,t
                                                            > ΓM
                                                               t
                                                    θt Li,t

                                                         38
      or, using the definition of ΓM
                                   t
                                                             µ ¶ α µ     ¶ 1−α
                                   Ki,t        1
                                                              α β−α 1 − α β−α
                                          > Φtα−β
                                  θt Li,t                     β      1−β


The result then follows.                                                                      ¤


A.2    Proof of proposition 2


Recall from the proof of Proposition 1, that during the adoption phase, we have

                            T               α(1 − β) M           α(1 − β)
                           Ki,t =                    Γ θt Li,t −          Ki,t
                                             β−α t                β−α
                            M               β(1 − α)        α(1 − β) M
                           Ki,t   =                  Ki,t −          Γ θt Li,t
                                             β−α              β−α t
and

                                              T               α−1
                                            Yi,t = ΓTt                T
                                                                     Ki,t                (A.11)
                                              M                   β−1 M
                                            Yi,t   =       Φ t ΓM
                                                                t    Ki,t                (A.12)

From these equations we can derive that
                                                       β−1        α T α−1
                                             Φt ΓM
                                                 t           =     Γ
                                                                  β t
and hence output can be written as
                                                                     µ            ¶
                                       T          M            α−1          α M
                            Yi,t =   Yi,t   +   Yi,t   =   ΓTt         T
                                                                      Ki,t + Ki,t
                                                                            β
                        T and K M , we obtain
Using the solution for Ki,t    i,t



                                                α−1                         α
                              Yi,t = αΓTt              Ki,t + (1 − α)ΓM
                                                                      t θt Li,t

which is of the form AK + Bθt L.                                                              ¤


A.3    Proof of proposition 3


Let us define the growth in output-per-worker at time t as the log–difference between periods
t and t − 1 (which is consistent with our empirical analysis). In the absence of the alternative
technology, this difference is given by
                      Yi,t      Yi,t−1        Ki,t        Ki,t−1
                 ln        − ln        = α ln      − α ln        + (1 − α)(1 + γ)
                      Li,t      Li,t−1        Li,t        Li,t−1

                                                             39
          k to represent       Ki,t −Ki,t−1
   Using γi,t                     Ki,t−1    ,    the growth of output–per–worker can be rewritten as
                                                           Ã                   !
                                                                      k )
                                                               (1 + γi,t
                         Yi,t      Yi,t−1
                      ln      − ln        = α ln                                   + (1 − α)(1 + γ)
                         Li,t      Li,t−1                       (1 + ηi )

from which, we get            ³                     ´
                                  Y          Yi,t−1
                             ∂ ln Li,t
                                    i,t
                                        − ln Li,t−1                       α        ∂γi,tk

                                            Y
                                                                   =        k
                                                                                ×   Y
                                                                                                         (A.13)
                                    ∂ ln Li,t−1                        1 + γi,t   ∂ Li,t−1
                                          i,t−1                                       i,t−1

and                   ³                     ´
                          Y          Yi,t−1                 Ã                                        !
                     ∂ ln Li,t
                            i,t
                                − ln Li,t−1                        1              k
                                                                               ∂γi,t
                                                   =α                k
                                                                         ×               −1              (A.14)
                           ∂ ln(1 + ηi )                        1 + γi,t   ∂ ln(1 + ηi )

                k is implicitly determined by the condition
   Recall that γi,t
                                                      Ãµ                ¶1                    !α−1
                                                                                       k )
                                                                               (1 + γi,t
                                      k                        Yi,t−1      α
                          rt + δ + ν(γi,t )=α
                                                               Li,t−1          θt (1 + ηi )

from which we get
                                        ³            ´− 1
                                            Yi,t−1         α
                                                          k )α−1 (θ (1 + η ))1−α
          ∂γi,tk              (α − 1)       Li,t−1  (1 + γi,t        t        i
           Y
                     =                     ³        ´ α−1                                    <0
         ∂ Li,t−1
             i,t−1      0  k                 Yi,t−1
                       ν (γi,t ) + α(1 − α) Li,t−1
                                                       α        k
                                                          (1 + γi,t ) α−2 (θt (1 + ηi )) 1−α


and
                                             ³            ´ α−1
                                                 Yi,t−1        α
                                                           k )α−1 (θ (1 + η ))1−α
             k
           ∂γi,t                α(1 − α)            (1 + γi,t
                                                 Li,t−1                t       i
                     =                     ³        ´ α−1                                    >0
       ∂ ln(1 + ηi )    0  k                 Yi,t−1    α        k     α−2                1−α
                       ν (γi,t ) + α(1 − α) Li,t−1        (1 + γi,t )     (θt (1 + ηi ))


   It then directly follows that
                                         ³                     ´
                                             Y          Yi,t−1
                                        ∂ ln Li,t
                                               i,t
                                                   − ln Li,t−1
                                                       Y
                                                                               <0
                                                     ∂ Li,t−1
                                                        i,t−1


Further, it is straightforward to check that the term inside the parenthesis in (A.14) is
                                          k
                                       ∂γi,t
negative, which together with       ∂ ln(1+ηi )    > 0 implies
                                                 ³                     ´
                                                     Y          Yi,t−1
                                                ∂ ln Li,t
                                                       i,t
                                                           − ln Li,t−1
                                   −α <                                             <0
                                                      ∂ ln(1 + ηi )


                                                                                                             ¤


                                                               40
A.4     Proof of proposition 4


During the technological adoption phase, the growth rate of output–per–worker can be written
as
                                  µ                         ¶        µ                  ¶
          Yi,t      Yi,t−1           Ki,t−1 (1 + γtk )                  Ki,t−1
       ln      − ln          = ln A                    + Bθt − ln A            + Bθt−1
          Li,t      Li,t−1           Li,t−1 (1 + ηi )                   Li,t−1
                                  µµ                  ¶                   ¶      µ        ¶
                                     Yi,t−1             (1 + γtk )                 Yi,t−1
                             = ln           − Bθt−1                + Bθt−1 − ln
                                     Li,t−1             (1 + ηi )                  Li,t−1

where the values for A and B are given in the proof of Proposition 2.

     In the above equations, note that γtk is not indexed by i since in the transition phase γtk
is equal across countries as it is determined by the relationship γ = ν −1 (A − rt − δ), and is
therefore independent from Yi,t−1 /Li,t−1 .

     We then have
                   ³                     ´
                       Y          Yi,t−1
                  ∂ ln Li,t
                         i,t
                             − ln Li,t−1                          1             (1 + γtk )    1
                             Y
                                             =                                             − Y
                                                     Ki,t−1 (1+γtk )            (1 + η   )
                          ∂ Li,t−1
                             i,t−1
                                                 A   Li,t−1 (1+ηi )       + Bθt        i       i,t
                                                                                             Li,t

It is then easy to check that
                            ³                    ´
                               Y          Yi,t−1
                          ∂ ln Li,t
                                 i,t
                                     − ln Li,t−1                           1 + γtk
                                        Y
                                                          > 0 ⇐⇒                   >1
                                     ∂ Li,t−1                              1 + ηi
                                        i,t−1


that is as long as there is growth in output–per–worker.

     Furthermore, we have
                   ³                     ´                   ³                ´
                       Y          Yi,t−1                         Yi,t−1         (1+γ k )
                 ∂ ln Li,t
                         i,t
                             − ln Li,t−1                             − Bθt−1 (1+ηti )
                                                                 Li,t−1
                                             = −³                        ´
                        ∂ ln(1 + ηi )                  Yi,t−1              (1+γ k )
                                                       Li,t−1     − Bθt−1 (1+ηti ) + Bθt−1

which may be rewritten as
               ³                     ´
                   Y          Yi,t−1
             ∂ ln Li,t
                     i,t
                         − ln Li,t−1             Yi,t − Bθt Li,t    AKi,t
                                            =−                   =−       = −ski < −α
                     ∂ ln(1 + ηi )                     Yi,t          Yi,t

where ski denotes the income share of capital in the technological adoption phase.

                                                                                                     ¤




                                                        41
