                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     ENTRY AND ASYMMETRIC LOBBYING: WHY GOVERNMENTS PICK LOSERS


                                          Richard E. Baldwin
                                        Frédéric Robert-Nicoud


                                         Working Paper 8756
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w8756


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2002




Our thanks to Alan Manning and Gene Grossman for feedback and the Swiss National Science Foundation
for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Richard E. Baldwin and Frédéric Robert-Nicoud. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Entry and Asymmetric Lobbying: Why Governments Pick Losers
Richard E. Baldwin and Frédéric Robert-Nicoud
NBER Working Paper No. 8756
February 2002
JEL No. F1, L5



                                              ABSTRACT


        Governments frequently intervene to support domestic industries, but a surprising amount of this
support goes to ailing sectors. We explain this with a lobbying model that allows for entry and sunk costs.
Specifically, policy is influenced by pressure groups that incur lobbying expenses to create rents. In
expanding industry, entry tends to erode such rents, but in declining industries, sunk costs rule out entry
as long as the rents are not too high. This asymmetric appropriablity of rents means losers lobby harder.
Thus it is not that government policy picks losers, it is that losers pick government policy.




Richard E. Baldwin
Graduate Institute of International Studies, Geneva
11a, ave de la Paix
1211 Geneva Switzerland
and NBER
baldwin@hei.unige.ch

Frédéric Robert-Nicoud
LSE, Economics Department
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UK
    Entry and asymmetric lobbying: Why governments
                      pick losers
                                          Richard E. Baldwin
                             Graduate Institute of International Studies, Geneva
                                        Frédéric Robert-Nicoud
                             London School of Economics & Political Science
                                                                           1
                             15 December 2000: This version December 2001



                                            ABSTRACT
      Governments frequently intervene to support domestic industries, but a surprising
      amount of this support goes to ailing sectors. We explain this with a lobbying
      model that allows for entry and sunk costs. Specifically, policy is influenced by
      pressure groups that incur lobbying expenses to create rents. In expanding
      industry, entry tends to erode such rents, but in declining industries, sunk costs
      rule out entry as long as the rents are not too high. This asymmetric
      appropriablity of rents means losers lobby harder. Thus it is not that government
      policy picks losers, it is that losers pick government policy.



1. Introduction
        Governments that try to pick winners and losers usually choose the latter, according to
an old adage. Some of the clearest examples come from trade policy. In the US and Europe,
the most protected sectors – agriculture, textiles, clothing, footwear, steel and shipbuilding –
have all been in decline for decades. Counter examples are rare. Even when a growing sector
gets protection, such as the US semiconductor industry, the protection tends to focus on
market segments – like memory chips – in which the domestic industry is losing ground. A
related phenomenon is the ‘NIMBY’ syndrome (Not in My Back Yard) whereby special
interest groups seem to fight harder to avoid loses than they do to achieve gains.
         In searching for an accounting of this phenomenon the natural place to start is the
political economy literature. The key approach for our purposes is the so-called ‘pressure
group’ or lobbying approach that was launched by the classic papers of Stigler (1971) and
Peltzman (1976) in the context of industrial regulation. The approach subsequently found a
very natural home in the field of international trade after a series of papers showed that it
provides important insights into why observed trade policy deviates so radically from welfare
maximising policies. The path-breaking papers here are Hillman (1982), which took the
political support function approach, and Findlay and Wellisz (1982), which introduced the
tariff-formation function approach. More recently, the pressure-group approach been
extended to include more explicit modelling of how lobbying expenditures affect
policymakers’ choices. Magee, Brock and Young (1989) work with a model where political
contributions influence the outcome of elections, but the dominant model in this literature is
now the ‘protection for sale’ model of Grossman and Helpman (1994). As Rodrik (1995)



1
  Our thanks to Alan Manning and Gene Grossman for feedback and the Swiss National Science Foundation for
financial support.
                                                                                                        2


notes, the great advantage of this model is that it provides clear-cut micro foundations for
lobbying and its effects in a tractable and fairly general setting.2

The loser’s paradox
        At the heart of the pressure-group approach is the presumption that special interest
groups (SIGs) who spend the most on lobbying or other political activities are, other things
equal, the ones that get the most government support. In this light, the success of sunset
industries in winning a disproportionate share of government support is paradoxical. After all,
lobbying dollars of expanding industries should be just as welcomed by politician as those of
declining industries and an industry’s ability to finance lobbying expenditures and its interest
in obtaining government support should be positively related to its size, employment and/or
profitability; one would expect the highest levels of government support in the biggest and
strongest sectors rather than in ailing sectors. In the same light, the NIMBY syndrome –
observed in issues ranging from health care reform to the location of landfill sites – is curious
since lobbying to reverse losses and lobbying to secure new gains might be expected to be
equally attractive to special interest groups.
        Our paper uses the pressure-group approach – in particular that of Grossman and
Helpman (1994) – to account for the surprising amount of support that goes to declining
industries. Our basic story is simple. Government policy is influenced by pressure groups and
such lobbying is expensive. Special interest groups spend the money in order to create rents
that they can appropriate.3 There is, however, a strong asymmetry in the ability of expanding
and contracting industries to appropriate the benefits of lobbying. In an expanding industry,
policy-created rents attract new entry that erodes the rents. In the extreme, free and
instantaneous entry obviates all rents. This is not true in declining industries. Since sunk
market-entry costs (e.g., unrecoverable investments in product development, training and
brand name advertising) create quasi-rents, profits in declining industries can be raised
without attracting entry as long as the level of quasi-rents does not rise above a normal rate of
return on the sunk capital. Plainly, asymmetric appropriability implies an asymmetric
incentive to lobby. The result is that losers lobby harder, so government policy doesn’t pick
losers; losers pick governments policy. A corollary to this reasoning accounts for the curious
tendency of special interest groups to fight harder to avoid losses than they do to win new
gains.

Literature Review
        Many explanations of the loser’s paradox have been suggested. One of the earliest and
best known is the conservative social welfare function (CSWF) of Corden (1974). As Corden
introduces it, “any significant absolute reduction in real incomes of any significant section of
the community should be avoided. … In terms of welfare weights, increases in incomes are
given relatively low weights and decreases very high weights.” While this sort of
government-with-a-heart explanation may have a good deal of explanatory power, it comes
close to assuming the answer. Moreover at least in developed nations, governments have
many policies for redistributing income and cushioning shocks (income taxes, unemployment
insurance, retraining schemes, etc.), so even if “caring” were a major motive in government
policy, an optimising government would separate industry support from pure income
distribution considerations. An even more important critique is that the conservative social
welfare function does not account for the fact that not all declining industries win massive

2
 See Grossman and Helpman (2001) for a synthesis.
3
 Using US data, Gawande and Bandyopadhyay (2000) provide some evidence that protection is indeed ‘for
sale’. See footnote 5 below.
                                                                                                  3


government support. In the 1980s for instance, the real wages of US unskilled workers fell
substantially but only a small subset of these attracted government support. As the work of
Goldberg and Maggi (1999) shows, well-organized sectors, for example US apparel workers,
are the ones that induced the US government to adopt distortionary policies that softened the
fall in their real incomes. In same spirit as the CSWF are the equity-concern model of
Baldwin (1982) and the status-quo model of Lavergne (1983).
        One of the most intuitive explanations for the loser’s paradox turns on Anne
Krueger’s use of the “identity bias” to account for what she calls “asymmetries in the
political market.” The bias, according to Krueger (1990), is that people care more about the
welfare of specific, known individuals than they do about unidentified, face-less individuals.
To see how it could explain asymmetric government support, contrast the impact of a subsidy
to a declining sector with one to an expanding industry. Both subsidies will alter the
allocation of employment, but in the ailing industry the jobs ‘saved’ are identified ex ante
with specific individuals, while the jobs created in the expanding sector cannot be identified
with any specific individual, ex ante. In a way, this provides psycho-micro foundations, of the
type associated with Schelling (1984), for the CSWF approach. As such, Krueger’s
explanation relies on the shape of policymakers’ objective function and thus shares the
shortcomings of the CSWF solution.
        A related paper, but one that relies on more standard microeconomic behaviour, is
Fernandez and Rodrik (1991). These authors use a mechanism that is related to the “identity
bias” notion to account for the reluctance of governments to adopt changes in policies, i.e.
reforms. To see this, consider a simple economy with 45% of workers in one sector and 55%
in another and a hypothetical reform that will help workers in the initially small sector and
hurt those in the initially big sector. Moreover, the reform will shift employment so that 60%
of workers are eventually in the sector that is helped, i.e. the sector that was initially small. If
each worker knew what her fate would be ex ante, the reform would easily garner support
from a majority of workers. However, workers in the initially large sector do not know, ex
ante, in which sector they will end up ex post; the probability that they move to the helped
sector is quite small, just 15/55, so each one of them may oppose the reform ex ante. Notice
that while the identity bias operates via the psychology of policymakers in the Krueger
model, the Fernandez-Rodrik model relies on nothing more than individual rationality and the
assumption of a random selection device.
        Another solution with solid micro-foundations is proposed by Hillman (1989), who
views trade policy as “social insurance” against exogenous changes in comparative
advantage; this model could account for the asymmetric protection of “losers”. Although it is
difficult to discern the underlying forces in their model, Magee, Brock and Young (1989) also
claim to explain asymmetric protection with their “compensation effect.”
        Another line of research that is tangentially related to the losers’ paradox is the study
of the collapse of senescent industry. The seminal papers, Hillman (1982) and Cassing and
Hillman (1986), applied the political support function approach to the question of why
declining industries continue to decline despite the protection they receive with a special
emphasis on their eventual collapse. Subsequent important contributions include Matsuyama
(1987), Van Long and Vousden (1991), and Brainard and Verdier (1997). While this branch
of the literature is also concerned with sunset sectors, its focus is a quite different in that it
                                                                                                                  4


takes as a point of departure that declining industries will receive protection; our paper seeks
to understand why this is so.4
        The main idea in our model is based on an unpublished manuscript by one of the
authors, Baldwin (1993), but our paper differs significantly in its modelling strategy and the
rigour of the analysis. Baldwin (1993) relied on unanticipated, but permanent changes in the
degree of foreign competition to generate differences between winners and losers and did not
explicitly allow for the simultaneous existence of both types. This paper generalizes Baldwin
(1993) using a model in which different industries face idiosyncratic, temporary demand
shocks, agents are forward looking and policy setting is intertemporal. We also note that
Grossman and Helpman (1996) extended the basic asymmetric lobbying framework of
Baldwin (1993) by considering free riding by new entrants in ‘winning’ sectors. Their main
argument is that it is free riding rather than entry, which causes the asymmetry; we re-visit
this issue below.
         We note that the sunk-cost based solution we propose in this paper is complementary
to all the abovementioned solutions.

Empirical studies of the losers’ paradox
        The lobbying success of losers – the losers’ paradox – has been extensively
documented empirically. In the US, Hufbauer and Rosen (1986), Hufbauer, Berliner and
Elliot (1986), and Ray (1991) have documented that declining industries receive a
disproportionate share of protection. Particularly successful are agriculture, textiles, footwear,
clothing and steel, all of which have experienced secular declines in employment and GDP
shares in the US. For instance, in their introduction Hufbauer and Rosen (1986) write:
“With bipartisan regularity, American presidents since Franklin D. Roosevelt have
proclaimed the virtues of free trade. They have inaugurated bold international programs to
reduce tariff and non-tariff barriers. But almost in the same breath, most presidents have
advocated or accepted special measure to protect problem industries. ... The United States is
not the only country to have experienced competition in mature industry from foreign goods.
Most industrial countries, in Europe, Japan and elsewhere, have encountered similar
difficulties. ”
        More directly, many econometric studies have found that being a ‘loser’ in terms of
employment, output or import competition helps an industry get more protection. Baldwin
(1985) and Baldwin and Steagall (1994) find a strong correlation between positive “serious
injury” findings of the US International Trade Commission and reduced industry profits and
employment. Glismann and Weiss (1980) find that above-trend income increases are
correlated in reductions in protection in Germany between 1880 and 1978. Marvel and Ray
(1983) find that an industry’s growth rate has a negative impact on its level of protection.
This is confirmed by Baldwin (1985)’s finding that industries which were most successful in
resisting tariff cuts in the Tokyo Round were characterised by, inter alia, relatively slow or
negative employment growth as well as by high and rising import penetration ratios. More
recently, econometric evidence from Ray (1991) shows that declining industries tend to get
more protection, and Trefler (1993) finds that an increase in import penetration tends to




4
  Many of these papers conjecture as to why declining, as opposed to expanding, industries so frequently garner
government support, but this is not their main focus. In particular, Brainard and Verdier (1997) suppose that
credit constraints prevent an expanding sector from investing in the lobbying it needs to get protection. Also,
Hillman (1989) discusses the asymmetrical effects of entry, but does not incorporate it into his formal model.
                                                                                                                 5


increase the level of protection a sector is afforded.5 Furthermore, a number of econometric
studies have found that average tariff levels tend to rise in recessions, for example Ray
(1987), Hansen (1990), O’Halloran (1994); Gallarotti (1985) finds the same for 19th and 20th
century tariffs in the US. In a similar light, the time-series approach of Bohara and Kaempfer
(1991) show that tariffs are Granger-caused (positively) by unemployment and real GNP.
        We also note that the systematic favouring of losers is actually inscribed in
international and national trade laws. GATT generally prohibits countries from pursuing
policies that favour domestic firms over foreign firms. The major exceptions to this principal
(safeguards, dumping duties and countervailing duties) involve situations where imports
cause or threaten to cause material injury to an established industry. In contrast, there are no
general exceptions that allow a country to promote the interests of an expanding industry.
These principles can also be found in national laws. For example, US trade laws make
‘decline’, appropriately interpreted, an explicitly requirement for trade protection.
        If one accepts the view that political economy forces shape national and international
trade laws, the abovementioned asymmetry is puzzling. Lobbying dollars of expanding
industries should be just as welcomed by politician as the dollars of declining industries.
Therefore it is odd that politicians should have adopted laws that greatly restrict their ability
to promote profits in expanding sectors, while at the same time creating loopholes that allow
them to boost the profits of declining industries.

Plan of the paper
        The paper is structured as follows. The next section develops the static economic and
political-economic model. Section 3 introduces the dynamic structure of the model and solves
the game allowing for entry. Section 4 considers extensions and Section 5 concludes.


2. The basic model
        Formalization of the asymmetric lobbying effects discussed in the introduction
requires a model that first shows how industry support affects the fortunes of firms that may
lobby and then connects these changing fortunes to the political decision-making process. To
this end we present a very simple model of the economy whose special features simplify the
algebra; we shall argue, however, that the basic results in the paper do not qualitatively
depend upon these special features. In particular, we combine a standard monopolistic
competition model with the lobbying model of Grossman and Helpman (1994).6

2.1. Tastes and technology
        Consider an economy with M+1 sectors. The ‘plus one’ sector, produces a
homogenous good, A, under constant returns and perfect competition using labour L. By
choice of units, one unit of L produces one unit of A. There is also a large number, M, of
symmetric industrial sectors that are marked by increasing returns and monopolistic
competition. A typical industrial firm faces variable costs equal to βwx were x is firm output,
β is the unit labour requirement, and w is the wage. In this section, we take the number of
firms as given to fix ideas, delaying consideration of entry to section 3.

5
  Interestingly, Gawande and Bandyopadhyay (2000), who explicitly test the Grossman-Helpman framework
using cross-industry data on US non-tariff barriers coverage rations and US lobbying spending, find a negative
relationship between import penetration and the level of protection when the sector is not organised; this
relationship is positive otherwise.
6
  Typically, the new political economy literature works with a Ricardo-Viner model.
                                                                                                             6


        Instantaneous utility is linear in the consumption of A and a two-tier index of
industrial-goods consumption:

                       M                                                 Nm

(1)      U = A + ∑ α m ln Dm ; D                  1−1 / σ
                                                  m         ≡N   −χ /σ
                                                                 m       ∫ c( j )
                                                                                   1−1 / σ
                                                                                             dj; σ > 1
                      m =1                                               0
Here Dm is the CES consumption index for typical industrial sector m, cmj is consumption of
variety j in sector m, Nm is the number (mass) of such symmetric varieties within a typical
sector, σ is the constant elasticity of substitution among varieties, and αm is a demand-shift
parameter. M is fixed.
        Note that inclusion of the parameter χ makes the CES aggregate Dm more general
than the usual functional form. The parameter χ measures the preference for diversity and in
the standard love-for-variety preferences, χ is taken to be zero implying that consumers could
become unboundedly happy by consuming an infinitely small amount of infinitely many
varieties. To avoid this feature, and to simplify our algebraic expressions, we neutralise the
love-of-variety aspect by taking χ=1.
      Importantly, we assume random preferences in the sense that αm is either αH or αL
where αH>αL, i.e. each sector faces either high or low demand.7
       The model features a continuum of consumers endowed with a share – equal to s(i)
for consumer i – of the economy’s labour and of all firms’ equity, so the individual budget
constraint is:
                                       M                                 M
                  s(i )( wL + ∑ Π m − T ) = p A Ai + ∑ ∫ τ m pmj cmj dj
                                                                                Nm
(2)
                                                                                j =0
                                      m =1                               m =1

where Πm is operating profit from all sector-m firms, L is the economy-wide labour
endowment, T is the total lump-sum tax collected, τ is an ad valorem tax or subsidy factor
(i.e. the rate is τ-1, with this being a tax if positive, or subsidy if negative). Producer prices
are denoted as ‘p’ so consumer prices are ‘τp’ (τ is fully passed on to consumers under Dixit-
Stiglitz monopolistic competition).
         We normalise the economy’s total labour endowment to unity,8 so optimal aggregate
demand for a typical variety j in a typical sector m, and the aggregate demand for A are:

                      α m (τ m pmj ) −σ                          M                      M     Nm
(3)       cmj =       Nm
                                                ; A = ( w + ∑ Π m − T − ∑ ∫ τ m pmj cmj dj ) / p A
                  ∫
                                                                                              j =0
                             (τ m pmj )1−σ dj                    m =1                  m =1
                      j =0

As usual, the producer price, pmj, for typical industrial firm j is related to marginal costs
according to pmj(1-1/σ)=βw. By choice of units (viz. β=1-1/σ) and taking L as numeraire, we
can – without loss of generality – set pmj=1 for all firms in all M sectors. Consequently, a
typical firm’s flow of operating profit is9:




7
  Our qualitative results would hold if we assumed technology shocks rather than demand shock (more on this in
Section 4.2).
8
  Accordingly, we assume that Σαm is small enough so that production of A is always positive at equilibrium.
9
  Rearranging the firm’s first order condition to (pmi-βw)cmi =pmicmi/σ and using the demand function and
symmetry of varieties yields the result.
                                                                                                 7


                              αm
(4)                  πm =            ; α m ∈ {α L ,α H }, Π m ≡ N mπ m
                            στ m N m
where within-sector symmetry allows us to drop the firm subscript. Using the ex ante
symmetry of sectors, it proves convenient to index sectors by the state of demand faced,
denoting the Π earned by those facing high and low demand as ΠH and ΠL, respectively;
plainly ΠH>ΠL for any given level of τm.

2.2. Utilitarian benchmark
        In the sequel, we introduce a political process governing the choice of τ, but intuition
is served by first identifying the socially optimal τ. Specifically, the government chooses
sector-specific taxes (τ>1) or subsidies (τ<1) to maximise aggregate welfare measured by a
parameter ‘a’ times the sum of consumers’ utility.10 The A-sector is untaxed and the lump-
sum tax T is adjusted to maintain a balanced budget. By symmetry of firms, the lump-sum tax
revenue (which may be negative) required to implement the vector τ is just the sum over all
m of (1-τm)Nmcm. Using (4), together with the solutions for T, p and cm, in (1) we find that the
Benethamite objective is:

                            M
                                   α       1 − 1/ σ 
(5)             W ≡ a (1 + ∑α m  ln( m ) −            )
                           m =1    τm         τ m 
where we have chosen units of A to normalise pA to unity.11
        Maximising this with respect to τm (all m) requires the government to offset the only
distortion in the economy, namely the monopolistic pricing distortion, and this implies that
the optimal utilitarian policy is:

(6)             τ m = β ≡ (1 −1/σ ) .
for all M sectors. This clearly entails a subsidy (τ<1 is a subsidy while τ>1 is a tax) to all
industrial sectors since σ>1. Note also that since there is only one distortion and lump-sum
taxation is possible, the Benthamite government can attain the first best. With this utilitarian
benchmark in hand, we turn to the lobbying game, where the policymaker may be influenced
by political contributions.

2.3. Lobbying
        Hillman (1989) and Baldwin (1985) point out that under realistic assumptions, elected
officials may not be fully aware of the economic interests of their constituents. And their
constituents may not be familiar with all the policies (and their economic consequences)
championed by their elected representatives. Consequently, Baldwin (1985) notes, a group of
voters “may have to engage in time-consuming and costly lobbying activities to bring its
viewpoint to the attention of legislators. Similarly office-seekers need funds to inform the
voters of how they have served them or will do so in the future.” The so-called pressure
group model, or lobbying model, developed by Olson (1965) and others, focuses on the costs
and benefits of lobbying and its impact on policy. This class of models abstracts from
electoral politics, assuming that the government is entrenched or at least that every elected
government will react in the same way to lobbying. See Grossman and Helpman (2001) for
formal modelling of these ideas.


10
     We introduce, ‘a’ – without loss of generality – to facilitate the algebra in the sequel.
11
     See the appendix for details of the calculation.
                                                                                                                 8


       Explicit consideration of such imperfections would require a model that is very much
more complicated than we need to examine the basic logic of asymmetric lobbying. Thus,
following standard practice (see, for example the political support function approach of
Hillman, 1989, and the formal lobbying approach of Findlay and Wellisz, 1982) we skip the
micro modelling of how lobbying funds influence policy choices. Rather we follow the
approach in Grossman and Helpman’s seminal 1994 paper in which lobbying expenditures, in
the form of ‘contributions’, are just assumed to directly enter the objective function of the
government.
        Specifically, we model lobbying as a menu auction (Bernheim and Whinston, 1986),
and we assume that all industrial sectors are perfectly organised in the Grossman-Helpman
sense (i.e. all firms in a sector act as one when it comes to political contributions).12
Contributions made by sector-m are denoted as Cm. Consumers and the untaxed A-sector are
unorganised and thus do not lobby.

Government’s objective, lobbies and contributions
       As in Grossman and Helpman (1994), the government’s objective function Ω is a
weighted sum of lobby contributions and aggregate social welfare W:
                              M
(7)               Ω = W + ∑ Gm I mCm ; Gm ∈ {0,1}, I m ∈ {0,1} ∀m
                             m =1
where the first term W=aU is the utilitarian social welfare function from (5), and the second
term is total political contributions; the binary variable Gm reflects the fact that the
government always has the option of rejecting contributions from any sector and the binary
variable Im reflects the lobbying choice of a sector (Im=0 implies no lobbying). By way of
interpretation, note that a pure Benthamite government would be characterised by a=∞ and a
pure ‘Leviathan’ by a=0, so ‘a’ captures the extent to which governments care about social
welfare as opposed to political contributions. Mitra (1999) adds a lobby-formation stage to
the Grossman-Helpman setting. He assumes an exogenous fixed cost of getting organised,
assumed to differ across sectors, and study how this affects the equilibrium outcome. By
contrast, we assume that the fixed cost of lobbying is zero for all M, but instead endogenise
the decision to lobby actively or not. This decision is taken according to an external factor
that has nothing to do with an exogenous cost of lobbying per se.
        The vectors τ and G are the government’s choice variables. Lobbies contribute in
order to induce the government to deviate from the utilitarian first best. As in the Grossman-
Helpman model, we restrict contributions to be globally ‘truthful’, so if an industrial sector
‘m’ decides to lobby (i.e. Im=1), its contribution is Cm(τ)=Πm(τ)-Bm, where Bm is a scalar; if it
decides not to contribute (i.e. Im=0) then Cm(τ)=0 for all τ.13 B is the vector of which Bm is a
typical element.

The all-lobby outcome
        An equilibrium in this world is defined by the government’s strategy (i.e. the vectors τ
and G), and the M-sectors’ strategies (i.e. the vectors I and B). The payoff function of a
typical sector ‘m’ is Πm-Bm. The government’s payoff function can be written as:


12
   Given that the representative consumer owns some of all firms, there is an issue about lobbying incentives.
Grossman and Helpman (1994) deal with these by assuming un-diversified portfolios. To keep our model as
streamlined as possible, we just assume that firms are concerned only with their own profit when lobbying.
13
   Locally truthful strategies are the only ones to survive the ‘coalition proofness’ refinement introduced in
Bernheim et al. (1987).
                                                                                                         9

                      M
                           α         β  M           α
(8)       Ω ≡ a (1 + ∑α m  ln( m ) − ) + ∑ I mGm ( m − Bm )
                     m =1  τm       τ m  m=1       τ mσ
where we have used (5), (4) and the fact that contributions are truthful.
        We shall calculate the Bm’s below, but taking them as given for the moment, we
investigate what policy would be chosen if a typical sector chooses to make contributions and
the government chooses to accept them (i.e. Im=Gm=1, all m). In this ‘politically’ influenced
case, the typical element of τ that maximises (8), can be shown to be:

                                         Im
(9)                                    τm = β −
                                             .
                                         aσ
        Three remarks are in order. First, recalling that β≡1-1/σ is the first-best subsidy, the
subsidy vector in the lobbying equilibrium equals the utilitarian benchmark only when the
government is benevolent (a=∞), or when no group contributes (all Im’s=0). Second, (9)
shows that the acceptance of contributions induces the government to subsidize a sector
beyond the social-welfare maximising level. This allows the sector to sell more even as it
continues to price monopolistically. Third, due to our functional forms, each sector’s τm
depends only on the sector-specific organisation variable and parameters, with the subsidy
increasing in the profit margin 1/σ and decreasing in the parameter ‘a’ that measures the
government’s concern for social welfare.14
         Characterisation of the equilibrium is facilitated by the fact that the government’s
participation constraint is just binding in equilibrium (as usual in the Grossman-Helpman
approach). Thus, the Bm’s are chosen by lobbies to make the government just indifferent
between allowing τ to be influenced by accepting contributions, and choosing its outside
option, which is to refuse contributions from a sector and set that sector’s subsidy to the
utilitarian optimal described in (6). That is, assuming all other sectors are lobbying and
contributing, sector-m’s contribution, which equals Πm-Bm, must be large enough to make the
government indifferent between accepting its contribution, i.e. choosing Gm=1 (and thus
setting τm=β-1/aσ) and refusing its contribution, i.e. choosing Gm=0 (and thus setting τm=β).
In symbols, the equilibrium Bm must satisfy:

                               αm       β            α        
(10)   Ω * −Ω dev ≡ aα m  (ln     −          ) − (ln m − 1)  + Π m − Bm = 0
                           β −1/aσ β −1/aσ            β       
where Π m is evaluated at τm=β-1/aσ. Here Ω* is the government’s payoff in the all-lobby
outcome – viz. (8) evaluated at τi=β-1/aσ (all i) with all sectors contributing – and Ω dev is the
government’s payoff where τi=β-1/aσ and Gi=1 (all i but m), Gm=0, and τm=β.
The Nash equilibrium
        To show that the all-lobby outcome is a Nash equilibrium with (9) giving the
equilibrium τ’s, we show that a typical sector gains from lobbying even when its contribution
is large enough to induce the government to accept its contributions. The informal argument
is quite simple. A sector’s contribution induces the government to choose a policy that –
while sub-optimal from the utilitarian perspective – transfers money from consumers to
firms. To respect the participation constraint, a sector’s net contribution need only
compensate the government for the reduction in social welfare (i.e. the reduction in the W
part of Ω). Because the social welfare loss is second-order while the transfer is first-order, all
sectors will indeed find it in their interests to contribute. Finally the government is, by

14
     This is due to the additively separable preferences; generally, all parameters would be relevant.
                                                                                              10


construction, just indifferent to deviating from the equilibrium, so its strategy of accepting
contributions is Nash. Note that since the inequality is independent of the state of demand, we
see that both high and low demand sectors would lobby. To summarise this intermediate
result, we write:
   Result 1: When entry is impossible, the outcome where all sectors lobby regardless
   of the state of demand is a Nash equilibrium. In this all-lobby outcome, the levels of
   subsidies are given by (9). Moreover, the outcome where lobbying is done only by
   sectors facing low demand is not a Nash equilibrium.
        The proof of this result boils down to the proof of a simple proposition. By
construction, the equilibrium B’s are set to induce the government to accept all contributions,
so all we need to show is that a typical sector will want to lobby. To this end, two facts are
useful: τm equals β-1/aσ if sector ‘m’ lobbies and β otherwise, and operating profit is
decreasing in τm (i.e. increasing in the subsidy rate 1-τm). Given these facts, a sector can gain
from lobbying provided only that the contribution it must pay to the government is
sufficiently low. Specifically, denoting the sector-m operating profit function as Πm[⋅], the
net profit from lobbying must exceed the net profit from not lobbying, i.e. Πm[β-1/aσ]-Cm >
Πm[β]. Given that contributions are truthful, the task is to show that Bm> Πm[β].
        The Nash-equilibrium Bm is determined by (10), which – using (4) and (9) – can be
written as:

                           αm    β        α            α /σ
(11)    Bm = aα m ( (ln(      ) − ) − (ln( m ) − 1) ) + m ; τ * = β −1/aσ
                           τ* τ*           β            τ*
Since (4) implies that Πm[β]=αm/σβ, lobbying is worthwhile to sectors, if the following
inequality holds:

                         1   1         1 1       1 1 1 
(12)     ∆ ≡ α m  a (ln − ln ) − aβ ( − ) + ( − )  > 0
                        τ*   β        τ* β σ τ* β 
Observe that the equality either holds for sectors facing both low and high states of demand,
or it holds for neither.
         By concavity of the log function, ln(1/τ*)- ln(1/β) exceeds τ*(1/τ*- 1/β). Substituting
this in (12) and rearranging, we see that the inequality is greater than something that equals
zero, i.e.:
                            1  1 1
        ∆ > ( aτ * − aβ +       − )=0
                                )(
                            σ τ* β
The right-hand side equals zero since a(τ*-β)=-1/σ, given (9).
       Finally, note that this reasoning shows that any equilibrium in which some sector was
not lobbying would not be a Nash equilibrium since each sector would unilaterally gain from
lobbying. QED.


3. Entry and the incentive to lobby
        We now extend the model to continuous time and allow the number of firms in a
typical sector to be determined via free entry.
                                                                                                                     11


3.1. Additional assumptions
         The representative agent maximises her lifetime utility, assumed to be additively
                              ∞
separable and equal to ∫ e − rtUdt , where U is as in (1) and r>0 is the discount rate. The
                             t =0
representative agent can chose to consume her income or to invest it in shares of new firms.
Preferences are random with the switching between αL and αH being governed a Markov
process.
        Creation of a new industrial firm in any of the M sectors entails a fixed cost consisting
of one unit of capital. One unit of capital is produced from F units of labour under conditions
of perfect competition, so the entry cost equals F. Importantly, this capital is sunk in the sense
that once a unit of capital is built it must be employed by an industrial sector or abandoned
(since all consumers are identical, no firms will be sold in equilibrium), also it does not
depreciate.15 This cost is meant to reflect market-entry costs as in the model of Baldwin
(1988). Any industry in state α∈{αL,αH} at date t remains in the same state α at date t+dt
with probability 1-λdt. That is, shocks arrive at a Poisson rate of λ. We therefore have the
Markov transition matrix depicted in Table 1.
Table 1: The Markov transition matrix

                              αL   αH
     Transition probabilities
                          αL 1-λdt λdt
                          αH λdt   1-λdt
         The next task is to characterise the entry decision.

3.2. Entry
        Entry, as usual, is assumed to occur instantaneously and up to the point where the
equilibrium value of firms is no greater than the entry cost, F. Due to the stochastic demand, a
single firm will have different values when it is facing high versus low demand.

Value of the firms at steady-state
        The value of a typical firm in a typical sector, denoted as V, is the discounted valued
of operating profits less any lobbying contribution.16 By symmetry, there are only two levels
of V at steady state, one for firms in low-demand sectors, VL, and one for firms in high-
demand sectors, VH. Specifically:

         VL = bL dt + e− rdt [ λ dtVH + (1 − λ dt )VL ] ;      bL = (Π L − I L CL ) / N
(13)
        VH = bH dt + e − rdt [ λ dtVL + (1 − λ dt )VH ] ; bH = (Π H − I H CH ) / N
where we omit the time and sector subscripts since these values are constant at steady state
and sectors face either high or low demand; note that the b’s (a mnemonic for benefit) are the
per-firm operating profit net of any contributions, so bi=Bi/N (i=H,L).
        These equations are easy to interpret. The value of a firm in state L at time t is equal
to the current flow of net profit plus the discounted expected value it will have at time t+dt.
With some probability λdt it will transit to state H; with probability 1-λdt it will remain in

15
   Adding depreciation is uncomplicated (see section 4.3) but is not necessary here.
16
   As a special feature of our functional forms, total operating profit per sector is independent of the number of
firms per sector, but the key point is that V is diminishing in N.
                                                                                               12


state L. VH is defined analogously. In the limit of continuous time, dt→0, by symmetry
among industries and firms within industries, and rearranging, we get:
        rVL = bL + λ (VH − VL ),    rVH = bH − λ (VH − VL )
(14)    ⇔
              (r+λ )bL +λ bH          (r+λ )bH +λbL
       VL =                  , VH =
                r ( r + 2λ )            r ( r + 2λ )
The top two expressions are standard asset-pricing equations, i.e. ‘r’ times the expected value
of the firm must equal the sum of the current flow of net profit and the expected capital gain.
The bottom two expressions are the solution for the V’s in terms of the b’s.
        As the cost of entry is F, free-entry requires that the steady state number of firms per
sector rises until the maximum value of a typical firm equals F. A firm’s value may differ
between high and low demand states, so the entry condition is:

(15)   N s.t. max{V H ,V L } = F
Note that U in (1) is quasi-linear, so the transition dynamics are degenerate, i.e. Nm
immediately jumps to its steady-state value N* as soon as αm=αH. (It jumps to some N0<N if
αm=αL initially. See below.)

3.3. The only-losers-lobby equilibrium
        We assert that the outcome in which only sectors facing low demand lobby is a
Markov perfect equilibrium (MPE), and refer to it as the “only losers lobby” outcome. In this
dynamic version of the model, the state variables are the number of firms in a typical sector,
N, which is influenced by players’ actions via free entry, and the vector of the states of
demand facing each sector. Given our simple set up, a sector’s strategy can be summarised by
its decision to lobby or not, with this action possibility depending upon the state of demand.
Formally, the only-losers-lobby equilibrium can be expressed as the set of sector strategies
such that:

              0, if α m = α H
(16)     Im = 
               1, if α m = α L
where Im=1 and Im=0 indicate, respectively, that sector m is, or is not lobbying. Note that due
to irreversible entry and the fact that Dixit-Stiglitz monopolistic competition never produces
negative operating profit, the number of firms active in each sector is constant in steady state.
This and symmetry of firms allows us to drop the sector subscript from the N’s. In this
outcome, the values of a typical firm are:
              bL (r + λ ) + λ bH         b (r + λ ) + λbL        α                αL             1
(17)   VLll =                    , VHll = H               ; bH = H , bL = (                 − B)
                  r ( r + 2λ )              r ( r + 2λ )        σβ N        σ ( β − 1/ aσ )      N
where the superscripts ‘ll’ signify the value of firms implementing (only) losers lobby
strategies.
        To demonstrate that the only-losers-lobby outcome is an MPE, it is useful to establish
that for any given N, the value of a firm when it faces low demand is no greater than its value
when it faces high demand, i.e. VLll ≤ VHll =F. This feature is intuitively obvious and easy to
                                                                                                                    13


establish formally.17 Figure 1 helps interpret the equilibrium by plotting values of a typical
firm against the number of firms per sector. Since competition lowers per-firm value, all lines
slope downwards. The second and third lines indicate the only-losers-lobby outcome for
sectors facing high and low demand. These are marked VHll and VLll respectively; the VHll line
is above the VLll line. Due to free entry, the value of a firm can never rise above F, so all the
value lines are cut off at the horizontal line, F. Plainly, the steady state number of firms is N*
in the only-losers-lobby outcome. The value of firms facing high demand will be F; point 2
gives the value of firms facing low demand.

Figure 1: The free-entry equilibrium


         €




                                                               4
     F                                         1
                        0
                                                                   5                  al
                                                    2                           VH
                                                                                 ll
                                                                   6           VH
                                               3
                                                                                ll             al
                                                                               VL = V L
                                                                                      ll,dev
                                                                                VL

                                                                                 N
                            N0                     N*         N**


Establishing the Markov perfect equilibrium
        Using the diagram, we can show that the only-losers-lobby outcome is a Markov
perfect equilibrium (MPE). We start with the government. At every time t, the government
cannot, by construction of the B’s, gain from deviating from the only-losers-lobby outcome.
Thus, accepting contributions and providing the politically influenced τ is Nash in every
subgame and state of the world. The argument for high-demand sectors is similar. No high-
demand sector could gain from deviating; after all, free entry ensures that the value of a
typical firm cannot rise above F, so any lobbying effort would be useless. Thus, the strategy
of no lobbying in high demand-states is Nash in every subgame.
        Finally, low-demand sectors cannot gain from deviation since ceasing to lobby would
lower their value from point 2 to point 3 in the diagram. More specifically, under this
deviation, the value of a typical firm facing low-demand sector would be
(λbH+(r+λ)bLdev)/r(r+2λ), where bLdev is the per-firm operating profit in the low-demand state
when the subsidy is the socially optimal β, namely bLdev=αL/σβN. From the proof of Result 1,

17
  The proof is by contradiction. If VllL>VllH, then the free entry condition implies F= VllL, so F> VllH. This in turn
implies that the high-demand sector could lobby without attracting entry and so by Result 1 it would. Since this
contradicts the definition of the only-losers-lobby outcome, we know VllL≤VllH =F.
                                                                                              14


we saw that one-period lobbying is always worthwhile when it does not change N, so we
know that bL=[-B+αL/σ(β-1/aσ)]/N exceeds bLdev. From (14) this tells us that not lobbying in
the low-demand state would lower the typical firm’s value.
We summarise these findings in:
  Result 2: Since free entry makes lobbying useless for sectors facing their entry
  margin (i.e. high-demand sectors), the only-losers-lobby outcome is a Markov
  perfect equilibrium. By contrast, sectors facing low demand find their values below
  entry costs, so lobbying can raise their value.
      As it turns out, the only-losers-lobby outcome is not the only MPE, as Grossman and
Helpman (1996) have pointed out.

3.4. Other equilibria
        Note that starting from N=N*, lobbying in the high state does no good – but neither
does it do any harm to firms facing high demand. If – for whatever reason – incumbents in a
sector with high demand actually did lobby, the results would be an increase in the number of
firms to N** in the diagram. Importantly, once the new entrants are irreversibly in the
market, a deviation by cessation of lobbying in the high-demand state would lower the value
of the firm from point 4 to 5 in the diagram, so no deviation would occur in the high-demand
state. Likewise, no deviation would occur in the low-demand state, so this outcome – what
we call the ‘all lobby’ outcome, denoted as ‘al’ in the diagram – is also an MPE. We
summarise this in:
   Result 3: When entry is free, the all-lobby outcome is a Markov perfect equilibrium
   since once high-demand lobbying has increased the number of active firms,
   cessation of lobbying would lower the value of such firms. As before, sectors facing
   low demand can raise their value by lobbying, so lobbying in both states is also a
   MPE.
        It is possible to arrive at the N=N** state since lobbying in the high-demand state
starting from N=N* is both useless and costless in terms of incumbents’ value in the high-
demand state.

Dominance of only-losers-lobby MPE
         Although this second MPE does exist, there are good reasons for believing that it
would never occur. The basic argument is that although the increase in the number of firms
from N* to N** does not affect VH, it will lower the value of the firm once low-demand
returns. Note that the value of a typical firm facing high demand is identical in the two MPEs
(namely F), but the value of a typical firm facing low-demand is lower in the all-lobby
outcome. To see this, observe that from (14) with VH=F, we have that VLi equals
(bLi+λF)/(r+λ), where i equals ‘ll’ (in the only-losers-lobby equilibrium) or ‘al’ (in the all-
lobby equilibrium). Because bL is given by (16) with αm=αL and N**>N*, it is clear that VLal
is less than VLll (these values correspond to points 2 and 6 in the diagram). In short, although
the lobbying-induced entry has no effect on the value of firms facing high-demand, the
presence of more firms lowers the value of the same firms in the low-demand state. To
summarise this we write:
   Result 4: While both the only-losers-lobby and all-lobby outcomes are MPEs, the
   only-losers-lobby MPE dominates the all-lobby MPE in the sense that firms are
   indifferent between the two when facing high-demand, but strictly prefer the only-
                                                                                               15


   losers-lobby equilibrium when facing the low-demand state. This makes the only-
   losers-lobby MPE focal.


4. Extensions
        We consider three extensions of our analysis in this section. We first allow for the
possibility that new entrants free ride on the lobbying contributions by former incumbents for
some time. We also show that assuming technological shocks yields the same qualitative
results as in the case of demand shocks described thus far. Finally, we apply our model to
sunset industries – namely, for the case of permanent adverse shocks.

4.1. Free riding
         In the spirit of the Grossman-Helpman lobbying approach, our basic model assumes
that all firms in a sector are perfectly organised politically in the sense that they act as one
when it comes to presenting and financing a contribution menu to the government. To deal
with entry, the basic model extended this assumption to allow for entry in the simplest
possible way, namely by supposing that all entrants immediately act as incumbents. This of
course this is not the only reasonable assumption (see Grossman and Helpman 1996 for
discussion of the issue) and, as we shall see, relaxing it has important implications for Result
3. We shall show, however, that it does not alter (and even reinforces) our main result, i.e.
that free entry removes the incentive for lobbying in sectors facing their entry margin since
above normal profits are immediately and successfully grabbed by entrants.

Modelling free riding
        To model free riding by entrants, we assume that new firms do not share the financing
of contributions initially, but they do become perfectly organised (i.e. act identically to
incumbents) eventually. Specifically, all newly entered firms start as free riders but switch to
non-free riders (i.e. become join the perfectly organised firms) according to a Poisson process
marked by a hazard rate of φ. This switch is synchronised across all entrants in the sense that
at any given moment all new entrants will either all be free riders, or will all be non-free
riders. Furthermore, we assume that the switch to non-free rider status is permanent, so that
eventually all firms are perfectly organised. Note that φ provides a natural parameter for the
extent of the free-riding problem since newcomers are expected to remain free riders for a
period equal to 1/φ. Our basic model implicitly assumes that φ is infinite.
         We begin by studying the all-lobby outcome, i.e. where both high- and low-demand
sectors lobby. Free riding complicates calculation of the expected value of entering since we
must take account of the probability that: (i) the sector sees its demand change, and that (ii)
the entrant experiences a shift in its free-riding status. Incumbent firms in this case will have
one of four possible values, namelyVH ,u , VL,u , VH or VL ; these are, respectively, the value of
an incumbent facing high or low demand when entrants are unorganised (as shown by the
subscript ‘u’), and when the entrants have joined the lobby (as shown by a lack of a
subscript). Three instantaneous probabilities are relevant to an incumbent’s value. These are:
(i) the probability that the sector experiences a shift in demand but entrants remain free riders,
viz. λ(1-φ), (ii) the probability that the sector experiences a demand shift and entrants become
non-free riders, viz. λφ, and (iii) the probability that the sector experiences no change in
demand but entrants become non-free riders, viz. (1-λ)φ. Taking account of these, the
expected values of an incumbent in the various states are:
                                                                                                                   16


       rVH ,u = bH ,u − λ[(1 − φ )(VH ,u − VL,u ) + φ (VH ,u − VL )] − (1 − λ )φ (VH ,u − VH )
       rVL,u = bL ,u − λ[(1 − φ )(VL,u − VH ,u ) + φ (VL,u − VH )] − (1 − λ )φ (VL ,u − VL )
(18)
       rVH = bH − λ (VH − VL )
    rVL = bL − λ (VL − VH )
where the b’s are the flow rewards to incumbents in the various states.
       The related value equations for entrants are:

          rJ H = π H − λ ( (1 − φ )( J H − J L ) + φ ( J H − VL ) ) − (1 − λ )φ ( J H − VH )
(19)
        rJ L = π L − λ ( (1 − φ )( J L − J H ) + φ ( J L − VH ) ) − (1 − λ )φ ( J L − VL )
where JH and JL are the values of free-riding firms when the sector is facing high and low
demand respectively.
        Since free riders do not contribute to lobbying expenses, the flow benefit of being a
free rider in both the high and low states of demand exceeds the flow benefit of being an
incumbent, i.e.:

(20)      π H − bH ,u ≡ γ H ≥ 0, π L − bL,u ≡ γ L ≥ 0
where the γ’s are constants.
       The free entry condition in this extension is JH=F.
Would high-demand incumbents lobby?
        In the basic model, when N=N* incumbents in the high-demand sector were
indifferent to lobbying since although lobbying won them no benefits, neither did it harm
their value. Now we turn to evaluating whether high-demand sectors would still be indifferent
to lobbying.
        Section 3 established that the value of high-demand incumbents in the only-losers-
lobby outcome was equal to F. To see whether high-demand sectors would be indifferent to
lobbying we check whether the value of incumbents at the moment they lobby – i.e. at the
instant of entry when entrants are still free riders, namely VH,u from (18) – is less than F. To
this end we solve (18) and (19) for the values of incumbents in the four possible states of the
world (high or low demand and entrants free riding or not). The solutions are somewhat
involved but we need consider only the difference JH-VH,u, which can be written as18:

                    ( λ (1 − φ ) + r + φ )γ H + λ (1 − φ )γ L
(21)      J H − VH ,u =
                         ( r + φ )(2λ (1 − φ ) + r + φ )
Given (20), we know this is positive for any finite φ. Moreover, this difference limits to zero
as φ approaches infinity.
        What this reasoning shows is that starting from N=N*, incumbents facing high
demand in the only-losers-lobby outcome would never agree to lobby if there were any
chance that free entrants would free ride, even for an infinitely short time. This result
reinforces our assertion that the only-losers-lobby outcome is focal.19


18
  See the appendix below.
19
  The idea here is akin to the trembling hand refinement. If incumbents did make a mistake and lobby in the
high state, thus raising the number of firms up to the point where JH=F, they would continue to lobby since
doing otherwise would lower their value even further. This result, however, relies on the lack of exit. If firms
did exit, a one-time mistake would be corrected eventually. We thank Thierry Verdier for this point.
                                                                                                   17


4.2. Technology shocks instead of demand shocks
        The basic model assumes stochastic preferences in order to generate stochastic
demand functions. In this section, we show that nothing would be changed by assuming
stochastic technology instead. To this end, we assume that the sector-specific marginal costs
are random variables, βm, that are independently and identically distributed across sectors.
Specifically, βm∈{(1-1/σ)βG, (1-1/σ)βB} for all m, where βG<βB; ‘G’ is a mnemonic for good
and ‘B’ for bad. Under Dixit-Stiglitz monopolistic competition and within-sector symmetry,
the price charged by all sector-m firms is βm/(1-1/σ).
        Moreover, we introduce some substitutability across sectors by assuming that
                                M
preferences are: U = A + ( ∑ Dm1−1/ θ )1/(1−1/ θ ) ; θ > 1 Given the law of large numbers, total
                                m =1
expenditure on sector-m’s varieties is:

                                          (τ m β m )1−σ
(22)                         Npm cm =           1−σ       1−σ
                                ( M / 2)(τ G β G + τ B β B )
Now re-defining αH and αL as equal to the right-hand side of expression (22) evaluated at βm
equal to (1-1/σ)βG and (1-1/σ)βB, respectively, we note that αH > αL and all other derivations
in the paper carry through unaltered.

4.3. Sunset industries
        As we said in the introduction, the literature on sunset industries insists on the fact
these industries continue to decline despite the protection they receive, assuming they get
protection in the first place. A simple extension of our model captures this idea; note that our
model allows for endogenous lobbying decisions, so that we do not assume that these
industries are protected a-priori.
        We first assume that firms are ‘dying’ at a Poisson rate δ, so that N can decrease as
well as increase. Next, we still assume that the shocks occurs on demand for simplicity. But
now we assume that once a negative shock has hit industry m (αm=αL), demand will not
recover. In other words, shocks are permanent and the cells of the first row of Table 1 now
contain the numbers 1 and 0, respectively. Together, these modifications imply that Eq. (14)
has to be replaced by:

        ( r + δ )VL = bL ,        ( r + δ )VH = bH − λ (VH − VL )
(23)    ⇔
               bL            b      b − bL
        VL =       , VH = L + H
             r +δ          r +δ r +δ + λ
where VH>VL holds without ambiguity whenever bH>bL, as before.
       Free-entry (15) implies VH=F, which once again pins down the equilibrium number of
firms. We call it N* so that Figure 1 illustrates the present extension as well. In particular, we
concentrate on the MPE in which losers only lobby. Note that dying firms are immediately
replaced by new entrants so that N=N* as long as α=αH.
         Consider now what happens when, at some random time T, demands falls
permanently to αL. At time T, the number of firms N*implies that the value of each firm in
the hit sector falls to VLll<F. In words, despite their lobbying, firms in this sector have values
below the opportunity cost of capital, so no firms enter the sector. What is new is that the
mass of firms is now decaying at a rate δ, so that VLll increases over time (remember that
                                                                                             18


bL=BL/N and that BL is constant). This suggests that N and VLll evolve over time as plotted in
Figure 2 below.
       Figure 2 plots the number of firms and the value of a typical firm in the sector hit by
the shock at time T against time. Two comments are in order. First, VLll ‘overshoots’ at time
T. Second, as the number of firms shrinks over time, VLll goes back to its steady-state value.
At time T+∆T, VLll =F holds again and the number of firms no longer changes: N=N0.
         To capture more fully the idea that the industry is ‘sunset industry’, assume now that
α keeps falling over time at random intervals without ever reaching 0. Namely, the α’s now
form an infinite sequence α1≡αH>α2> … αJ>αJ+1>…>0 and the Markov square matrix has
now an infinitely countable number of rows and column, with identical terms 1-λdt along the
main diagonal, λdt on the diagonal on the left of the previous one, and zeroes everywhere
else. Then N0, the steady-state mass of firms for α<αH, keeps falling. Note however that N0>0
for all α>0.
        That ‘tomorrow never dies’ is not a nice feature of the model, but this is a direct
consequence of the fact that Dixit-Stiglitz monopolistic competition never produces negative
operating profit. With more reasonable assumptions, there would exist a threshold α, call it
α0, at which N0(α0)<0. In such a case, all firms would have left the sector eventually.

Figure 2: Sunset Industries


    €, N




                                                                  ll
   F                                                           VL




  N*

  N0                                                          N

                                                              time
                          T                    T+∆T




5. Conclusion
        Despite differences in political institutions and laws, declining industries account for
the bulk of protection granted in all industrialized nations. The GATT also asymmetrically
favours ailing industries. This asymmetry is curious since selfish governments should be
symmetrically interested in the lobbying dollars of expanding and declining industries. Our
paper provides a political equilibrium explanation, based on sunk entry costs. We assume that
industries spend money on lobbying to obtain profit-boosting protection and note a strong
asymmetry between the appropriability of protection in contracting and expanding industries.
                                                                                                19


In expanding industries, rents attract new entrants that erode the rents. This is not true in
ailing industries. Sunk entry costs (product development, training, advertising, etc.) allow
protection to raise profits without attracting entry - as long as profits rise to not more than a
normal return on sunk capital. Plainly, asymmetric appropriability implies asymmetric
lobbying and the result is that losers get most of the protection because losers lobby harder.

Policy implications
        The analysis in our paper can also be used to shed light on the social desirability of
packaging protectionist policies with anti-entry policies (such as a government monopoly,
and production quotas). Such packing is likely to lead to greater levels of protection, because
it increases the incentives of all industries to lobbying for protection. Consider, for instance,
an industry that is able to organize a cartel that prevents new production and entry. In such
cases, where entry is impossible, all sectors, both expanding and contracting, will find that
lobbying generates appropriable rents. As result 1 showed, in such a case all sectors will lobby
and the overall outcome will be a greater reduction in social welfare than would occur without
the entry barriers.
         Most OECD countries have laws prohibiting such collusion, however, in certain
industries such as medicine, the special interest group itself regulates the flow of new entrants
via control over standards. Labour unions could serve a similar role. In the basic model
above, labour was paid the going wage and all rent accrued to firm owners. However it is
easy to imagine a model where an industry-specific labour union managed to capture some or
all of the rents created by protection. In such a model the labour union would benefit from
higher tariffs in expanding industries, as long as they could be sure to control the wages of
new workers. In fact many countries do, or did, sanction “closed shop” rules that have
exactly this effect. Alternatively, the fixed set-up cost can also be interpreted as human-
capital investments; under this interpretation, the model would explain why workers with
skills specific to ailing industries would lobby.
       One obvious policy implication flows directly from this analysis. Protectionist
packages that place controls on domestic entry or production is likely to attract greater
lobbying efforts and thereby lead to greater deviations from the social optimum. Prohibiting
such packaging of policies would lower equilibrium protection rates.

References
Baldwin, Richard E. (1988). “Hysteresis in Import Prices: The Beachhead Effect,” American
  Economic Review, 78, 4, pp 773-785.
Baldwin, Richard E. (1993). “Asymmetric lobbying effects: Why governments pick losers.”
  Mimeo, Graduate Institute of International Studies on http://heiwww.unige.ch/~baldwin/.
Baldwin, Robert E. (1982). “The political economy of protectionism.” In J. Baghwati (ed.)
  Import Competition and Response. University of Chicago Press: 263-86.
Baldwin, Robert E. (1985). The political economy of US import policy, MIT Press,
  Cambridge MA.
Baldwin, Robert E. and Jeffrey Steagall (1994). “An analysis of factors influencing ITC
  decisions in antidumping, countervailing duty and safeguard cases.” Weltwirtschaftliches
  Archiv 130 (2): 290-308.
Bernheim, Douglas B. and Michael D. Whinston (1986). “Menu auctions, resource allocation,
  and economic influence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101(1): 1-31.
                                                                                             20


Bernheim, Douglas B. Bezalel Peleg and Michael D. Whinston (1987). “Coalition-proof Nash
  equilibria I. Concepts.” Journal of Economic Theory 42: 1-12.
Brainard, Lael and Thierry Verdier (1997). “The political economy of declining industries:
  Senescent industry collapse revisited,” Journal of International Economics, 42, pp 221-
  237.
Bohara, A and W. Kaempfer (1991). “A test of tariff endogeneity in the US,” American
  Economic Review, 81, pp 952-960.
Cassing, James and Arye Hillman (1986). “Shifting comparative advantage and senescent
  industry collapse,” American Economic Review 76: 516-523.
Coate, Stephen and Stephen Morris (1999). ‘Policy persistence.’ American Economic Review
  89(5): 1327-36.
Corden, Max (1974). Trade Policy and Economic Welfare, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Dixit, Avinash K. and Joseph Stiglitz (1977). “Monopolistic competition and the optimum
  product diversity.” American Economic Review 67: 297-308.
Fernandez, Raquel and Dani Rodrik (1991). “Resistance to reform: Status quo bias in the
   presence of individual-specific uncertainty,” American Economic Review 81:5, pp 1146-
   1156.
Findlay, Ronald and Stanislaw Wellisz (1982). “Endogenous tariffs, the political economy of
   trade restrictions and welfare,” pp 223-234, in J. Bhagwati (ed) Important competition and
   response, Chicago University Press, Chicago.
Gallaroti, Giulio (1985). “Toward a business cycle model of tariffs.” International
  Organization 39: 155.
Gawande, Kishore and Usree Bandyopadhyay (2000). “Is protection for sale? Evidence on
  the Grossman-Helpman theory of endogenous protection.” Review of Economics and
  Statistics 82(1): 139-152.
Glismann, H. and F. Weiss (1980). “On the political economy of protection in Germany.”
   World Bank Staff WP 427.
Goldberg Pinepoli, and Giovanni Maggi (1999). ‘Protection for sale: An empirical
  investigation.’ American Economic Review 89(5): 1135-.
Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman (1994). “Protection for sale.” American Economic
  Review 84(4): 833-50.
Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman (1996). “Rent dissipation, free riding, and trade
  policy.” European Economic Review 40: 795-803.
Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman (2001). Special interest politics, MIT Press,
  Cambridge MA.
Hansen, J. (1990). “Taxation and the political economy of the tariff,” International
  Organisation, 44, pp 527-552.
Hillman, Ariel (1989). The Political Economy of Protection, New York: Harwood Academic
   Publishers.
Hillman, Arye (1982). “Declining industries and political-support protectionists motives,”
   American Economic Review, 72, pp 1180-1187.
                                                                                            21


Hufbauer, Gary and Howard Rosen (1986). Trade Policy for Troubled Industries, Policy
  Analyses in International Economics 15, Institute for International Economics
  Washington, D.C.
Hufbauer, Gary, Diane Berliner and Kimberly Elliot (1986). Trade Protection in the United
  States: 31 Case Studies, Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C.
Krueger, Anne (1990). “Asymmetries in policy between exportables and import-competing
  goods,” pp 161-178 in R. Jones and A. Krueger (eds) The political economy of
  international trade, Basil Blackwell, Cambridge MA.
Lavergne, Real (1983). The Political Economy of US Tariffs: An Empirical Analysis.
  Academic Press.
Magee, Stephen P., William A. Brook and Leslie Young (1989). Black Holes Tariffs and
  Endogenous Policy Theory. Cambridge University Press.
Marvel, H and E. Ray (1983). “The Kennedy Round: Evidence on the regulation of trade in
  the US,” American Economic Review, 73, pp 190-197.
Matsuyama, Kiminori (1987). “Perfect equilibrium in a trade liberalisation game,” American
  Economic Review 80, pp 480-482.
Mitra, Devashish (1999). ‘Endogenous lobby formation and endogenous protection.’
  American Economic Review 89(5): 1116-34.
O’Halloren, Sharyn (1994). Politics, Process, and American Trade Policy. University of
  Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
Olson, Mancur (1965). The logic of collective action, Harvard University Press, Cambridge
  MA.
Peltzman, Sam (1976). “Toward a more general theory of regulation,” Journal of Law and
   Economics, 19 (2), pp 221-240.
Ray, E . (1991). “Protection of manufactures in the US,” in D. Greenaway (ed), Global
  protectionism: Is the US playing on a level field? Macmillan, London.
Ray, E . (1987). “Changing patterns of protectionism: The fall in tariffs and the rise in non-
  tariff barriers, “ Northwestern Journal of International Law and Business, 8, pp 285-327.
Schelling, Thomas (1984). Choices and consequence, Harvard University Press, Cambridge
  MA.
Stigler, George (1971). “The theory of economic regulation,” Bell Journal of Economic
   Management, 2, pp 3-21.
Trefler, Daniel (1993). “Trade liberalisation and the theory of endogenous protection,”
   Journal of Political Economy, 101, pp 138-160.
Van Long, N. and N. Vousden (1991). “Protectionist responses and declining industries,
  Journal of International Economics, 30, pp 87-103.
                                                                                                      22




Appendix
Deriving the government’s reduced form objective
function, equation (5)
      From the industry demand functions, symmetry of varieties within an industry, and
p=1 (which itself follows from mark-up pricing and choice of numeraire and units), we have:
                                                       1 /(1−1 / σ )
                           Nm    α               α
         Dm ≡  N m−1 / σ ∫ ( m )1−1 / σ dj   = m
                            j =0 N τ               τm
                                  m m        
so, the second term in the utility function reduces to:
        M                         M
                                             αm
        ∑ α m ln Dm = ∑ α m ln(
        m =1                     m =1        τm
                                                )

        As usual with quasi-linear utility, spending on Ac is a residual, thus the total demand
for A, aggregating over all consumers is:
                      M                        M                                     M
                                                                                              αm
Ac = Y − T − ∑ N m pτ m cm ; T = ∑ N m pcm (1 −τ m ); Y = 1 + ∑ N m
                   m =1                        m =1                                  m =1   N mστ m
where we have used the balanced budget assumption to define the level of lump sum taxation,
T; aggregate consumer income Y equals labour income, namely unity, and all operating
profit, which, given (4), equals the second right-hand term in the expression for Y.
Combining the elements, and using p=1, we have:

           1   M
                               αm     M
                                                                1          M
                                                                               αm
Ac = 1 +
           σ
               ∑ Nm
               m =1
                                    − ∑ N m cm
                              N mτ m m=1
                                                      = 1+ (
                                                               σ
                                                                       − 1) ∑
                                                                          m =1 τ m

where we have used symmetry to get, cm = (α/Nmτm), and thus the final expression on the
right-hand side.
        Combining these expressions for Ac and the Dm’s yields expression (5) in the text.
        To boost intuition and facilitate graphical representation of the model, it is useful to
re-write W as:
                          M           M
       V = 1 + ∑ Π m + ∑ N m (α m Dm − pcm )
                      m =1            m =1

That is to say, indirect utility of consumers and thus the utilitarian social welfare function,
equals 1 plus the sum of operating profit plus that sum of consumer surplus.

Deriving equation (21)
        Refer to (18) and (19) and define ∆J and ∆Vu as JH-JL and VH,u-VL,u, respectively.
Then the system given by (18) and (19) and the previous definition can be rewritten so as to
solve for JH-VH,u and JH-VH,u –namely, for the differences between the payoff of the free-
riders and of the contributors in each state– as well as for ∆J-∆Vu:
                                                                                        23


       r + φ    0    λ (1 − φ )   J H − VH ,u  γ H 
        0     r + φ −λ (1 − φ )   J L − VL ,u  =  γ L 
                                                
        −1     1        1        ∆J − ∆Vu   0 
where we have made use of (20). Note also that the term VH-VL does not appear in the system
above. Using Cramer’s rule, it is now easy to derive (21).
