NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL LABOR ECONOMICS
Daniel S. Hamermesh
Working Paper 8757
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8757
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2002

The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2002 by Daniel S. Hamermesh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

International Labor Economics
Daniel S. Hamermesh
NBER Working Paper No. 8757
February 2002
JEL No. J0

ABSTRACT
I argue for increased reliance on non-U.S. data and policy evaluations to understand basic labormarket parameters and to predict the effects of changes in U.S. labor-market policies. Foreign experiences
generate exogenous shocks to labor costs that create unusual opportunities to measure impacts on labor
demand. Foreign policies often provide more variation in the underlying parameters in systems that are
often structured like their American counterparts. Foreign data sets are often larger and better suited to
inferring behavior. An examination of empirical studies in labor economics shows the effect of the
location of the author, data set and journal on the subsequent impact of the research on other scholars.

Daniel S. Hamermesh
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712-1173
and NBER
hamermes@eco.utexas.edu

I. The Scope of International Labor Economics
The modern theory of labor economics—the essential insights of Gary Becker, Jacob
Mincer, Sherwin Rosen and others—is surely international and applicable to the behavior of firms
and workers in all countries. I worry, because we Americans form such a huge fraction of
practicing labor economists and generate so much research output, that we may have developed a
jingoistic reticence to using research studies based on other countries’ experiences and data. My
purpose here is to consider the extent to which expanding our horizons to other countries might
increase our understanding of basic issues in labor economics and of our own policies.
The first question is whether international evidence can help us to obtain tighter estimates
of some of the basic parameters describing labor markets. For this purpose in Section II I
summarize recent quasi-experimental international evidence on various aspects of labor demand.
Many people believe that American labor-market policies are unique, and no doubt to some
extent they are; but other countries have policies that are not completely dissimilar from ours. If
the similarities are great, it may be the case that we can learn at least as much about our own
policies by examining others’, an argument that I make with examples in Section III and that I
follow with a discussion of data sets in Section IV. One might ask, given this discussion, why not
simply fill American journals with studies of foreign countries’ labor markets and policies that
use foreign data sets? This question leads non-North American labor economists to complain that
leading American economics journals discriminate against their work, a belief that I examine in
Section V.
II. New International Evidence on Labor Demand
There are two central issues in the study of labor demand: 1) What are the relationships
between labor costs and the components of labor demand—employment, total hours, overtime
hours, etc.? 2) What do we know about the nature of these relationships, in particular, the sizes of
the impacts of changes in labor costs on those components?

In addition to summarizing a

number of recent international studies that try to infer the impacts of shocks to labor costs, I also
indicate some potentially fruitful areas for further research.
Hamermesh (1993) included a summary of an immense literature on labor demand, both
the theory and evidence on all its aspects, particularly the impact of labor costs on total
employment, hours and on the employment of different types of workers. Most of the empirical
studies summarized there have been criticized on the grounds that they fail to examine the impact
of exogenous shocks to labor demand, relying instead on statistical methods to justify exogeneity.
Here I examine a number of recent studies in which there is very little doubt that the shocks to
labor costs that employers face are beyond their control. While not “natural experiments,”
employers’ responses to those shocks are probably as close as we are likely to get to observing
responses to exogenous events in any nontrivial case. This novel approach requires looking at
specific changes in individual countries and trying to understand their structures and impacts.
When constructed carefully, these studies may be an advance on the earlier literature on labor
demand and will offer a better way of studying the impact of labor costs than broad-brush
comparisons of the impact of labor costs across countries (such as those in OECD, 1999, Chapter
2). That they depend on unusual events that generate the exogenous shocks means that we need
to be eclectic in finding examples.
A. Evidence on the Overall Demand for Labor
Angrist (1996) examined the “experiment” generated by the Palestinian intifada when the
State of Israel occasionally closed off the West Bank and prevented Palestinian laborers who had
worked in Israel from commuting for the day to fill jobs there. This policy generated large
fluctuations in the supply of unskilled labor, which was greatly reduced whenever the curfew was
tightened and which flowed more freely when it was relaxed. He compared the average number
of days of curfew per month during the intifada to the daily wage rate paid to low-skilled workers

2

in Israel. The virtue of this study is not only the exogeneity of the change, but also that its size
relative to the labor market affected was much larger than we typically see in the U.S.
The study shows very clearly that, as Israel allowed in more Palestinian workers from the
West Bank—as the curfew become less stringent, the wage rate of low-skilled workers in Israel
declined. Variations in the harshness of the curfew caused the market for low-skilled workers in
Israel to trace out a downward-sloping demand curve for such labor. Taking his numbers, one
finds that Angrist’s results imply a demand elasticity of –3 for these low-skilled workers. This is
a much bigger elasticity than I would have thought likely for all workers. It is not totally
surprising, however, when we remember that these workers have only five or six years of
education and that demand elasticities generally rise as the skill level decreases.
Kugler (1999) examined evidence on the impact of a change in job-security legislation
that substantially reduced severance pay and thus labor costs in Colombia. Using household data
she showed that, while the reduction increased flows of workers out of employment, it increased
the outflow from the pool of unemployed even more. Her research suggests that the reduction in
labor costs increased employment, clearly in the short run and perhaps even in the long run.
Saavedra and Torero (2000) dealt with labor-market regulation in Peru, namely with the
generosity of severance pay based on years of prior service on the job. Each of four policy
regimes suddenly and sharply varied the generosity of severance pay and, even more interesting,
varied generosity differently at different years of prior work experience. Using establishment
data and holding the usual “everything else” constant, they found that changes in severance pay
generated an elasticity of employment of about -0.25.
One other thing worth looking at in both the Colombian and Peruvian studies is the
relative sizes of the formal and informal sectors, which relate to the scale effects generated by
changes in labor costs. In both countries the cuts in severance pay appear to have resulted in sharp
increases in the size of the formal sector and reductions in the size of the informal sector. This is

3

just what one would expect if employers who had sought to avoid the costs of higher severance
pay by going informal move back into the formal sector, and if new employers are more likely at
the margin to choose to operate formally. In addition to this compositional effect, the cut in labor
costs also made formal-sector firms more competitive, and these scale effects enabled them to
expand employment and output (which also rose at this time).
No single empirical study of an economic phenomenon is ever highly convincing, since
one can worry about the representativeness of the example and particular problems with the
research design. Here we have three examples where economies were substantially shocked by
some policy change that is arguably exogenous, and in each case we observe some response of
employment demand in the direction opposite that of the shock to labor costs. This evidence,
coupled with the abundant non-experimental evidence generated in the massive earlier literature
on labor demand, makes it quite clear that higher labor costs do reduce employment. Moreover,
the sizes of the responses here do not seem much different from those found in the earlier
literature, suggesting that Topel’s (1998) concerns about the width of a confidence interval for
this parameter are misplaced.
B. Labor Costs and the Hours-Workers Decision
The difficulty in evaluating the effect of changes in the relative costs of hours and
workers in the U.S. is twofold. First, the federal statutory mandate that affects this relative price,
the overtime provision of the 1938 Fair Labor Standards Act, has been essentially unchanged for
over 60 years. This makes it hard to find evidence of what the labor market would have looked
like without the policy. Second, while it is trivial to write down theoretical models linking the
relative demands to the relative costs, linking those costs to particular data series is not easy:
Which measurable components of labor cost affect hours per worker differently from
employment?

4

Unfortunately neither of the two available international quasi-experiments is based
directly on mandated changes in the relative price of workers and hours. Instead, both let us infer
the impact of changes in standard hours, essentially changes in the point at which the price of an
extra hour of labor rises, on employers’ demand for hours of work.1

With microeconomic

household data for Germany (the SOEP) Hunt (1999) examined the impact of collectively
bargained changes in standard hours that occurred in different industries at different times.
Essentially using the now-ubiquitous double-difference method, she showed that cuts in the
standard workweek produced declines in total employment.
Crépon and Kramarz (2000) also use micro data describing workers to study the effect of
legislated cuts in the standard workweek in France in the early 1980s. Their results suggest that
these caused some decline in employment and that they led to substantial job losses among those
workers who had previously been observed working at the old standard weekly hours. Moreover,
this job loss was greatest among minimum-wage workers (whose hourly wages presumably could
not adjust to the imposed change in total labor cost). While neither study allows us to infer
estimates of cross-price elasticities between hours and workers, just as most of the older literature
did not, both sets of results are in line with the standard theory of labor demand.
C. Skill Substitution
The issue of skill substitution—measuring cross-price and cross-quantity elasticities
between different groups of workers—arises whenever we consider the potential effects of
policies to alter the mix of skilled and unskilled workers in employment. Especially in the U.S.,
where inequality of earnings rose substantially from the late 1970s, such policies are particularly
appealing. Will employers respond to changes in the relative cost of skilled and unskilled
workers by substituting between groups of workers? A number of studies that have examined this
issue over the last 20 years (see Hamermesh, 1993) suggest the answer on that question is yes.
There are unfortunately no quasi-experimental studies like the ones I have discussed above that

5

inform us about this question.

Here too is a fertile area for research, as other countries’

differential changes in payroll taxes (e.g., the German and Dutch low-wage exemptions) or
severance pay (the nearly EU-wide relaxation of job security for short-term, typically low-skilled
and inexperienced workers) offer possibly exogenous shocks that allow one to identify these
cross-elasticities.
III. Using International Evidence to Understand U.S. Labor-Market Policies
A. What Can We Learn From International Evidence on Labor-Market Policy?
Nothing. The United States has unique institutions, a uniquely ordered labor market, and
a unique history that make it impossible to use evidence from other countries’ labor markets to
shed light on policies here. If nothing else, the very history of the responses in those labor
markets to their governments’ policies means that they have developed differently from way the
U.S. would have developed had those same policies been applied here in exactly the same way.
Even ignoring cultural differences, there is a policy-induced hysteresis (Hamermesh, 1995) that
prevents us from drawing useful inferences from foreign experiences about the likely impacts of
domestic labor-market policies.
A lot. Cultures and democratic institutions are not that different, and economic theory
provides clear predictions about human behavior in the face of incentives that cut across cultures
and institutions. While care must be taken, common human responses suggest that we can derive
useful insights from others’ experiences with policy. American economists are remarkably
ethnocentric about their own institutions (a comment that no doubt applies to economists
everywhere). Economics journals are replete with articles on the impact of this or that policy (viz.
the recent brouhaha about the U.S. minimum wage) in which authors bruit about the results of
their empirical research as if they were universally applicable. The U.S. provides only one
replication of a (federal) policy’s impact; and even a true natural experiment (and most such
animals are neither natural nor experimental) still only provides one replication. By using foreign

6

evidence we can possibly gain access to a larger number of replications. These same arguments
would apply (indeed, perhaps more strongly, since the localized nature of some U.S. labor-market
programs allows more domestic replications in the U.S. than in many other countries) were I
viewing the situation from another nation’s perspective.
We thus face a trade-off between the imperfect fit of the foreign labor market to the U.S.
experience and the chance of vastly enhancing the set of available (although not necessarily
completely relevant) evidence on a policy.

Simple statistical theory suggests that foreign

evidence will be more useful the smaller the range of policy parameters that we can observe in
current or past domestic policies, and the closer that foreign policies come to having a design that
we would consider here. Even if the dissimilarities between foreign and domestic institutions are
great, if we have only minor variations in the parameters defining the U.S. policy, foreign
evidence will be very useful.

Even if there is substantial variation in the policy, if other

countries’ policies are similar to ours the international evidence will be also be helpful.
B. Care and Prescriptions
One possible way of bringing international evidence to bear on domestic policies is to
undertake comparative studies—to analyze a particular type of policy in a large number of
countries and draw general conclusions. The difficulty with this too frequent approach is that
serious policy analysis requires understanding the institutions (and usually too the language in
which the discussions take place). Constructing indexes of the costs imposed by different
countries’ institutions and estimating their impacts on outcomes in a cross-country regression is
problematic. Equally problematic is estimating the same regression over a large number of
international replications. In most cases we are regrettably relegated to picking out others’
detailed research on their own countries and trying to draw implications for the U.S., in each case
assessing the similarity of the foreign policies and institutions to our own.

7

Simply pointing to foreign experiences, noting some general policy differences, and
drawing some broad conclusions is also a poor way to use international evidence. As a standard
application of this sort of logic, the U.S. in the 1990s had much lower unemployment than in the
EU (a 4.6 percentage-point difference between the U.S. and an average of the four largest EU
countries during the decade). American employers (allegedly) faced much lower costs of hiring
and firing than their European counterparts, a difference that has been adduced to explain the
different recent unemployment histories (as European employers, loath to be stuck with
employees who are expensive to fire during the next downturn, limit their hiring).
This convenient explanation ignores history: In the 1960s and 1970s European labor
markets were at least as restrictive as they are now (unionization was typically higher then),
although with restrictions in Northern Europe eased by the importation of Italian, Greek and
Portuguese labor then as they may similarly be by Turkish, Moroccan and other labor today.
Arguably too, there were fewer restrictions on hiring and firing in most segments of the U.S. than
there are now. Yet during 1965-74 European unemployment rates were 2.1 percentage points
below those in the U.S. A double-difference approach to the impact of imposing hiring and firing
costs rules them out as a good explanation of current trans-Atlantic differences in unemployment.
With a bit more care the broad international experience can be used to help us understand
our own. The premier labor-market problem in the U.S. in the past two decades has been the rise
in wage inequality. While a few observers point to institutional changes as a contributing factor,
most explanations center on the opening of the U.S. economy to foreign product-market
competition or on skill-biased technical change. Foreign trade represents a far greater share of
European GDP than it does here, and it grew during this period there as well as in the United
States.

Europe presumably also faced similar technologies (and similarly biased technical

change); yet wage inequality rose in some parts of the EU, fell in others, and in nearly all rose
less than in the U.S. (OECD, 1996, Chapter 3). How can the evidence on European wage

8

inequality be reconciled with the similar technology shocks and more open economies? No doubt
more subtle answers can be derived (as in the excellent studies by Berman et al, 1998, and
Ljungqvist and Sargent, 2001); but this simple comparison should vitiate in most observers’
minds the usefulness of the many American studies that rely on the relation between interindustry differences in changes in trade and technology and changing earnings inequality.
C. Nearby Mirrors on Specific Policies
One of the most useful applications of foreign evidence is prescriptive, to a policy
proposal that has not been tried here or on which domestic evidence cannot be obtained. In
Section II I indicated how proposals to change standard hours under the FLSA (e.g., 104th
Congress, H.R. 1050) might be evaluated ex ante using international studies. Proposals to change
the penalty rate applicable to overtime work are equally amenable to foreign evidence, as the
structure of overtime regulation is similar to the U.S. in many European countries, and
regulations there have exhibited greater variation in the policy parameters.
In discussions of labor-market policy the greatest ratio of ink to importance has been
spilled over the minimum wage. Recent discussion (e.g., Card and Krueger, 1995) has suggested
that increasing the minimum wage might not reduce employment and that evidence of any
negative effects is very weak. Perhaps so; but the U.S. is a particularly poor laboratory in which
to evaluate the impact of mandated wage minima: 1) The mandate is national; 2) There has been
relatively little variation in the effective minimum other than steady erosion after the few times it
has been raised, and 3) The minimum wage rates cuts only a small way up the wage distribution.
Attempts to circumvent these problems have relied on small spatial and temporal differences
resulting when some state-mandated minimum wage rates exceeded the federal minimum wage
rate (usually by small amounts).
Foreign evidence obviates the need for contorted econometric case histories that are
designed to find needles in statistical haystacks. In Canada all wage minima are provincial

9

mandates; a number of developing countries, for example, Mexico and Colombia, have
drastically varied effective wage minima; and others, e.g. France, have substantially varied their
effective minimum wage around a much higher average than the U.S. The evidence from these
comparisons is clear: If we raise the minimum wage so that it cuts deeply into the wage
distribution, employment (especially that of low-skilled workers) decreases substantially (Bell,
1997; Abowd et al, 1999b; Baker et al, 1999). Contrary to what one might infer from some
recent discussion, demand curves in low-wage labor markets do slope downward.
For labor economists the U.S. “system” of unemployment insurance is a gold mine,
since it is not one but 53 separate systems. That fact allows us to exploit substantial, possibly
exogenous, albeit not always independent variation in the major parameters describing benefits.
Thus the now immense literature on the impact of higher and potentially longer benefits on
unemployment duration is based on more than one set of underlying policy parameters. Even
here, though, there is a problem: Intersystem variation in parameters is limited compared to most
other countries, especially in terms of the potential duration of benefits. One wonders how useful
the fairly strong consensus about the effects of higher benefits in the U.S. is for predicting the
effect of non-marginal changes in policy, even if those might not lead to systems as generous as
most of those in Europe.
Concern about the robustness of U.S. results to large changes in policy parameters seems
misplaced: Within the range observed in the U.S., the impact of marginal changes in the potential
duration of benefits, and especially in replacement rates, seems roughly the same as for equalsized marginal changes in European countries with their more generous systems (Atkinson and
Micklewright, 1991). (Some very careful evidence, Narendranathan and Stewart, 1995, suggests,
however, that increases in potential duration beyond what we observe in the U.S. cause only
minute effects on the actual duration of long spells of unemployment in times of high
unemployment.) Consensus estimates from the first ten studies of this issue (Hamermesh, 1977),

10

that each 20-percent increase in net replacement raises the actual duration of spells of
unemployment by one-half to one week, seem to have stood up well against both the huge
amount of subsequent U.S. research and against international evidence.
The unique aspect of American UI systems is their reliance on partly experience-rated
payroll taxes. These are designed to encourage employers to minimize separations by making
them pay (at least part of) the costs they impose on their state’s UI system. Only recently have
other countries begun to experiment with experience-rated financing of UI benefits; and some do
not even rely on a payroll tax to finance benefits. A growing amount of evidence (e.g., Anderson,
1993) indicates that greater experience rating reduces employment variation and temporary
layoffs. The difficulty with these believable results is that they do not jibe with the European
experience: Temporary layoffs are very rare in Europe, and employment fluctuations are smaller
than in the U.S., yet there is no experience rating of payroll taxes.
Do European employers not optimize the way our models say they will?

Here the

institutions of employment relations are sufficiently different that we cannot expect to transfer the
evidence directly. Employers’ and workers’ responses to the underlying incentives do, however,
transfer. In the Dutch system in the 1990s employers, especially in the manufacturing sector,
appeared to use their generous and long-duration UI benefits to ease workers into a comfortable
early retirement and postpone (and thus raise) their eventual pension benefits (Hartog, 1996).
Just as in the United States the failure to experience rate fully leads to cross-subsidization from
some industries to others that can easily lay off workers, so too in the Netherlands employers and
workers in industries where early retirement could be offered easily were subsidized by other
firms. The response was the same, but it was along a dimension that is more consistent with other
labor-market institutions.
American immigration policy is essentially federal, allowing only one domestic
replication. Infrequent policy changes mean that immigration is one area where international

11

replications may be especially useful. Perhaps not surprisingly, the ubiquity and importance of
such policies has generated large amounts of international evidence. An area of special concern
in the U.S. has been the impact of immigration on natives’ earnings and unemployment, with the
conventional wisdom from most studies suggesting little effect (see the summary in Hamermesh,
1993, Table 3.10), but with at least one recent challenge (Borjas et al, 1996).
Two foreign-based studies are especially relevant here. Hunt (1992) examines the impact
of the pieds noirs on France after Algerian independence and concludes that this massive flow
had only a small effect on natives’ earnings, and an even tinier one on unemployment. Withers
and Pope (1985) test for Granger causality between unemployment and immigration using very
long time series on Australia. They find no evidence that (very large) variations in Australian
immigration altered domestic unemployment (although flows of immigrants responded sharply to
recent changes in unemployment). This very convincing foreign evidence does not support
challenges to the conventional wisdom.
D. Basic Policy Research
In many cases the best policy research is not specific, but instead seeks to generate good
estimates of basic parameters that will provide the foundations for evaluating proposed policies
that lack current close analogs. A huge amount of policy evaluation in government is based on
this approach (tax incidence, child-care policies, mandated employee benefits, tax cuts, and
others). Such estimates should also provide grist for the busy macro-calibration and computable
general equilibrium mills. To the extent that government policy evaluators and the operators of
those mills are interested in grinding real instead of imaginary wheat, do they gain anything from
evidence generated by other economies? The main issues here are the elasticities of labor
demand and labor supply—the basic behavioral parameters in labor economics.
Section II already discussed some new international evidence on substitution and scale
parameters in labor demand. International evidence, albeit not of the quasi-experimental variety,

12

may be even more useful in the area of the dynamics of labor demand. Ideally such dynamics can
be informative about the impacts of policies that mandate limits on hiring and firing—particularly
those that alter firing costs. The size of the costs imposed by mandates on hiring and firing, along
with the much greater range of these mandates in Europe, necessitates relying on foreign
evidence. A comparison among studies based on the appropriate firm-level data suggests that the
adjustment of employment in response to demand shocks is slower in Europe than in North
America (Hamermesh and Pfann, 1996). While the results are not so closely linked to theory that
we can quantify the impact on employment dynamics of policies that raise hiring or firing costs,
the results strongly suggest that raising those costs does induce additional labor-market rigidities.
Moreover, that they add to employers’ costs means that these mandates reduce the level of market
employment and thus measured output, as some of the evidence in Section II showed.
A booming industry in estimating labor-supply parameters has slowed down in the past
15 years and gone off in the directions of concern about the nature of household decision-making,
worries about abstruse econometric detail, and recently generalizations linking observed behavior
to more complicated dynamic optimization models (Lich-Tyler, 2001). The best American
estimates, mostly from research completed by the mid-1980s (summarized, for example, by
Heckman, 1993), suggest that for adult males and increasingly (Shaw, 1994) adult women too
labor-supply elasticities are quite small. Probably the most important policy application of these
estimates is to inferring ex ante the likely impact of cuts in taxes on labor. The relatively narrow
band of marginal tax rates in the U.S. should leave us a bit skeptical about inferring these
impacts. This lack of variation suggests obtaining evidence using the greater variation in tax rates
that exists in most European countries. Perhaps the best evidence on this is Stuart’s (1981) from
Sweden’s then extremely high marginal tax rates on labor, which implied large labor-supply
responses at very high tax rates.

13

Even if one accepts, contrary to nearly all the evidence, that the labor supply of most
workers responds strongly to changes in wage rates at current tax rates, one would be able to infer
that cutting tax rates would sharply increase labor supply only if workers treat tax changes as
equivalent to increases in wage rates. While there is a strong American consensus that this is true
(based on Rosen, 1976, and several subsequent studies), given the small range of tax rates in
effect today it would be difficult to replicate those studies in the United States. This is especially
unfortunate, since none of them used the now widely accepted techniques designed to account for
complexities in measuring tax effects (e.g., the work of Hausman, 1985).

The American

consensus seems contradicted, however, by a careful recent German study (König et al, 1995),
the first on this issue to use the econometric techniques of the past 20 years, and one that is based
on a somewhat wider range of tax rates than exists in the U.S. That study suggests tax rates are
perceived only imperfectly, with the surprising finding that the greatest failure of perception is
among higher-income families. If this result holds true in subsequent research, it implies even
less change in work effort in response to tax cuts.
E. Worth the Candle?
As the discussion above should make clear, the usefulness of foreign evidence ranges from
moderate to crucial. Figure 1 illustrates the idea of the intellectual trade-off implicit in the
discussion here by summarizing for each of a number of general areas of applied research in labor
economics the degree to which other countries’ institutions approximate those in the United
States and the extent of variation in the relevant policy parameters in the U.S. program(s).
Movements up the vertical axis imply a greater similarity of U.S. and foreign institutions, and
rightward movements along the horizontal axis describe lesser variation in the parameters
describing the U.S. institutions. The best field for international evidence is that where other
countries’ institutions are similar to American ones, but for whatever reason they have
experimented with a broader range of values of the parameters underlying the institutions than we

14

have. I summarize the discussion in this section by including a number of specific policy types
here. No doubt other policies could be placed on this graph, and the value of international
evidence on them could be assessed too. The preference map in the Figure is my own, and
readers are free to impose their own preferences.

Clearly, however, because of the small

domestic variation, both cross section and over time, and because the underlying economic
questions are fairly general, policies like hours legislation and the minimum wage provide
especially fruitful areas in which to apply the results of studying foreign experiences to the U.S.
policy debate.
IV. International versus U.S. Data
Stafford (1986) perceptively pointed out the role of new data sets in reinvigorating
empirical research and in providing the basis that allows us to generate new ideas about the nature
of labor markets. The quality of applied research is limited by the extent and quality of the data
sets that are available to analyze the issues. In the area of household behavior—labor supply and
consumer behavior—the U.S. has long been a leader. Our longitudinal data sets, particularly the
Panel Study of Income Dynamics and the National Longitudinal Surveys, have provided models
for surveys in many other countries, both in the English-speaking world and in numerous other
nations. The Current Population Survey has a longer tradition and is as comprehensive as laborforce surveys anywhere. The raw data necessary to provide estimates of the basic labor-supply
parameters are as good here as they are anywhere.
There is much that cannot be learned about labor supply and household behavior using
the snapshot and retrospective information in which U.S. household data sets have specialized.
They fail to tell us what the respondents are doing, and when and with whom they are doing it.
Unfortunately in this area of household behavior the U.S. has been in the derrière garde in
generating useful data sets. The last representative time-budget study for the U.S. was conducted
in the mid-1970s. Far more comprehensive and larger surveys have been produced in many other

15

countries (with Australia and Germany having two of the best of these). They have been repeated
at various intervals over the past two decades and can be used to generate a new and otherwise
unobtainable understanding of household behavior (cf. Gronau and Hamermesh, 2001).2
The situation is still bleaker if one wishes to study labor demand or the interactions of
firms and workers. Cross-section matches of large databases of workers and establishments have
been produced in the U.S. (e.g., Troske, 1998); but the U.S. has just one establishment-level
longitudinal data set (the Longitudinal Research Database). That source is limited to
manufacturing industry and is only now being linked to other data sets that might provide
information on workers’ characteristics. France, for example, has a detailed economy-wide
sample providing longitudinal information on matched workers and firms (Abowd et al, 1999b);
Denmark has similarly detailed information covering the entire population of firms (Albæk and
Sørensen, 1998); the Netherlands, Britain and Australia have surveys that, while not as broad as
the French or Danish, are far more extensive than anything on offer in the U.S. Powerful fears
about confidentiality, and no doubt some bureaucratic inertia, have left the U.S. behind many
other developed countries as a place to study how jobs are generated and how workers and
employers interact to create job matches.3
V. International and North American Data and Scholars in the Marketplace for Economic
Ideas
A reasonable question in response to these arguments is: If greater internationalization of
empirical labor economics is potentially so profitable, why do editors of the leading North
American economics journals not publish more studies using international data?

Are they

unaware of the importance of such studies? Do they simply publish work by people (North
American economists) with whom they are familiar? These possibilities go hand-in-hand with
the oft-voiced complaints of European labor economists that their research is rejected by the
leading U.S. journals because it is based on non-North American data. In this section I examine
the empirical validity of this claim and the more general issue of how the locations of authors and

16

of data sources in studies in empirical labor economics affect where they are published and their
subsequent impacts on other scholars.
A. Editorial Motivation
The background question is what goals editors of general economics journals have in
mind. No doubt some have venal goals, but the main goals must surely be: 1) To maintain
readership by presenting papers that engage intellectual and occasionally popular interest; 2) To
encourage additional scholarly research that will, more concretely, generate recognition (in the
form of citations and public acknowledgment) of the journal. Editors who fail along both criteria
are likely to see their journal’s importance diminish over time (as undoubtedly has happened to
some general economics journals over the past three decades).
A rational editor will therefore publish pieces that he/she believes will meet these goals.
Specifically, such an editor, while uncertain about the future impacts of the articles that are
submitted, should on average be publishing articles whose expected impacts are identical.
Obviously the expected impacts will differ across individual articles (some are obvious
blockbusters right from the start, while others are, rightly or wrongly, accepted in full realization
that they will be far from path-breaking). If, however, we define a set of categories, the rational
editor will make sure that the expected impacts of the marginal article in each definable category
will be equal. While we cannot know what is the marginal article in a particular category, as a
first approximation we can examine this issue by studying whether articles in different categories
by location have different impacts on average. Thus an initial test of whether American editors
are publishing “enough” research using foreign data would compare the impacts of studies using
North American and other data that are otherwise identical.
B. Publications in Empirical Labor Economics, 1990-98
To examine how the locations of authors and data affect publication in labor economics I
collected data on all empirical papers in labor economics published from 1990-98 in what are

17

arguably the top North American general journals: the American Economic Review, Journal of
Political Economy and Quarterly Journal of Economics. As a comparison group I also included
empirical papers in labor economics published in three major general European economics
journals: the Economic Journal, European Economic Review and Review of Economic Studies.
Given my classification of research as empirical, this search resulted in a data set of 376 articles.
The studies were classified along three criteria: 1) Did at least one of the authors have a NorthAmerican affiliation (treating Canada and the U.S. as one)?4 2) Were the data used North
American, non-North American, or mixed (i.e., several data sets, including a North American
one, were used, or the study involved a cross-country analysis that included North American
data)? 3) Was the journal one of the three North American outlets, or not?
The frequency distributions of the articles in the samples along these three criteria are
shown in the top two panels in Table 1. Quite unsurprisingly, the U.S. journals tend to publish
articles with at least one North American author (93 percent of the papers), while the European
journals also have a “domestic” focus (although they exhibit a bit more diversity—with “only” 77
percent of the published papers having no North American authors).5 Just as the U.S. journals
publish few non-North American authors, the North American authors they do publish
concentrate almost exclusively on North American data sets: The admonitions in the previous
sections have certainly not been reflected in publishing practices in major U.S. journals. 82
percent of the articles in those journals are by North Americans and use North American data.
The record is slightly more diverse in the European journals, but even in them 68 percent of the
articles are by non-North Americans (and no North American coauthor) who are using data
exclusively from outside North America. One might well infer that there is essential segregation
between these two markets for the dissemination of ideas.6
It is interesting to see how these results compare to those for this Journal, arguably the
most widely cited labor economics journal that does not focus on one country specifically

18

(Kalaitzidakis et al, 2001). The bottom panel in Table 1 classifies in the same way as for the
general journals the empirical articles published in regular issues of this Journal from 1992-2001,
a sample of 204 articles. The frequency distribution of articles shown in Table 1 looks quite
similar to that describing the top North American general journals, in particular in the fraction of
articles that are authored by North Americans and that use North American data. There are,
however, two interesting differences: 1) This Journal seems more open to research by non-North
Americans using non-North American data than are the top general North American journals; and
2) This Journal publishes fewer studies that use mixed sets of data, perhaps reflecting a lesser
interest in comparative studies or those that use experiences in many economies to test some
general hypothesis.
The issue here is whether the apparent segregation between the U.S. and European
general journals is rational, in particular, whether U.S. editors have not moved too far down the
quality level of studies using North American data compared to foreign data sets.7 To examine
this possibility I collected data on subsequent citations by other scholars to each of the studies in
these six general journals. Whether this is a reasonable measure of the studies’ quality is
arguable, but it is one that has been used many times in the literature on academic productivity
(Hamermesh et al, 1982, is a very early example). Because it takes time for studies to be
recognized, I include each of the first four years of post-publication citations in the estimates.
Table 2 presents the means and standard errors of the means of subsequent citations to
the 344 articles in the sample that did not contain mixed data sets. In this sample the articles
published in the North American general journals are more frequently cited than their European
counterparts. Among the articles published in North American journals, those that use North
American data receive more citations (significantly more on a cumulative basis after the first year
of publication). On the other hand, articles published in European journals that use non-North
American data receive (almost significantly—t=1.81 on the cumulative four-year citation count)

19

more citations than those using North American data that are also published in those journals.
There may be citation networks that generate citations to papers published on one’s “home
journals,” or perhaps these contrasting differences merely demonstrate the parochialism of
researchers on both sides of the Atlantic.
To examine these issues in more detail, I estimate negative binomial regressions
describing subsequent citations to these 344 articles. (I use this technique because the data are
integer counts of citations and because initial estimates showed that the simpler Poisson
distribution did not characterize the variation well (Wooldridge, 2002, Chapter 19).) Because an
article’s subsequent citations may depend on the author’s reputation independent of the quality of
the publication per se, I include in the regressions a vector of indicator variables describing the
first author’s citation count in the year the article was published (10-49 citations, 50+ citations,
with fewer than 10 citations per year the excluded category).8
Table 3 presents the estimates of these equations for the first post-publication year and
for cumulative citations through years t + 2, t + 3 and t + 4. Unsurprisingly, articles whose
authors are more heavily cited are themselves significantly more heavily cited, whether because
the articles are of higher quality or because of a “Matthew Effect” (Merton, 1968) is unclear. The
estimated coefficients of the main effect terms on the location of author, data and journal and
their interactions are not particularly interesting by themselves, so instead I focus the
interpretation of the results on the partial derivatives presented toward the bottom of this table.
Articles published in North American journals are more widely cited (δCITS/δNAJournal is
significantly positive), even conditional on the author’s prior citations.

Despite this, it is

gratifying to note that δCITS/δNAAuthor is significantly different from zero only in the equation
estimating the impact on the four-year cumulative citations, and even there t=1.81 only. The
author’s location does not have a highly significant effect on the impact of the article, once we
account for the author’s prior productivity. Otherwise identical articles (in terms of journal

20

outlet, author’s affiliation and author’s prior scholarly impact) that use North American data,
however, are generally more widely cited than those that do not.

While the estimate of

δCITS/δNAData is not statistically significant for all cumulative citation counts, after year t + 1
the t-statistic always exceeds 1.64.
In no way do these results suggest that North American editors are averse to publishing
high-quality articles by foreign authors. Nor do they imply that those editors favor studies using
North American data. Rather, the estimates suggest that, if anything, the editors have moved
further down the quality curve on articles using non-North American data than on those using
North American data. They appear to have favored studies by non-North American authors and
studies using non-North American data, at least as measured by the subsequent impact of these
studies on other scholars’ research. Thus both grounds on which European researchers might
complain about their treatment at the hands of U.S. editors appear to be unfounded.
These conclusions generate a conundrum: If research using foreign data sets is no more
productive than that using North American data, what happens to the arguments made in the
Sections II and III for using foreign data and foreign labor-market policies to study the American
labor market and American labor-market policies? The results presented in this section can easily
arise even if foreign data and policies are highly valuable in studying U.S. labor markets. They
only demonstrate that the U.S. labor economists, who generate the bulk of academic research in
our subdiscipline and thus the bulk of citations to other work, currently pay little attention to and
fail to cite research that uses foreign data. A major purpose of the arguments in Sections II and
III is to demonstrate to U.S. labor economists that our failure to acknowledge the value of foreign
material is misplaced and that we may have gotten ourselves trapped in a suboptimal intellectual
equilibrium. That equilibrium is reflected in the empirical results in this Section.

21

VI. Conclusions
I have provided a variety of justifications designed to lure North American labor
economists away from a narrow view of potential sources of evidence on the general labormarket and specific North American issues that concern us. These admonitions in no way are
meant to suggest that we should search mindlessly for whatever cute natural experiment or
tweaking of policy is thrown up by other countries’ experiences: As I hope the discussion in
Section III made clear, the cleanliness of the evidence that is generated must always be weighed
against the relevance of the foreign experience. I am not offering a panacea, merely a way to
accomplish our goals of understanding basic labor-market behavior better and provide better
estimates of the likely impact of proposed policy changes.
How is this proposed greater catholicity of practice to be attained? In many cases the
data most appropriate for our purposes are described in a language incomprehensible to us. In
other cases we are not even aware that the best possible data even exist outside the U.S. In the
most egregious cases we refuse even to contemplate the possibility that looking outside the U.S.
might be valuable. I hope the examples I have provided here reduce the number of such cases. If
they do, making an effort to learn what other economies’ experiences have to offer and what data
sets are available suggests itself as a valuable step for any newly reformed jingoistic American
economist. And, if the data are not easily understood, using foreign data with a coauthor familiar
with them is a good way to enhance the quality of one’s own research.

22

References
Abowd, John; Kramarz, Francis; and Margolis, David. “Minimum Wages and Employment in
France and the United States.” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper
No. 6996, March 1999, a.
----------------; ---------------------; and -------------------. “High Wage Workers and High Wage
Firms.” Econometrica, 67 (March 1999): 251-333, b.
Albæk, Karsten, and Sørensen, Bent. “Worker Flows and Job Flows in Danish Manufacturing,
1980-91.” Economic Journal, 108 (November 1998): 1750-71.
Anderson, Patricia. “Linear Adjustment Costs and Seasonal Labor Demand: Evidence from
Retail Trade Firms.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108 (November 1993): 1015-42.
Angrist, Joshua. “Short-Run Demand for Palestinian Labor.” Journal of Labor Economics, 14
(July 1996): 425-53.
Atkinson, Tony, and Micklewright, John. “Unemployment Compensation and Labor-Market
Transitions: A Critical Review.” Journal of Economic Literature, 29 (December 1991):
1679-1727.
Baker, Michael; Benjamin, Dwayne; and Stanger, Shucita. “The Highs and Lows of the
Minimum Wage Effect: A Time Series-Cross Section Study of the Canadian Law.”
Journal of Labor Economics, 17 (April 1999): 318-50.
Bell, Linda. “The Impact of Minimum Wages in Mexico and Colombia.” Journal of Labor
Economics, 15 (July 1997): S102-35.
Berman, Eli; Bound, John; and Machin, Stephen. “Implications of Skill-Biased Technological
Change: International Evidence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113 (November
1998): 1245-80.
Borjas, George; Freeman, Richard; and Katz, Lawrence. “Searching for the Effect of Immigration
on the Labor Market.” American Economic Association, Papers and Proceedings, 86
(May 1996): 246-51.
Card, David, and Krueger, Alan. Myth and Measurement. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1995.
Crépon, Bruno, and Kramarz, Francis. “Employed 40 Hours or Not-Employed 39: Lessons from
the 1982 Mandatory Reduction of the Workweek.” Centre for Economic Policy
Research, Discussion Paper No. 2358, January 2000.
Elliott, Caroline; Greenaway, David; and Sapsford, David. “Who’s Publishing Who? The
National Composition of Contributors to Some Core US and European Journals.”
European Economic Review, 42 (January 1998): 201-6.

23

Gronau, Reuben, and Hamermesh, Daniel. “The Demand for Variety: A Household Production
Perspective.” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 8509,
September 2001.
Hamermesh, Daniel. Jobless Pay and the Economy. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1977.
-----------------------. Labor Demand. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1993.
------------------------. “Policy Transferability and Hysteresis: Daily and Weekly Hours in the
BRD and the US.” In Buttler, Friedrich; Franz, Wolfgang; Schettkat, Ronald; and
Soskice, David, eds. Institutional Frameworks and Labor Market Performance:
Comparative Views on the US and German Economies. London: Routledge, 1995, 82100.
------------------------, and Pfann, Gerard. “Adjustment Costs in Factor Demand.” Journal of
Economic Literature, 34 (September 1996): 1264-92.
------------------------; Johnson, George; and Weisbrod, Burton. “Scholarship, Citations and
Salaries.” Southern Economic Journal, 49 (October 1982): 472-81.
Hartog, Joop. “No-claim in de Werkloosheidswet.” Trouw, July 23, 1996, p. 7.
Hausman, Jerry. “The Econometrics of Nonlinear Budget Sets.” Econometrica, 53 ((Nov. 1985):
1255-82.
Heckman, James. “What Has Been Learned About Labor Supply in the Past Twenty Years?”
American Economic Association, Papers and Proceedings, 83 (May 1993): 116-21.
Hunt, Jennifer. “The Impact of the 1962 Repatriates from Algeria on the French Labor Market.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 45 (April 1992): 556-72.
-----------------. “Has Work-Sharing Worked in Germany?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114
(February 1999): 117-48.
Kalaitzidakis, Pantelis; Mamuneas, Theofanis; and Stengos, Thanasis. “Rankings of Academic
Journals and Institutions in Economics.” Unpublished paper, University of Guelph,
October 2001.
König, Heinz; Laisney, François; Lechner, Michael; and Pohlmeier, Winfried. “Tax Illusion and
Labor Supply of Married Women: Evidence from German Data.” Kyklos, 48, No.3
(1995): 347-68.
Kugler, Adriana. “The Impact of Firing Costs on Turnover and Unemployment: Evidence from
the Colombian Labor Market Reform.” International Tax and Public Finance, 6 (August
1999): 389-410.
Lich-Tyler, Stephen. “Life-Cycle Labor Supply Under Uncertainty.” Unpublished paper,
University of Texas at Austin, December 2001.

24

Ljungqvist, Lars, and Sargent, Thomas. “The European Employment Experience.” Unpublished
paper, Stockholm School of Economics, November 2001.
Merton, Robert. “The Matthew Effect in Science.” Science, 159, 3810 (January 1968): 56-63.
Narendranathan, Wiji, and Stewart, Mark. “The Determinants of Individual Unemployment
Durations in an Era of High Unemployment.” Economic Journal, 105 (March 1995):
321-32.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. OECD Employment Outlook, 1996.
Paris: OECD, 1996.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------. OECD Employment Outlook, 1998.
Paris: OECD, 1998.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------. OECD Employment Outlook, 1999.
Paris: OECD, 1999.
Rosen, Harvey. “Taxes in a Labor Supply Model with Joint Wage-Hours Determination.”
Econometrica, 44 (May 1976): 485-507.
Saavedra, Jaime, and Torero, Maximo. “Labor Market Reforms and Their Impact on Formal
Labor Demand and Job Market Turnover: The Case of Peru.” Interamerican
Development Bank, Research Network Working Paper, No. R394, 2000.
Shaw, Kathryn, “The Persistence of Female Labor Supply,” Journal of Human Resources, 29
(Spring 1994): 348-78.
Stafford, Frank. “Forestalling the Demise of Empirical Economics: The Role of Microdata in
Labor Economics Research.” In Ashenfelter, Orley, and Layard, Richard, eds. Handbook
of Labor Economics. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1986, 387-423.
Stuart, Charles. “Swedish Tax Rates, Labor Supply, and Tax Revenues.” Journal of Political
Economy, 89 (October 1981): 1020-38.
Topel, Robert. “Analytical Needs and Empirical Knowledge in Labor Economics.” In
Haltiwanger, John; Manser, Marilyn; and Topel, Robert, eds. Labor Statistics
Measurement Issues. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998, 51-70.
Troske, Kenneth. “The Worker-Establishment Characteristics Database.” In Haltiwanger, John;
Manser, Marilyn; and Topel, Robert, eds. Labor Statistics Measurement Issues.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998, 371-404.
Withers, Glenn, and Pope, David. “Immigration and Unemployment.” Economic Record, 61
(June 1985): 554-63.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 2002.

25

Table 1. Frequency Distributions of Empirical Labor Economics Articles by Journal
Location, Author Location and Location of Data
Author:
North American Non-North American Total
North American General Journals, 1990-98 (N=228)
Data Type:
North American
Non-North American
Mixed
Total

.816
.048
.070
.934

.022
.022
.022
.066

.838
.070
.092
1.000

Non-North American General Journals, 1990-98 (N=148)
North American
Non-North American
Mixed
Total

.128
.095
.007
.230

.020
.682
.068
.770

.148
.777
.075
1.000

Journal of Labor Economics, 1992-2001 (N=204)
North American
Non-North American
Mixed
Total

.833
.049
.015
.897

.010
.088
.005
.103

.843
.137
.020
1.000

Table 2. Means and their Standard Errors of Subsequent Citations by Geographic
Location of Data and Journal
Cumulative Citations Through Year
t+1

t+2

t+3

t+4

North American Journals
Data Type:
North American

1.85
(0.16)

5.27
(0.46)

9.74
(0.87)

14.85
(1.46)

Non-North American

1.38
(0.39)

2.73
(0.84)

3.00
(0.71)

6.75
(1.28)

Non-North American Journals
North American

0.45
(0.17)

1.45
(0.41)

2.22
(0.74)

3.31
(0.97)

Non-North American

0.57
(0.09)

1.81
(0.22)

3.24
(0.36)

4.92
(0.57)

Table 3. Negative Binomial Estimates of Subsequent Citations to Empirical Labor Articles
in General Economics Journalsa
Cumulative through Year:
t+1

t+2

t+3

t+4

Author 10-49 Citations

.394
(.150)

.472
(.130)

.528
(.122)

.551
(.127)

Author 50+ Citations

.874
(.189)

.949
(.180)

1.026
(.173)

.970
(.185)

No. Amer. Journal

.450
(.355)

.468
(.562)

.070
(.522)

.289
(.552)

No. Amer. Author

.894
(.355)

.751
(.304)

.404
(.301)

.416
(.320)

No. Amer. Data

-.273
(.761)

-1.682
(1.121)

-2.345
(1.110)

-1.204
(.662)

NA Journal/Author

-.399
(.709)

-.847
(.741)

-.702
(.717)

-.403
(.745)

NA Journal/Data

1.227
(.554)

2.288
(1.370)

3.827
(1.316)

.580
(1.120)

NA Author/Data

-.719
(.726)

1.023
(1.189)

1.759
(1.175)

.517
(.775)

-.969
(1.478)

-2.038
(1.429)

.780
(1.257)

NA Journal/Author/Data
δCITS/δNAJournal

1.278
(.374)

.939
(.291)

1.157
(.273)

1.266
(.280)

δCITS/δNAAuthor

.225
(.162)

-.042
(.424)

-.576
(.664)

1.329
(.733)

δCITS/δNAData

.234
(.328)

.660
(.392)

1.203
(.406)

.692
(.405)

Pseudo R2

.080

.069

.074

.067

N

344

306

273

238

a

American Economic Review, Journal of Political Economy, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Economic Journal, European Economic Review and Review of Economic Studies. Standard
errors are in parentheses below the coefficients and partial derivatives.

Institutional
Similarity

• 0T

(US Parameter Variation)-1

Figure 1. Policy Variation in an International Setting

OT
HRS
MW
UI
IMM
FC
TAX

=
=
=
=
=
=
=

Overtime Premium
Standard Hours
Statutory Minimum Wage
Unemployment Insurance
Immigration Policy
Firing Costs
Taxes and Effort

Footnotes
*Centennial Professor of Economics, University of Texas at Austin, and research associate,
National Bureau of Economic Research and Institute for the Future of Labor (IZA). This article is
a revised version of a presidential address delivered at the annual meeting of the Society of Labor
Economics, April 20, 2001. Elaine Zimmerman provided helpful research assistance for the
analysis in Section V. I thank Joop Hartog, David Neumark, Gerald Oettinger and Gerard Pfann
for helpful comments.
1

OECD (1998) provides information on a substantial variety of changes in overtime penalties that

occurred in member countries during the 1990s.

A series of studies of their effects on

employment and hours, based on microeconomic data, would be a tremendous addition to our
knowledge of labor demand.
2

In 2003 the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics is beginning an effort to bring America into the

forefront of this line of research by instituting a small monthly time-budget survey. While it will
lack some of the features of the infrequent, but larger foreign surveys, it is a very welcome step
forward.
3

There are some rays of hope along this dimension. John Abowd, Julia Lane and others are

engaged in a major project designed to make a large array of existing administrative records
usable by researchers.
4

None of the results changes qualitatively if I delete Canadian-authored studies from the sample,

or if I lump them together with non-North Americans.
5

This somewhat greater openness to non-residents is shown more generally by Elliott et al (1998).

6

One might wonder whether the results for the three non-North American journals might look

different if we exclude the Economic Journal, which may arguably be British rather than
European generally. Excluding this journal reduces the sample of articles to only 59, but the
frequency distribution looks remarkably similar to that in the second panel in this Table: The first
column has the values .136, .050, 0 and .186, while the second column has the values .034, .644,
.136 and .814.
7

It might be the case that this apparent segregation has resulted from an unwillingness of non-

North American authors to supply high-quality papers to the top U.S. general journals, and a
similar unwillingness of North American authors to supply such papers to the European journals.
The former possibility, at least, is inconsistent with the frequent complaints of European
economists.
8

If we exclude the author’s citations the results are somewhat stronger.

2

