                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                THE GUARANTEES OF FREEDOM


                                            Rafael La Porta
                                      Florencio López-de-Silanes
                                         Cristian Pop-Eleches
                                            Andrei Shleifer


                                          Working Paper 8759
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8759


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2002




We are grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Simeon Djankov, Edward Glaeser, and Simon Johnson for helpful
comments, Filippos Papakonstaninou for research assistance, and to the World Bank, the NSF, and the Gildor
Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Rafael La Porta, Florencio López-de-Silanes, Cristian Pop-Eleches and Andrei Shleifer. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Guarantees of Freedom
Rafael La Porta, Florencio López-de-Silanes, Cristian Pop-Eleches and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 8759
February 2002
JEL No. K0, N40, P10



                                            ABSTRACT


        Hayek (1960) distinguishes the institutions of English freedom, which guarantee the
independence of judges from political interference in the administration of justice, from those of
American freedom, which allow judges to restrain law-making powers of the sovereign through
constitutional review. We create a data base of constitutional rules in 71 countries that reflect these
institutions of English and American freedom, and ask whether these rules predict economic and political
freedom in a cross-section of countries. We find that the English institutions of judicial independence
are strong predictors of economic freedom and weaker predictors of political freedom. The American
institutions of checks and balances are strong predictors of political but not of economic freedom.
Judicial independence explains half of the positive effect of common law legal origin on measures of
economic freedom.


Rafael La Porta                                         Florencio López-de-Silanes
Assistant Professor of Economics                        Professor of Finance and Economics
Harvard University                                      Yale School of Management
M7 Littauer Center                                      135 Prospect Street
Cambridge, MA 02138                                     New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER                                                and NBER
(617) 495-9592                                          (203) 432-2421
rafael_laporta@harvard.edu                              florencio.lopezdesilanes@yale.edu

Cristian Pop-Eleches                                    Andrei Shleifer
Ph.D. Candidate, Economics                              Professor of Economics
Harvard University                                      Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
(617) 787-4217                                          and NBER
eleches@fas.harvard.edu                                 (617) 495-5046
                                                        ashleifer@harvard.edu
1. Introduction.

       In his 1960 classic “The Constitution of Liberty,” Hayek defines freedom as the absence of

coercion by the government, and describes the various institutions that guarantee it. He focuses on

two clusters of institutions of free societies, which following his analysis we call English freedom

and American freedom. Central to English freedom is the idea of rule of law, which refers to the

equality of subjects before the law, and the impartial administration of justice. The coercion that

English freedom restricts is the power of the sovereign – be it king or Parliament – to interfere with

the administration of justice by the courts. Parliament makes the laws, but judges enforce them

without interference from Parliament.

       The American idea of freedom, according to Hayek, accepts the British notion of judicial

independence, but goes further and holds that law-making itself is subject to restraints. The will of

the majority, as expressed by the decisions of the executive or the Parliament, is itself limited by the

constitution, and courts are able to strike down laws which they deem unconstitutional. Put very

simply, English freedom refers to the inability of law-makers to interfere with the courts, while

American freedom refers to the ability of the courts to interfere with the law-makers.

       Both the English and the American conceptions of freedom are based on a common notion

that the will of the sovereign -- even a democratically elected sovereign -- must be restrained. Both

reject the idea -- articulated most clearly by Rousseau -- that the democratically elected sovereign

can, on behalf of the people, legitimately act without constraints. Both the English and the American

conceptions of freedom deal with the limits on government, but refer to different limits.

       In order to restrain the sovereign, the architects of the English and the American freedom

have invented a variety of institutions. These institutions have been widely adopted around the



                                                   1
world, and their merits discussed extensively. Yet despite extensive discussions, to our knowledge

there has been no attempt to measure the institutional arrangements related to English and American

freedom, and to ask empirically which of these arrangements are in fact successful guarantees of

freedom. This is precisely what we do in this paper. We collect information on a variety of

constitutional arrangements in 71 countries related to the organizing themes of English and

American freedom. Although national constitutions sometimes change (and we consider separately

the sub-sample of countries where constitutions have been very stable), we see them as largely

determined by history and therefore possibly shaping subsequent economic and social outcomes.

         We use these data to examine which constitutional arrangements are associated with

measures of political and economic freedom in a cross-section of countries. Perhaps the key

contribution of this paper is to collect data on constitutional variables in a large number of countries

that reflect particular attempts by the framers of these constitutions to guarantee freedom.

         As we see it, the English conception of freedom is most intimately focused on the prevention

of arbitrary action of the government, which is accomplished through the separation of powers

between the creators and the administrators of laws. Hayek credits Locke with an early statement

of the doctrine of separation of powers,2 although the development of this doctrine is typically

associated with Montesquieu (1748). In constitutional terms, the doctrine of separation of powers

is implemented through the guarantees of judicial independence, and of accountability of all subjects




    2
       Thus, John Locke (1690, Chapter 11; §137) writes “For all the power the government has, being only for the
good of the society, as it ought not to be arbitrary and at pleasure, so it ought to be exercised by established and
promulgated laws, that both the people may know their duty, and be safe and secure within the limits of the law, and
the rulers, too, kept within their due bounds, and not be tempted by the power they have in their hands to employ it to
purposes, and by such measures as they would not have known, and own not willingly.”

                                                          2
of a commonwealth, including government officials, before the law.3

         In English history, various attempts at judicial independence begin in the 12th century, when

Henry II introduces trial by jury, and thereby surrenders at least some powers over dispute resolution

to lay judges (Dawson 1960). The importance of the jury expands over the following centuries,

including through Magna Carta, although judges continue to be employed by the king. Several

English monarchs, especially the Tudors, are unhappy with this loss of control over adjudication:

they punish disagreeable juries for perjury and create jury-free courts of royal prerogative. The

English Revolution confirms the principle of judicial independence. The 1701 Act of Settlement

grants judges lifetime appointments as well as independence from Parliament.

         Accordingly, we measure English freedom in terms of the constitutional mandates governing

the appointment terms of judges in high courts. We focus both on Supreme Courts (the highest

courts of the land), and the administrative courts, which address disputes between citizens and the

government. We also look at a measure of independence of administrative courts. Lastly, we look

at what some writers, including Hayek, regard as a crucial protection of judicial independence in

England, namely precedent (or case law) as a source of law. On this theory, the ability of sovereign

to influence judges is severely limited when prior judicial decisions constrain the sitting judges.

         While restraints on Parliamentary or royal interference with judges are central to English

freedom, the idea of limiting the law-making freedom of Parliament is foreign to the English

constitution. In fact, in his classic statement of the subject, Dicey (1885) defined the English

constitution in terms of the unconstrained law-making power of Parliament. Hayek in fact sees this


    3
      “The first maxim of a free state is, that the laws be made by one set of men, and administered by another; in other
words, that the legislative and the judicial character be kept separate.” (William Paley as quoted by Hayek, page 173).
Less clearly, John Locke (Chapter 11; §136) writes: “...so it serves not as it aught, to determine the rights and fence the
properties of those that live under it, especially where every one is judge, interpreter, and executioner of it too...”.

                                                            3
feature of the English constitution as posing a severe risk to freedom from the tyranny of the majority

or (to use the French term) the general will. For this reason, Hayek sees the United States as the

great innovator in the development of freedom in the 19th century.

       The American idea of freedom is most intimately related to the notion of checks and

balances, referring especially to the power of the Supreme Court to check congressional law-making

against a difficult-to-amend Constitution. We consider a variety of constitutional measures of

American freedom from this general perspective. First, we measure the rigidity of a country’s

constitution in terms of the difficulty of modification. Second, we examine the ability of Supreme

or constitutional courts to review the laws passed by parliaments. Third, and more tentatively, we

consider federalist arrangements as a source of checks and balances.

       We examine how these constitutional arrangements influence both economic and political

freedom. Economic freedom is measured by assessments of the security of property rights in various

countries as well as by an objective measure of the burden of government regulation, namely an

estimate of the number of steps that an entrepreneur must take in order to legally open a business

(Djankov et al. 2002). Political freedom is measured using indices of democracy, political rights,

and human rights from different sources.

       These data enable us to ask the key question: do the institutions of either English or

American freedom, as reflected in a country’s constitution, make the citizens of that country free?

We find that, holding certain parameters constant, the institutions of English freedom contribute to

both the economic and the political freedom in a country. The institutions of American freedom

contribute to political freedom, but less clearly to economic freedom. It is perhaps not entirely

surprising that judicial independence is especially important for economic freedom while judicial



                                                  4
checks on the legislature for political freedom, but it nonetheless is interesting to know that these

results are confirmed by the data.

       Earlier research finds that common law countries – those whose commercial laws derive from

those of England – score better on various indicators of economic freedom, such as financial

development and lightness of regulation – than do civil law countries (La Porta et al. 1997, 1998,

1999). Legal origin of commercial laws is an interesting predictor of economic and social outcomes

because most countries have acquired these laws through conquest or transplantation from a

relatively few “mother” origins, namely England, France, Germany and Soviet Russia. Legal origin

is therefore largely exogenous. We do not know whether this evidence is explained by greater

politicization of economic life in civil law countries (Damaska 1986, La Porta et al.1999), or by

differences in the legal systems themselves (Coffee 2000, Johnson et al. 2000, Djankov et al. 2001).

We confirm that English legal origin is a strong predictor of economic, but less so of political,

freedom, and ask whether adding our measures of the institutions of English freedom “kills” this

predictive power of legal origin. We find that our measures of English freedom reduce the effect

of common law origin on economic freedom in half, which suggests that judicial independence may

be an important reason why English legal origin is associated with greater security of property.



2. Data.

Construction of the Database and Definition of the Variables.

       Our analysis is based on a data set of measures of freedom and its potential determinants in

71 countries. The sample covers all countries in the Maddex (1995) Encyclopedia of Constitutions,

with the exception of transition economies.     The Maddex sample generally includes the richer



                                                 5
countries, which in fact are the appropriate universe to examine the effectiveness of constitutional

guarantees of freedom, since constitutions are more likely to be followed in these countries. We

choose not to expand the country coverage to assure the compatibility of our coding with Maddex.

We exclude from the Maddex sample transition economies (Bulgaria, Cambodia, Czech Republic,

Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovak Republic, and Russia) because their laws and institutions have

been changing very rapidly in the 1990s. The sample does, however, include countries with socialist

constitutions (China, Cuba, Vietnam, and North Korea). The actual number of observations varies

between regressions depending on data availability. The data, however, are nearly complete for the

constitutional variables, where we supplement the Maddex data with other variables from actual

constitutions. Table 1 summarizes the definitions and sources for all variables in the paper.

       Unlike our constitutional variables, which come from written laws, our measures of freedom

generally come from survey assessments. We measure economic freedom in two ways. The first

is an index of the security of property rights, developed by a think tank concerned generally with the

protection of private property -- especially against infringement by the government. The second

measure (which comes from rules rather than assessments) is the number of different steps that a

start-up has to comply with in order to begin operating as a legal entity. This measure was developed

by Djankov et al. (2002) as an objective estimate of regulatory interference by the government in

private markets. We measure political freedom by an index of democracy, an index of political

rights, and an index of human rights -- all taken from different data bases.

       The correlations among the measures of freedom within the same category are high. In the

economic freedom category, countries that score high on property rights tend to require few

procedures to start a business (-0.57 correlation). In the political freedom category, countries that



                                                  6
score high on the index of political rights also score high on democracy (0.91 correlation) and high

on human rights (0.90 correlation). Similarly, countries that score low on democracy tend to score

low on human rights (0.82 correlation).

       Economic and political freedom are also highly positively correlated. A few countries such

as Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and Singapore score high on economic freedom but low on democracy.

Other countries, like Haiti, score low on the former and high on the latter. But such countries are

an exception not the rule, as economic and political freedom typically go hand-in-hand. Countries

that score high on property rights also score high on democracy (correlation is 0.60), political rights

(0.68 correlation), and human rights (0.71 correlation). Similarly, countries that require a large

number of procedures to setup a new business tend to score low in democracy (-0.25 correlation),

political rights (-0.33 correlation), and human rights (-0.42 correlation).

       We relate freedom to two sets of its potential determinants: judicial independence (English

freedom), and checks-and-balances (American freedom). Our principal contribution is to focus on

de jure variables derived from national constitutions. These variables reflect the relatively

permanent features of a country’s institutional environment as compared to the de facto political

outcomes, such as the turnover of politicians, for example. By collecting these data, we also provide

a new source of information for the comparative study of institutions.

       Recall that the essence of the English view is the enforcement of laws to an independent

judiciary. We use three proxies for judicial independence. First, in some countries judges have life-

long tenure whereas in others they are appointed for a short period of time or even serve at the

pleasure of the president. When judges have life-long tenure, they are both less susceptible to direct

political pressure and less likely to have been selected by the authorities currently in office. Because



                                                   7
the English view of freedom stresses the independence of judges adjudicating disputes between

citizens and the state (in freedom of speech cases, contracts, etc.), we focus on the tenure of two sets

of judges: those in the highest ordinary courts, and those in administrative courts.

        In England, the idea of decision-making by independent juries dates back to the 12th century,

and the history of lifetime tenure of judges to the Act of Settlement in 1701. Over time, nearly all

the countries following the common law legal tradition adopted this principle.4 Its importance was

summarized by Alexander Hamilton: “nothing can contribute so much to [the judiciary’s] firmness

and independence as permanency in office, this quality may therefore be justly regarded as an

indispensable ingredient” (Federalist 78). The approach of civil law countries to judicial tenure is

quite different: a judge usually enters the judiciary at a low level and works his way up the hierarchy

through promotions and assignments from either a council or the ministry of judges (Merryman

1969). Such promotions are influenced by the government. After World War II, many civil law

countries introduced constitutional guarantees of the tenure of judges, at least for the higher ranked

courts. Despite recent convergence, in a number of countries judges serve at the will of the president

(as in Iraq), or their tenure does not exceed that of the legislature (as in Vietnam).

        Second, in some countries, citizens can challenge administrative acts of the government only

in administrative courts that form part of the executive branch. In other countries, in contrast,

citizens can seek redress against administrative acts directly through ordinary courts and/or they can

request the Supreme Court to review decisions made by administrative courts. Arbitrary government

actions are less likely when the judicial branch can review administrative acts. In addition, the courts


    4
      Glaeser and Shleifer (2002) argue that the reason that England adopted a jury system, whereas France did not,
was that England was a more peaceful country than France through most of the last millennium, and therefore did not
need to worry as much as France did about protecting jurors from intimidation by the powerful local magnates
interested in subverting justice.

                                                        8
ruling on administrative disputes are presumably more independent, the longer their tenure. Thus

our administrative review variable is a dummy that takes the value of one when the Supreme Court

has jurisdiction over administrative cases and judges ruling over these cases have lifelong tenure.

       The historical development of judicial review of administrative cases in England dates back

to the conflict between Parliament, backed by judges and lawyers, and Charles I, which ultimately

led to the independence of the judiciary. A direct result of this conflict was the concept that ordinary

courts can rule on the lawfulness of executive actions. As with other institutional features, this idea

was also adopted by the countries in the common law tradition. In contrast, the French (strict)

interpretation of the principle of separation of powers, did not allow judges to review administrative

acts and decisions. In France, a parallel institution, Conseil d’Etat, was created following a basic

structure laid down by Napoleon in 1799. This institution, which is part of the executive branch, has

the power to rule over administrative decisions.

       Third, in some countries courts merely interpret laws. In other countries, courts have

“lawmaking” powers and, moreover, through the doctrine of stare decisis, judicial decisions are

constrained by prior judicial decisions. Because the power of the precedent restricts the ability of

the government to influence judges, it too serves as a useful measure of judicial independence.

       In many countries, case law exists de-facto although not de-jure (Merryman 1969). The

French revolution stripped all legislative (and power over administrative acts) from the judicial

system. However, judges in civil law countries do pay attention to precedent (Glendon et al.1982,

pp. 132-134, and Damaska 1986, p. 33).          For example, the career incentives induced by the

hierarchical judicial systems of civil law countries may lead judges to heed precedent even when

case law is not explicitly recognized as a source of law. Thus, Damaska (1986, p. 37) writes that



                                                   9
“Firmly tied to the mast of the civil service, lower judges could hear the seductive music of freedom

as Ulysses heard the singing of the sirens.”

        Still, de-jure case law may be important for freedom for two reasons. First, “...the traditional

conception that a single case has no binding effect seems to have hindered civil law judges and

scholars alike from developing a workable system of precedent.” (Glendon et al. 1982, p. 134).

Second, hierarchical review systems of civil law countries are less likely to allow case law to rule,

thus reducing judicial independence. “The Continental judge does not weigh the symmetry of factual

situations which, under the aegis of stare decisis, permits fine distinctions and thus assures the

flexible growth of the law. Instead he seeks ever more concrete rules in prior decisions, disregarding

the enveloping factual context. Assuming the binding nature of this progressive norm concretization,

decisional standards would in time become intolerably rigid, each new decision a drop in the

formation of an ever longer stalactite of norms. In short, while a judicial organization composed of

loosely hierarchical judges may require a doctrine of binding precedent as an internal ideological

stabilizer, a hierarchical career judiciary may well be better off without it.” (Damaska 1986, p. 37).

        The American system, through a written Constitution, endows separate branches of

government with limiting powers over each other. In this system of checks-and-balances, no branch

is supreme. We use four variables to capture the importance of checks-and-balances in molding the

political institutions of a country.

        First, in some countries the legislature derives its power and authority from the constitution

and is bound by it when making laws. In other countries, in contrast, there is no hierarchy of laws

to restrain the power of the legislature either because there is no constitution or because the

legislature can alter it in the same way as it writes new laws. Thus, a rigid constitution (i.e., one that

is difficult to modify) may constrain the power of the legislature.

                                                   10
         Historically, the U.S. was the first country to introduce a rigid constitution. A proposed

amendment to the American constitution requires either a two thirds majority in both chambers of

congress or the organization of a convention called by at least two thirds of the states. In addition,

the ratification by either the legislatures or conventions of three-fourths of the states is needed. In

contrast, the U.K. has a flexible constitution since an Act of Parliament can make changes to all

constitutional institutions and rules. In the 19th and 20th centuries, most countries that passed new

constitutions opted for the American “rigid” approach. Thus, in most countries, the text of the

constitution provides for a special procedure for changing it, which usually involves a combination

of majority or supermajority in legislature, referendum by the population, approval of the head of

state, or approval of a majority of sub-national legislatures. Finally, only under a rigid constitution

is it possible to establish an institutional arrangement to control the conformity of legislation with

the constitution, a concept that we turn to next.

         Second, in some countries, the constitutionality of laws cannot be challenged. In other

countries, however, laws are reviewed by specialized constitutional courts and/or by ordinary courts

as they hear cases. The availability of constitutional review may constrain the power of the

legislative branch to make laws.5

         In practice, constitutional review may be carried out by the judiciary (as in the US) or by a

special constitutional court outside of the judicial system (as in many continental European

countries). The constitutional review performed by ordinary courts is typically specific, a posteriori


    5
        The importance of constitutional review was not lost to the framers of the constitution. For example, Alexander
Hamilton writes (Federalist Papers, no. 78): "The complete independence of the courts of justice is peculiarly essential
in a limited constitution. By a limited constitution, I understand one, which contains certain specified exceptions to the
legislative authority; such, for instance, as that it shall pass no bills of attainder, no ex post facto laws, and the like.
Limitations of this kind can be preserved in practice no other way than through the medium of the courts of justice;
whose duty it must be to declare all acts contrary to the manifest tenor of the constitution void. Without this, all the
reservations of particular rights or privileges would amount to nothing.”

                                                            11
and, in principle, court decisions apply only inter-partes. In contrast, specialized constitutional

courts are a relatively new phenomenon. They were first introduced in Austria in 1920 and spread

throughout Europe after World War II as a response to the excesses of Nazi Germany.               When

constitutional review is carried out by specialized courts, it is typically abstract, a priori (although,

a posteriori review is also possible), and has erga omnes effects.             Importantly, judges in

constitutional review courts are typically political appointees without life-long tenure. The two

systems of constitutional review are not mutually exclusive. A few countries such as Chile and

South Africa have both systems of review in place.

        Independently of whether the Supreme or the Constitutional court performs the constitutional

review, countries also differ in the scope of such review. In some countries, such the U.S., Germany,

Japan, and Brazil, the institutions established to decide on the constitutionality of laws and actions

enjoy the right of full review. As an example, the Japanese constitution stipulates that the Supreme

Court is the court of last resort, with power to determine the constitutionality of any law, order,

regulation, or official act. In other countries, the review of constitutionality is limited in the sense

that it is only available to certain persons or entities, or is restricted to certain aspects of the

constitution. In France, the Constitutional Council established in 1958 rules on the constitutionality

of laws before they are promulgated, but only the president, premier, the presidents of the two

legislative houses, or sixty members of either house can make a request for a review. Moreover,

once the law has been enacted, the Constitutional Council has no power to nullify it. Finally, a

number of countries, such as China, Finland, Iran, North Korea, or the U.K. have no review at all.

In North Korea, the absence of the power of judicial review by the courts is the consequence of the

concentration of all power in the leadership of the communist party, whereas in the U.K., the lack



                                                   12
of review derives from the absolute supremacy of Parliament.

       Third, in some countries power is shared between a central government and the states in a

federal system. In other countries, all power rests with the central government. A federal system

may be an important element of a system of checks-and-balances if it introduces competition among

different levels of government and impedes their ability to act unilaterally (Riker 1964).

       The creation of a federal system as an instrument to restrain the power of the national

legislature was another American constitutional invention. The founding fathers envisioned the

sharing of power between national and state legislatures as an effective limit on all government.

Looking at the U.S., Lord Acton considered this institutional setup “the most efficacious and most

congenial of all checks on democracy” (quoted in Hayek 1960, p. 184). Despite the success of the

American federal model, few countries have adopted a federal structure of their government in the

last 200 years. In general, the vast majority of nation-states, including Belgium, France, Great

Britain, the Scandinavian countries, and most of Latin American and African countries, have unitary

systems of government.

       As we have indicated in the introduction, one motivation for this paper is to relate our

findings to those on the predictive power of legal origin. As a start, the next section organizes the

data by legal origin of the country’s commercial laws. In section 4, we examine the relationship

between the institutions we measure and legal origin.



Descriptive Statistics.

       Table 2 presents our data on the institutions of freedom. The variables are listed by country,

and countries are organized by the legal origin of their commercial laws.



                                                 13
        Consider our proxies for English freedom first. The results for the tenure of Supreme and

Administrative Court judges are very similar and we only discuss the former. In 54 out of 70

countries for which we have the data, including the UK and the US, Supreme Court judges are

appointed for life (SC tenure=2). In contrast, Supreme Court judges are appointed for terms of more

than six years, but less than life, (SC tenure=1) in 9 countries, including Japan, Mexico, Korea, and

Switzerland. Finally, Supreme Court judges are appointed for less than six years in Algeria, China,

Cuba, Honduras, Iraq, North Korea, and Vietnam (SC tenure=0).

        As these examples suggest, tenure of Supreme Court judges varies among legal origins.

Supreme Court judges have life-long tenure in all countries of English (ELO) and Scandinavian legal

origin (ScLO), but in only 71.9% of French-legal-origin (FLO) countries, 50% of German-legal-

origin ones (GLO), and never in Socialist-legal-origin (SoLO) countries. Supreme Court judges are

appointed for more than six years, albeit not for life, in 50% of GLO countries and 18.8% of FLO

ones. Finally, the tenure of Supreme Court judges is shorter than six years (SC tenure=0) in 9.4%

of FLO countries and in all SoLO countries.6

        Our next variable deals with the nature of administrative review. Many key disputes in this

area are adjudicated by administrative judges. However, whereas in 19 countries, including France,

the rulings of administrative judges are final, in 51 countries, such as the UK and the US, they can

be appealed to judges in ordinary courts. A key implication of the ability to appeal administrative

sentences in ordinary courts is that, as a result, the Supreme Court has ultimate jurisdiction over the




    6
      Administrative Court judges always have life-long tenure in ELO and ScLO countries. However, Administrative
Court judges have life-long tenure in only 62% of FLO countries, 50% of GLO countries, and never in SoLO countries.
Administrative Court judges are appointed for more than six years, albeit not for life, in 50% of GLO countries and
18.8% of FLO ones. Finally, the tenure of Administrative Court judges is shorter than six years in 18.8% of FLO
countries and in all SoLO countries.

                                                       14
rulings of the administrative courts.

       Judges in ELO and ScLO countries have more power over administrative cases than judges

in other legal origins. Whereas the Supreme Court has ultimate control over administrative cases in

91.3% of ELO and in 80% of ScLO countries, it only does so in 60.6% of FLO, and 66.7% of GLO

and SoLO countries (only the ELO/FLO difference is statistically significant). The Supreme Court

has jurisdiction over administrative cases even in Cuba. However, administrative review in Cuba,

as in all other SoLO countries, is conducted by judges without life-long tenure.

       The example of Cuba suggests that the ability of the Supreme Court to review sentences by

administrative courts may not effectively restrain the power of the executive unless coupled with

independent (i.e., tenured) judges. For this reason, we combine the administrative review and tenure

variables in our measure. We find that administrative review is conducted by judges with life-long

tenure and subject to Supreme Court review (power of administrative judge = 1) in 91.3% of ELO

countries, 80% of ScLO countries, 40.6% of FLO countries, 16.7% of GLO countries, and never in

SoLO countries.

       The availability of case law as a legitimate source of law is our final proxy for English

freedom. As expected, case law is a source of law in all ELO countries but Thailand, which is

difficult to classify anyhow (see La Porta et al. 1998). Case law is also a source of law in all ScLO

countries and in 83.3% of GLO countries. On the other hand, case law is never a source of law in

SoLO countries. FLO countries occupy an intermediate position: case law is a source of law in

28.1% of the FLO countries (many of them are Latin American countries which modeled their

constitutions after the US one). These differences in case law across legal origins are magnified

when combined with the previous results on the tenure of the Supreme Court judges (i.e., of those



                                                 15
who ultimately interpret the law). For example, not only do Supreme Court judges have law-making

power in ELO and ScLO countries but they also have life-long tenure. Conversely, Supreme Court

judges in SoLO countries lack both lawmaking power and life-long tenure.

          Turning to the American view of freedom, begin with the rigidity of the constitution. The

constitution can be changed by a simple law (Rigidity = 1) in countries such as Israel and the U.K.

In Sweden (Rigidity = 2) a proposal to amend the constitution needs the approval of the majority of

legislature (1 point) twice, the second time after a new parliament is elected (1 point). Changing the

constitution is harder in Australia (Rigidity = 3), where a majority (1 point) in both houses (1 point)

have to pass the amendment and a referendum has to be organized (1 point). In Japan (Rigidity =

4), constitutional changes can be made often after the approval of a supermajority of two thirds of

members (2 points) in each house (1 point) of parliament, and a referendum (1 point). The rigidity

of the constitution shows little variation among legal origins, and the differences are never

statistically significant.

          The nature of the judiciary review is our second American freedom proxy. As we have

indicated earlier, countries vary greatly in the scope of constitutional review. Our variable ranges

from full review (value of 2), such as in Austria, Germany, Ghana, and the U.S., to limited review

(value of 1) in countries such as Belgium, France, Honduras, and Jordan, to no review (value of 0)

in China, Cuba, the Netherlands, and the U.K.

          A few patterns emerge from these data. Although there is no review of the constitution in

SoLO countries, it exists in roughly 80-85% of the countries of each of the remaining four legal

origins.7 Differences in the incidence of constitutional review among legal origin are not statistically



    7
        Specialized courts are common in FLO and GLO, but rare in ELO and ScLO, countries.

                                                       16
significant except with regards to SoLO countries which have sharply lower levels of review.

Perhaps this is to be expected in light of the fact that constitutional review, as an American

innovation, is less tied to legal origin than are the English freedom variables.

       Defining a federation involves many judgement calls (Riker 1964). Some countries, such

as Uruguay, have a unitary form of government and are clearly not federations. Other countries, such

as the United States, are clearly federations as they have both a federal government and local

governments with substantial autonomy. Still other countries, such as Argentina, are nominally

federations although local governments are weak. In what follows, a country is defined as a

federation when sub-federal units have “substantial” fiscal authority. Following this definition,

federations turn out to be rather rare: there are only eight of them in our sample of 71 countries.

There are no federal governments among ScLO and SoLO countries. Federations are relatively rare

in FLO countries (6.1%; Belgium and Chile) and ELO countries (17.4%; Australia, Canada, South

Africa, and the United States), but more likely in GLO countries (33.3%; Germany and Switzerland).

       Not surprisingly, English and American freedom capture different aspects of the data.

English freedom varies with legal origin. Supreme Court judges in ELO and ScLO countries are

most independent and powerful: they are appointed for life, their decisions are sources of law, and

they tend to have power to control administrative acts. In contrast, Supreme Court judges in SoLO

countries are least independent and powerful: they have short appointments and lack lawmaking

power. The independence and power of judges in FLO and GLO takes intermediate values between

these extremes. Unlike English freedom, American freedom is not consistently related to legal

origin. The rigidity of the constitution and the incidence of constitutional review do not vary much

across legal origins (SoLO countries are different from other groups as they don’t have constitutional



                                                 17
review). Federalism also yields a different ranking of legal origins than English freedom variables.

Federations are most likely in GLO countries and least likely in ScLO and SoLO countries.

         The correlations among the various guarantees of freedom are presented in Table 2a. The

data show that the correlations among the institutions of English freedom are generally high and

statistically significant, whereas those among the three institutions of American freedom we measure

are low and insignificant (except that between judiciary review and the rigidity of constitution). The

correlations between the institutions of English and American freedom are also generally low and

insignificant, except that judiciary review is strongly correlated with tenure of supreme and

administrative courts. Even these correlations, however, are on the order of .33-.34. These data

confirm the evidence in Table 2 that our measures of English and American freedom do indeed

reflect different aspects of the data, and are not just raw measures of institutional goodness.

Furthermore, we have run regressions of our guarantees of freedom on the logarithm of per capita

income. The regressions show that these measures are not higher in richer countries.



3. Regression Results.

         In this section we present regressions of the determinants of freedom. Following our earlier

work (La Porta et al. 1999), we include both latitude and ethnolinguistic fractionalization as controls

in all regressions. We include latitude because temperate zones have more productive agriculture

and healthier climates, which might have enabled them to develop better economies and institutions

(Landes 1998, Acemoglu et al. 2001).8 We include ethnolinguistic fractionalization because both



    8
       Acemoglu et al. (2001) argue that settler mortality is a better variable for thinking about the influence of
geography on institutions than latitude, especially for colonies. We have only 27 colonies with data on settler mortality
in our sample, and hence stick with the more conventional geographic control.

                                                          18
the available evidence (e.g., Easterly and Levine 1997) and theory (e.g., Alesina et al. 1999) suggest

that ruling groups in ethnically heterogeneous societies may fashion government policies that

expropriate (or kill) ethnic losers, restrict their freedom of opposition, and limit the production of

public goods.    As a result, both economic and political freedom may suffer when ethnic

heterogeneity is high.

       We present each regression with and without controlling for the logarithm of per-capita

income. The appropriateness of including per capita income control in these regressions is

questionable. We have gone to great lengths to focus on the arguably exogenous independent

variables, derived from national constitutions.       In contrast, per capita income is obviously

endogenous. The motivation for including per-capita income is that development itself improves

the performance of the institutions guaranteeing freedom. For example, courts may only be able to

restrain governments when they are adequately funded and employ well-trained judges (and both of

those conditions are more likely to hold when per-capita income is high). The arguments for

excluding per capita income are also powerful. We have checked that our constitutional measures

of English and American freedom are not themselves higher in richer countries. Including per-capita

income may also cause estimation problems if restraints on the government as reflected in English

or American freedoms themselves enhance output. For example, if independent judiciaries boost

per-capita income, which in turn benefits economic freedom, then controlling for per capita income

inappropriately reduces the overall estimated effect of independent judiciaries on freedom. We

present the results both ways, but remain quite skeptical that income belongs in the regressions.

       While results vary among regressions, we generally find, not surprisingly, that both economic

and political freedom are higher in richer countries, and in countries further away from the equator.



                                                 19
Perhaps more surprisingly, we do not find that ethnolinguistic fractionalization is associated with

lower levels of freedom; in most regressions, the coefficient on this variable is insignificant. Perhaps

most importantly for the discussion to follow, the effects of the constitutional variables that we are

interested do not disappear when we introduce controls in the regressions. As a consequence, our

discussion on the effects of the guarantees of freedom will generally ignore these controls.



English freedom.

       We present the results regarding tenure of the Supreme and administrative courts,

administrative review, and case law (i.e., our English freedom proxies) in Tables 3 through 6. The

results on the effects of longer tenure for administrative and Supreme court judges are similar and

we discuss them jointly (Tables 3 and 4). Longer tenure for judges in either court has a beneficial

effect on both economic and political freedom. The estimated coefficients typically imply that tenure

for judges has a large impact on freedom. For example, going from no-tenure to life-long tenure for

Supreme Court judges is associated with an increase of 1.98 points in property rights and 4.15 points

in democracy. These are large numbers given that property rights is measured on a 1-5 scale and has

standard deviation of 1.31 while democracy is measured on a 0-10 scale and has a 4.18 standard

deviation. To make these estimates more concrete, note that Egypt, India, and Mexico have a

property-rights score of 3 (2 points away from a perfect score), and that Zambia has a democracy

score of 6 (4 points away from a perfect score).

       Recall that our measure of the power of the administrative law judges takes the value of 1

if the Supreme Court has control over administrative cases and judges ruling over administrative

cases have life-long tenure, and 0 otherwise. The results for this measure are presented in Table 5.



                                                   20
Administrative review by independent judges has strong benefits for both economic and political

freedom. These results suggest that administrative review has a large effect on freedom when carried

out by judges with life-long tenure. The estimated coefficients imply that going from no-review

to review-cum-tenured-judges is associated with an increase of 0.96 points in property rights and

2.23 points in democracy.9

         Table 6 shows that case law has a statistically significant positive effect on economic

freedom and democracy, but not on political and human rights. The estimated coefficients suggest

that giving judges law-making power is associated with an increase of 1.05 points in property rights

and 2.06 points in democracy.

         In summary, proxies for judicial independence are associated with more economic and

political freedom, with and without per capita income controls. These results support the hypothesis

that judicial independence fosters both economic and political freedom.



American freedom.

         We present regressions using the rigidity of constitutions, constitutional review and

federalism as independent variables (i.e., our American freedom proxies) in Tables 7 through 9.

Consistent with the findings in Section 2, the results on the rigidity of the constitution are mostly

insignificant. The results for judiciary review are more interesting. Recall that such review may

be carried out by the judiciary (as in the U.S.) or by a special constitutional court outside of the

judicial system (as in many continental European countries). Table 8 shows that judiciary review is


    9
        To put these estimates in perspective recall that the standard deviation of property rights is 1.31 while that of
democracy is 4.18. Italy, Spain, and Turkey are examples of countries that have a property-rights score of 4 (i.e., 1 point
away from a perfect score). France, India, and Venezuela are examples of countries that have a democracy score of 8
(i.e, 2 points away from a perfect score).

                                                           21
a powerful predictor of all measures of political freedom. There is weaker evidence that judiciary

review is associated with more secure property rights, whereas the coefficient on the judiciary review

in the number of procedures regression is of the “wrong” sign. The effect on political freedom is

large. Moving from a regime of no judiciary review to full review raises the score by 4.09 for

democracy (std of 4.18), and 2.39 for political rights (std of 2.27), and 27.12 for human rights (std

of 24.77) in the regressions that do not include per-capita income.10, 11

         Table 9 presents the results on federalism. Federations appear not to have better measures

of economic freedom, but they generally do have higher scores on political freedom. In this respect,

the general pattern of results is similar to those for judiciary review.

          In summary, the results in Tables 7-9 support the hypothesis that the institutions of checks

and balances are associated with political, but not economic, freedom.



A Horse Race

         We next investigate whether the institutions of English and American freedom have

differential effects on the political and economic outcomes by including in each regression one

measure of each type of freedom. Judiciary review is our preferred measure of American freedom,

and the power of administrative judge of English freedom. (Other measures yield similar results.)

         The results in Table 10 confirm our previous findings. They show that, in a horse race, the



    10
       To make the effect of judiciary review on democracy, political rights, and human rights concrete note that
Nicaragua, Thailand, and Zambia have democracy scores of 6 (i.e., 4 points away from a perfect score); Nepal, Pakistan,
and Zambia have political-rights scores of 5 (i.e., 2 points away from a perfect score); and Nicaragua and Venezuela
have human rights scores of 75 (i.e., 24 points away from the highest score in the sample).
    11
       We also examined the role of tenure in judiciary review (defined the same way as the other tenure variables) and
found that tenure for the judge ruling over constitutional matters is associated with more property rights and less
burdensome regulation of entry (with and without per-capita income). We do not report these results.

                                                         22
power of the administrative judge predicts economic, but less clearly political, freedom. Judiciary

review predicts political, but not economic, freedom.

        The interpretation of this evidence is intuitively plausible. Economic freedom in general, and

the security of property rights from government abuse and regulation in particular, are likely to

depend on the ability of courts to resolve commercial disputes without government intervention, and

on the accountability of government officials in such disputes to ordinary courts. These are, of

course, precisely the institutions of judicial independence we use to measure English freedom.

Political freedom depends additionally on limiting coercion by the government, accomplished to a

large extent through checks and balances. The institutions of American freedom in general, and

judiciary review in particular, aim precisely to check such coercion.



4. Legal Origins.

        As mentioned in the introduction, recent research shows that the origin of a country’s

commercial laws is a strong predictor of many economic and social outcomes. Some studies have

attributed this effect to the greater political centralization of socialist and civil law countries than that

of common law countries; others focused on the attributes of the legal systems themselves.

        In Table 11, we present the results of regressions similar to those reported in La Porta et al.

(1999), but using this paper’s five measures of freedom as dependent variables. The omitted

“dummy” in the regression is French legal origin. Table 11 documents two facts. First, compared

to French legal origin (FLO) countries, SoLo countries lag in both the security of property rights and

all measures of political freedom. This finding is unsurprising, and we do not develop it. Second,

compared to FLO countries, ELO countries regulate entry less heavily (see also Djankov et al. 2002)



                                                     23
and have higher property rights scores (see also La Porta et al. 1999). In contrast, the positive effect

of the ELO on political rights is not statistically significant.

        The results in Table 11 raise the question of whether the institutions of judicial independence

that we have associated with English freedom are the source of the beneficial effect of English legal

origin on economic freedom. We examine this question empirically in Table 12, where we use as

independent variables both legal origins and the institutions of English freedom. In Panel A, the

dependent variable is the property rights index; in Panel B, it is the number of procedures. The

results in both panels show that the addition of our measures of judicial independence reduces the

magnitude of the coefficient on English legal origin roughly in half, but does not eliminate its

statistical significance. In the two panels, 5 out of 8 coefficients on our measures of judicial

independence are statistically significant at a 10% or better level.

        What can we make of these results? We have shown in Section 3 that our measures of

judicial independence are strong predictors of economic freedom. Table 12 suggests that judicial

independence is part of the reason why common law is associated with greater economic freedom,

but not the whole story. The possibility that some other aspect of the legal system is crucial, such

as the ability of judges to use “smell tests”rather than bright line rules (Coffee 2000, Johnson et al.

2000), remains open. So does the possibility that broader political factors correlated with common

law are responsible for greater economic freedom (Glaeser and Shleifer 2002, La Porta et al. 1999).



5. Robustness.

        One issue in our analysis is whether constitutional rules are exogenous. After all, some

countries occasionally change their constitutions in response to political circumstances that may



                                                   24
themselves be captured by our measures of freedom. To address this problem, we repeat the analysis

using a sample of 44 countries that have not changed their constitutions since 1980. All of our basic

results survive, except the influence of the Supreme Court tenure variable becomes weaker. These

results indicate that our findings are driven by pre-determined constitutional variables, and alleviate

the concern that constitutions accommodate rapidly changing political circumstances.

       A closely related objection is that both the levels of freedom and constitutional rules are then

determined by some omitted permanent factors, giving rise to spurious correlations. We note that

we control for geography, ethno-linguistic fractionalization, and per capita income in our regressions,

which should at least partially deal with this problem. Another way to possibly address it is by

focusing on former colonies, many of which have borrowed significant parts of their constitutional

and other rules from their former colonizers (see La Porta et al. 1998, Djankov et al. 2001). For

these colonies, it may be more convincing to treat constitutional rules as exogenous. We repeat our

analysis for the 43 countries in the sample that are former colonies. All of our results survive and

if anything become stronger. This evidence mitigates the concern that the results are driven by

omitted factors shaping both the freedoms and their constitutional guarantees. Needless to say,

however, this concern cannot be removed entirely within our empirical framework.

       Finally, we have presented the results in this paper using individual measures of English and

American freedom – largely to understand which constitutional guarantees appear to matter. One

can alternatively make composite indices of English and American freedom respectively, by

averaging for each country its scores on each dimension of freedom. We have done that, and

repeated the analysis for the resulting indices of English and American freedom. Not surprisingly,

the results work as well or better for the indices as they do for the components.



                                                  25
6. Conclusion.

       In this paper, we consider two conceptually distinct ideas of how the will of the sovereign

– even a democratically elected sovereign – must be restrained to guarantee economic and political

freedom of the subjects. The English idea of freedom holds the separation of powers between the

creators and the administrators of laws, implemented through the independent judiciary, to be the

crucial source of such guarantees. The American idea of freedom sees checks and balances, and in

particular constraints on the lawmakers by the judiciary, as a key source of such guarantees. By

examining the constitutions of 71 countries, we attempt to measure the institutional arrangements

that capture the English and the American ideas of freedom in different countries, and to assess the

consequences of these arrangements for economic and political freedom.

       The data show that the institutions of English freedom are associated with both greater

economic and political freedom, whereas those of American freedom are important primarily for

political freedom. These results are consistent with the intuition that dispute resolution by

independent judges are key for economic law and order, whereas political freedom is achieved

additionally through a system of checks on governmental power.

       We then go on to address the puzzle of a strong predictive power of common law legal origin

for economic freedom. We find that our measures of judicial independence reduce the common law

effect in half, but do not wipe it out. We take this evidence to suggest that judicial independence is

a potentially important source of economic freedom, which might explain at least part of the

persistent finding of greater such freedom in the common law countries.




                                                 26
                                          References.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson (2001), “The Colonial Origins of

       Comparative Development,” American Economic Review 91, 1369-1401.

Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir, and William Easterly (1999), “Public Goods and Ethnic Divisions,”

       Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 1243-1284.

Banks, Arthur (1999), Political Handbook of the World, Binghamton: CSA Publications.

Bruk, S.I., V.S. Apenchenko, eds. in chief. (1964), Atlas Narodov Mira,, Moscow:

       Miklukho-Maklai Ethnological Institute at the Department of Geodesy and Cartography of

       the State Geological Committee of the Soviet Union, USSR Academy of Sciences.

Central Intelligence Agency (1996), CIA World Factbook, published online.

Coffee, John (2000), “Privatization and Corporate Governance: the Lessons from the Securities

       Market Failure,” Working Paper 158, Columbia Law School, New York.

Damaska, Mirjan (1986), The Faces of Justice and State Authority: A Comparative Approach to the

       Legal Process, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

David, Rene (1973), International Encyclopedia of Comparative Law, New York, NY: Oceana.

Dawson, John (1960), A History of Lay Judges, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Dicey, Albert Venn (1885), Lectures Introductory to the Study of the Law of the Constitution,

       London, UK: Macmillan.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer (2001),

       “Courts: the Lex Mundi Project,” Mimeo, Harvard University.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer (2002),

       “The Regulation of Entry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 1-37.



                                               27
Easterly, William and Ross Levine (1997), “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic

       Divisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 1203-1250.

Freedom House (1996), World Survey of Economic Freedom 1995-1996: A Freedom House Study,

       New Brunswick, N.J. Transaction Publishers.

______ (1996) Freedom in the World: The Annual Survey of Political Rights and Civil Liberties

       1995-1996, New Brunswick, New York, NY: Freedom House.

Glaeser, Edward L. and Andrei Shleifer (2001), “Legal Origins,” Quarterly Journal of Economics

       117, forthcoming.

Glendon, Mary Ann, Michael Wallace Gordon, and Christopher Osakwe (1982),

       Comparative Legal Traditions in a Nutshell, Saint Paul, Minn: West Pub. Co.

Gunnemark, Erik V. (1991), Countries, Peoples, and Their Languages: The Linguistic Handbook,

       Gothenburg, Sweden: Lanstryckeriet.

Gurr, Ted, R. (1990), Polity II: Political Structures and Regime Change, 1800-1986, [Computer

       file]. Boulder, CO: Center for Comparative Politics [producer], Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-

       University Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor].

Hayek, Friedrich (1960), The Constitution of Liberty , Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago

       Press.

Holmes, Kim R., Bryan T. Johnson, and Melanie Kirkpatrick (1997), 1997 Index of Economic

       Freedom, Washington, D.C.: The Heritage Foundation, and New York, NY: Dow Jones &

       Company, Inc.

Humana, Charles (1992), World Human Rights Guide, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Hunter, Brian. (1991), The Statesman’s Yearbook, New York: St. Martin’s Press.



                                               28
Jaggers, Keith, and Ted Robert Gurr (1996), Polity III: Regime Change and Political Authority,

       1800-1994, [computer file], Boulder, CO: Keith Jaggers/College Park, MD: Ted Robert

       Gurr [producers], Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social

       Research [distributor].

Johnson, Simon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer (2000),

       “Tunneling,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 90, 22-27.

Landes, David (1998), The Wealth and Poverty of Nations, New York, NY: W. W. Norton.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny (1997),

       “Legal Determinants of External Finance,” Journal of Finance 52,1131-1150.

______ (1998), “Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.

______ (1999), “The Quality of Government,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15,

       222-279.

______ (2000), “Investor Protection and Corporate Governance,” Journal of Financial

       Economics 58, 3-27.

Locke, John ([1690], 1976), The Second Treatise of Government, ed. J. W. Gough. Oxford,

       UK: Basil Blackwell.

Maddex, Robert (1995), Constitutions of the World, Washington, D.C.: Congressional Quarterly.

Madison, John, Alexander Hamilton, and John Jay ([1788], 1961), The Federalist Papers,

       New York, NY: New American Library.

Merryman, John Henry (1969), The Civil Law Tradition, Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Montesquieu, Charles de Secondat (1748), The Spirit of the Laws, Paris.



                                              29
Muller, Siegfried H. (1964), The World’s Living Languages: Basic Facts of Their Structure,

       Kinship, Location, and Number of Speakers, New York, NY: Ungar.

Paley, William (1827), The Principles of Moral and Political Philosophy, Boston, MA: N. H.

       Whitaker.

Poe, Steven, Neal Tate and Linda Keith (1999), “Repression of The Human Right to Personal

       Integrity Revisited: A Global Cross National Study Covering the Years 1976-1993,"

       International Studies Quarterly 43, 291-313.

Reynolds, Thomas H., and Flores, Arturo, A. (1989), Foreign Law: Current Sources of Codes

       and Basic Legislation in Jurisdictions of the World, Littleton, CO: Rothman.

Riker, William (1964), Federalism: Origin, Operation, Significance, Boston, MA: Little, Brown.

Roberts, Janet (1962), “Sociocultural Change and Communication Problems,” in Frank A. Rice,

       ed., Study of the Role of Second Languages in Asia, Africa, and Latin America,

       Washington, DC: Center for Applied Linguistics of the Modern Language Association of

       America, 105-23.

United Nations (2000), Indicators on income and economic activity, published online.




                                              30
                                     Table 1: Description of the variables

This table describes the variables collected for the 71 countries included in our study. The information
that is provided is the name of the variable, the range of values, and the sources from which the variable
was collected. For convenience some variables are assigned a label, which appears in parentheses next to
the name of the variable.


1. Dependent variables:

Property rights index:
     A rating of property rights in each country in 1997 (on a scale from 1 to 5). The more protection private
     property receives, the higher the score. The score is based, broadly, on the degree of legal protection of private
     property, the extent to which the government protects and enforces laws that protect private property, the
     probability that the government will expropriate private property, and the country's legal protection of private
     property. Source: Holmes et al. (1997).

Number of procedures:
    This variable measures the number of different steps that a start-up has to comply with in order to obtain a
    legal status, i.e. to start operating as a legal entity. The number of procedures ranges in the sample from 2 to
    19. Source: Djankov et al. (2000).

Democracy index:
    Democracy score for the year 1994, except for Liberia where the latest available year (1989) was used. Ranges
    from 0 to 10, with lower values indicating a less democratic environment. Source: Gurr and Jaggers (1996).

Political rights index:
      Index of political rights in 1996 (on a scale from 1 to 7). Higher ratings indicate countries that come closer to
      the ideals suggested by the checklist questions of: (1) free and fair elections; (2) those elected rule; (3) there
      are competitive parties or other competitive political groupings; (4) the opposition has an important role and
      power; and (5) the entities have self-determination or an extremely high degree of autonomy. Source:
      Freedom House (1996b).

Human rights index:
    A measure of 37 criteria based on the rights enumerated in the three major UN treaties: 1948 Universal
    Declaration of Human Rights, 1996 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, International
    Covenant on Economics, Social, and Cultural Rights. Ranges from 17 to 99 in the sample, with higher scores
    indicating better human rights. Source: Humana (1992).


2. Independent Variables:

Legal origin (LO):
     Identifies the legal origin of the Company Law or Commercial Code of each country. There are five possible
     origins: (1) English Common Law; (2) French Commercial Code; (3) German Commercial Code; (4)
     Scandinavian Commercial Code; and (5) Socialist/Communist laws. Source: La Porta et al. (1998), extended
     using Reynolds and Flores (1989); and Central Intelligence Agency (1996).

Tenure of Supreme Court judges (SC tenure):
     This variable measures the tenure of Supreme Court judges (highest court in any country). The variable takes
     three possible values: 2 - if tenure is lifelong, 1 - if tenure is more than six year but not lifelong, 0 - if tenure is
     less than six year. Source: collected mainly from the constitutions of countries as well as secondary sources.

Tenure of administrative court judges (AC tenure):
     This variable measures the tenure of the highest ranked judges ruling administrative cases. The variable takes
     three possible values: 2 - if tenure is lifelong, 1 - if tenure is more than six year but not lifelong, 0 - if tenure is
     less than six year. Source: collected mainly from the constitutions of countries as well as secondary sources.
Supreme Court control over administrative cases (SC control AC):
     This variable measures whether the Supreme Court in a country has control over administrative issues. The
     variable takes two possible values: 1 - if the administrative court is the Supreme Court or if cases judged by
     administrative courts can be appealed to the Supreme Court, 0 - if an administrative court exists but the
     Supreme Court has no power over it, or if there is no court that rules over the acts of the administration.
     Source: collected mainly from the constitutions of countries as well as secondary sources.

Power of administrative law judges over executive (Power of admin. judge):
    This variable combines the Tenure of administrative court judges variable with a variable measuring Supreme
    Court control over administrative cases. The variable is a dummy taking value 1 if administrative law judges
    have lifelong tenure and if either the administrative court is the Supreme Court or if cases judged by
    administrative courts can be appealed to the Supreme Court, 0 otherwise. Source: collected mainly from the
    constitutions of countries as well as secondary sources, and Maddex (1995).

Case law:
     This variable is a dummy taking value 1 if judicial decisions in a given country are a source of law, 0
     otherwise. Source: Rene (1973).

Rigidity of Constitution:
     This variable measures (on a scale from 1 to 4) how hard it is to change the constitution in a given country.
     One point each is given if the approval of the majority of the legislature, the chief of state and a referendum is
     necessary in order to change the constitution. An additional point is given for each of the following: if a
     supermajority in the legislature (more than 66% of votes) is needed, if both houses of the legislature have to
     approve, if the legislature has to approve the amendment in two consecutive legislative terms or if the approval
     of a majority of state legislature is required. Source: Maddex (1995).

Judiciary review:
      This variable measures the extent to which judges (either Supreme Court or constitutional court) have the
      power to review the constitutionality of laws in a given country. The variable takes two values: 2- if there is
      full review of constitutionality of laws, 1 - if there is limited review of constitutionality of, 0 - if there is no
      review of constitutionality of laws. Source: Maddex (1995).

Federalism:
     This variable is a dummy for federalism. The variable takes value 1 if sub-federal units in a state have
     substantive fiscal authority, 0 otherwise. Source: Henisz (1998).

Ethnolinguistic fractionalization:
     Average value of five different indices of ethnolinguistic fractionalization. Its value ranges from 0 to 1. The
     five component indices are: (1) index of ethnolinguistic fractionalization in 1960, which measures the
     probability that two randomly selected people from a given country will not belong to the same ethnolinguistic
     group (the index is based on the number and size of population groups as distinguished by their ethnic and
     linguistic status); (2) and (3) probability of two randomly selected individuals speaking different languages; (4)
     percent of the population not speaking the official language; and (5) percent of the population not speaking the
     most widely used language. Sources: Easterly and Levine (1997); the sources of the components of the
     average index are: (1) Bruk (1964); (2) Muller (1964); (3) Roberts (1962); (4) Gunnemark (1991); (5)
     Gunnemark (1991).

Latitude:
      The absolute value of the latitude of the country, scaled to take values between 0 and 1. Source: Central
      Intelligence Agency (1996).

Ln GDP per capita:
    Logarithm of gross domestic product per capita in US dollars for 1998. Ranges from 4.5 to 10.5 in the sample.
    Source: United Nations (2000).
                                Table 2: Independent variables by country and Legal origin

This table classifies countries by Legal origin and shows the value of each independent variable for each country. Panel A shows the
values for English Legal origin countries; Panel B shows the values for French Legal origin countries; Panel C shows the values for
German, Scandinavian, and Socialist Legal origin countries; and Panel D shows the tests (t-statistics) of differences in means for the
different legal origins. Variables are further defined in Table 1.


                                          Panel A: Data for countries of English Legal origin
                                                  ENGLISH FREEDOM                                       AMERICAN FREEDOM
Country                       SC tenure   AC tenure SC control AC         Power of      Case law    Rigidity of Judiciary Federalism
                                                                        admin. judge               Constitution   review
Australia                         2            2            1                1              1            3           2           1
Bangladesh                        2            2            1                1              1            2           2           0
Canada                            2            2            1                1              1            3           1           1
Ghana                             2            2            1                1              1            2           2           0
India                             2            2            1                1              1            3           2           0
Ireland                           2            2            1                1              1            3           2           0
Israel                            2            2            1                1              1            1           0           0
Kenya                             2            2            1                1              1            1           2           0
Liberia                           2            2            1                1              1            3           2           0
Malaysia                          2            2            1                1              1            2           1           0
Nepal                             2            2            1                1              1            3           2           0
New Zealand                       2            2            1                1              1            1           0           0
Nigeria                           2            2            1                1              1            4           2           0
Pakistan                          2            2            1                1              1            4           1           0
Saudi Arabia                      2            2            0                0              1            1           0           0
Singapore                         2            2            1                1              1            2           2           0
South Africa                      2            2            1                1              1            2           2           1
Thailand                          2            2            0                0              0            4           1           0
Uganda                            2            2            1                1              1            2           2           0
United Kingdom                    2            2            1                1              1            1           0           0
United States                     2            2            1                1              1            3           2           1
Zambia                            2            2            1                1              1            2           1           0
Zimbabwe                          2            2            1                1              1            3           1           0
English LO average              2.00         2.00         0.91             0.91           0.96         2.39        1.39        0.17
                                   Panel B: Data for countries of French Legal origin
                                           ENGLISH FREEDOM                                      AMERICAN FREEDOM
Country                SC tenure   AC tenure SC control AC         Power of     Case law    Rigidity of Judiciary Federalism
                                                                 admin. judge              Constitution   review
Algeria                    0           0            1                0              0            4          1           0
Argentina                  2           2            1                1              1            2          2           0
Belgium                    2           2            1                1              0            3          1           1
Brazil                     2           2            1                1              0            2          2           1
Chile                      2           2            1                1              0            3          1           0
Colombia                   1           1            0                0              0            2          2           0
Ecuador                    2           2            1                1              1            3          2           0
Egypt, Arab Republic       2           2            1                1              0            3          2           0
Ethiopia                   2           2            1                1              0            3          1           0
France                     2           0            0                0              0            3          1           0
Greece                     2           2            0                0              0            2          2           0
Haiti                      1           1            1                0              0            4          1           0
Honduras                   0           0            1                0              1            3          1           0
Indonesia                  2           2            1                1              1            2          0           0
Iran, Islamic              2           0            0                0              0            1          0           0
Iraq                       0           0            0                0              0            1          0           0
Italy                      2           2            0                0              0            2          2           0
Jordan                     2           2            1                1              1            3          1           0
Kuwait                     2           2            0                0              0            3          1           0
Lebanon                    2           2            0                0              0            3          1           0
Libya                      .           .            1                .              .            1          0           0
Mexico                     1           1            0                0              0            3          2           0
Mozambique                 2           2            0                0              0            2          2           0
Netherlands                2           2            1                1              0            4          0           0
Nicaragua                  1           1            1                0              0            2          1           0
Panama                     1           1            1                0              0            2          2           0
Peru                       2           2            1                1              1            2          2           0
Philippines                2           2            1                1              1            2          2           0
Portugal                   2           0            0                0              1            2          2           0
Spain                      2           2            1                1              0            3          1           0
Syrian Arab Republic       2           2            0                0              0            3          1           0
Turkey                     2           2            0                0              1            2          1           0
Venezuela                  1           1            1                0              0            2          2           0
French LO average        1.63        1.44         0.61             0.41           0.28         2.48       1.27        0.06
                          Panel C: Data for countries of German, Scandinavian, and Socialist Legal origin
                                                ENGLISH FREEDOM                                        AMERICAN FREEDOM
Country                    SC tenure    AC tenure SC control AC        Power of     Case law       Rigidity of Judiciary Federalism
                                                                     admin. judge                Constitution    review
Austria                        2            2            0               0             0             2            2           0
Germany                        2            2            0               0             1             3            2           1
Japan                          1            1            1               0             1             4            2           0
South Korea                    1            1            1               0             1             3            2           0
Switzerland                    1            1            1               0             1             2            0           1
Taiwan                         2            2            1               1             1             2            2           0
German LO average            1.50         1.50         0.67            0.17          0.83          2.67         1.67        0.33


Denmark                        2            2            1               1             1             3            2           0
Finland                        2            2            1               1             1             2            0           0
Iceland                        2            2            1               1             1             4            2           0
Norway                         2            2            1               1             1             3            2           0
Sweden                         2            2            0               0             1             2            1           0
Scandinavian LO average      2.00         2.00         0.80            0.80          1.00          2.80         1.40        0.00


China                          0            0            1               0             0             2            0           0
Cuba                           0            0            1               0             0             2            0           0
North Korea                    0            0            .               0             .             2            0           0
Vietnam                        0            0            0               0             0             2            0           0
Socialist LO average         0.00         0.00         0.67            0.00          0.00          2.00         0.00        0.00
                                                 Panel D: Tests (t-statistics) of differences in means
                                                        ENGLISH FREEDOM                                                AMERICAN FREEDOM
Comparison Groups                  SC tenure     AC tenure SC control AC             Power of     Case law        Rigidity of Judiciary Federalism
                                                                                  admin. judge                   Constitution   review

English vs. French LO               2.7181   a    3.3602   a           2.6659    b   4.3686    a   6.5996    a     -0.3918     0.5855       1.3464

English vs. German LO               4.6275   a    4.6275   a           1.5712        5.1878    a   1.0437          -0.6266    -0.7612       -0.8391

English vs. Scandinavian LO            .             .                 0.7209        0.7209        -0.4594         -0.8571    -0.0220       0.9887

English vs. Socialist LO               .             .                 1.2454        6.2361    a   7.8053    a     0.7793      3.4977   a   0.8830

French vs. German LO                0.4353       -0.1823               -0.2737       1.1049        -2.7554   a     -0.5132    -1.2110       -2.0856   b



French vs. Scandinavian LO         -1.2556       -1.5523               -0.8231       -1.6597       -3.4766   a     -0.8208    -0.3581       0.5528

French vs. Socialist LO             4.8627   a    3.5453   a           -0.2005       1.6077        1.0521          1.2042      3.4964   a   0.4941

German vs. Scandinavian LO         -2.0226   c   -2.0226   c           -0.4523       -2.4552   b   -0.9045         -0.2667     0.5169       1.4302

German vs. Socialist LO             5.3666   a    5.3666   a           0.0000        0.8000        3.4157    b     1.6000      4.0000   a   1.2649

Scandinavian vs. Socialist LO          .             .                 0.3693        3.5277    a      .            1.8856      3.0867   b      .

Note: a Significant at 1%; b Significant at 5%; c Significant at 10%
                                       Table 2a: Correlations of English and American freedom
Correlations of English and American freedom variables for the sample of 71 countries around the world. Variables are further defined



                                                         ENGLISH FREEDOM                                         AMERICAN FREEDOM
                                   SC tenure     AC tenure SC control AC   Power of              Case law    Rigidity of Judiciary Federalism
                                                                         admin. judge                       Constitution   review
SC tenure                           1.0000

AC tenure                           0.8325   a
                                                  1.0000

SC control AC                       0.0114        0.2097   c
                                                                       1.0000

Power of admin. judge               0.5683   a
                                                  0.6393   a
                                                                       0.7029   a
                                                                                    1.0000

                                             a             a                    a            a
Case law                            0.3554        0.3778               0.4156       0.5255        1.0000


Rigidity of Constitution            0.0313        0.0975               0.1513       0.0718       -0.0786      1.0000

Judiciary review                    0.3356   a
                                                  0.3447   a
                                                                       0.0699       0.1952        0.1887      0.2920   a
                                                                                                                           1.0000

Federalism                          0.1128        0.1430               0.1183       0.1395        0.1149      0.0683       0.0984    1.0000




Note: a Significant at 1%; b Significant at 5%; c Significant at 10%
                         Table 3: Freedom and Tenure of Supreme Court judges
The table presents the results of OLS regressions. In Panel A, the dependent variables are two proxies
for economic freedom: (1) Property rights index; and (2) Number of procedures. In Panel B, the
dependent variables are three proxies for political freedom: (1) Democracy index; (2) Political rights
index; and (3) Human rights index. In both panels, the independent variables are: (1) Tenure of
Supreme Court judges; (2) Ethnolinguistic fractionalization; (3) Latitude; and (4) Ln GDP per capita.
Variables are further defined in Table 1. Robust standard errors are shown below the coefficients in
parentheses.


                                      Panel A: Results for economic freedom
Dependent Variables         SC tenure    Ethnolinguistic     Latitude      Ln GDP       Intercept    Adj. R2
                                        fractionalization                 per capita                   [N]
Property rights index        0.9912 a          -0.8383         2.0276 a                   1.5090 a    0.4422
                            (0.2239)           (0.5389)       (0.7180)                   (0.4002)       67

                             0.6616 a            0.3954        -0.2016       0.5312 a    -1.8697 a   0.6655
                            (0.1986)            (0.4765)       (0.4798)     (0.0620)     (0.4889)      67

Number of procedures        -1.9430 b          -2.8278        -10.1709 a                16.5348 a    0.2901
                            (0.7992)           (2.2747)        (2.6659)                 (1.5942)       54

                            -1.0022            -7.0781 a       -5.3473 c    -1.4518 a   26.7269 a    0.4114
                            (0.8823)           (1.7924)        (2.9598)     (0.4514)    (3.3477)       54


                                      Panel B: Results for political freedom
Dependent Variables         SC tenure    Ethnolinguistic    Latitude        Ln GDP      Intercept    Adj. R2
                                        fractionalization                  per capita                  [N]
Democracy index              2.0749 a          -3.6265 c      7.0857 a                    1.2687      0.3394
                            (0.7304)           (2.1681)      (2.5111)                    (1.4366)       70

                             1.5714 b          -1.7547          3.9585       0.7702 c    -3.6599     0.3832
                            (0.7664)           (2.3863)        (3.1334)     (0.4050)     (2.8107)      70

Political rights index       1.2209 a          -1.0687          4.8699 a                  1.3587 c   0.3937
                            (0.4047)           (1.0804)        (1.1865)                  (0.7389)      69

                             0.8317 b            0.4029         2.3191       0.6171 a    -2.5795 c   0.4890
                            (0.4036)            (1.1484)       (1.4812)     (0.1940)     (1.3200)      69

Human rights index          14.1100 a         -19.7762 c       44.9745 a                34.2196 a    0.3902
                            (5.0876)          (11.1764)       (14.2311)                 (8.6970)       64

                             9.3509 c          -2.0528         16.8000       7.3130 a   -13.5567     0.5006
                            (4.8041)          (11.9309)       (15.2647)     (1.9098)    (14.6281)      64

Note: a Significant at 1%; b Significant at 5%; c Significant at 10%
                   Table 4: Freedom and Tenure of administrative court judges
The table presents the results of OLS regressions. In Panel A, the dependent variables are two proxies
for economic freedom: (1) Property rights index; and (2) Number of procedures. In Panel B, the
dependent variables are three proxies for political freedom: (1) Democracy index; (2) Political rights
index; and (3) Human rights index. In both panels, the independent variables are: (1) Tenure of
administrative court judges; (2) Ethnolinguistic fractionalization; (3) Latitude; and (4) Ln GDP per
capita. Variables are further defined in Table 1. Robust standard errors are shown below the
coefficients in parentheses.


                                     Panel A: Results for economic freedom
Dependent Variables        AC tenure     Ethnolinguistic     Latitude     Ln GDP          Intercept   Adj. R2
                                        fractionalization                per capita                     [N]
Property rights index        0.9192 a          -0.7492        2.3569 a                     1.5781 a   0.4731
                            (0.2034)           (0.5178)      (0.6771)                     (0.3900)       67

                              0.7016 a           0.3803         -0.1108       0.5405 a    -1.9746 a   0.7155
                             (0.1752)           (0.4654)        (0.4614)     (0.0591)     (0.4904)      67

Number of procedures         -2.3610 a          -2.1598        -10.1651 a                16.9135 a    0.3453
                             (0.7478)           (2.3092)        (2.5530)                 (1.5156)       54

                             -1.8361 c          -5.9900 a       -5.2164 c    -1.3740 a   27.0731 a    0.4585
                             (0.9323)           (1.8825)        (2.9964)     (0.4475)    (3.4089)       54


                                       Panel B: Results for political freedom
Dependent Variables        AC tenure      Ethnolinguistic     Latitude       Ln GDP       Intercept   Adj. R2
                                         fractionalization                  per capita                  [N]
Democracy index               1.7865 a          -3.3077         7.8816 a                   1.5609     0.3375
                             (0.6709)           (2.0892)       (2.3816)                   (1.4238)       70

                              1.4293 b          -1.4966          4.2463       0.8228 b    -3.8911     0.3900
                             (0.6570)           (2.2680)        (3.1295)     (0.3933)     (2.8097)      70

Political rights index        0.9287 b          -0.7575          5.4418 a                  1.6568 b   0.3683
                             (0.3942)           (1.0382)        (1.1562)                  (0.7381)      69

                              0.6561 c           0.6664          2.4800       0.6603 a    -2.7041 b   0.4829
                             (0.3607)           (1.0975)        (1.4934)     (0.1926)     (1.3474)      69

Human rights index          11.5435 b          -17.0519         51.1354 a                36.8237 a    0.3750
                            (4.8332)           (10.7864)       (13.5910)                 (8.4768)       64

                              8.1801 c          -0.0846         18.7246       7.6951 a   -15.1398     0.5039
                             (4.4160)          (11.7793)       (15.0699)     (1.9542)    (15.0740)      64

Note: a Significant at 1%; b Significant at 5%; c Significant at 10%
             Table 5: Freedom and Power of administrative law judges over executive
The table presents the results of OLS regressions. In Panel A, the dependent variables are two proxies for
economic freedom: (1) Property rights index; and (2) Number of procedures. In Panel B, the dependent
variables are three proxies for political freedom: (1) Democracy index; (2) Political rights index; and (3)
Human rights index. In both panels, the independent variables are: (1) Power of administrative law
judges over executive; (2) Ethnolinguistic fractionalization; (3) Latitude; and (4) Ln GDP per capita.
Variables are further defined in Table 1. Robust standard errors are shown below the coefficients in
parentheses.


                                     Panel A: Results for economic freedom
Dependent Variables         Power of       Ethnolinguistic    Latitude     Ln GDP        Intercept    Adj. R2
                          admin. judge    fractionalization               per capita                     [N]
Property rights index         0.9565 a           -0.7498       2.6548 a                    2.4067 a   0.3302
                             (0.3228)            (0.6193)     (0.7325)                    (0.4075)      67

                               0.6693 b            0.5267        -0.1039      0.5924 a    -1.6991 a   0.6285
                              (0.2550)            (0.5525)       (0.5489)    (0.0661)     (0.5478)      67

Number of procedures          -4.2658 a           -0.7862       -10.4104 a               15.2125 a    0.4528
                              (1.1900)            (2.2970)       (2.6101)                (1.3886)       54

                              -3.5463 a           -4.2637 b      -6.0772 b   -1.1814 a   24.3003 a    0.5343
                              (1.0338)            (1.8711)       (2.6766)    (0.3369)    (2.7103)       54


                                     Panel B: Results for political freedom
Dependent Variables         Power of      Ethnolinguistic      Latitude     Ln GDP       Intercept    Adj. R2
                          admin. judge   fractionalization                 per capita                    [N]
Democracy index               2.2319 b          -3.6649 c      8.2633 a                    3.1259 b   0.3057
                             (1.0003)           (2.1636)      (2.3937)                    (1.3656)      70

                               1.7310 c           -1.5971         4.2195      0.8980 b    -3.1639     0.3696
                              (1.0032)            (2.3499)       (3.2613)    (0.4114)     (3.0611)      70

Political rights index         1.3343 b           -1.1140         5.5472 a                 2.4532 a   0.3550
                              (0.5265)            (1.0952)       (1.1572)                 (0.6465)      69

                               0.9879 b            0.4110         2.4195      0.6834 a    -2.3096     0.4806
                              (0.4890)            (1.1309)       (1.5869)    (0.1951)     (1.4089)      69

Human rights index            17.2851 a          -21.4115 b      53.0525 a               45.9589 a    0.3624
                              (5.8543)           (10.3634)      (13.4686)                (7.3984)       64

                              13.5099 b           -3.6114        17.7614      8.0899 a   -11.7258     0.5107
                              (5.1725)           (10.7122)      (16.1917)    (2.0952)    (16.2995)      64

Note: a Significant at 1%; b Significant at 5%; c Significant at 10%
                                         Table 6: Freedom and Case law

The table presents the results of OLS regressions. In Panel A, the dependent variables are two proxies for
economic freedom: (1) Property rights index; and (2) Number of procedures. In Panel B, the dependent
variables are three proxies for political freedom: (1) Democracy index; (2) Political rights index; and (3)
Human rights index. In both panels, the independent variables are: (1) Case law; (2) Ethnolinguistic
fractionalization; (3) Latitude; and (4) Ln GDP per capita. Variables are further defined in Table 1.
Robust standard errors are shown below the coefficients in parentheses.


                                      Panel A: Results for economic freedom
Dependent Variables          Case law     Ethnolinguistic     Latitude     Ln GDP          Intercept   Adj. R2
                                         fractionalization                per capita                    [N]
Property rights index         1.0492 a          -0.7499        2.4296 a                     2.4374 a   0.4040
                             (0.3066)           (0.5497)      (0.7665)                     (0.3919)      66

                              0.7879 a            0.4371         -0.0520       0.5394 a    -1.3338 b   0.6394
                             (0.2435)            (0.4998)        (0.4839)     (0.0643)     (0.5609)      66

Number of procedures         -3.7405 a           -1.1487         -9.2081 a                14.6612 a    0.4015
                             (1.2713)            (2.4984)        (2.8016)                 (1.4071)       54

                             -2.9035 b           -4.8299 b       -5.0741 c    -1.2193 a   24.1038 a    0.4867
                             (1.1463)            (2.1769)        (2.8098)     (0.3776)    (3.0569)       54


                                       Panel B: Results for political freedom
Dependent Variables          Case law     Ethnolinguistic     Latitude        Ln GDP       Intercept   Adj. R2
                                         fractionalization                   per capita                 [N]
Democracy index               2.0583 b          -3.4213 c       8.0665 a                    3.2578 b   0.3295
                             (0.9516)           (1.9954)       (2.4761)                    (1.4352)      69

                              1.6634 c           -1.7378          4.8436       0.7243 c    -1.8562     0.3678
                             (0.9505)            (2.1191)        (3.3379)     (0.3999)     (2.9605)      69

Political rights index        0.8722             -0.6915          5.6782 a                  2.5836 a   0.3493
                             (0.5269)            (1.0372)        (1.2111)                  (0.6671)      68

                              0.5562              0.7395          2.8227 c     0.6307 a    -1.8486     0.4486
                             (0.5049)            (1.1096)        (1.6162)     (0.1952)     (1.4466)      68

Human rights index          10.3310            -16.3091         55.2031 a                 48.0300 a    0.3441
                            (6.3883)           (10.8021)       (13.9512)                  (7.4357)       63

                              7.7503            -0.0081         22.5495        7.4064 a    -5.3860     0.4622
                             (5.8601)          (11.3493)       (16.0923)      (1.9928)    (16.0239)      63

Note: a Significant at 1%; b Significant at 5%; c Significant at 10%
                            Table 7: Freedom and Rigidity of Constitution

The table presents the results of OLS regressions. In Panel A, the dependent variables are two proxies
for economic freedom: (1) Property rights index; and (2) Number of procedures. In Panel B, the
dependent variables are three proxies for political freedom: (1) Democracy index; (2) Political rights
index; and (3) Human rights index. In both panels, the independent variables are: (1) Rigidity of
Constitution; (2) Ethnolinguistic fractionalization; (3) Latitude; and (4) Ln GDP per capita. Variables
are further defined in Table 1. Robust standard errors are shown below the coefficients in parentheses.


                                     Panel A: Results for economic freedom
Dependent Variables       Rigidity of     Ethnolinguistic     Latitude     Ln GDP        Intercept    Adj. R2
                          Constitution fractionalization                  per capita                    [N]
Property rights index        0.2667             0.2830         3.1335 a                    1.7974 a   0.2461
                            (0.2050)           (0.5532)       (0.7858)                    (0.5983)      68

                              0.3925 b            1.3939 a       -0.2075      0.6585 a    -3.0799 a   0.5994
                             (0.1722)            (0.4835)        (0.5482)    (0.0634)     (0.7015)      68

Number of procedures          0.3244             -4.2612 c      -11.9934 a               13.2645 a    0.2485
                             (0.5270)            (2.2152)        (2.7238)                (1.9085)       54

                              0.0945             -8.1052 a       -5.7932 c   -1.5684 a   26.1232 a    0.4006
                             (0.5389)            (1.7602)        (3.0951)    (0.4489)    (3.9837)       54


                                     Panel B: Results for political freedom
Dependent Variables       Rigidity of    Ethnolinguistic      Latitude      Ln GDP       Intercept    Adj. R2
                          Constitution fractionalization                   per capita                   [N]
Democracy index              0.3886            -1.2997          9.3715 a                   2.3245     0.2496
                            (0.5429)           (1.9014)       (2.3477)                    (1.8640)      71

                              0.5913              0.5640          4.2123      1.0555 b    -5.6172     0.3378
                             (0.5422)            (2.0370)        (3.2748)    (0.4083)     (3.5263)      71

Political rights index        0.2227              0.3084          6.2387 a                 1.9762 b   0.2884
                             (0.3063)            (0.9669)        (1.1487)                 (0.9870)      70

                              0.3593              1.6425          2.4656      0.7651 a    -3.7230 b   0.4435
                             (0.2898)            (1.0197)        (1.5465)    (0.2018)     (1.8060)      70

Human rights index            5.6146             -4.4592        58.5946 a                 34.9543 a   0.2871
                             (3.5466)            (9.6413)      (13.6988)                 (11.0848)      65

                              6.3220 c           11.7232        17.1477       9.0377 a   -31.9017     0.4693
                             (3.2781)           (10.3075)      (16.0457)     (2.1205)    (19.3675)      65

Note: a Significant at 1%; b Significant at 5%; c Significant at 10%
                                 Table 8: Freedom and Judiciary review

The table presents the results of OLS regressions. In Panel A, the dependent variables are two proxies
for economic freedom: (1) Property rights index; and (2) Number of procedures. In Panel B, the
dependent variables are three proxies for political freedom: (1) Democracy index; (2) Political rights
index; and (3) Human rights index. In both panels, the independent variables are: (1) Judiciary
review; (2) Ethnolinguistic fractionalization; (3) Latitude; and (4) Ln GDP per capita. Variables are
further defined in Table 1. Robust standard errors are shown below the coefficients in parentheses.


                                    Panel A: Results for economic freedom
Dependent Variables         Judiciary    Ethnolinguistic     Latitude    Ln GDP         Intercept     Adj. R2
                             review     fractionalization               per capita                      [N]
Property rights index         0.5241 b          0.2472        3.6745 a                    1.6286 a   0.3161
                            (0.2017)           (0.5342)      (0.7121)                    (0.5459)      68

                              0.3638 b           1.2472 a        0.7374      0.5771 a    -2.1791 a   0.5832
                             (0.1691)           (0.4640)        (0.6423)    (0.0659)     (0.5431)      68

Number of procedures          0.4902            -4.0728 c      -11.1291 a               13.0340 a    0.2523
                             (0.6614)           (2.2392)        (3.0134)                (2.1075)       54

                              0.9534 c          -8.0479 a       -3.9117     -1.7026 a   25.5083 a    0.4271
                             (0.5445)           (1.7344)        (3.0765)    (0.4413)    (3.2520)       54


                                     Panel B: Results for political freedom
Dependent Variables         Judiciary    Ethnolinguistic      Latitude      Ln GDP      Intercept     Adj. R2
                             review     fractionalization                  per capita                   [N]
Democracy index               2.0429 a         -1.5073        11.1444 a                   0.1528     0.3885
                            (0.5066)           (1.6553)       (2.0515)                   (1.3075)      71

                              1.8112 a          -0.1149          7.3493 b    0.7624 b    -4.9167 c   0.4335
                             (0.4967)           (1.8625)        (3.0087)    (0.3800)     (2.6711)      71

Political rights index        1.1947 a           0.1726          7.2414 a                 0.7228     0.4499
                             (0.2812)           (0.8152)        (0.9645)                 (0.6544)      70

                              1.0243 a           1.2658          4.2015 a    0.6068 a    -3.3071 a   0.5457
                             (0.2543)           (0.8787)        (1.3765)    (0.1768)     (1.2519)      70

Human rights index          13.5585 a           -4.6834         75.1405 a               26.0351 a    0.4413
                            (3.3518)            (8.5670)       (11.7588)                (8.0147)       65

                            11.6614 a            8.8060         39.6463 a    7.4326 a   -24.7509     0.5612
                            (2.9294)            (9.6021)       (13.6556)    (1.7810)    (14.9406)      65

Note: a Significant at 1%; b Significant at 5%; c Significant at 10%
                                     Table 9: Freedom and Federalism

The table presents the results of OLS regressions. In Panel A, the dependent variables are two proxies
for economic freedom: (1) Property rights index; and (2) Number of procedures. In Panel B, the
dependent variables are three proxies for political freedom: (1) Democracy index; (2) Political rights
index; and (3) Human rights index. In both panels, the independent variables are: (1) Federalism; (2)
Ethnolinguistic fractionalization; (3) Latitude; and (4) Ln GDP per capita. Variables are further
defined in Table 1. Robust standard errors are shown below the coefficients in parentheses.



                                    Panel A: Results for economic freedom
Dependent Variables        Federalism    Ethnolinguistic     Latitude     Ln GDP         Intercept    Adj. R2
                                        fractionalization                per capita                     [N]
Property rights index        0.7038 b           0.1651        3.0184 a                     2.4387 a   0.2453
                            (0.2773)           (0.5589)      (0.7447)                     (0.4254)      68

                             -0.0955              1.3952 a       0.3002       0.6296 a    -2.0367 a   0.5374
                             (0.2538)            (0.4808)       (0.5734)     (0.0760)     (0.6271)      68

Number of procedures         -1.9128             -3.9022 c     -10.8181 a                13.8550 a    0.2706
                             (1.3908)            (2.2623)       (2.9538)                 (1.5069)       54

                             -0.2701             -7.9958 a      -5.6939 c    -1.5437 a   26.1231 a    0.4008
                             (1.3988)            (1.7541)       (2.9635)     (0.4444)    (3.4596)       54


                                     Panel B: Results for political freedom
Dependent Variables        Federalism    Ethnolinguistic      Latitude      Ln GDP       Intercept    Adj. R2
                                        fractionalization                  per capita                   [N]
Democracy index              3.3031 a          -1.8794         8.0669 a                    3.4860 a   0.3028
                            (0.6738)           (1.7929)       (2.2415)                    (1.2885)      71

                              2.2927 a           -0.2460         4.7161       0.8062 c    -2.3304     0.3496
                             (0.7706)            (2.0606)       (3.0669)     (0.4247)     (3.2909)      71

Political rights index        1.8499 a           -0.0148         5.5135 a                  2.6363 a   0.3453
                             (0.3768)            (0.8618)       (1.0829)                  (0.6060)      70

                              1.0319 b            1.2714         2.8139 c     0.6419 a    -1.9636     0.4438
                             (0.4036)            (0.9914)       (1.4497)     (0.2082)     (1.5781)      70

Human rights index          15.3198 a            -6.9911        54.4341 a                48.5642 a    0.2918
                            (5.0333)             (9.5040)      (13.8130)                 (7.1904)       65

                              4.9910            10.1303         21.9468       8.3375 a   -12.7184     0.4296
                             (5.0078)          (10.5413)       (15.7721)     (2.2997)    (18.3752)      65

Note: a Significant at 1%; b Significant at 5%; c Significant at 10%
Table 10: Freedom, Judiciary review, and Power of administrative law judges over executive

 The table presents the results of OLS regressions. In Panel A, the dependent variables are two proxies
 for economic freedom: (1) Property rights index; and (2) Number of procedures. In Panel B, the
 dependent variables are three proxies for political freedom: (1) Democracy index; (2) Political rights
 index; and (3) Human rights index. In both panels, the independent variables are: (1) Judiciary review;
 (2) Power of administrative law judges over executive; (3) Ethnolinguistic fractionalization; (4)
 Latitude; and (5) Ln GDP per capita. Variables are further defined in Table 1. Robust standard errors
 are shown below the coefficients in parentheses.


                                      Panel A: Results for economic freedom
 Dependent Variables      Judiciary     Power of      Ethnolinguistic Latitude     Ln GDP Intercept Adj. R2
                           review     admin. judge   fractionalization            per capita            [N]
 Property rights index     0.3854 b       0.8373  a         -0.6512     2.9898  a             1.8450 0.3832
                                                                                                      a

                          (0.1786)       (0.3012)           (0.6426)   (0.7438)              (0.5318)    67

                           0.2347           0.6094 b            0.5301       0.2224      0.5661 a   -1.8591 a 0.6475
                          (0.1430)         (0.2366)            (0.5560)     (0.6012)    (0.0667)    (0.5414)    67

 Number of procedures      0.4113          -4.2454 a           -0.6351      -9.8534 a               14.3932 a 0.4580
                          (0.4894)         (1.1892)            (2.2837)     (2.7333)                (1.7232)    54

                           0.7792 c        -3.4370 a           -4.3184 b    -4.5973 c -1.2972 a     23.6388 a 0.5520
                          (0.4198)         (1.0292)            (1.8180)     (2.6675) (0.3288)       (2.6447)    54


                                       Panel B: Results for political freedom
 Dependent Variables      Judiciary     Power of       Ethnolinguistic Latitude       Ln GDP Intercept Adj. R2
                           review     admin. judge    fractionalization              per capita          [N]
 Democracy index           1.7578 a       1.6275  c          -3.1965       9.9650  a             0.5028 0.4076
                          (0.4851)       (0.9211)            (1.9825)     (2.2094)              (1.3435)  70

                           1.5573 a         1.2966             -1.5994       6.5431 b 0.7168 c      -4.2184    0.4470
                          (0.4735)         (0.9152)            (2.2209)     (3.1352) (0.3968)       (2.7589)     70

 Political rights index    1.0306 a         0.9987 b           -0.8656       6.5178 a                0.9281    0.4755
                          (0.2703)         (0.4766)            (1.0082)     (1.0505)                (0.6680)     69

                           0.8759 a         0.7521 c            0.4042       3.6911 b 0.5858 a      -2.9255 b 0.5651
                          (0.2438)         (0.4350)            (1.0462)     (1.4903) (0.1816)       (1.2571)    69

 Human rights index       11.4438 a       13.9660 a          -18.3961 c 66.0296 a                   28.0959 a 0.4934
                          (3.0046)        (5.2043)            (9.9873) (12.2515)                    (7.9502)    64

                           9.7322 a       11.1741 b           -3.3429       33.3498 b 7.0464 a -19.4765        0.6030
                          (2.6072)        (4.5450)           (10.5849)     (14.4421) (1.8822) (15.1976)          64

 Note: a Significant at 1%; b Significant at 5%; c Significant at 10%
                                                          Table 11: Freedom and Legal origin




The table presents the results of OLS regressions. In Panel A, the dependent variables are two proxies for economic freedom: (1) Property
rights index; and (2) Number of procedures. In Panel B, the dependent variables are three proxies for political free


                                                            Panel A: Results for economic freedom
Dependent Variables      English         Socialist      German         Scandinavian    Ethnolinguistic     Latitude     Ln GDP      Intercept   Adj. R2
                           LO               LO             LO               LO         fractionalization               per capita                 [N]
Property rights index      1.0645 a      -2.0653 a       1.3088 a         -0.6748 c          -0.9183        2.1264 a                 2.7325 a   0.5433
                          (0.3488)       (0.3283)       (0.2518)          (0.4022)           (0.6525)      (0.7803)                 (0.3595)       68

                            0.8443 a     -1.2815 a       0.9233 a         0.5279             0.1298         0.3440      0.4325 a    -0.4237     0.6665
                           (0.2705)      (0.3667)       (0.2688)         (0.3440)           (0.6035)       (0.5318)    (0.0804)     (0.7185)      68

Number of procedures       -5.9878 a      1.4577        -1.4986          -5.2365 a           2.0168        -6.5578 b                13.0464 a   0.5985
                           (1.2173)      (1.9811)       (1.0694)         (1.1031)           (2.3996)       (2.6973)                 (1.3254)      54

                           -5.1767 a     -0.7244        -0.6398          -4.8626 a          -1.4142        -3.4046     -1.0308 b    21.3653 a   0.6445
                           (1.1408)      (1.8947)       (1.0587)         (1.1133)           (2.4180)       (2.6977)    (0.4012)     (3.3295)      54

Note: a Significant at 1%; b Significant at 5%; c Significant at 10%
                                                             Panel B: Results for political freedom
Dependent Variables      English         Socialist      German         Scandinavian      Ethnolinguistic      Latitude     Ln GDP       Intercept   Adj. R2
                           LO             LO               LO               LO           fractionalization                per capita                  [N]
Democracy index            1.2845        -6.1652 a       2.2393 a          1.0206              -3.3933         7.3810 a                  4.1605 a   0.4051
                          (1.1112)       (0.9017)       (0.8573)          (1.1247)             (2.2174)       (2.7082)                  (1.4104)       71

                            1.0772       -5.3563 a       1.7836 c         0.8515              -2.3064          5.6482      0.4403        0.9091     0.4173
                           (1.1576)      (1.0926)       (0.9135)         (1.0654)             (2.4059)        (3.4032)    (0.3818)      (2.9149)      71

Political rights index      0.5515       -3.6059 a       1.2957 a         0.4511              -0.7511          5.1566 a                  3.0632 a   0.4567
                           (0.5959)      (0.4929)       (0.4836)         (0.6273)             (1.1504)        (1.3409)                  (0.6488)      70

                            0.3298       -2.7455 a       0.8842 b         0.2883               0.4059          3.2763 b    0.4676 b     -0.3784     0.5036
                           (0.6112)      (0.5542)       (0.4292)         (0.5632)             (1.2437)        (1.5915)    (0.1783)      (1.3736)      70

Human rights index          5.5523      -43.3675 a      10.4564          13.8583 c           -17.0199         43.5134 a                55.7871 a    0.4716
                           (6.8361)      (6.3501)       (8.4148)         (7.2439)            (12.1046)       (15.2648)                 (6.9490)       65

                            3.7557      -32.5717 a       6.1820          12.1566 c            -3.7990         22.8380      5.4581 a     14.4861     0.5235
                           (6.5900)      (6.3137)       (7.4921)         (6.7145)            (12.5960)       (15.6424)    (1.7346)     (14.4979)      65

Note: a Significant at 1%; b Significant at 5%; c Significant at 10%
                                                Table 12: Economic freedom with English freedom and Legal origin

The table presents the results of OLS regressions. In Panel A, the dependent variable is Property rights index. In Panel B, the dependent variable is Number of
procedures. In both panels, the independent variables are: (1) Tenure of Supreme Court judges; (2) Tenure of administrative court judges; (3) Power of
administrative law judges over executive; (4) Case law; (5) Legal origin dummy variables; (6) Ethnolinguistic fractionalization; (7) Latitude; and (8) Ln GDP per
capita. Variables are further defined in Table 1. Robust standard errors are shown below the coefficients in parentheses.


                                                                       Panel A: Results for Property rights index
Dependent Variable      SC tenure AC tenure        Power of Case law         English Socialist German Scandinavian Ethnolinguistic Latitude Ln GDP Intercept Adj. R2
                                                 admin. Judge                  LO        LO      LO         LO     fractionalization        per capita          [N]
Property rights index     0.5012 c                                           0.6299 b -0.5848  1.0196 a   0.4336          -0.1752 -0.2060    0.4299 a -0.9050 0.7340
                         (0.2882)                                           (0.2583) (0.6008) (0.3031)   (0.3229)        (0.6168) (0.5773) (0.0800) (0.8035)     67

                                      0.5493 b                               0.4849 b -0.5711      0.8546 a     0.1914    -0.0562     0.0044     0.4521 a -1.1400   0.7607
                                     (0.2258)                               (0.2146) (0.5205)     (0.2797)     (0.2878)   (0.5440)   (0.5049)   (0.0768) (0.7634)     67

                                                    0.5675 c                 0.5527 c 1.1897 a 1.0676 a         0.2706    -0.2541     0.0780     0.4297 a -0.3801   0.7306
                                                   (0.3135)                 (0.2917) (0.3925) (0.2904)         (0.2609)   (0.6543)   (0.5395)   (0.0840) (0.7332)     67

                                                                0.4291       0.4966    -1.2196 a 0.5869 b       0.1277    -0.0026     0.2074     0.4486 a -0.5150   0.6972
                                                               (0.3088)     (0.3296)   (0.4372) (0.2721)       (0.3723)   (0.5842)   (0.5200)   (0.0792) (0.7194)     66

                         -0.0077      0.5314        0.0738      0.4101       0.2019    -0.4774     0.6484 c    -0.1426    -0.1758     0.0178     0.4478 a -1.1804   0.7590
                         (0.4051)    (0.3212)      (0.3042)    (0.2921)     (0.3397)   (0.6363)   (0.3353)     (0.3721)   (0.5803)   (0.5906)   (0.0822) (0.7990)     66

Note: a Significant at 1%; b Significant at 5%; c Significant at 10%
                                                                    Panel B: Results for Number of procedures
Dependent Variable     SC tenure AC tenure         Power of Case law       English Socialist German      Scandinavian Ethnolinguistic Latitude Ln GDP Intercept Adj. R2
                                                 admin. judge                LO        LO       LO             LO     fractionalization        per capita          [N]
Number of procedures -1.4130                                              -5.0578 a -3.2959  -1.1813        -4.9085 a        -0.8813 -2.3752 -1.0425 b 23.6251 a 0.6536
                     (1.4984)                                             (1.1520) (3.4795) (1.1475)        (1.1321)        (2.2787) (2.5774) (0.3999) (4.2923)     54

                                     -1.7038 c                            -4.7191 a -3.6928   -0.8119      -4.3015 a      -0.9424    -2.6599    -1.1208 a 24.6013 a 0.6768
                                     (1.0007)                             (1.0822) (2.6518)   (0.9202)     (0.9967)       (2.1278)   (2.6669)   (0.3672) (3.5135)     54

                                                   -2.5673 b              -4.4907 a -1.5946   -1.6557       4.2985 a       0.1555    -3.8082    -0.8280 b 20.8097 a 0.7002
                                                   (0.9648)               (0.9966) (2.0315)   (1.0395)     (1.0014)       (2.0178)   (2.5610)   (0.3546) (2.8866)     54

                                                               -1.2708    -4.5591 a -1.1073    0.0144      -3.9646 a      -0.8948    -3.4807    -1.0119 b 21.5612 a 0.6562
                                                               (1.1069)   (1.2253) (2.0100)   (1.1897)     (1.1950)       (2.2747)   (2.6927)   (0.3926) (3.3826)     54

                          0.8781     -1.1592       -1.9618 b -0.6161      -4.1157 a -1.9964   -0.8795      -3.5858 a       0.0270    -3.8829 c -0.9206 a 21.8329 a 0.7091
                         (1.8367)    (1.2324)      (0.8723) (1.0501)      (1.2878) (3.5647)   (1.3030)     (1.2690)       (1.9779)   (2.2898) (0.3418) (3.9116)      54

Note: a Significant at 1%; b Significant at 5%; c Significant at 10%
                                Appendix: Dependent variables by country and Legal origin

This table classifies countries by Legal origin and shows the value of each dependent variable for each country. Panel A shows
the values for English Legal origin countries, Panel B shows the values for French Legal origin countries, and Panel C shows the
values for German, Scandinavian, and Socialist Legal origin countries. Exact definitions of each of the dependent variables can be
found in Table 1.


                                         Panel A: Data for Countries of English Legal origin
                                                                  DEPENDENT VARIABLES
Country                    Property rights index Number of procedures Democracy index        Political rights index   Human rights index
Australia                           5                      2                     10                    7                     91
Bangladesh                          2                      .                      9                    5                     59
Canada                              5                      2                     10                    7                     94
Ghana                               3                     10                      1                    4                     53
India                                3                    11                      8                     4                    54
Ireland                              5                     3                     10                     7                    94
Israel                              4                      5                      9                    7                     76
Kenya                               3                      9                      0                    1                     46
Liberia                              .                     .                      0                    1                      .
Malaysia                            4                      7                      8                    4                     61
Nepal                                3                     .                      8                     5                    69
New Zealand                         5                      3                     10                    7                     98
Nigeria                             3                      9                      0                    1                     49
Pakistan                            4                      8                      8                    5                     42
Saudi Arabia                        5                      .                      0                    1                     29
Singapore                           5                      6                      2                    3                     60
South Africa                        3                      9                      8                    7                     50
Thailand                            5                      8                      6                    5                     62
Uganda                              4                     11                      0                    3                     46
United Kingdom                      5                      4                     10                    7                     93
United States                        5                     3                     10                     7                    90
Zambia                              3                      5                      6                    5                     57
Zimbabwe                            3                      5                      0                    3                     65
English average                    3.95                  6.32                   5.78                  4.61                  65.36
                                     Panel B: Data for Countries of French Legal origin
                                                              DEPENDENT VARIABLES
Country                Property rights index Number of procedures Democracy index       Political rights index   Human rights index
Algeria                         3                     .                      0                    2                     66
Argentina                       4                    13                      8                    6                     84
Belgium                         5                     7                     10                    7                     96
Brazil                           3                   11                     10                     6                    69
Chile                           5                    10                      9                    6                     80
Colombia                        3                    17                      9                    4                     60
Ecuador                          .                   16                      9                    6                     83
Egypt, Arab Republic             3                   11                      0                     2                    50
Ethiopia                         2                    .                      2                     4                     .
France                          4                    15                      8                    7                     94
Greece                          4                    15                     10                    7                     87
Haiti                           1                     .                      8                    3                      .
Honduras                        3                     .                      6                    5                     65
Indonesia                       3                    11                      0                    1                     34
Iran, Islamic                    1                    .                      0                     2                    22
Iraq                            1                     .                      0                    1                     17
Italy                           4                    11                     10                    7                     90
Jordan                          4                    12                      4                    4                     65
Kuwait                          5                     .                      0                    3                     33
Lebanon                         3                     9                      2                    2                      .
Libya                           1                     .                      0                    1                     24
Mexico                          3                    15                      1                    4                     64
Mozambique                       2                   19                      6                     5                    53
Netherlands                     5                     6                     10                    7                     98
Nicaragua                       2                     .                      6                    4                     75
Panama                          3                     7                      8                    6                     81
Peru                            3                     6                      2                    3                     54
Philippines                     4                     9                      8                    6                     72
Portugal                        4                    10                     10                    7                     92
Spain                           4                    10                      9                    7                     87
Syrian Arab Republic             2                    .                      0                     1                    30
Turkey                          4                    12                      9                    3                     44
Venezuela                       3                    14                      8                    5                     75
French average                 3.16                 11.57                  5.52                  4.36                  64.80
                       Panel C: Data for Countries of German, Scandinavian, and Socialist Legal origin
                                                               DEPENDENT VARIABLES
Country                 Property rights index Number of procedures Democracy index     Political rights index   Human rights index
Austria                          5                      8                   10                    7                    95
Germany                          5                      8                   10                    7                    98
Japan                            5                     11                   10                    7                    82
South Korea                      5                     11                   10                    6                    59
Switzerland                      5                      7                   10                    7                    96
Taiwan                            .                     8                    6                     .                    .
German average                  5.00                  8.83                 9.33                  6.80                 86.00


Denmark                          5                     3                    10                    7                    98
Finland                          5                     3                    10                    7                    99
Iceland                           5                     .                   10                     7                    .
Norway                           5                     4                    10                    7                    97
Sweden                           4                     4                    10                    7                    98
Scandinavian average            4.80                  3.50                 10.00                 7.00                 98.00


China                            2                    10                    0                     1                    21
Cuba                             1                     .                    0                     1                    30
North Korea                      1                     .                    0                     1                    20
Vietnam                          1                    16                    0                     1                    27
Socialist average               1.25                 13.00                 0.00                  1.00                 24.50
