NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRODUCTIVITY, OUTPUT, AND FAILURE:
A COMPARISON OF TAIWANESE AND KOREAN MANUFACTURERS
Bee Yan Aw
Sukkyun Chung
Mark J. Roberts
Working Paper 8766
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8766
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2002

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2002 by Bee Yan Aw, Sukkyun Chung and Mark J. Roberts. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Productivity, Output, and Failure: A Comparison of Taiwanese and Korean Manufacturers
Bee Yan Aw, Sukkyun Chung and Mark J. Roberts
NBER Working Paper No. 8766
February 2002
JEL No. D2, L0

ABSTRACT
Industry cost and demand conditions can vary across countries leading to differences in industry
market structure, including the distribution of output and productivity across firms and the magnitude of
entry and exit flows. It has been argued that despite many outward similarities, two of the most
successful Southeast Asian economies, Taiwan and South Korea, differ systematically in the nature of
entry costs, the competitiveness of output markets, and the working of their capital markets. In this paper
we use micro panel data for producers in seven two-digit manufacturing industries in South Korea and
Taiwan and identify a number of systematic differences in industry structure between the two countries.
Our empirical findings indicate that, relative to their counterparts in Korea, Taiwanese industries are
characterized by less concentrated market structure, more producer turnover, smaller within-industry
productivity dispersion across producers, a smaller percentage of plants operating at low productivity
levels, and smaller productivity differentials between surviving and failing producers. These patterns are
consistent with strong competitive pressures in Taiwan that lead to market selection based on productivity
differences. In contrast, the patterns in Korea are consistent with the presence of some impediments to
exit or entry that insulate inefficient producers from market pressures.

Bee Yan Aw
Department of Economics
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
byr@psu.edu

Sukkyun Chung
Ministry of Information and
Communication
Seoul 110-760
Republic of Korea
schung@mic.go.kr

Mark J. Roberts
Department of Economics
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
and NBER
mroberts@psu.edu

I. Introduction
The rapid economic growth of the Newly Industrializing Countries in East Asia has been
a focus of interest for academics and policy makers for two decades. The bulk of the research in
this area focuses on key features shared by these countries, such as their strong orientation
towards the export market and their high rates of capital investment, and relies on evidence
derived from aggregate or sectoral data.1 However, it has also been frequently noted that across
these countries there are a number of significant differences in the organization of their industry
and ownership structure of their firms.2 For example, in the case of the two most prominent East
Asian NICs, Taiwan and Korea, the manufacturing sector in the former is dominated by small
and medium-sized enterprises while Korea’s large business groups (chaebols) control much of
the country’s manufacturing output. The relationship between market structure and the
performance of these economies, in general, and micro-level performance, in particular, has been
less clearly identified.
In this paper we use micro data for seven key manufacturing industries in Taiwan and
Korea to quantify several relationships between market structure, producer turnover, and
productivity at the micro level. The organizing framework for our inquiry is a class of
theoretical models of industry dynamics that have been developed to explain the diverse patterns
of firm growth and exit observed in micro data. They recognize that producers within an
industry have idiosyncratic differences in their efficiency and profitability. This underlying

1

A number of recent studies based on aggregate and sectoral level data have focused on the role of productivity
growth and capital accumulation as determinants of this growth. Krugman (1994), and Rodrik (1995) are among the
many researchers that emphasize capital accumulation while others, including Page (1994) and the World Bank
(1993) emphasize productivity growth as the principal source of success in these East Asian countries.

2

Levy (1991) traces the differences in market structure to variations in the costs of market transactions in the initial
stages of industrialization, while Martins (1992), Rodrik (1993), and Feenstra, Yang, and Hamilton (1999) examine
their impact on trade patterns.

1

profit heterogeneity, when embedded in a market framework, generates a size distribution of
producers, a distribution of productivity or profitability across producers, an endogenous exit
decision for incumbent producers that is based on their productivity, and an endogenous flow of
new entering firms. A key parameter in many of these models is the sunk cost that must be
incurred by a new firm entering the market. This cost acts as a barrier to entry but also insulates
inefficient producers from market pressure. An increase in the entry cost results in lower exit
probabilities for inefficient producers and less reallocation of output from inefficient to more
efficient producers over time, a more concentrated industry structure, and less producer turnover.
Scholars who have discussed the market structure of these two countries have
emphasized the greater reliance on market transactions in Taiwan relative to Korea. Pack (1992)
and Levy and Kuo (1991) argue that the magnitude of up-front investment required either to
construct production facilities or to gather specialized market information is less in Taiwan.
They contend that these differences in entry costs induce Taiwanese firms to initiate production
at a much smaller size than Korean firms. In addition, Levy (1991) discusses the reliance on
subcontracting relationships among Taiwanese producers. The presence of a well-developed
network of subcontractors in several key industries in Taiwan works to reduce the cost of entry
by allowing firms to enter at small scale without a serious cost disadvantage. More recently,
Feenstra, Hamilton, and Huang (2001) argue that the contrast in the intensity of business
networks in the two economies is more than just a simple reflection of market or state forces, but
ultimately affects industry performance.
Our empirical results demonstrate systematic differences in the relationship between exit,
productivity, and output for many manufacturing industries in Korea and Taiwan. Korean
industries are characterized by less producer turnover, more cross-sectional productivity

2

dispersion among producers, a slightly more concentrated market structure, larger productivity
differentials between surviving and failing producers, and a larger percentage of plants located in
the lower tail of the productivity distribution. All of these patterns are consistent with
impediments to entry or exit that act to insulate inefficient producers from market pressures in
Korea.
The remainder of the paper is divided into five sections. In the next section, we
summarize the theoretical framework. In section three, we discuss the micro data sets from the
Korean and Taiwanese Census of Manufactures and describe our methodology for measuring
total factor productivity for each producer. The fourth section analyzes the relationships between
the cross-sectional distributions of output and productivity in each of seven industries in Taiwan
and Korea. In section five we use the time-series elements of our data and focus on the
relationships between producers’ productivity, size, and exit patterns. In the final section we
summarize the major findings and conclusions.

II.

The Theoretical Framework: Productivity, Size, and Turnover

Theoretical models of industry dynamics by Jovanovic (1982), Lambson (1991),
Hopenhayn (1992), and Ericson and Pakes (1995) have been developed to explain the divergent
paths of growth and failure that characterize micro data on individual producers. While each of
these models differs in particular details, they have a number of important similarities including
a source of persistent profit heterogeneity across producers and a source of random shocks that
lead to fluctuations in each producer’s profits over time. Each producer makes an exit decision
based on their current profit conditions and knowledge of the stochastic process generating
future profits. Given a decision to continue in business, each producer then makes an output

3

decision. The models produce a description of the set of producers in operation at a point in time
and the distributions of output and profits across the producers. They can be used as a basis for
explaining differences in market structure, exit rates, and producer heterogeneity across
countries, time periods, or industries.
In this paper we will focus on differences in two-digit manufacturing industries between
Taiwan and South Korea. To organize our empirical analysis we will rely on the model of firm
dynamics developed by Hopenhayn (1992). In this model an industry is composed of a
continuum of price-taking firms that produce a homogeneous output. Firms are heterogeneous in
terms of their efficiency, with each firm’s output depending on input levels and a random
productivity shock, φ. This productivity shock follows a Markov process that is independent
across firms. The distribution of future productivity for each firm is represented by the
distribution function F(φt+1 | φt ) which is strictly decreasing in φt, implying that, relative to a
low-productivity firm, a high-productivity firm in year t has a larger probability of having high
productivity in year t+1. Each incumbent firm knows its current productivity and the
distribution function F.
At the start of each time period, before its productivity level for that period is observed,
each firm makes a decision to participate in the market or not. Incumbent firms have two
choices: they may choose to exit the industry or remain in the industry. If they exit they earn a
scrap value for their plant. If they remain in, they pay a fixed cost Cf after which they observe
their productivity shock and choose their output level for that period. Potential entrants can enter
by paying a sunk entry cost, Ce , after which they draw their initial productivity level φ from a
common distribution function G(φ), and choose their output level. Input and output prices in the
industry are determined competitively to clear the respective markets.

4

The endogenous variables produced by the model are the flow of entrants into the market
in each period and the minimum level of productivity required for incumbents to stay in the
market. The flow of entrants is determined so that the expected profits of an entrant equal the
sunk entry cost. The failure boundary, which we denote by X , is the lowest level of productivity
, φ , that will enable the firm to have positive discounted expected profits over future periods.
Firms with current productivity less than X will choose to exit the market and those with current
productivity greater than X will choose to remain in.
The theoretical framework has an important role for sunk entry costs, Ce. Specifically, if
Ce is not too large and demand is stable, industry equilibrium will involve simultaneous
offsetting flows of entering and exiting firms, and changes in the level of entry cost will affect
the magnitude of these flows. Hopenhayn demonstrates that a higher Ce will raise the level of
discounted profits needed to make entry profitable, thus discouraging entry. In addition, a higher
Ce will also lower the minimum productivity level X needed for incumbents to survive, thus
reducing the amount of firm exit. High sunk entry costs provide a barrier to the entry of new
firms and thus insulate incumbents from the effects of market selection. Alternatively, low sunk
entry costs produce high levels of firm turnover and demanding requirements on the productivity
of incumbent firms. In this model, sunk entry costs are a key determinant of both producer
turnover and the distribution of efficiency levels and output across incumbent producers in the
industry.
Using the micro data sets developed in the next section we can summarize several aspects
of an industry’s turnover, productivity distribution, and output distribution and compare these
characteristics for the same industry in Korea and Taiwan. The model predicts that exit will be
concentrated among the producers with the lowest current productivity. We can empirically test

5

this prediction in our data by examining producers in period t and asking if there are systematic
productivity differences between the group that exits the market after period t and the group that
survives into period t+1. We can further refine this prediction to recognize the role that sunk
entry costs play in the failure process. The theory model predicts that high entry costs weaken
the pressure of market selection on incumbents and will result in the survival of more lowproductivity producers in the industry. Related to this is that the productivity differential
between exiting firms and surviving firms will be larger as sunk entry costs increase. This
occurs because the reduction in the failure boundary X means that exiting firms will be more
heavily concentrated in the low-productivity tail of the distribution when entry costs are high.
By comparing the productivity differentials between surviving and failing producers in an
industry we will be able to tell if the patterns observed in Korea are consistent with higher entry
costs than the patterns in Taiwan. We will provide several comparisons of the productivity
distribution that are designed to quantify differences between exiting and surviving firms.
A second implication of the theory is that high entry costs should result in lower producer
turnover and we can directly compare the turnover rate for an industry across the two countries.
Third, the theory makes some predictions about the output distribution across firms. Industries
with high entry costs will have less entry and a higher market price. This will result in a higher
output level for firms conditional on their efficiency level φ. Offsetting this is the fact that more
firms with a low level of φ will be able to survive, so the overall effect on the size distribution is
ambiguous. We can examine the net effect of these two forces by comparing the market share of
producers sorted by their productivity levels. A higher concentration of industry output resulting
from firms in the lower tail of the productivity distribution is consistent with weaker market
selection and the survival of more low-productivity producers.

6

III.

Micro Data and Productivity Measurement

Census of Manufactures Data
The data sets used in our empirical analysis are collected as part of the manufacturing
censuses taken every five years in Taiwan and Korea.3 We will focus on seven two-digit
manufacturing industries: textiles, apparel, chemicals, plastics, fabricated metals, electrical
machinery and electronics, and transportation equipment. These represent the key traditional
industries that both countries relied upon for their early export market development and key
modern industries that have played an increasingly important role in each country’s exports in
recent years. With the exception of apparel, all of these industries have had substantial output
growth during the 1980’s, the decade we study. These industries account for at least 54 percent
of manufacturing output in each year of our data in Taiwan and at least 53 percent in Korea.
In the Korean data, the observations are for manufacturing plants with five or more
employees in the census years, 1983, 1988 and 1993. In the case of Taiwan, observations are at
the firm level for the three census years, 1981, 1986 and 1991. In each case the micro
observations are linked across the three census years so we can identify entering and exiting
producers in each year. Ideally, we would like comparisons of the size and productivity
distributions to be based on micro observations for the same units, either plants or firms.
Unfortunately for our purposes, the manufacturing censuses in the two countries are not
conducted with the same sampling unit. However, since the vast majority of firms in Taiwan are
single-plant producers, the distinction between plant and firm is not as important as in other

3

The collection of the data contained in the industrial censuses of Taiwan comes under the jurisdiction of the
Directorate-General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics, Executive Yuan. The data at the firm level is aggregated
and published as separate volumes entitled, The Report on Industrial and Commercial Census Taiwan-Fukien Area,
The Republic of China. The National Statistical Office of the Republic of Korea collects the plant-level data
contained in the industrial census. The plant-level data is aggregated to the industry level and published in separate
volumes entitled, Report on Industrial Census (Whole Country).

7

countries. The difference in sampling unit will tend to underestimate the size of Korean
producers relative to their counterparts in Taiwan, and that must be recognized when interpreting
our findings. To simplify the discussion we will refer to the data as being plant-level for both
countries, even though only firm-level information is available for Taiwan. Finally, in order to
make comparisons of the size distributions in the two countries more comparable, we limit our
analysis to firms in Taiwan that have five or more employees. This corresponds to the size
cutoff imposed in the Korean data. It eliminates between 39 and 44 percent of the firm
observations in each of the three years, but only between 2.8 and 3.2 percent of industry output
in any year.4
Total Factor Productivity Index
The data collected in each country is similar, and contains variables that are commonly
collected in micro data sets based on producer surveys. The value of output produced in the
plant, expenditure on intermediate materials, employment levels, expenditure on labor, and the
book value of the capital stock are the primary variables we use to construct an index of total
factor productivity (TFP) for each plant. The index is used as a single measure of the plant’s
relative efficiency in a year, a proxy for φ , in the theoretical model. A TFP index captures many
factors that can lead to profit differences across plants, including differences in technology, age
or quality of the capital stock, managerial ability, scale economies combined with differences in
size, or differences in output quality. Our interest is in the relationship between this broad-based
performance measure and the plant’s output and exit decision.

4

Since the plants with less than five employees are not surveyed in the Korean census we do not know how many
producers are eliminated by this sampling cutoff in Korea.

8

As our index of TFP we adopt the multilateral index developed by Caves, Christensen
and Diewert (1982) and extended by Good, Nadiri, and Sickles (1997). The productivity index is
calculated separately for each of the seven two-digits industries in each country. The multilateral
index relies on a single reference point that is constructed as a hypothetical plant that has the
arithmetic mean values of log output, log input, and input cost shares over all plants in the twodigit industry/country in each year. Each plant’s logarithmic output and input levels are
measured relative to this reference point in each year and then the reference points are chainlinked over time.
The total factor productivity index for plant i in year t is defined as:

(

)

t

ln TFPt i = ln Qti − ln Qt + å (ln Q s − ln Qs −1 )
s =2

t
é 1 i
ù
i
+
−
+
- êå 2 (α tj α tj )(ln X tj ln X tj ) åå 12 (α sj + α s −1 j )(ln X sj − ln X s −1 j )ú
s =2 j
ë j
û

ln Qti , ln X tji , and α tji are the log output, log input of factor j, and the cost share of factor j
for plant i. ln Qt , ln X tj , and α tj are the same variables for the hypothetical reference plant in
the industry in year t and are equal to the arithmetic mean of the corresponding variable over all
plants in the year. The first term of the first line in the above equation is the deviation of the
plant’s output from the output of the reference point in the industry in year t, and the second term
is the cumulative change in the output reference point between year t and the initial year, t=1.
The two terms in the second line perform the same operation for each factor input j, and are
weighted by the average of the cost shares for plant i and the reference point in year t. The index
measures total factor productivity of each plant in each year relative to that of the hypothetical

9

plant in the initial year. This productivity index is particularly useful in analyzing the crosssectional distribution of plant productivity levels for an industry in one of the countries and the
movement of this distribution over time.5 Because the index measures only the relative
productivity of the plants in an industry, it cannot be used to make productivity comparisons
across industries or across countries for a single industry.6 When we make productivity
comparisons between Korea and Taiwan for an industry we will not compare the levels of
productivity in the two countries but rather focus on the shape of the productivity distribution
across plants within each of the countries.

IV.

Cross-Section Distribution of Output and Productivity

We begin by summarizing the distribution of gross output by plant size, measured in
terms of three employment categories: 5-99 workers, 100-499 workers, and 500 plus workers.
These figures are reported for 1986 in Taiwan and 1988 in Korea in Table 1. In every industry,
the largest size category of plants account for larger shares of total industry output in Korea than
in Taiwan. This difference is largest in transportation equipment and fabricated metals. On
average, plants employing 500 or more workers contribute 51.8 percent of total industry output
in Korea and 35.4 percent in Taiwan. At the other end of the size spectrum, plants in the
smallest employment category in six of the seven industries account for larger shares of total
output in Taiwan compared to Korea, averaging 33.6 percent and 21 percent of total output,
5

Aw, Chen, and Roberts (2001) summarize the cross-sectional productivity distributions for a few of these
Taiwanese industries using kernel density estimators. The distributions are generally symmetric, bell-shaped
distributions with long tails. For most of the industries they shift systematically to the right over time reflecting a
widespread increase in total factor productivity for producers.

6

The index can be used to make across-country comparisons for a single industry if the researcher has appropriate
deflators for output in each country. The deflators must recognize the differences in the composition of output in
each country. We do not have price deflators that do this and instead construct the productivity index as a measure
of plant efficiency relative to other plants in the same industry and country.

10

respectively. This general pattern is consistent with results reported by Levy and Kuo (1991)
and Levy (1991).7
The models of industry dynamics rely on underlying differences in efficiency to generate
differences in producer size and turnover. With our data we can directly measure the crosssection distribution of productivity in each industry. Table 2 presents two measures of withinindustry cross-sectional dispersion in the productivity index lnTFP. The table reports the
standard deviation and the range between the 10th and 90th percentiles of the plant-level
distribution by industry and country. The summary statistics are averaged over the three census
years in each country.
Both dispersion measures are higher in Korea than in Taiwan in every one of the seven
industries. The largest differences in magnitude between Taiwan and Korea occur in the
chemicals, textiles, and apparel industries. The industries with the smallest difference in
dispersion, measured by either the standard deviation or percentile range, are plastics and
transportation. These results imply that there is much more heterogeneity in productivity among
plants in Korea than in Taiwan. The higher dispersion in Korea relative to Taiwan is
independent of the average growth in TFP across the seven industries in the two countries as
indicated in Table 2. Taiwanese industries with very high as well as very low TFP growth rates
relative to those in Korea, all have dispersion measures that are lower than their counterparts in
Korea.

7

The figures presented in these papers, as in ours, underestimate the difference in firm concentration between
Korea and Taiwan. First, producers with less than five workers are not included in these calculations because they
are not included in the Korea dataset we utilize. Firms in this size range account for almost half of the total number
of manufacturing firms in Taiwan but are much less common in Korea. Second, as mentioned above, the Korean
industrial census data we utilize in Table 1 is collected at the plant level rather than the firm level as in Taiwan. For
both these reasons, the actual concentration of output in the hands of large firms in Korea would be even higher than
the numbers in Table 1 indicate.

11

One possible reason for the larger variance in productivity in Korea is that higher entry
and exit costs result in the survival of more relatively low-productivity plants in the industry.
We can examine this by summarizing the distribution of the number of plants and plant output by
relative productivity level. In the left half of Figure 1, we plot the share of the number of plants
against the percentage deviation of plant TFP from the industry-country mean TFP. In every
industry we observe that the plant line for Korea lies above the line for Taiwan at low levels of
productivity (roughly, productivity levels below the mean). This implies that, relative to Taiwan,
a higher percentage of plants in Korea are concentrated in the lower tail of the productivity
distribution. This difference is particularly large in the textiles, apparel, and chemicals
industries, the three industries with the largest difference in productivity dispersion between the
two countries. This pattern, which shows that a larger percentage of the industry’s plants are at a
productivity disadvantage in Korea, is consistent with weaker market selection forces and a
lower threshold level of productivity needed for survival.
The graphs in the right half of Figure 1 show how the cumulative market share of the
plants varies with the plant productivity level. Two features stand out. First, for productivity
levels below the mean, the curves for Taiwan and Korea are very similar for all but two of the
seven industries. This implies that the cumulative output contribution of plants at low
productivity levels is similar across the two countries. In the other two industries, chemicals and
plastics, plants with relatively low levels of productivity are responsible for a larger share of
output in Korea than in Taiwan. Second, at the highest productivity levels, the cumulative output
distribution in Korea lies below the level of Taiwan. This implies that output in Korea is more
skewed toward plants in the high end of the productivity distribution. While Korea has a larger
concentration of plants in the lower tail of the productivity distribution, the effect of firm size

12

distribution on aggregate productivity is offset by the higher concentration of output in plants in
the highest tail of the productivity distribution.
To summarize, the data indicate that Korean industries have much larger dispersion in
plant productivity than the same industry in Taiwan. This wider dispersion in Korea is
accompanied by a higher concentration of plants with relatively low productivity levels.
However, the higher concentration of plants does not translate into a higher concentration of
output in the low-productivity tail of the distribution. The cumulative distribution of output is
similar in Korea and Taiwan for plants with productivity below the industry mean. In fact, the
relatively high-productivity plants in Korea tend to account for a larger fraction of industry
output than their high-productivity counterparts in Taiwan. In short, relative to Taiwan, most of
the Korean industries have a higher percentage of their plants operating at low productivity
levels but a higher percentage of their output coming from their high-productivity plants. These
patterns are largely consistent with the predictions of the market selection theory. Higher initial
investment costs and sunk costs of entry can combine to weaken market selection forces in
Korea and result in the survival of more low-productivity plants in the Korean industries.

V.

Turnover and Productivity Differentials

In this section we use the panel aspects of our data to quantify differences between Korea
and Taiwan in the rates of plant turnover and the relationship between plant productivity and the
plant’s status as an entrant, exit, or continuing producer. Both the Korean and Taiwanese
manufacturing sectors are characterized by high simultaneous rates of plant or firm entry and
exit, but much of the turnover reflects the net expansion of the manufacturing industries.8 For

8

Patterns of firm entry and exit in Taiwan are summarized in Dahlman and Sananikone (1990), Wade (1990), and
Aw, Chen, and Roberts (2001).

13

example, the total number of manufacturing firms in Taiwan increased by 24 percent (from
110,818 to 137,428 firms) between 1986 and 1991. The corresponding figure for the period
1988-1993 in Korea is a 49 percent increase in the number of plants (from 59,732 to 88,864
plants)

Industry Turnover Rates

Net changes in the number of plants or firms mask large offsetting flows of entering and
exiting firms. Similarly, the reallocation of resources and output that result from these gross
flows have been found to be many times larger than net changes.9 If industries differ in the
magnitude of sunk entry costs, for example, because the capital intensity of the production
process varies across industries, then the theoretical model outlined above predicts that, across
industries, the turnover rate for producers, the simultaneous flows of firms into and out of the
industry, will be negatively correlated with the level of sunk entry costs. High sunk cost
industries will have both low entry and low exit rates, while industries with low entry costs will
have frequent turnover of the producers in the industry. The theoretical result is one that holds in
equilibrium when market demand is constant. When calculating turnover rates, the sum of the
entry and exit rate, in industry data, the level of market demand is also changing inducing a net
expansion or contraction in the number of firms. This is particularly true in our data for Taiwan
and Korea, where the net entry rate can exceed 100 percent over 5 years for some industries.
In order to control for the net expansion or contraction of the size of the industry when
calculating firm turnover, Dunne and Roberts (1991) suggest a measure of industry volatility.

9

Numerous empirical studies have documented this pattern using employment, output, and the number of firms or
plants to measure entry and exit. Dunne, Roberts and Samuelson (1988) and Dunne and Roberts (1991) report net
and gross flows for the number of U.S. manufacturing firms and their output; Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh (1996)

14

The measure is defined as the sum of the entry rate and exit rate minus the absolute value of the
net entry rate. It is a measure of the amount of producer turnover that is in excess of the amount
needed to account for the change in industry size. 10 All of the measures of producer flows, the
entry rate, exit rate, turnover rate, and volatility rate, can be measured using either the number of
producers that enter and exit or the amount of industry output or employment that the entering
and exiting producers account for. Dunne and Roberts (1991) show that for U.S. data the output
volatility rate tends to be stable over time for an industry but varies substantially across
industries in a way that is correlated with the capital intensity of the industry. Cross-industry
differences tend to reflect differences in technology, such as the capital-labor ratio in the
industry, while time-series variation due to fluctuations in industry demand tend to be small with
this measure. In contrast, net entry tends to vary substantially over time for an industry as
demand fluctuates and is virtually uncorrelated with differences in technology across industries.
For this reason we use the output volatility rate as our preferred measure of the amount of
producer turnover that arises from differences in technology, including differences in the sunk
cost of entry, across industries.
The output volatility rates for each industry and 5-year time period in our data are
reported in Table 3. Comparing the 1986 figures for Taiwan with that in 1988 for Korea,
volatility rates for Taiwan are higher than in Korea in every industry. In the three key industries
(textiles, chemicals, and electric/electronics), these rates are between 1.5 and 2.5 times higher
than those for Korea. With the exception of the apparel industry, a similar pattern holds when
we compare the 1991 numbers for Taiwan with that in 1993 for Korea. A simple regression of
document employment flows in the U.S. and summarize similar statistics for other developed countries; Roberts
(1996) summarizes employment flows in three developing countries.

15

the volatility rates in Table 3 on industry dummies and country/year dummies shows that,
relative to the textile industry in Taiwan in the 1981-1986 period, the apparel and fabricated
metals industries have statistically significantly higher volatility. The transport equipment and
chemical industries have significantly less volatility, and the plastic and electrical equipment
industries have rates that are not statistically different. The year dummy for Taiwan for the
1986-1991 period is not significant but both year dummies for Korea are significantly negative.
After controlling for the industry, the Korean data are characterized by less producer turnover.
Although both countries experienced high rates of output growth during the period we
study, it is possible that differences in demand growth can still contribute to the differences in
volatility rates between Taiwan and Korea. Other explanations focus on cost or market
conditions that differ between the countries. Levy (1991) argues that the dense network of
subcontractors in Taiwan helps to lower sunk entry and exit costs, in contrast to Korea where this
network is significantly weaker. The higher volatility rates in Taiwan are also consistent with
the results in Table 1 that report that, in contrast to Korea, a higher proportion of output is
concentrated in the hands of smaller producers in Taiwan whose survival may be more sensitive
to cyclical fluctuations. Finally, Pack and Westphal (1986), Levy (1991) and Rodrik (1995),
have documented the importance of investment subsidies in Korea. These policies can depress
turnover by subsidizing inefficient plants or industries.

Productivity Differences between Failures and Survivors

In the remainder of this section we examine whether the systematic differences in
productivity across plants are correlated with transition patterns in and out of production. We

10

Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh (1996) use this variable, defined with employment flows, as a measure of excess
employment reallocation in an industry.

16

also examine if these patterns differ between Taiwan and Korea in ways that can reflect
differences in the strength of market selection forces in the two countries.
We begin by quantifying mean differences in productivity across groups of plants with
different transition patterns. In order to organize our analysis, we define groups of plants based
on year, entry cohort, and transition status as shown in Figure 2. Each column in the figure
summarizes a census year, with the subscripts 1,2 and 3 representing the years 1981, 1986, and
1991 for Taiwan and 1983, 1988, and 1993 for Korea. Each row in the figure for Taiwan
(Korea) represents a different cohort of plants: the α cohort comprising plants present in 1981
(1983); the β cohort consisting of plants that first appear in 1986 (1988), and finally the γ cohort
comprising plants that first appear in 1991 (1993). Each initial cohort of plants can be further
divided into those that survive (S superscript) and failures (X superscript). We estimate
regression equations for each industry in each country in which plant productivity is summarized
with a set of 9 dummy variables representing the combinations of year (1,2,3), cohort (α,β,γ),
and exit/survival status (S, X).
Table 4 begins by comparing the mean productivity differences among cohorts of
continuing and exiting plants in the same year to see if the former have higher productivity than
the latter as predicted by the theoretical model. A negative coefficient means that exiting plants
have lower productivity than surviving plants. Overall, of the 21 cells containing the coefficients
for Taiwan, all but three are negative. None of the coefficients with positive signs is statistically
significant. Thus, relative to surviving plants, plants that exit production after year t have lower
productivity in that year. For example, the figures in column 2 are negative for all seven
industries, indicating that, in 1981, plants that will exit before 1986 have lower total factor
productivity, on average, than the plants that will survive. The productivity gap varies from 3.4

17

(fabricated metals) to 7.8 (textiles) percent. Similarly, the negative differentials in columns 3
and 4 imply that, plants that will survive until 1991 are more productive than plants that will not
survive. The only difference is that the exit-survivor differentials are smaller in absolute value,
ranging from 2 to 5 percent, indicating that as the cohort ages the productivity advantage of
incumbent plants diminishes.
Columns 5 and 6 of the table report F-statistics for the hypotheses that there is no
productivity differential between exiting and surviving plants and that the differential is constant
across the three cohort/years combinations we observe, respectively. The hypothesis of no exit
differential is rejected for all seven industries and the hypothesis that it is equal across cohorts is
rejected in three of the seven industries. Overall, the results lead to the conclusion that exit is
concentrated among the least productive firms in any cohort and year, a result consistent with the
self-selection model.
As in Taiwan, plants in Korea that will exit before 1988 and 1993 are less productive
than plants that survive. Of the 21 cells in columns 7-9, only three coefficients are positive.
However, in contrast to the same industries in Taiwan, the shortfall in productivity among
exiting plants is significantly larger in Korea. For example, in column 7, plants that exit
production before 1988 are less productive, with the differential exceeding 10 percent in all
industries except textiles. This pattern holds true in the next two columns. Of the coefficients
that are statistically significant, the differential between exits and incumbent plants is always
larger for Korean plants than the corresponding Taiwanese plants.11 The larger productivity

11

The last two columns in Table 4 report F-statistics for the hypotheses that, in Korea, there is no productivity
differential between exiting and surviving plants and that the differential is constant across the three cohort/years
combinations we observe. Both hypotheses are rejected for all seven industries under study.

18

differentials between exiting and continuing members of a cohort in Korea relative to Taiwan is
consistent with weaker market selection forces in Korea that lower the survival threshold.

Productivity Differences between Entrants and Incumbents

Table 5 summarizes the difference in mean productivity between entering and incumbent
plants by cohort and year. The second column reports, for Taiwan, differences in productivity in
1986 between new entrants in 1986 and firms from the 1981 cohort that survived through 1986.
The third (fourth) column reports the productivity differences between new entrants in 1991 and
survivors from the 1986 (1981) entry cohort. In general, the negative sign of all 21 coefficients
in columns 2-4 indicates that entering cohorts are always less productive, on average, than
incumbents in Taiwanese industries.
The coefficients in column 2 indicate that entrants in 1986 are between 2.1 percent and
6.6 percent less productive than incumbents. All but one coefficient is statistically significant. A
very similar pattern is found for the entrants in 1991. When compared with the incumbents from
the 1986 cohort (column 3), entrants are between 2.6 and 4.9 percent less productive than
incumbents. Again, the coefficients of all but one industry are statistically significant. When
compared with the 1981 cohort (column 4), the productivity disadvantage of the entrants ranges
from 2.2 to 5.2 percent and are statistically significant for all seven industries. Thus, in general,
older cohorts have higher average productivity than younger cohorts.12 The hypothesis that
entrants and incumbents are equally productive is rejected in all seven industries (column 5).
The hypothesis that the difference in productivity between entrants and incumbents is constant

12

The magnitude of the productivity difference between entrants and incumbents depends on how the productivity
distribution of entrants, G(φ ) in the theoretical model, is altered as the entrants age. Failure and productivity
improvements of the survivors transform this initial distribution as the cohort ages.

19

across cohorts and years (column 6) is rejected in only one industry. This last result suggests
that the productivity distributions of entering firms and incumbents shift over time in similar
ways.
The results for Korea differ from those for Taiwan in two important ways. First, of the
21 coefficients in columns 7, 8, and 9 that summarize the difference in mean productivity
between entering and incumbent plants, the majority (13) are positive. The positive sign implies
that the entrants are more productive than the incumbents, however, only three of the differences
are statistically significant. Second, of the 21 coefficients for Korea, more than half (12) are not
statistically significant. In fact, as shown by the F statistics in column 10, the hypothesis that
entrants and incumbents in Korea are equally productive is not rejected in four of the seven
industries. The hypothesis that the difference in productivity between the two groups is constant
across cohorts and years is rejected only in the textile and electric/electronics industry (column
11). Overall, the evidence that market selection systematically eliminates the lower productivity
members of a cohort is much weaker in Korea than Taiwan.13

Productivity Evolution of Survivors

The final piece of evidence we examine focuses on the group of plants that survive across
adjoining census years in Taiwan and Korea. The theoretical model outlined above assumes that
there is persistence in a plant’s productivity over time, specifically, that the distribution of future
productivity, conditional on current productivity, F(φt+1|φt) is strictly decreasing in φt . We can
examine the extent of productivity persistence in each country by comparing estimates of these
distributions. To do this, we assign each plant to a productivity quartile in year t based on its
13

Another explanation is that the technology in Korea is changing over time so that entering cohorts adopt more
productive technologies in Korea. Comparisons across cohorts then do not hold the technology fixed.

20

productivity in that year. We then graph the empirical distribution of productivity in year t+1 for
plants in each of the quartiles. That is, we condition on the plant’s presence in a quartile in one
year and calculate the empirical distribution of future productivity for all plants in that quartile,
F(φt+1|φjt) where φjt represents that the plant was in quartile j=1,2,3,4 in year t.
The cumulative distributions of future productivity are graphed in Figure 3 for each
country and industry. Within each graph, you move from left to right, the four cdf’s each
condition on a higher level (quartile) of initial productivity. Each of the graphs shows evidence
of persistence in plant productivity with higher initial productivity levels leading to a lower
probability of a low level of future productivity. There are two striking differences between the
graphs for the two countries. First, in Taiwan the cumulative distributions across the four
quartiles are more tightly concentrated together than they are in Korea. This implies that a
plant’s initial productivity has a larger impact on the plant’s future productivity in Korea than in
Taiwan. Second, the cdf’s are shifted to the left in Korea relative to Taiwan. This implies that
there is a greater probability of a surviving plant moving to the low-productivity tail of the
distribution in Korea. This can reflect our earlier finding from Table 5 that entering plants are
not at a productivity disadvantage in Korea, as they tend to be in Taiwan, and are replacing the
incumbent producers.
Both of these points can be seen by calculating the value of the cdf for a specific level of
current productivity. In Table 6 we report the estimates of F(φt+1 =0 |φjt) for each of the four
quartiles. These are the probabilities that a plant in each respective quartile in year t has period
t+1 productivity less than the mean for the industry. The entries correspond to the values of the
function F(⋅) evaluated at zero on the horizontal axis in Figure 3. Table 6 shows, for example, in
the Taiwanese textile industry the probability that a plant in the lowest productivity quartile in

21

year t (quartile 1) has productivity less than the mean in year t+1 is .638. For plants that begin in
the highest productivity quartile (quartile 4), this probability is much lower, at .333.
The more important role for initial productivity in Korea can be seen by noting the drop
in the probabilities as we move from the 1st to 4th quartile in each row of the table. For the textile
industry the probability of being below the mean drops by .305 (=.638 - .333) as we move from
the least to most productive quartile in Taiwan, while the same decline is .523 (=.876 - .353) in
Korea. This pattern is present in every industry with the decline varying from .144 to .386 across
the Taiwanese industries and .292 to .523 in Korea. Finally, the fact that Korean plants are more
likely to move into the low-productivity tail of the distribution than plants in Taiwan can be seen
by comparing the cells in Table 6 for a given industry/quartile across countries. The higher
probabilities for the Korean plants imply a greater likelihood that the surviving plants have less
than mean productivity in the future and this is true even for plants that begin in the highest
productivity (4th) quartile of the distribution.
One way to characterize the results from Figure 3 and Table 6 is that the process of
productivity evolution for surviving producers in Korea, relative to Taiwan, involves a much
more significant role for a plant’s initial productivity in determining future success. A plant’s
movements through the productivity distribution are more likely to be downward in Korea than
in Taiwan, regardless of starting position. This, in turn, should lead to more failure among
Korean plants but, as shown in Table 4, failing plants in Korea have a larger productivity
disadvantage relative to survivors than in Taiwan. This suggests that there is some impediment,
possibly a sunk cost or possibly a policy-induced incentive, that makes it profitable for the
producer to remain in operation.14

14

Further support that there is a weaker link between productivity and market transitions in Korea is provided by
Aw, Chung, and Roberts (2000). We focus on the group of surviving plants and study their transitions in and out of

22

VI.

Summary and Conclusion

In this paper, we use micro panel data from the census of manufactures for Taiwan and
Korea to examine the relationship between productivity, size, and turnover for producers in
seven two-digit industries. Our empirical study reveals a set of differences between the two
countries that are very robust across the seven industries. Compared to Taiwan, Korean
industries have lower rates of producer turnover, larger cross-sectional dispersion in plant
productivity, a higher percentage of plants operating at low productivity levels but a higher
percentage of output attributable to high-productivity plants. Introducing information on the
entry or exit status of the plant reveals that productivity differentials between exiting and
incumbent plants are much larger in Korea than Taiwan. Entering plants in Korea do not appear
to operate at any productivity disadvantage, on average, when compared to incumbents. In
contrast, in Taiwan the average productivity of entering cohorts is significantly less than the
incumbents. Finally, if we focus on just the surviving plants in a cohort over time and condition
on their initial productivity level, Korean plants are more likely to remain in or move into the
low-productivity tail of the distribution than their counterparts in Taiwan.
All of these patterns are consistent with some impediment to exit or entry that weakens
market selection forces and results in the survival of more low-productivity producers in Korea
than in Taiwan. As demonstrated by Hopenhayn’s (1992) theoretical model, large sunk entry
costs are one such impediment. By making entry more costly, these costs reduce the flow of new
producers and lower the level of productivity needed for incumbents to earn positive expected
profits. This makes it easier for low-productivity incumbents to survive, reduces the amount of
the export market. In Taiwan, we find that plants entering the export market are significantly more productive and
exits are significantly less productive than the group of plants that do not make the transition. This pattern holds in
all industries and is consistent with productivity-based selection into the export market. In Korea, the pattern is
much weaker. In three of five industries, export market entrants are significantly more productive than nonentrants.

23

exit, and results in an industry characterized by a higher proportion of low-productivity
producers. Only the lowest productivity plants would find it optimal to exit, leading to large
productivity differentials between exiting and incumbent plants. Finally since the incumbent
cohorts are subject to less market selection over time they are less likely to improve, leading to
smaller productivity differentials between incumbents and entrants.
Entry costs may be higher in Korea than in Taiwan because the less-developed network
of subcontractors leads to more internal production and higher initial investment expenditures.
An alternative explanation for the patterns we observe may be a greater reliance on nonmarket
allocation of capital in Korea. Pack and Westphal (1986) and Rodrik (1995) have discussed the
importance of investment subsidies to Korean firms in the 1980s. These policies often resulted
in the channeling of credit at negative real rates of interest to Korea’s conglomerates. Any factor
that distorts the linkage between underlying productivity and future profitability may weaken
market selection forces, reduce entry and exit, and promote the survival of low-productivity
producers.
While Korea and Taiwan have both experienced considerable success with their
manufacturing sector development in recent decades, the micro data we analyze reveal some
distinct differences in performance, particularly in the productivity differentials between
entering, exiting, and incumbent producers. Do these micro patterns characterize other
countries? We can point to some comparable evidence from several recent empirical studies that
have quantified how firm entry, growth, and exit contribute to sectoral or aggregate productivity
growth. These papers include Baily, Hulten, and Campbell (1992) and Foster, Haltiwanger, and
Krizan (2001a) for the U.S. manufacturing sector, Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan (2001b) for

In two of five industries, exits are less productive than continuing exporters. This suggests that factors other than
productivity are determinants of the export decision for Korean plants.

24

the U.S. retail sector, Olley and Pakes (1996) for the U.S. telecommunications industry, Tybout
(1996) and Liu and Tybout (1996) for Chile and Colombia, Griliches and Regev (1995) for
Israel, and Aw, Chen, and Roberts (2001) for Taiwan. All of these papers find that the
expansion of relatively high-productivity incumbents and the contraction of relatively lowproductivity incumbents contribute to sectoral productivity growth. The role of entry and exit is
less robust. The studies for the U.S. and Taiwan find that the exit of inefficient producers and
the entry of new producers make a positive contribution to sectoral productivity growth because
the entering producers are more productive than the exiting ones. For the other countries, entry
and exit have little effect because both groups account for very little industry output or the
productivity differential between the two groups is quite small.
We can also make some direct comparisons of the productivity differentials between
Taiwan, Korea, and the U.S. manufacturing sector using results in Foster, Haltiwanger, and
Krizan (2001a). They report that the average difference in multifactor productivity between
exiting and surviving plants is –4.0 percent. On the entry side, they find that, on average, there is
a 0.3 percent difference between entering and incumbent plants.15 Using our data, the estimates
of the average exit differential for Taiwanese and Korean plants is –3.5 percent and –6.8 percent,
respectively. The entry differential is –3.6 percent in Taiwan and 1.1 percent in Korea.16 The
summary statistics for the U.S. fall between those of Taiwan and Korea. The pattern is
consistent with strong competitive pressures in Taiwan that lead to vigorous market selection.
Plants exit even when their productivity disadvantage is relatively small and incumbent cohorts
improve, relative to entrants, because of this attrition. Higher entry barriers in the other two

15

Table 8.12. These are the average of their estimates for three different five-year intervals.

25

countries, particularly Korea, insulate some lower productivity producers from exit pressure and
require entrants to have a larger productivity advantage over incumbents before entry is
profitable.

16

These are from a regression that pools the seven industries in each country and includes dummies for industry,
year, exit status, and entrant status as independent variables.

26

Appendix: Construction of Plant-Level Output, Inputs, and Productivity
To construct the index of total factor productivity ln TFPt i defined in the text we need to
construct output, input, and cost-share variables for each plant-year observation. The value of
plant output is measured as the sum of total revenues from sales, repairing and fixing services,
the revenue from performing subcontracted work, and the change in inventory of final goods
between the beginning and end of the year. The value of output is deflated by a producer price
index defined at the 2-digit industry level.
In our analysis, each producer uses four inputs in production: labor, capital, intermediate
materials, and subcontracting services. The labor input is measured as the number of production
and non-production workers. Total payments to labor are measured as total salaries to both
groups (unfortunately, these do not include fringe benefits and pensions). The cost share of labor
is the ratio of total payments to labor to the value of plant output.
The capital input is estimated as the book values of tangible assets, including building,
machinery, tools, and transport equipment at the beginning of the year. To control for price level
changes in new capital goods, using the 1988 book values (1986 in Taiwan) as the basis, we
deflate the changes in each plant’s book values between the censuses by the producer price
indices for capital goods. By adjusting these deflated changes to the 1988 book values, we scale
the 1983 and 1993 (1981 and 1991 in Taiwan) book values of capital goods to the 1988 basis.
The cost share of capital is measured as the residual after subtracting the shares of labor,
material, and subcontracting services.
The material input includes raw materials, fuel, and electricity used by the plant.
Expenditures on raw materials are deflated by the producer price index for manufacturing raw
materials. Fuel expenditures are deflated by an energy producer price index, and electricity
expenditures are deflated by an electricity producer price index. The cost share of materials is
the ratio of total expenditures on intermediate materials to the value of plant output. The cost
incurred for the work that is subcontracted out to other plants is included as an input expenditure
since it comprises the principle’s payments to subcontractors for the labor, capital services, and
expenditures on fuel and electricity by the latter. These costs are deflated by the producer price
index of the industry to construct a subcontracting input. The cost share of subcontracting
services is the ratio of the principle’s payments to the plant’s output value.

27

References

Aw, Bee Yan, Xiaomin Chen, and Mark J. Roberts (2001), “Firm-Level Evidence on
Productivity Differentials, Turnover, and Exports in Taiwanese Manufacturing.” Journal
of Development Economics, 66, 51-86.
Aw, Bee Yan, Sukkyun Chung, and Mark J. Roberts (2000), “Productivity and Turnover in the
Export Market: Micro Evidence from the Republic of Korea and Taiwan.” World Bank
Economic Review, 14, 65-90.
Baily, Martin Neil, Hulten, Charles and Campbell, David (1992), “Productivity Dynamics in the
Manufacturing Plants,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics 1992,
187-267.
Caves, Douglas W., Laurits Christensen, and Erwin Diewert (1982), “Output, Input, and
Productivity Using Superlative Index Numbers,” Economic Journal, 92, 73-96.
Dahlman, C. and O. Sananikone (1990), “Technology Strategy in the Economy of Taiwan:
Exploiting Foreign Linkages and Investing in Local Capability,” mimeo, The World
Bank, Washington, D.C.
Davis, Steven J., John C. Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh (1996), Job Creation and Destruction,
MIT Press.
Dunne, Timothy, Mark J. Roberts, and Larry Samuelson (1988), “Patterns of Entry and Exit in
US Manufacturing Industries,” The Rand Journal of Economics, 19, 495-515.
Dunne, Timothy and Mark J. Roberts (1991), “Variation in Producer Turnover Across U.S.
Manufacturing Industries,” in P.A. Geroski and J. Schwalbach (eds.) Entry and Market
Contestability, Basil Blackwell Ltd., 187-203.
Ericson, Richard and Ariel Pakes (1995), “Markov-Perfect Industry Dynamics: A Framework for
Empirical Work.” Review of Economic Studies, 62, 53-82.
Feenstra, Robert C., Gary G. Hamilton, and Deng-Shing Huang (2001), “The Organization of the
Taiwanese and South Korean Economies: A Comparative Equilibrium Analysis”, in
James Rauch and Alessandra Casella (eds.), Networks and Markets, Russell Sage.
Feenstra, Robert C., Tzu-Han Yang and Gary G. Hamilton (1999), “Business Groups and
Product Variety in Trade: Evidence from South Korea, Taiwan and Japan,” Journal of
International Economics, 48, 71-100.
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and C.J. Krizan (2001a), “Aggregate Productivity Growth:
Lessons for Microeconomic Evidence,” in E. Dean, M. Harper, and C. Hulten (eds.), New
Contributions to Productivity Analysis, University of Chicago Press.

28

Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and C.J. Krizan (2001b), “The Link Between Aggregate and
Micro Productivity Growth: Evidence from Retail Trade.” Working Paper.
Good, David H., M. Ishaq Nadiri, and Robin Sickles (1997), “Index Number and Factor
Demand Approaches to the Estimation of Productivity,” in H. Pesaran and P. Schmidt
(eds.) Handbook of Applied Econometrics: Microeconometrics, Vol.II. Blackwell,
Oxford.
Grilliches, Zvi and Haim Regev (1995), “Firm Productivity in Israeli Industry, 1979-1988,”
Journal of Econometrics, 65, 175-203.
Hopenhayn, Hugo (1992), “Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long-Run Equilibrium.”
Econometrica, 60, 1127-50.
Jovanovic, Boyan (1982), “Selection and the Evolution of Industry.” Econometrica, 50, 649-670.
Krugman, Paul (1994), “The Myth of Asia’s Miracle,” Foreign Affairs, November/December
1994, 62-78.
Lambson, Val E. (1991), “Industry Evolution With Sunk Costs and Uncertain Market
Conditions,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 9, 171-196.
Levy, Brian (1991), “Transactions Costs, the Size of Firms and Industrial Policy: Lessons from a
Comparative Case Study of the Footwear industry in Korea and Taiwan,” Journal of
Development Economics, 34, 151-178.
Levy, Brian and W.J. Kuo (1991), “The Strategic Orientation of Firms and the Performance of
Korea and Taiwan in Frontier Industries,” World Development, 19, 363-374.
Liu, Lili and Tybout, James R. (1996), “Productivity Growth in Chile and Columbia: The Role
of Entry, Exit, and Learning,” in Industrial Evolution in Developing Countries, edited by
Mark J. Roberts and James R. Tybout, Oxford University Press.
Martins, J.O. (1992), “Export Behaviour with Differentiated Products: Exports of Korea, Taiwan
and Japan to the U.S. Domestic Market,” in M.G. Dagenais, D.A. Nuet (eds.),
International Trade Modeling. Chapman and Hall.
Olley, G. Steve and Ariel Pakes (1996), “The Dynamics of Productivity in the
Telecommunications Equipment Industry,” Econometrica, 64, 1263-1297.
Pack, Howard (1992), “New Perspectives on Industrial Growth in Taiwan,” in Gustav Ranis
(ed.), Taiwan From Developing to Mature Economy, Westview Press.
Pack, Howard and Larry Westphal (1986), “Industrial Strategy and Technical Change: Theory
versus Reality,” Journal of Development Economics, 22(1): 87-128.

29

Page, John (1994), “The East Asian Miracle: Four Lessons for Development Policy,” NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 1994, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Roberts, Mark J. (1996), “Employment Flows and Producer Turnover,” in Roberts, M.J., Tybout,
J.R. (Eds.), Industrial Evolution in Developing Countries: Micro Patterns of Turnover,
Productivity, and Market Structure. Oxford University Press, New York, NY, 18-42.
Rodrik, Dani (1993), “Industrial organization and product quality: evidence from South Korean
and Taiwanese exports,” in P. Krugman and A. Smith (eds.), Empirical Studies of
Strategic Trade Policy. University of Chicago and NBER, Chicago, 195-210.
Rodrik, Dani (1995), “Getting Interventions Right: How South Korea and Taiwan Grew Rich,”
Economic Policy, 20, 55-107.
Tybout, James R. (1996), “Heterogeneity and Productivity Growth: Assessing the Evidence,” in
Industrial Evolution in Developing Countries: Micro Patterns of Turnover, Productivity,
and Market Structure, Mark J. Roberts and James R. Tybout (eds.), Oxford University
Press.
Wade, Robert. (1990), Governing the Market: Economic Theory and the Role of the Government
in East Asian Industrialization, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
World Bank (1993), The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policy, Oxford:
Oxford University Press for the World Bank.

30

Table 1
Distribution of Gross Output by Employment Categories

Textiles
5-99 workers
100-499 workers
500+ workers
Apparel
5-99 workers
100-499 workers
500+ workers
Chemicals
5-99 workers
100-499 workers
500+ workers
Plastics
5-99 workers
100-499 workers
500+ workers
Fabricated Metals
5-99 workers
100-499 workers
500+ workers
Electrical Machinery/Electronics
5-99 workers
100-499 workers
500+ workers
Transport Equipment
5-99 workers
100-499 workers
500+ workers

31

Taiwan
(1986)

South Korea
(1988)

.235
.400
.365

.193
.223
.553

.340
.401
.259

.285
.383
.332

.430
.233
.337

.140
.361
.499

.324
.342
.334

.352
.263
.385

.640
.272
.088

.330
.352
.317

.184
.262
.554

.105
.168
.727

.225
.237
.538

.070
.114
.816

Table 2
Cross-Sectional Productivity Dispersion
(average values over three census years)
Industry

Taiwan
(1981-1991)

South Korea
(1983-1993)

.266
.635
.159

.380
.893
.095

.273
.643
.039

.376
.910
.217

.193
.255
.576

.013
.400
.936

.237
.553
.119

.314
.713
.120

.244
.575
.052

.330
.791
.083

.236
.546
.173

.326
.756
.061

.240
.550
-.020

.310
.722
.115

Textiles
Standard Deviation
Range (10th-90th Percentile)
Mean TFP Growth
Apparel
Standard Deviation
Range (10th-90th Percentile)
Mean TFP Growth
Chemicals
Standard Deviation
Range (10th-90th Percentile)
Mean TFP Growth
Plastics
Standard Deviation
Range (10th-90th Percentile)
Mean TFP Growth
Fabricated Metals
Standard Deviation
Range (10th-90th Percentile)
Mean TFP Growth
Electrical Machinery/Electronics
Standard Deviation
Range (10th-90th Percentile)
Mean TFP Growth
Transport Equipment
Standard Deviation
Range (10th-90th Percentile)
Mean TFP Growth

32

Table 3
Industry Output Volatility Rates
Industry

Taiwan
1981-1986
1986-1991

South Korea
1983-1988 1988-1993

Textiles

.847

.829

.335

.656

Apparel

1.00

.881

.750

1.10

Chemicals

.540

.655

.265

.158

Plastics

.719

.886

.618

.558

Fabricated Metals

.788

.918

.786

.858

Electrical Machinery/Electronics

.602

.640

.370

.454

Transport Equipment

.451

.510

.432

.194

Volatility is defined as (entry rate + exit rate) - |entry rate – exit rate| =
2 Min(entry rate, exit rate). Entry and exit rates are measured using the value of output
accounted for by the entering and exiting firms. See Dunne and Roberts (1991) or
Roberts (1996) for details.

33

* significant at the .05 level.
** significant at the .01 level.

Transport Equipment

Electric/Electronics

Fabricated Metals

Plastics

Chemicals

Apparel

Textiles

-.055**
(.015)

-.070**
(.010)

-.034**
(.010)

-.039**
(.009)

-.074**
(.012)

-.072**
(.018)

-.078**
(.013)

α1x-α1S

-.041
(.024)

-.049**
(.016)

-.026
(.014)

.015
(.014)

-.041*
(.018)

.007
(.031)

.028
(.021)

α2x-α2S

-.023
(.013)

-.020*
(.009)

-.026**
(.007)

-.011
(.008)

-.054**
(.011)

-.010
(.018)

-.028*
(.013)

β2x-β2S

Taiwan

34

6.09**

20.73**

9.55**

6.76**

22.90**

5.52**

13.41**

No exit
differential
(a)

F-statistic:

1.2

7.07**

.22

5.41**

1.52

4.06*

9.93**

Equal exit
differential
(b)

-.130**
(.026)

-.131**
(.018)

-.129**
(.017)

-.126**
(.017)

-.263**
(.023)

-.119**
(.020)

-.051**
(.017)

α1x-α1S

.015
(.041)

-.007
(.030)

-.085**
(.027)

-.028
(.026)

-.136**
(.039)

-.028
(.037)

-.115**
(.025)

α2x-α2S

Mean Productivity Difference Between Exiting and Surviving Firms by Cohort and Year
(standard errors of the difference in parentheses)

Table 4

.004
(.021)

-.028
(.016)

-.010
(.017)

-.003
(.014)

-.046
(.027)

-.035
(.021)

.036
(.020)

β2x-β2S

South Korea

8.30**

19.04**

23.63**

18.29**

47.37**

13.55**

11.12**

No exit
differential
(a)

8.97**

11.35**

12.78**

15.42**

18.81**

5.13**

12.17**

Equal exit
differentia
l (b)

F-statistic:

-.013
(.014)

-.040**
(.009)

-.021**
(.008)

-.047**
(.008)

-.066**
(.010)

-.034*
(.017)

-.062**
(.012)

* significant at the .05 level.
** significant at the .01 level.

Transport
Equipment

Electric/Electronics

Fabricated Metals

Plastics

Chemicals

Apparel

Textiles

β2 - α2

-.045**
(.013)

-.034**
(.007)

-.035**
(.006)

-.044**
(.008)

-.026**
(.010)

-.020
(.017)

-.049**
(.013)

γ3 - β3

-.045**
(.016)

-.052**
(.010)

-.022*
(.010)

-.052**
(.011)

-.023*
(.012)

-.047*
(.023)

-.040**
(.015)

γ3 - α3

Taiwan

6.31**

20.92**

12.95**

27.68**

17.31**

2.89*

14.85**

No entry
differential
(a)

35

1.74

1.26

1.33

.20

5.09**

.55

.63

Equal entry
differential
(b)

F-statistic:

-.023
(.023)

-.032*
(.017)

-.008
(.016)

-.001
(.015)

-.110**
(.021)

.012
(.019)

.050**
(.015)

β2 - α2

.001
(.019)

-.034*
(.015)

.015
(.015)

.007
(.013)

-.056*
(.024)

.007
(.020)

.090**
(.018)

γ3 - β3

.001
(.030)

.017
(.020)

.017
(.019)

.029
(.019)

-.102**
(.022)

.071*
(.033)

.112**
(.018)

γ3 - α3

South Korea

Mean Productivity Differences Between Entrants and Incumbent Firms by Cohort and Year
(standard errors of the difference in parentheses)

Table 5

.35

3.47*

.66

.83

16.25**

1.72

21.75**

No entry
differential
(a)

.37

2.58

.73

.86

1.85

1.61

3.50*

Equal entry
differential
(b)

F-statistic:

Table 6
Cumulative Distribution of Current Productivity Conditional on Past Productivity
F(φt+1 = 0/ φt)
TAIWAN

KOREA

Quartile for φt

Quartile for φt

1st

2nd

3rd

4th

1st

2nd

3rd

4th

Textiles

.638

.508

.421

.333

.876

.809

.627

.353

Apparel

.660

.539

.463

.311

.859

.700

.541

.471

Chemicals

.654

.512

.420

.268

.836

.689

.551

.340

Plastics

.607

.498

.383

.357

.784

.685

.565

.491

Fabricated
Metals

.548

.483

.412

.334

.846

.686

.574

.412

Electrical
Machinery

.602

.541

.461

.458

.791

.700

.611

.470

Transportation
Equipment

.632

.516

.408

.394

.789

.685

.560

.497

36

Figure 1. Cumulative Distribution of Number of Plants and Output by Productivity Level

Textiles

Taiwan plants

Korea plants

Taiwan outpu

1

1

.75

.75

.5

.5

.25

.25

0

Korea outpu

0
-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

Apparel

Taiwan plants

Korea plants

Taiwan output

1

1

.75

.75

.5

.5

.25

.25

0

Korea output

0

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

Chemicals

Taiwan plants

Korea plants

Taiwan outpu

1

1

.75

.75

.5

.5

.25

.25

0

Korea outpu

0

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

Plastics

Taiwan plants

Korea plants

Taiwan outpu

1

1

.75

.75

.5

.5

.25

.25

0

Korea outpu

0

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

Fabricated Metals

Taiwan plants

Taiwan outpu

Korea plants

1

1

.75

.75

.5

.5

.25

.25

Korea outpu

0

0

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

Electrical Machinery and Electronics

Taiwan plants

Taiwan output

Korea plants

1

1

.75

.75

.5

.5

.25

.25

Korea output

0

0
-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

Transportation equipment

Taiwan plants

Korea plants

Taiwan outpu

1

1

.75

.75

.5

.5

.25

.25

0

Korea outpu

0

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

Figure 2: Plant groups based on year, entry cohort, and transition status

Period 2
(1986)

Period 1
(1981)

1981 Cohort ()

1



S
1

2

Period 3
(1991)
2S

3

X

2

X1
S

1986 Cohort ()

1991 Cohort ()

For Korea the years and cohorts are 1983, 1988, and 1993.

2

2

3

X

2

3

Figure 3: CDF of Productivity Conditional on Prior Productivity

Textiles

1st quartile
3rd quartile

2nd quartile
4th quartile

1st quartile
3rd quartile

1

1

.8

.8

.6

.6

.4

.4

.2

.2

0

2nd quartile
4th quartile

0

-.75

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

.75

-.75

Korea

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

.75

Taiwan

Apparel

1st quartile
3rd quartile

2nd quartile
4th quartile

1st quartile
3rd quartile

1

2nd quartile
4th quartile

1

.8

.8

.6

.6

.4

.4

.2

.2

0

0

-.75

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

Korea

.75

-.75

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

Taiwan

.75

Chemicals

1st quartile
3rd quartile

1st quartile
3rd quartile

2nd quartile
4th quartile

2nd quartile
4th quartile

1

1

.8

.8

.6

.6

.4

.4

.2

.2

0

0
-.75

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

-.75

.75

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

.75

Taiwan

Korea

Plastics

1st quartile
3rd quartile

1st quartile
3rd quartile

2nd quartile
4th quartile

2nd quartile
4th quartile

1

1

.8

.8

.6

.6

.4

.4

.2

.2

0

0
-.75

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

Korea

.75

-.75

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

Taiwan

.75

Fabricated Metals

1st quartile
3rd quartile

1st quartile
3rd quartile

2nd quartile
4th quartile

2nd quartile
4th quartile

1

1

.8

.8

.6

.6

.4

.4

.2

.2

0

0
-.75

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

-.75

.75

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

.75

Taiwan

Korea

Electrical Machinery and Electronics

1st quartile
3rd quartile

1st quartile
3rd quartile

2nd quartile
4th quartile

2nd quartile
4th quartile

1

1

.8

.8

.6

.6

.4

.4

.2

.2

0

0
-.75

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

Korea

.75

-.75

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

Taiwan

.75

Transportation Equipment

1st quartile
3rd quartile

1st quartile
3rd quartile

2nd quartile
4th quartile

2nd quartile
4th quartile

1

1

.8

.8

.6

.6

.4

.4

.2

.2

0

0
-.75

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

Korea

.75

-.75

-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Percentage deviation from industry-country mean TFP

Taiwan

.75

