                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE FINANCING OF RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT


                                            Bronwyn H. Hall


                                          Working Paper 8773
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8773


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2002




I am grateful to Colin Mayer and Andrew Glyn for very helpful comments on the first draft. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.


© 2002 by Bronwyn H. Hall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Financing of Research and Development
Bronwyn H. Hall
NBER Working Paper No. 8773
February 2002
JEL No. G32, O32, O38



                                              ABSTRACT


        Evidence on the “funding gap” for R&D is surveyed. The focus is on financial market reasons
for underinvestment in R&D that persist even in the absence of externality-induced underinvestment. The
conclusions are that 1) small and new innovative firms experience high costs of capital that are only partly
mitigated by the presence of venture capital; 2) evidence for high costs of R&D capital for large firms is
mixed, although these firms do prefer internal funds for financing these investments; 3) there are limits
to venture capital as a solution to the funding gap, especially in countries where public equity markets are
not highly developed; and 4) further study of governmental seed capital and subsidy programs using
quasi-experimental methods is warranted.




Bronwyn H. Hall
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880,
Institute of Fiscal Studies, London,
and NBER
bhhall@econ.berkeley.edu
Financing R&D                                                                            B. H. Hall - January 2002




                            The Financing of Research and Development

                                                  Bronwyn H. Hall


I. Introduction

           It is a widely held view that research and development (R&D) activities are difficult to

finance in a freely competitive market place. Support for this view in the form of economic-theoretic

modeling is not difficult to find and probably begins with the classic articles of Nelson (1959) and

Arrow (1962), although the idea itself was alluded to by Schumpeter (1942).1 The argument goes as

follows: the primary output of R&D investment is the knowledge of how to make new goods and

services, and this knowledge is nonrival: use by one firm does not preclude its use by another. To

the extent that knowledge cannot be kept secret, the returns to the investment in it cannot be

appropriated by the firm undertaking the investment, and therefore such firms will be reluctant to

invest, leading to the underprovision of R&D investment in the economy.

           Since the time when this argument was fully articulated by Arrow, it has of course been

developed, tested, modified, and extended in many ways. For example, Levin et al (1987) and

Mansfield et al (1981) found using survey evidence that imitating a new invention was not costless,

but could cost as much as fifty to seventy-five per cent of the cost of the original invention. This

fact will mitigate but not eliminate the underinvestment problem. Empirical support for the basic

point concerning the positive externalities created by research that was made by Arrow is

widespread, mostly in the form of studies that document a social return to R&D that is higher than

the private level (Griliches, 1992; Hall, 1996). Recently, a large number of authors led by Romer

(1986) have produced models of endogenous macro-economic growth that are built on the


1   See, for example, footnote 1, Chapter VIII of Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy.

                                                                    2
Financing R&D                                                                  B. H. Hall - January 2002


increasing returns principle implied by Arrow’s argument that one person’s use of knowledge does

not diminish its utility to another (Aghion and Howitt, 1997).

        This line of reasoning is already widely used by policymakers to justify such interventions as

the intellectual property system, government support of R&D, R&D tax incentives, and the

encouragement of research partnerships of various kinds. In general, these incentive programs can

be warranted even when the firm or individual undertaking the research is the same as the entity that

finances it. However, Arrow’s influential paper also contains another argument, again one which was

foreshadowed by Schumpeter and which has been addressed by subsequent researchers in

economics and finance: the argument that an additional gap exists between the private rate of return

and the cost of capital when the innovation investor and financier are different entities.

        This paper concerns itself with this second aspect of the market failure for R&D investment:

even if problems associated with incomplete appropriability of the returns to R&D are solved using

intellectual property protection, subsidies, or tax incentives, it may still be difficult or costly to

finance R&D using capital from sources external to the firm or entrepreneur. That is, there is often a

wedge, sometimes large, between the rate of return required by an entrepreneur investing his own

funds and that required by external investors. By this argument, unless an inventor is already

wealthy, or firms already profitable, some innovations will fail to be provided purely because the

cost of external capital is too high, even when they would pass the private returns hurdle if funds

were available at a “normal” interest rate.

        In the following, I begin by describing some of the unique features of R&D investment.

Then I discuss the various theoretical arguments why external finance for R&D might be more

expensive that internal finance, going on to review the empirical evidence on the validity of this

hypothesis and the solutions that have been developed and adopted by the market and some

governments. The paper concludes with a discussion of policy options.


                                                       3
Financing R&D                                                                    B. H. Hall - January 2002


II. Research and development as investment

        From the perspective of investment theory, R&D has a number of characteristics that make

it different from ordinary investment. First and most importantly, in practice fifty per cent or more

of R&D spending is the wages and salaries of highly educated scientists and engineers. Their efforts

create an intangible asset, the firm’s knowledge base, from which profits in future years will be

generated. To the extent that this knowledge is “tacit” rather than codified, it is embedded in the

human capital of the firm’s employees, and is therefore lost if they leave or are fired.

        This fact has an important implication for the conduct of R&D investment. Because part of

the resource base of the firm itself disappears when such workers leave or are fired, firms tend to

smooth their R&D spending over time, in order to avoid having to lay off knowledge workers. This

implies that R&D spending at the firm level typically behaves as though it has high adjustment costs

(Hall, Griliches, and Hausman, 1986; Lach and Schankerman, 1988), with two consequences, one

substantive and one that affects empirical work in this area. First, the equilibrium required rate of

return to R&D may be quite high simply to cover the adjustment costs. Second, and related to the

first, is that it will be difficult to measure the impact of changes in the costs of capital, because such

effects can be weak in the short run due to the sluggish response of R&D to any changes in its cost.

        A second important feature of R&D investment is the degree of uncertainty associated with

its output. This uncertainty tends to be greatest at the beginning of a research program or project,

which implies that an optimal R&D strategy has an options-like character and should not really be

analyzed in a static framework. R&D projects with small probabilities of great success in the future

may be worth continuing even if they do not pass an expected rate of return test. The uncertainty

here can be extreme and not a simple matter of a well-specified distribution with a mean and

variance. There is evidence, such as that in Scherer (1998), that the distribution of profits from



                                                        4
Financing R&D                                                                           B. H. Hall - January 2002


innovation sometimes has a Paretian character where the variance does not exist. When this is the

case, standard risk-adjustment methods will not work well.

        The natural starting point for the analysis of R&D investment financing is the “neo-

classical” marginal profit condition, suitably modified to take the special features of R&D into

account. Following the formulation in Hall and Van Reenen (2000), I define the user cost of R&D

investment ρ as the pre-tax real rate of return on a marginal investment that is required to earn r

after (corporate) tax. The firm invests to the point where the marginal product of R&D capital

equals ρ:

                   1 − Ad − Ac
         MPK = ρ =             ( r + δ + MAC )
                       1−τ

τ is the corporate tax rate, δ is the (economic) depreciation rate, and MAC is the marginal

adjustment cost.

        In this equation, Ad and Ac are the present discounted value of deprecation allowances and

tax credits respectively. In most financial accounting systems, including those used by major OECD

economies, R&D is expensed as it is incurred rather than capitalized and depreciated, which means

that the lifetime of the investment for accounting purposes is much shorter than the economic life

of the asset created and that Ad is simply equal to τ for tax-paying firms. Many countries have a form

of tax credit for R&D, either incremental or otherwise, and this will be reflected in a positive value

for Ac.2 Note that when Ac is zero, the corporate tax rate does not enter into the marginal R&D

decision, because of the full deductability of R&D.




2 See Hall and Van Reenen (2000) for details. The US has an incremental R&D tax credit with a value for Ac of about
0.13, whereas the UK has no credit at the present time, so Ac=0.

                                                             5
Financing R&D                                                                        B. H. Hall - January 2002


        The user cost formulation above directs attention to the following determinants of R&D

financing:

        1.        tax treatment such as tax credits, which are clearly amenable to intervention by policy

        makers.

        2.        economic depreciation δ, which in the case of R&D is more properly termed

        obsolesence. This quantity is sensitive to the realized rate of technical change in the industry,

        which is in turn determined by such things as market structure and the rate of imitation.

        Thus it is difficult to treat δ as an invariant parameter in this setting.

        3.        the marginal costs of adjusting the level of the R&D program.

        4.        the investor’s required rate of return r.

        The last item has been the subject of considerable theoretical and empirical interest, on the

part of both industrial organization and corporate finance economists. Two broad strands of

investigation can be observed: one focuses on the role of asymmetric information and moral hazard

in raising the required rate of return abve that normally used for conventional investment, and the

latter on the requirements of different sources of financing and their differing tax treatments for the

rate of return. The next section of the paper discusses these factors.


III. Theoretical background

        This section of the paper reviews the reasons that the impact of financial considerations on

the investment decision may vary with the type of investment and with the source of funds in more

detail. To do this, I distinguish between those factors that arise from various kinds of market failures

in this setting and the purely financial (or tax-oriented) considerations that affect the cost of

different sources of funds.




                                                              6
Financing R&D                                                                    B. H. Hall - January 2002


         One of the implications of the well-known Modigliani-Miller theorem (1958, 1961) is that a

firm choosing the optimal levels of investment should be indifferent to its capital structure, and

should face the same price for investment and R&D investment on the margin. The last dollar spent

on each type of investment should yield the same expected rate of return (after adjustment for

nondiversifiable risk). A large literature, both theoretical and empirical, has questioned the bases for

this theorem, but it remains a useful starting point.

         Reasons why the theorem might fail in practice are several: 1) uncertainty coupled with

incomplete markets may make a real options approach to the R&D investment decision more

appropriate; 2) the cost of capital may differ by source of funds for non-tax reasons; 3) the cost of

capital may differ by source of funds for tax reasons; and 4) the cost of capital may also differ across

types of investments (tangible and intangible) for both tax and other reasons.

         With respect to R&D investment, economic theory advances a plethora of reasons why there

might be a gap between the external and internal costs capital; these can be divided into three main

types:

    1. Asymmetric information between inventor and investor.

    2. Moral hazard on the part of the inventor or arising from the separation of ownership and

    management.

    3. Tax considerations that drive a wedge between external finance and finance by retained

    earnings.


Asymmetric information problems

         In the R&D setting, the asymmetric information problem refers to the fact that an inventor

frequently has better information about the likelihood of success and the nature of the contemplated

innovation project than potential investors. Therefore, the marketplace for financing the



                                                        7
Financing R&D                                                                             B. H. Hall - January 2002


development of innovative ideas looks like the “lemons” market modeled by Akerlof (1970). The

lemons' premium for R&D will be higher than that for ordinary investment because investors have

more difficulty distinguishing good projects from bad when the projects are long-term R&D

investments than when they are more short-term or low-risk projects (Leland and Pyle, 1977). When

the level of R&D expenditure is a highly observable signal, as it is under current U.S. and U.K. rules,

we might expect that the lemons' problem is somewhat mitigated, but certainly not eliminated.3

         In the most extreme version of the lemons model, the market for R&D projects may

disappear entirely if the asymmetric information problem is too great. Informal evidence suggests

that some potential innovators believe this to be the case in fact. And as will be discussed below,

venture capital systems are viewed by some as a solution to this “missing markets” problem.

         Reducing information asymmetry via fuller disclosure is of limited effectiveness in this arena,

due to the ease of imitation of inventive ideas. Firms are reluctant to reveal their innovative ideas to

the marketplace and the fact that there could be a substantial cost to revealing information to their

competitors reduces the quality of the signal they can make about a potential project (Bhattacharya

and Ritter, 1983; Anton and Yao, 1998). Thus the implication of asymmetric information coupled

with the costliness of mitigating the problem is that firms and inventors will face a higher cost of

external than internal capital for R&D due to the lemons’ premium.

         Some empirical support for this proposition exists, mostly in the form of event studies that

measure the market response to announcements of new debt or share issues. Both Alam and Walton

(1995) and Zantout (1997) find higher abnormal returns to firm shares following new debt issues

when the firm is more R&D-intensive. The argument is that the acquisition of new sources of


 3 Since 1974, publicly traded firms in the United States have been required to report their total R&D expenditures in

their annual reports and 10-K filings with the SEC, under FASB rule No. 2, issued October 1974. In 1989, a new
accounting standard, SSAP 13, obligated similar disclosures in the UK. Most continental European countries do not
have such a requirement, although they may evolve in that direction due to international harmonization of accounting
standards, at least for publicly traded firms.

                                                               8
Financing R&D                                                                 B. H. Hall - January 2002


financing is good news when the firm has an asymmetric information problem because of its R&D

strategy. Similary, Szewcxyk, Tsetsekos, and Zantout (1996) find that investment opportunities (as

proxied by Tobin’s q) explain R&D-associated abnormal returns, and that these returns are higher

when the firm is highly leveraged, implying a higher required rate of return for debt finance in

equilibrium.


Moral hazard problems

       Moral hazard in R&D investing arises in the usual way: modern industrial firms normally

have separation of ownership and management. This leads to a principal-agent problem when the

goals of the two conflict, which can result in investment strategies that are not share value

maximizing. Two possible scenarios may co-exist: one is the usual tendency of managers to spend

on activities that benefit them (growing the firm beyond efficient scale, nicer offices, etc.) and the

second is a reluctance of risk averse managers to invest in uncertain R&D projects. Agency costs of

the first type may be avoided by reducing the amount of free cash flow available to the managers by

leveraging the firm, but this in turn forces them to use the higher cost external funds to finance

R&D (Jensen and Meckling, 1976). Empirically, there seem to be limits to the use of the leveraging

strategy in R&D-intensive sectors. See Hall (1990, 1994) for evidence that the LBO/restructuring

wave of the 1980s was almost entirely confined to industries and firms where R&D was of no

consequence.

       According to the second type of principal-agent conflict, managers are more risk averse than

shareholders and avoid R&D projects that will increase the riskiness of the firm. If bankruptcy is a

possibility, managers whose opportunity cost is lower than their present earnings and potential

bondholders may both wish to avoid variance-increasing projects which shareholders would like to

undertake. The argument of the theory is that long-term investments can suffer in this case. The



                                                      9
Financing R&D                                                                 B. H. Hall - January 2002


optimal solution to this type of agency cost would be to increase the long-term incentives faced by

the manager rather than reducing free cash flow.

       Evidence on the importance of agency costs as they relate to R&D takes several forms.

Several researchers have studied the impact of antitakeover amendments (which arguably increase

managerial security and willingness to take on risk while reducing managerial discipline) on R&D

investment and firm value. Johnston and Rao (1997) find that such amendments are not followed by

cuts in R&D, while Pugh, Jahara, and Oswald (1999) find that adoption of an Employee Stock

Ownership Plan (ESOP), which is a form of antitakeover protection, is followed by R&D increases.

Cho (1992) finds that R&D intensity increases with the share that managerial shareholdings

represent of the manager’s wealth and interprets this as incentive pay mitigating agency costs and

inducing long term investment.

       Some have argued that institutional ownership of the managerial firm can reduce the agency

costs due to free-riding by owners that is a feature of the governance of firms with diffuse

ownership structure, while others have held that such ownership pays too much attention to short

term earnings and therefore discourages long term investments. Institutions such as mutual and

pension funds often control somewhat larger blocks of shares than individuals, making monitoring

firm and manager behavior a more effective and more rewarding activity for these organizations.

       There is some limited evidence that this may indeed be the case. Eng and Shackell (2001)

find that firms adopting long term performance plans for their managers do not increase their R&D

spending but that institutional ownership is associated with higher R&D; R&D firms tend not to be

held by banks and insurance companies. Majumdar and Nagarajan (1997) find that high institutional

investor ownership does not lead to short-term behavior on the part of the firm, in particular, it does

not lead to cuts in R&D spending. Francis and Smith (1995) find that diffusely held firms are less

innovative, implying that monitoring alleviates agency costs and enables investment in innovation.


                                                      10
Financing R&D                                                               B. H. Hall - January 2002


       Although the evidence summarized above is fairly clear and indicates that long term

incentives for managers can encourage R&D and that institutional ownership does not necessarily

discourage R&D investment, it is fairly silent on the magnitude of these effects, and whether these

governance features truly close the agency cost-induced gap between the cost of capital and the

return to R&D.


Capital structure and R&D

       In the view of some observers, the leveraged buyout (LBO) wave of the 1980s in the United

States and the United Kingdom arose partly because high real interest rates meant that there were

strong pressures to eliminate free cash flow within firms (Blair and Litan, 1990). For firms in

industries where R&D is an important form of investment, such pressure should have been reduced

by the need for internal funds to undertake such investment and indeed Hall (1993, 1994) and Opler

and Titman (1993) find that firms with high R&D intensity were much less likely to do an LBO.

Opler and Titman (1994) find that R&D firms that were leveraged suffered more than other firms

when facing economic distress, presumably because leverage meant that they were unable to sustain

R&D programs in the fact of reduced cash flow.

       In related work using data on Israeli firms, Blass and Yosha (2001) report that R&D-

intensive firms listed on the United States stock exchanges use highly equity-based sources of

financing, whereas those listed only in Israel rely more on bank financing and government funding.

The former are more profitable and faster-growing, which suggests that the choice of where to list

the shares and whether to finance with new equity is indeed sensitive to the expected rate of return

to the R&D being undertaken. That is, investors supplying arms-length finance require higher

returns to compensate them for the risk of a “lemon.”




                                                    11
Financing R&D                                                                       B. H. Hall - January 2002


        Although leverage may be a useful tool for reducing agency costs in the firm, it is of limited

value for R&D-intensive firms. Because the knowledge asset created by R&D investment is

intangible, partly embedded in human capital, and ordinarily very specialized to the particular firm in

which it resides, the capital structure of R&D-intensive firms customarily exhibits considerably less

leverage than that of other firms. Banks and other debtholders prefer to use physical assets to secure

loans and are reluctant to lend when the project involves substantial R&D investment rather than

investment in plant and equipment. In the words of Williamson (1988), “redeployable” assets (that

is, assets whose value in an alternative use is almost as high as in their current use) are more suited to

the governance structures associated with debt. Empirical support for this idea is provided by

Alderson and Betker (1996), who find that liquidation costs and R&D are positively related across

firms. The implication is that the sunk costs associated with R&D investment are higher than that

for ordinary investment.

        In addition, servicing debt usually requires a stable source of cash flow, which makes it more

difficult to find the funds for an R&D investment program that must be sustained at a certain level

in order to be productive. For both these reasons, firms are either unable or reluctant to use debt

finance for R&D investment, which may raise the cost of capital, depending on the precise tax

treatment of debt versus equity.4 Confirming empirical evidence for the idea that limiting free cash

flow in R&D firms is a less desirable method of reducing agency costs is provided by Chung and

Wright (1998), who find that financial slack and R&D spending are correlated with the value of

growth firms positively, but not correlated with that of other firms.




4 There is also considerable cross-sectional evidence for the United States that R&D intensity and leverage are
negatively correlated across firms. See Friend and Lang (1988), Hall (1992), and Bhagat and Welch (1995).

                                                          12
Financing R&D                                                                                 B. H. Hall - January 2002


Taxes and the source of funds

         Tax considerations that yield variations in the cost of capital across source of finance have

been well articulated by Auerbach (1984) among others. He argued that under the U.S. tax system

during most of its history the cost of financing new investment by debt has been less that of

financing it by retained earnings, which is in turn less than that of issuing new shares. More

explicitly, if r is the risk-adjusted required return to capital, τ is the corporate tax rate, θ is the

personal tax rate, and c is the capital gains tax rate, we have the following required rates of return for

different financing sources:

         Debt                        r(1-τ)             interest deductible at the corporate level

         Retained earnings           r(1-θ)/(1-c)       avoids personal tax on dividends, but capital gains tax

         New shares                  r/(1-c)            eventual capital gains tax

         If dividends are taxed, clearly financing with new shares is more expensive than financing

with retained earnings. And unless the personal income tax rate is much higher than the sum of the

corporate and capital gains rates, the following inequalities will both hold:

                      1−θ   1
         (1 − τ ) <       <
                      1−c 1−c

These inequalities express the facts that interest expense is deductible at the corporate level, while

dividend payments are not, and that shareholders normally pay tax at a higher rate on retained

earnings that are paid out than on those retained by the firm and invested.5 It implicitly assumes that

the returns from the investment made will be retained by the firm and eventually taxed at the capital

gains rate rather than the rate on ordinary income.



 5 A detailed discussion of tax regimes in different countries is beyond the scope of this survey, but it is quite a common

in several countries for long term capital gains on funds that remain with a firm for more than one year to be taxed at a
lower rate than ordinary income. Of course, even if the tax rates on the two kinds of income are equal, the inequalities
will hold. Only in the case where dividends are not taxed at the corporate level (which was formerly the case in the UK)
will the ranking given above not hold.

                                                                 13
Financing R&D                                                                B. H. Hall - January 2002


           It is also true that the tax treatment of R&D in most OECD economies is very different

from that of other kinds of investment: because R&D is expensed as it is incurred, the effective tax

rate on R&D assets is lower than that on either plant or equipment, with or without an R&D tax

credit in place. This effectively means that the economic depreciation of R&D assets is considerably

less than the depreciation allowed for tax purposes -- which is 100 percent -- so that the required

rate of return for such investment would be lower. In addition some countries offer a tax credit or

subsidy to R&D spending, which can reduce the after tax cost of capital even further.6

           The conclusion from this section of the paper is that the presence of either asymmetric

information or a principal-agent conflict imply that new debt or equity finance will be relatively

more expensive for R&D than for ordinary investment, and that considerations such as lack of

collateral further reduce the possibility of debt finance. Together, these arguments suggest an

important role for retained earnings in the R&D investment decision, independent of their value as a

signal of future profitability. In fact, as has been argued by both Hall (1992) and Himmelberg and

Petersen (1994), there is good reason to think that positive cash flow may be more important for

R&D than for ordinary investment. The next section reports on a series of empirical tests for this

proposition.


IV. Testing for financial constraints

           The usual way to examine the empirical relevance of the arguments that R&D investment in

established firms can be disadvantaged when internal funds are not available and recourse to

external capital markets required is to estimate R&D investment equations and test for the presence

of “liquidity” constraints, or excess sensitivity to cash flow shocks. This approach builds on the

extensive literature developed for testing ordinary investment equations for liquidity constraints



6   See Hall and Van Reenen (2000) for details.

                                                      14
Financing R&D                                                                  B. H. Hall - January 2002


(Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen, 1988; Arellano and Bond, 1991). It suffers from many of the same

difficulties as the estimates in the investment literature, plus one additional problem that arises from

the tendency of firms to smooth R&D spending over time.

       The ideal experiment for identifying the effects of liquidity constraints on investment is to

give firms additional cash exogenously, and observe whether they pass it on to shareholders or use it

for investment and/or R&D. If they choose the first alternative, either the cost of capital to the firm

has not fallen, or it has fallen but they still have no good investment opportunities. If they choose

the second, then the firm must have had some unexploited investment opportunities that were not

profitable using more costly external finance. A finding that investment is sensitive to cash flow

shocks that are not signals of future demand increases would reject the hypothesis that the cost of

external funds is the same as the cost of internal funds. However, lack of true experiments of this

kind forces researchers to use econometric techniques such as instrumental variables to attempt to

control for demand shocks when estimating the investment demand equation, with varying degrees

of success.

       The methodology for the identification of R&D investment equations is based on a simple

supply and demand heuristic, as shown in Figure 1. The curve sloping downward to the right

represents the demand for R&D investment funds and the curves sloping upward the supply of

funds. Internal funds are available at a constant cost of capital until they are exhausted, at which

point it becomes necessary to issue debt or equity in order to finance more investment. When the

demand curve cuts the supply curve in the horizontal portion, a shock that increases cash flow (and

shifts supply outward) has no effect on the level of investment. However, if the demand curve cuts

the supply curve where it is upward sloping, it is possible for a shock to cash flow to shift the supply

curve out in such a way as to induce a substantial increase in R&D investment. Figure 2 illustrates




                                                       15
Financing R&D                                                                           B. H. Hall - January 2002


such a case, where the firm shifts from point A to point B in response to a cash flow shock that

does not shift the demand curve.

            Econometric work that tests the hypothesis that financing constraints matter for R&D

investment has largely been done using standard investment equation methodology. Two main

approaches can be identified: one uses a neoclassical accelerator model with ad hoc dynamics to

allow for the presence of adjustment costs, and the other an Euler equation derived from the

forward-looking dynamic program of a profit-maximizing firm that faces adjustment costs for

capital.7

            The accelerator model begins with the marginal product equal to cost condition for capital:

                                                        MPK = C

Assuming that the production function for the ith firm at time t is Cobb-Douglas and taking

logarithms of this relationship yields

                                                     kit = sit + ai – cit

where k = log(R&D capital), s = log(output or sales), and c = log(cost of R&D). ai captures any

permanent differences across firms, including differences in the production function.

            Lagged adjustment is allowed for by specifying an autoregressive distributed lag (ADL) for

the relationship between capital and sales. For example, specifying an ADL(2,2) and approximating

Δk by R/K-δ yields an estimating equation of the following form:

                        R/K = f(R(-1)/K(-1), Δs, Δs(-1), k(-2)-s(-2), time dummies, firm dummies)

The time dummies capture the conventional cost of capital, assumed to be the same for all firms.

Firm-specific costs related to financing constraints are included by adding current and lagged values

of the cash flow/capital ratio to this equation. Because of the presence of firm dummies, estimation



7 A detailed consideration of the econometric estimation of these models can be found in Mairesse, Hall, and Mulkay
(1999). See also Hall (1981).

                                                             16
Financing R&D                                                                   B. H. Hall - January 2002


is done using first differences of this equation, instrumented by lagged values of the right hand side

variables to correct for the potential endogeneity of the contemporaneous values. In principle, this

will also control for the potential simultaneity between current investment and the disturbance.

        The Euler equation approach begins with the following first order condition for investment

in two adjacent periods:

                        Et-1 [MPKt + (1-δ)(pt+MACt) – (1+r)(αt-1/αt) (pt-1+MACt-1)] = 0

where MAC denotes the marginal adjustment costs for capital and αt is the shadow value of

investment funds in period t, which will be unity if there are no financing constraints. After

specifying a Cobb-Douglas production function and quadratic adjustment costs, we obtain the

following estimating equation:

                           R/K = f(R(-1)/K(-1), S/K, (R/K)2, time dummies, firm dummies)

Like the accelerator model, this equation also should be estimated in differenced from with lagged

values of the right hand side variables as instruments.

        When financial constraints are present, the coefficient of lagged R&D investment in the

Euler equation differs from (1+r) by the term (αt-1/αt). The implication is that when the firm changes

its financial position (that is, the shadow value of additional funds for investment changes) between

one period and the next, it will invest as though it is facing a cost of capital greater than r (when the

shadow value falls between periods) or less than r (when the shadow value rises between periods).

Clearly this is a very difficult test to perform because (αt-1/αt) is not constant across firms or across

time periods, so it cannot be treated as a parameter.

        Three solutions are possible: the first is to model (αt-1/αt) as a function of proxies for

changes in financial position, such as dividend behavior, new share issues, or new debt issues. The

second is more ad hoc: recall that this term also multiplies the price pt of R&D capital to create a

firm-specific cost of capital. Most researchers simply include the cash flow to capital ratio in the


                                                          17
Financing R&D                                                                 B. H. Hall - January 2002


model to proxy for the firm-specific cost of capital and test whether it enters in the presence of time

dummies that are the same for all firms. This method assumes that all firms face the same R&D

price (cost of capital), except for the cash flow effect.

        The third possibility is to stratify firms in some way that is related to the level of cash

constraints that they face (for example, dividend-paying and non-dividend paying firms) estimate

separate investment equations for each group, and test whether the coefficients are equal. This last

was the method used by Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988) in the paper that originated this

literature. Note that this approach does not rely on the full Euler equation derivation given above,

but uses a version of the neoclassical accelerator model (the first model given above).

        During the past few years, various versions of the methodologies described above have been

applied to data on the R&D investment of U.S., U.K., French, German, Irish, and Japanese firms.

The firms examined are typically the largest and most important manufactuing firms in their

economy. For example, Hall (1992) found a large positive elasticity between R&D and cash flow,

using an accelerator-type model and a very large sample of U.S. manufacturing firms. The estimation

methodology here controlled for both firm effects and simultaneity. Similarly and using some of the

same data, Himmelberg and Petersen (1994) looked at a panel of 179 U.S. small firms in high-tech

industries and find an economically large and statistically significant relationship between R&D

investment and internal finance.

        Harhoff (1998) found weak but significant cash flow effects on R&D for both small and

large German firms, although Euler equation estimates for R&D investment were uninformative due

to the smoothness of R&D and the small sample size. Combining limited survey evidence with his

regression results, he concludes that R&D investment in small German firms may be constrained by

the availability of finance. Bond, Harhoff, and Van Reenen (1999) find significant differences

between the cash flow impacts on R&D and investment for large manufacturing firms in the United


                                                            18
Financing R&D                                                                 B. H. Hall - January 2002


Kingdom and Germany. German firms in their sample are insensitive to cash flow shocks, whereas

the investment of non-R&D-doing UK firms does respond. Cash flow helps to predict whether a

UK firm does R&D, but not the level of that R&D. They interpret their findings to mean that

financial constraints are important for British firms, but that those which do R&D are a self-selected

group that face fewer constraints. This is consistent with the view that the desire of firms to smooth

R&D over time combines with the relatively high cost of financing it to reduce R&D well below the

level that would obtain in a frictionless world.

        Mulkay, Hall, and Mairesse (2001) perform a similar exercise using large French and U.S.

manufacturing firms, finding that cash flow impacts are much larger in the U.S. than in France, both

for R&D and for ordinary investment. Except for the well-known fact that R&D exhibits higher

serial correlation than investment (presumable because of higher adjustment costs), differences in

behavior are between countries, not between investment types. This result is consistent with

evidence reported in Hall, Mairesse, Branstetter, and Crepon (1999) for the U.S., France, and Japan

during an earlier time period, which basically finds that R&D and investment on the one hand, and

sales and cash flow on the other, are simultaneously determined in the United States (neither one

“Granger-causes” the other, whereas in the other countries, there is little feedback from sales and

cash flows to the two investments. Using a nonstructural R&D investment equation together with

data for the US, UK, Canada, Europe, and Japan, Bhagat and Welch (1995) found similar results for

the 1985-1990 period, with stock returns predicting changes in R&D more strongly for the US and

UK firms.

        Recently, Bougheas, Goerg, and Strobl (2001) examined the effects of liquidity constraints

on R&D investment using firm-level data for manufacturing firms in Ireland and also found

evidence that R&D investment in these firms is financially constrained, in line with the previous

studies of US and UK firms.


                                                     19
Financing R&D                                                                                B. H. Hall - January 2002




         Brown (1997) argues that existing tests of the impact of capital market imperfections on

innovative firms cannot distinguish between two possibilities: 1) capital markets are perfect and

different factors drive the firm's different types of expenditure or 2) capital markets are imperfect

and different types of expenditure react differently to a common factor (shocks to the supply of

internal finance). He then compares the sensitivity of investment to cash flow for innovative and

non-innovative firms. The results support the hypothesis that capital markets are imperfect, finding

that the investment of innovative firms is more sensitive to cash flow.

         The conclusions from this body of empirical work are several: first, there is solid evidence

that debt is a disfavored source of finance for R&D investment; second, the “Anglo-Saxon”

economies, with their thick and highly developed stock markets and relatively transparent ownership

structures, typically exhibit more sensitivity and responsiveness of R&D to cash flow than

continental economies; third, and much more speculatively, this greater responsiveness may arise

because they are financially constrained, in the sense that they view external sources of finance as

much more costly than internal, and therefore require a considerably higher rate of return to

investments done on the margin when they are tapping these sources. However, it is perhaps equally

likely that this responsiveness occurs because firms are more sensitive to demand signals in thick

financial equity markets; a definitive explanation of the “excess sensitivity” result awaits further

research.8 In addition to these results, the evidence from Germany and some other countries

suggests that small firms are more likely to face this difficulty than large established firms (not

surpisingly, if the source of the problem is a “lemons” premium).


 8 It is also true that much of the literature here has tended to downplay the role of measurement error in drawing

conclusions from the results. Measurement error in Tobin’s q, cash flow, or output is likely to be sizable and will ensure
that all variables will enter any specification of the R&D investment equation significantly, regardless of whether they
truly belong or not. Instrumental variables estimation is a partial solution, but only if all the errors are serially
uncorrelated, which is unlikely.

                                                                20
Financing R&D                                                                  B. H. Hall - January 2002




        From a policy perspective, these results point to another reason why it may be socially

beneficial to offer tax incentives to companies in order to reduce the cost of capital they face for

R&D investment, especially to small and new firms. Many governments, including those in the

United States and the United Kingdom, currently have such programs. Such a policy approach

simply observes that the cost of capital is relatively high for R&D and tries to close the gap via a tax

subsidy. However, there is an alternative approach relying on the private sector that attempts to

close the financing gap by reducing the degree of asymmetric information and moral hazard rather

than simply subsidizing the investment. I turn to this topic in the next section.


V. Small Firms, Startup Finance, and Venture Capital

        As should be apparent from much of the preceding discussion, any problems associated with

financing investments in new technology will be most apparent for new entrants and startup firms.

For this reason, many governments already provide some of form of assistance for such firms, and

in many countries, especially the United States, there exists a private sector “venture capital”

industry that is focused on solving the problem of financing innovation for new and young firms.

This section of the paper reviews what we know about these alternative funding mechanisms,

beginning with a brief look at government funding for startups and then discussing the venture

capital solution.


Government funding for startup firms

        Examples of such programs are the U.S. Small Business Investment Company (SBIC) and

Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) programs. Together, these programs disbursed $2.4

billion in 1995, more than 60% of the amount from venture capital in that year (Lerner 1998a). In

Germany, more than 800 federal and state government financing program have been established for

                                                       21
Financing R&D                                                                              B. H. Hall - January 2002


new firms in the recent past (OECD 1995). In 1980, the Swedish established the first of a series of

investment companies (along with instituting a series of measures such as reduced capital gains taxes

to encourage private investments in startups), partly on the United States model. By 1987, the

government share of venture capital funding was 43 percent (Karaomerliolu and Jacobsson 1999).

Recently, the UK has instituted a series of government programs under the Enterprise Fund

umbrella which allocate funds to small and medium-sized firms in high technology and certain

regions, as well as guaranteeing some loans to small businesses (Bank of England 2001). There are

also programs at the European level.

         A limited amount of evidence, most of it U.S.-based, exists as to the effectiveness and

“additionality” of these programs. In most cases, evaluating the success of the programs is difficult

due to the lack of a “control” group of similar firms that do not receive funding.9 Therefore most of

the available studies are based on retrospective survey data provided by the recipients; few attempt

to address the question of performance under the counterfactual seriously. A notable exception is

the study by Lerner (1999), who looks at 1435 SBIR awardees and a matched sample of firms that

did not receive awards, over a ten-year post-award period. Because most of the firms are privately

held, he is unable to analyze the resulting valuation or profitability of the firms, but he does find that

firms receiving SBIR grants grow significantly faster than the others after receipt of the grant. He

attributes some of this effect to “quality certification” by the government that enables the firm to

raise funds from private sources as well.10




 9 See Jaffe (this issue) for a review of methodologies for evaluation such government programs. For a complete review

of the SBIR program, including some case studies, see the National Research Council (1998).
 10 Also see Spivack (2001) for further studies of such programs, including European studies, and David, Hall, and Toole

(2000) and Klette, Moen, and Griliches Klette (2000) for surveys of the evaluation of government R&D programs in
general.

                                                               22
Financing R&D                                                                  B. H. Hall - January 2002


Venture capital

       Many observers view the rise of the venture capital (VC) industry, especially that in the

United States, a “free market” solution to the problems of financing innovation. In fact, many of the

European programs described above have as some of their goals the provision of seed capital and

the encouragement of a venture capital industry that addresses the needs of high technology

startups. Table 1 shows why this has been of some concern to European policymakers: the amount

of venture capital available to firms in the United States and Europe was roughly comparable in

1996, but the relative allocation to new firms (seed money and startups) in Europe was much less,

below 10% of the funds as opposed to 27%. A correspondingly greater amount was used to finance

buyouts of various kinds.

       In the United States, the VC industry consists of fairly specialized pools of funds (usually

from private investors) that are managed and invested in companies by individuals knowledgeable

about the industry in which they are investing. In principle, the idea is that the lemons premium is

reduced because the investment managers are better informed and moral hazard is minimized

because a higher level of monitoring than that used in conventional arm’s length investments is the

norm. But the story is more complex than that: the combination of high uncertainty, asymmetric

information, and the fact that R&D investment typically does not yield results instantaneously not

only implies option-like behavior for the investment decision but also has implications for the form

of the VC contract and the choice of decision maker. That is, there are situations in which it is

optimal for the investor (VC) to have the right to shut down a project and there are other situations

in which optimal performance is achieved when the innovator has control.

       A number of studies have documented the characteristics and performance of the VC

industry in the United States. The most detailed look at the actual operation of the industry is that by

Kaplan and Stromberg (2000), who examine 200 Venture Capital contracts and compare their

                                                       23
Financing R&D                                                                  B. H. Hall - January 2002


provisions to the predictions of the economic theory of financial contracting under uncertainty.

They find that the contracts often provide for separate allocation of cash flow rights, control rights,

voting rights, board positions, and liquidation rights, and that the rights are frequently contingent on

performance measures. If performance is poor, the VCs often gain full control of the firm.

Provisions such as delayed vesting are often included to mitigate hold-up by the entrepreneur as

suggested by Anand and Galetovic (2000).

       Kaplan and Stromberg conclude that these contracts are most consistent with the

predictions of Aghion and Bolton (1992) and Dewatripont and Tirole (1994), all of whom study the

incomplete contracts that arise when cash flows can be observed but not verified in sufficient detail

to be used for contract enforcement. Put simply, the modal VC contract is a complex debt-equity

hybrid (and in fact, frequently contains convertible preferred securities and other such instruments)

that looks more like debt when the firm does poorly (giving control to the investor) and more like

equity when the firm does well (by handing control to the entrepreneur, which is incentive-

compatible).

       In a series of papers, Lerner (1992, 1995) studied a sample of VC-financed startups in detail,

highlighting the important role that investing and monitoring experience has in this industry. He

found that the amount of funds provided and the share of equity retained by the managers are

sensitive to the experience and ability of the capital providers and the maturity of the firm being

funded. VCs do increase the value of the firms they fund, especially when they are experienced

investors. Firms backed by seasoned VC financiers are more likely to successfully time the market

when they go public, and to employ the most reputable underwriters.

       At a macro-economic level, VC funding tends to be pro-cyclical but it is difficult to

disentangle whether the supply of funding causes growth or productivity growth encourages funding

(Kortum and Lerner 2000; Gompers and Lerner 1999a,b; Ueda 2001). The problem here is very


                                                       24
Financing R&D                                                                 B. H. Hall - January 2002


similar to the identification problem for R&D investment in general: because of feedback effects,

there is a chicken-egg simultaneity in the relationship. Some evidence (Majewski 1997) exists that

new and/or small biotechnology firms turn to other sources of funding in downturns, but that such

placements are typically less successful (Lerner and Tsai 2000), due to the misallocation of control

rights (when the startup firm is in a weak bargaining position, control tends to be allocated to the

more powerful corporate partner, but this has negative consequences for incentives).

       The limited evidence from Europe on the performance of VC-funded firms tends to

confirm that from the U.S. Engel (2001) compares a matched sample of German firms founded

between 1991 and 1998 and finds that the VC-backed firms grew faster than the non-VC-backed

firms. Lumme et al (1993) compare the financing and growth of small UK and Finnish firms. This

approach permits a comparison between a financial market-based and a bank-centered economy,

and indeed, they find that small UK firms rely more on equity and less on loan finance and grow

faster than small Finnish firms. Further evidence on small UK high technology firms is provided by

Moore (1993), who looks at 300 such firms, finding that the availability and cost of finance is the

most important constraint facing these firms, but that they are affected only marginally more than

other types of small firms. That is, the financing “gap” in the UK may be more related to size than

to R&D intensity.

       For Japan, Hamao, Packer, and Ritter (1998) find that the long run performance of VC-

backed Initial Public Offerings (IPOs) are no better than that for other IPOs, unlike Lerner’s

evidence for the United States. However, many VCs in Japan are subsidiaries of major securities

firms rather than specialists as in the United States. Only these VCs have low returns, whereas those

that are independent have returns more similar to the US. They attribute the low returns to conflicts

of interest between the VC subsidiary and the securities firm that owns it, which affects the price at




                                                     25
Financing R&D                                                                   B. H. Hall - January 2002


which the IPO is offered. This result highlights the importance of the institutions in which the

venture capital industry is embedded for the creation of entrepreneurial incentives.

           Black and Gilson (1997) and Rajan and Zingales (2001) take the institutional argument

further. Both pairs of authors emphasize the contrast between arms’ length market-based financial

systems (e.g., the US and the UK) and bank-centered capital market systems (e.g., much of

continental Europe and Japan), and view venture capital as combining the strengths of the two

systems, in that it provides both the strong incentives for the manager-entrepreneur characteristic of

the stock market system and the monitoring by an informed investor characteristic of the bank-

centered system. They emphasize the importance of an active stock market, especially for newer and

younger firms, in order to provide an exit strategy for VC investors, and allow them to move on to

financing new startups. Thus having a VC industry that contributes to innovation and growth

requires the existence of an active IPO (Initial Public Offering) market to permit successful

entrepreneurs to regain control of their firms (and incidentally to provide powerful incentives for

undertaking the startup in the first place) and also to ensure that the VCs themselves are able to use

their expertise to help to establish new endeavors.


VI.        Conclusions

           Based on the literature surveyed here, what do we know about the costs of financing R&D

investments and the possibility that some kind of market failure exists in this area? Several main

points emerge:

      1.   There is fairly clear evidence, based on theory, surveys, and empirical estimation, that small

      and startup firms in R&D-intensive industries face a higher cost of capital than their larger

      competitors and than firms in other industries. In addition to compelling theoretical arguments

      and empirical evidence, the mere existence of the VC industry and the fact that it is concentrated


                                                        26
Financing R&D                                                                                B. H. Hall - January 2002


    precisely where these startups are most active suggests that this is so. In spite of considerable

    entry into the VC industry, returns remain high, which does suggest a high required rate of

    return in equilibrium (Upside 2001).

    2. The evidence for a financing gap for large and established R&D firms is harder to establish.

    It is certainly the case that these firms prefer to use internally generated funds for financing

    investment, but less clear that there is an argument for intervention, beyond the favorable tax

    treatment that currently exists in many countries.11

    3. The VC solution to the problem of financing innovation has its limits: First, it does tend to

    focus only on a few sectors at a time, and to make investment with a minimum size that is too

    large for startups in some fields. Second, good performance of the VC sector requires a thick

    market in small and new firm stocks (such as NASDAQ or EASDAQ) in order to provide an

    exit strategy for early stage investors.

    4. The effectiveness of government incubators, seed funding, loan guarantees, and other such

    policies for funding R&D deserves further study, ideally in an experimental or quasi-

    experimental setting. In particular, studying the cross-country variation in the performance of

    such programs would be desirable, because the outcomes may depend to a great extent on

    institutional factors that are difficult to control for using data from within a single country.




 11 It is important to remind the reader of the premise of this paper: I am focusing only on the financing gap arguments

for favorable treatment of R&D and ignoring (for the present) the arguments based on R&D spillovers and externalities.
There is good reason to believe that the latter is a much more important consideration for large established firms,
especially if we wish those firms to undertake basic research that is close to industry but with unknown applications (the
Bell Labs model).

                                                                27
Financing R&D                                                                    B. H. Hall - January 2002



                                              References

Aghion, Phillippe, and Patrick Bolton. 1992. An Incomplete Contracts Approach to Financial
Contracting,” Review of Economic Studies 77:338-401.
Aghion, Phillippe, and Peter Howitt. 1997. Endogenous Growth Theory, Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT
Press.
Akerlof, George A. 1970. “The Market for 'Lemons': Quality, Uncertainty, and the Market
Mechanism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 84: 488-500.
Alam, Pervaiz, and Karen Schuele Walton. 1995. “Information Asymmetry and Valuation Effects of
Debt Financing,” Financial Review 30(2): 289-311.
Alderson, Michael J., and Brian L. Betker. 1996. “Liquidation Costs and Accounting Data,” Financial
Management 25(2): 25-36.
Anand, Bharat N., and Alexander Galetovic. 2000. “Weak Property Rights and Holdup in R&D,”
Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 9(4): 615-42.
Anton, James J., and Dennis A. Yao. 1998. “The Sale of Intellectual Property: Strategic Disclosure,
Property Rights, and Incomplete Contracts,” The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania:
working paper.
Arellano, Manuel, and Stephen Bond. 1991. “Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data: Monte
Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations,” Review of Economic Studies 58: 277-
297.
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1962. “Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention,” In
Richard Nelson (ed.), The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity. Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University
Press.
Auerbach, Alan J. 1984. ”Taxes, Firm Financial Policy, and The Cost of Capital: An Empirical
Analysis,” Journal of Public Economics 23: 27-57.
Bank of England. 2001. Finance for Small Firms – An Eighth Report. London: Domestic Finance
Division, Bank of England.
Bhagat, Sanjai, and Ivo Welch. 1995. “Corporate Research and Development Investments:
International Comparisons,” Journal of Accounting and Economics 19 (March-May).
Bhattacharya, Sudipto, and Jay R. Ritter. 1985. “Innovation and Communication: Signaling with
Partial Disclosure,” Review of Economic Studies L: 331-46.
Black, Bernard S., and Ronald J. Gilson. 1998. “Venture Capital and the Structure of Capital
Markets: Banks versus Stock Markets,” Journal of Financial Economics 47: 243-277.
Blair, Margaret M., and Robert E. Litan. 1990. Corporate Leverage and Leveraged Buyouts in the Eighties.
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Blass, Asher A., and Oved Yosha. 2001. “Financing R&D in Mature Companies: An Empirical
Analysis,” Bank of Israel, Tel Aviv University, and CEPR: working paper.
Bond, Stephen, Dietmar Harhoff, and John Van Reenen. 1999. “Investment, R&D, and Financial
Constraints in Britain and Germany,” London: Institute of Fiscal Studies Working Paper No. 99/5.

                                                        28
Financing R&D                                                                 B. H. Hall - January 2002


Bougheas, Spiros, Holger Goerg, and Eric Strobl. 2001. “Is R&D Financially Constrained? Theory
and Evidence from Irish Manufacturing,” Nottingham: University of Nottingham.
Brown, Ward. “R&D Intensity and Finance: Are Innovative Firms Financially Constrained?,”
London: London School of Economics Financial Market Group, 1997.
Cho, Shin. 1992. “Agency Costs, Management Stockholding, and Research and Development
Expenditures,” Seoul Journal of Economics 5(2): 127-52.
Carlin, Wendy, and Colin Mayer. 1998. “Finance, Investment, and Growth,” University College
London: working paper.
Chung, Kee H., and Peter Wright. 1998. “Corporate Policy and Market Value:               A q Theory
Approach,” Review of Quantitative Finance and Accounting 11(3): 293-310.
David, Paul A., Bronwyn H. Hall, and Andrew A. Toole. 2000. “Is Public R&D a Complement or a
Substitute for Private R&D? A Review of the Econometric Evidence,” Research Policy 29: 497-530.
Dewatripont, Matthias, and Jean Tirole. 1994. “A Theory of Debt and Equity: Diversity of Securites
and Manager-Shareholder Congruence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109: 1027-1054.
Eng, Li Li, and Margaret Shackell. 2001. “The Implications of Long Term Performance Plans and
Institutional Ownership for Firms' Research and Development Investments,” Journal of Accounting,
Auditing and Finance 16(2): 117-39.
Engel, Dirk. 2001. “Hoeheres Beschaeftigungswachstum Durch Venture Capital?,” Mannheim:
ZEW Discussion Paper No. 01-34.
Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen. 1988. “Financing Constraints and
Corporate Investment,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1988(1): 141-205.
Francis, Jennifer, and Abbie Smith. 1995. “Agency Costs and Innovation:              Some Empirical
Evidence,” Journal of Accounting and Economics 19(2/3): 383-409.
Gompers, Paul A., and Josh Lerner. 1999a. “What Drives Venture Capital Fundraising?,”
Cambridge, Mass.: NBER Working Paper No. 6906.
_________________. 1999b. Capital Formation and Investment in Venture Markets: Implications for the
Advanced Technology Program. Washington, DC: Advanced Technology Program, NIST, U.S. Dept. of
Commerce.
Griliches, Zvi. 1992. “The Search for R&D Spillovers,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 94: S29-S47.
Hall, Bronwyn H. 1996. “The Private and Social Returns to Research and Development,” in B. L. R.
Smith and C. E. Barfield (eds.), Technology, R&D, and the Economy, 140-83. Washington, DC:
Brookings Institution and the American Enterprise Institute.
__________________. 1994. “Corporate Capital Structure and Investment Horizons in the United
States, 1976-1987,” Business History Review 68: 110-143.
__________________. 1993. “R&D Tax Policy During the Eighties: Success or Failure?,” Tax
Policy and the Economy 7: 1-36.
__________________. 1992. “Research and Development at the Firm Level: Does the Source of
Financing Matter?,” NBER Working Paper No. 4096 (June).



                                                      29
Financing R&D                                                                 B. H. Hall - January 2002


__________________. 1991. “Firm-Level Investment with Liquidity Constraints: What Can the
Euler Equations Tell Us?” University of California at Berkeley and the National Bureau of
Economic Research. Photocopied.
__________________. 1990. “The Impact of Corporate Restructuring on Industrial Research and
Development,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1990(1): 85-136.
Hall, Bronwyn H., and John van Reenen. 2000. “How Effective are Fiscal Incentives for R&D? A
New Review of the Evidence,” Research Policy 29: 449-469.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Jacques Mairesse, Lee Branstetter, and Bruno Crepon. 1999. “Does Cash Flow
Cause Investment and R&D: An Exploration using Panel Data for French, Japanese, and United
States Firms in the Scientific Sector,” in Audretsch, D., and A. R. Thurik (eds.), Innovation, Industry
Evolution and Employment. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Zvi Griliches, and Jerry A. Hausman. 1986. “Patents and R&D: Is There a Lag?”
International Economic Review 27: 265-83.
Hao, Kenneth Y., and Adam B. Jaffe. 1993. “Effect of Liquidity on Firms’ R&D Spending,”
Economics of Innovation and New Technology 2: 275-282.
Hamao, Yasushi, Frank Packer, and Jay R. Ritter. 1998. “Institutional Affiliation and the Role of
Venture Capital: Evidence from Initial Public Offerings in Japan,” New York: FRB of New York
Staff Report No. 52.
Harhoff, Dietmar. 1998. “Are There Financing Constraints for R&D and Investment in German
Manufacturing Firms?,” Annales d'Economie et de Statistique 49/50: 421-56.
Himmelberg, Charles P., and Bruce C. Peterson. 1994. “R&D and Internal Finance: A Panel Study
of Small Firms in High-Tech Industries,” Review of Economics and Statistics 76: 38-51.
Friend, Irwin and Harry H. P. Lang. 1988. “An Empirical Test of the Impact of Management Self-
Interest on Corporate Capital Structure,” Journal of Finance 43: 271-283.
Jensen, Michael C., and William Meckling. 1976. “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency
Costs, and Ownership Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics 3: 305-60.
Johnson, Mark S., and Rajesh P. Rao. 1997. “The Impact of Antitakeover Amendments on
Corporate Financial Performance,” Financial Review 32(4): 659-89.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Stromberg, Per. 2000. “Financial Contracting Theory Meets the Real World:
An Empirical Analysis of Venture Capital Contracts,” Cambridge, Mass.: NBER Working Paper No.
7660.
Karaomerliolu, Dilek Cetindamar, and Staffan Jacobsson. 1999. “The Swedish Venture Capital
Industry – An Infant, Adolescent, or Grown-up?” Goteborg, Sweden: Chalmers Institute of
Technology.
Klette, Tor Jakob, Jarle Moen, and Zvi Griliches. 2000. “Do Subsidies to Commercial R&D Reduce
Market Failures? Microeconometric Evaluation Studies,” Research Policy 29: 471-496.
Kortum, Samuel, and Josh Lerner. 2000. “Assessing the Contribution of Venture Capital to
Innovation,” Rand Journal of Economics 31(4): 674-92.
Lach, Saul, and Mark Schankerman. 1988. “Dynamics of R&D and Investment in the Scientific
Sector,” Journal of Political Economy 97(4): 880-904.

                                                      30
Financing R&D                                                               B. H. Hall - January 2002


Leland, Haynes E., and David H. Pyle. 1977. “Informational Asymmetries, Financial Structure, and
Financial Intermediation,” Journal of Finance 32: 371-87.
Lerner, Josh. 1999. “The Government as Venture Capitalist: The Long-run effects of the SBIR
Program,” Journal of Business 72: 285-318.
__________. 1998b. “’Public Venture Capital’: Rationale and Evaluation,” in National Research
Council (ed.), SBIR: Challenges and Opportunities, Washington, DC: Board on Science, Technology, and
Economic Policy, NRC.
__________. 1998a. “’Angel’ Financing and Public Policy: An Overview,” Journal of Banking and
Finance 22: 773-783.
__________. 1995. “Venture Capitalists and the Oversight of Privately-Held Firms,” Journal of
Finance 50: 301-318.
__________. 1992. “Venture Capitalists and the Decision to Go Public,” Harvard Business School
Working Paper No. 93-002.
Lerner, Josh, and Alexander Tsai. 2000. “Do Equity Financing Cycles Matter? Evidence from
Biotechnology Alliances,” NBER Working Paper No. 7464 (January).
Levin, Richard C., Alvin K. Klevorick, Richard R. Nelson, and Sidney G. Winter. 1987.
“Appropriating the Returns from Industrial Research and Development,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 1987(3): 783-832.
Lumme, A. et al. 1993. “New, Technology-Based Companies in Cambridge in an International
Perspective,” University of Cambridge Small Business Research Centre Working Papers 35
(September).
Mairesse, Jacques, Bronwyn H. Hall, and Benoit Mulkay. 1999. “Firm-Level Investment in France
and the United States: An Exploration of What We Have Learned in Twenty Years,” Annales
d'Economie et de Statistique No. 55-56: 27-69.
Majewski, Suzanne E. 1997. “Using Strategic Alliance Formation as a Financing Mechanism in the
Biotechnology Industry. UC Berkeley: photocopied.
Majumdar, Summit K., and Amerada Nagarajan. 1997. “The Impact of Changing Stock Ownership
Patterns in the United States: Theoretical Implications and Some Evidence,” Revue d'Economie
Industrielle 82: 39-54.
Mansfield, Edwin, Mark Schwartz, and Samuel Wagner. 1981. “Imitation Costs and Patents: An
Empirical Study,” Economic Journal 91: 907-918.
Miller, Merton H., and Franco Modigliani. 1961. “Dividend Policy, Growth, and the Valuation of
Shares,” Journal of Business 34: 411-33.
Modigliani, Franco, and Merton H. Miller. 1958. “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and the
Theory of Investment,” American Economic Review 48: 261-97.
Moore, Barry. 1993. “Financial Constraints to the Growth and Development of Small High-
Technology Firms,” University of Cambridge Small Business Research Centre Working Paper 31
(July).




                                                    31
Financing R&D                                                                  B. H. Hall - January 2002


Mulkay, Benoit, Bronwyn H. Hall, and Jacques Mairesse. 2001. “Investment and R&D in France and
in the United States,” in Deutsche Bundesbank (ed.), Investing Today for the World of Tomorrow. Springer
Verlag.
National Research Council. 1998. SBIR: Challenges and Opportunities, Washington, DC: Board on
Science, Technology, and Economic Policy, NRC.
Nelson, Richard R. 1959. “The Simple Economics of Basic Scientific Research,” Journal of Political
Economy 49: 297-306.
OECD. 1995. Venture Capital in OECD Countries. Paris: Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Devlopement.
Opler, Tim C., and Sheridan Titman. 1994. “Financial Distress and Corporate Performance,” Journal
of Finance 49(3): 1015-40.
_______________. 1993. “The Determinants of Leveraged Buyout Activity: Free Cash Flow vs.
Financial Distress Costs,” Journal of Finance 48(5): 1985-99.
Pugh, William N., John S. Jahera, Jr., and Sharon Oswald. 1999. “ESOPs, Takeover Protection, and
Corporate Decision Making,” Journal of Economics and Finance 23(2): 170-83.
Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales. 2001. “Financial Systems, Industrial Structure, and
Growth,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 17: 467-482
Rausch, Lawrence M. 1998. “Venture Capital Investment Trends in the United States and Europe,”
Washington, DC: National Science Foundation Division of Science Resource Studies Issues Brief
99-303.
Romer, Paul M. 1986. “Increasing Returns and Long Run Growth,” Journal of Political Economy 94(5):
1002-1037.
Scherer, F. M. 1998. “The Size Distribution of Profits from Innovation,” Annales d'Economie et de
Statistique 49/50: 495-516.
Schumpeter, Joseph. 1942. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. New York: Harper and Row (reprinted
1960).
Spivack, Richard N. 2001. The Economic Evaluation of Technological Change, Washington, DC:
Conference Proceedings of the Advanced Technology Program, National Institute of Standards and
Technology.
Szewczyk, Samuel H., George P. Tsetsekos, and Zaher Z. Zantout. 1996. “The Valuation of
Corporate R&D Expenditures: Evidence from Investment Opportunities and Free Cash Flow,”
Financial Management 25(1): 105-10.
Ueda, Masako. 2001. “Does Innovation Spur Venture Capital?,” Barcelona: Universitat Pompeu
Fabra.
Upside, December 2001.
Williamson, Oliver E. 1988. “Corporate Finance and Corporate Governance,” Journal of Finance 43:
567-91.
Zantout, Zaher Z. 1997. “A Test of the Debt Monitoring Hypothesis: The Case of Corporate R&D
Expenditures,” Financial Review 32(1): 21-48.


                                                       32
Financing R&D                                                                                                                    B. H. Hall - January 2002


                                                                            Figure 1
                                                                        Unconstrained Firm
    Rate of return/Cost of funds          1.2




                                                    Demand for funds



                                                                                                    Supply of funds




   cost of                                                                                                    Supply of funds shifted out
                                                                 A, B
   internal
   funds


                                           0
                                                0                                                                                      10

                                                                              R&D Investment




                                                                            Figure 2
                                                                         Constrained Firm
                                      1.2
           Rate of return/Cost of funds




                                                                                                    Supply of funds


                                                                          A

                                                                                                              Supply of funds shifted out
   cost of                                                                    B
   internal
   funds
                                                                                  Demand for funds
                                           0
                                                0                                                                                      10

                                                                              R&D Investment




                                                                                               33
Financing R&D                                                        B. H. Hall - January 2002


                                             Table 1
           Venture Capital Disbursements by Stage of Financing (1996)


                                                   United States   Europe
          Total    VC    disbursements 9,420.6                     8,572.0
          (millions $1996)
          Share seed and startups                  27.1%           6.5%
          Share for expansion                      41.6%           39.3%
          Share other (incl. buyouts)              31.3%           54.2%
      Source: Rausch (1998) and author’s calculations.




                                                    34
