                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       A THEORY OF GOVERNMENT REGULATION OF ADDICTIVE BADS:
 OPTIMAL TAX LEVELS AND TAX INCIDENCE FOR CIGARETTE EXCISE TAXATION


                                            Jonathan Gruber
                                            Botond Koszegi


                                          Working Paper 8777
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8777


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2002




We thank Alan Auerbach, Peter Diamond, David Laibson, Sendhil Mullainathan, as well as seminar
participants at the NBER’s Public Economics program and the University of Kentucky for discussion. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.


© 2002 by Jonathan Gruber and Botond Koszegi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
A Theory of Government Regulation of Addictive Bads:
Optimal Tax Levels and Tax Incidence for Cigarette Excise Taxation
Jonathan Gruber and Botond Koszegi
NBER Working Paper No. 8777
February 2002
JEL No. H2, I1



                                              ABSTRACT


        The traditional normative analysis of government policy towards addictive bads is carried out in
the context of a “rational addiction” model, whereby the only role for government is in correcting the
external costs of consumption of such goods. But available evidence is at least as consistent, if not more
so, with an alternative where individuals are “time inconsistent” about decisions such as smoking, having
a higher discount rate between this period and the next than between future periods. We develop this time
inconsistent model, and show that this alternative formulation delivers radically different implications for
government policy towards smoking. Unlike the traditional model, our alternative implies that there is
a role for government taxation of addictive bads even if there are no external costs; we estimate that the
optimal tax on cigarettes is $1 or more higher than that implied by the traditional model. And we
estimate that cigarette excise taxes are much less regressive than previously believed, and indeed for most
parameter values are progressive, since lower income groups are much more price elastic and therefore
benefit more from the commitment device provided by higher excise taxes.




Jonathan Gruber                                                   Botond Koszegi
Department of Economics                                           UC Berkeley
MIT
E52-355
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu
    One of the major sources of debate among policymakers at all levels of government is the appro-
priate role of governments in regulating addictive bads. This is an important topic because a large
share of consumer spending is on activities which potentially t this classi cation. This category
certainly includes smoking, illicit drug use, and (at least high levels of) alcohol consumption, but
may also include activities such as risky driving and poor eating habits.
    The traditional economic approach to such activities has been to treat consumers as \rational
addicts", to use the term of Becker and Murphy (1988). Their seminal article codi ed what had
become the standard approach among economists to thinking about regulation of addictive bads.
In their model, consumption of addictive bads is governed by the same decisionmaking process
as is consumption of all other goods. Consumers trade o the utility gains from consuming the
good against the costs of doing so, and as rational forward-looking agents they recognize that those
costs include the damage that they are doing to themselves through consumption, as well as the
additional future damage to which they are driving themselves by consuming more of an addictive
good.
    In this standard revealed preference framework, there is no rationale for government regulation
of addictive bads other than interpersonal externalities. Just as the government has no cause,
absent market failures, for interfering with revealed preference in the realm of non-addictive goods,
there is no reason to take addictiveness per se as a call to government action, if individuals are
pursuing these activities \rationally". It is this framework which implicitly underlies the well known
e orts of Manning et al. (1991) and others to measure the external costs to society of drinking
and smoking. These estimates, which are frequently cited and in uential in debates over excise
taxation, suggest that the optimal tax rate for cigarettes in particular is fairly low, since the net
external costs of smoking are small.
    In this paper we consider an alternative formulation of consumption of addictive bads. Our
model follows that of Becker and Murphy, with one exception: we allow agents to be time incon-
sistent in their smoking decisions. Laboratory evidence on preferences uniformly indicates that
individuals use lower discount rates in evaluating future intertemporal tradeo s, relative to the
discount rate that they use in evaluating similar tradeo s today. For example, in smoking deci-
sions, the agent might want to enjoy her cigarette today, but would prefer to exercise self-control
tomorrow. Since she will have similar preferences for immediate rewards in the future, there is a
con ict between the intertemporal selves. This kind of time inconsistency has been modeled as
quasi-hyperbolic discounting by Laibson (1997) and O'Donoghue and Rabin (1999a), and it has

                                                  1
been applied in the context of savings decisions (Laibson 1997, Laibson, Repetto, and Tobacman
1998, O'Donoghue and Rabin 1999b), retirement decisions (Diamond and K}oszegi 1998), and even
growth (Barro 1999).
    The goal of this paper is to explore the implications of applying quasi-hyperbolic discounting to
the analysis of government regulation of addictive bads. Although our theoretical model is general,
we focus in particular on the case of smoking. We do so because the available evidence, reviewed
below, suggests that smoking decisions are better modeled in the time inconsistent framework than
in the time consistent one.
    We begin, in Part I, with some background on smoking, addiction modeling, and time inconsis-
tency. Part II then introduces the model, and discusses the implications for optimal taxation. The
key insight of this analysis is that, with time inconsistent agents, the presence of \internalities" due
to smoking justify non-zero optimal taxes even in the absence of externalities. These parts sum-
marize our earlier work on this topic (Gruber and K}oszegi 2001), and extend that earlier analysis
to consider a variety of questions around optimal policy design towards addictive bads.
    We then turn to a new question: how does time inconsistency a ect the distributional impli-
cations of excise taxation? Standard incidence analysis, in which a marginal increase in taxes is
equivalent to a negative income e ect due to the higher prices the agent has to pay, is invalid in
our model. Taxation also a ects how the agent's self-control problem plays out. In particular, a
price-induced decrease in consumption may be good for the agent, because it softens the overcon-
sumption due to the desire for immediate grati cation. Our model adjusts for this theoretically, and
under simplifying conditions yields a simple multiplicative adjustment to the standard incidence
measure.
    The theoretical framework allows us to reexamine a classic argument against excise taxation
of bads such as cigarettes. Since lower income groups spend a larger share of their incomes on
addictive bads, such taxes are viewed as regressive. When taxation plays a role as a self-control
device for time inconsistent agents, the possibility that lower income individuals have a lower short-
term discount factor ( ), and the fact that they are more price sensitive, can mitigate or reverse
this conclusion.
    On the other hand, as we highlight, this self-control adjustment does not unambiguously improve
the progressivity of excise taxes. Several of the reasons typically o ered for why the poor smoke
more than the rich would actually lead this adjustment to increase regressivity. If the poor have
lower values of life, or if smoking does less damage to them (shortens their life by fewer years), then

                                                   2
the future damage from smoking, and thus the self-control adjustment we develop, is less important
to them. Surprisingly, the same is the case if the poor have a lower long-term as opposed to short-
term discount factor ( ); thus, if the poor are more impatient, the impact on regressivity depends
critically on whether this impatience arises through a lower long term discount factor (which would
raise regressivity) or more short term time inconsistency (which would lower regressivity).
    We therefore, in Part III, turn to calibrations of our model. We rst calibrate the optimal tax
model, and show that the optimal corrective tax is at least $1, and likely much higher. We also
show that, so long as the poor do not value their lives very little relative to the rich and are not
much more (long run) impatient, this adjustment reduces and most likely reverses the conclusion
that cigarette taxes are regressive. For even modest levels of time inconsistency, we nd that excise
taxes can be progressive, delivering a larger bene t to lower than to higher income groups.

1 Background
1.1 Addiction and The Case for Government Intervention
There has been a long-standing interest in the economics community in modeling the consumption
of addictive goods. Until the mid-1980s, most of this literature modeled addiction as habit for-
mation, whereby past consumption of the addictive good increases taste for current consumption.
In a pathbreaking article, Becker and Murphy (1988) explored the dynamic behavior of the con-
sumption of addictive goods, and pointed out that many phenomena previously thought to have
been irrational are consistent with optimization according to stable preferences. In the Becker and
Murphy model, individuals recognize the addictive nature of choices that they make, but may still
make them because the gains from the activity exceed any costs through future addiction. In this
\rational addiction" framework, individuals recognize the full price of addictive consumption goods:
both the current monetary price, and the cost in terms of future harm and addiction.
    Rational addiction has subsequently become the standard approach to modeling consumption
of goods such as cigarettes. This standard has been reinforced by a sizeable empirical literature,
beginning with Chaloupka (1991) and Becker, Grossman and Murphy (1994), which has tested and
generally supported the key empirical contention of the Becker and Murphy (1988) model: that
consumption of addictive goods today will depend not only on past consumption but on future
consumption as well. More speci cally, this literature has generally assessed whether higher prices
next year lead to lower consumption today, as would be expected with forward-looking addicts. The

                                                 3
consistent ndings across a variety of papers that this is the case has been cited in the widespread
use of this framework for modeling addiction.
    The key normative implication of the Becker and Murphy (1988) model is that the optimal
regulatory role for government is solely a function of the interpersonal externalities induced by
smoking. Since smoking, like all other consumption decisions, is governed by rational choice, the
fact that smokers impose enormous costs on themselves is irrelevant; it is only the costs they impose
on others that gives rise to a mandate for government action.
    There is a large literature that is devoted to measuring the magnitude of these externalities. Key
contributors include Manning et al. (1989, 1991) and Viscusi (1995), and the literature is nicely
reviewed in Chaloupka and Warner (1998) and Evans, Ringel and Stech (1999). The estimates
of Manning et al. suggest that the net externalities associated with smoking are only about 16
cents per pack in 1986. This low-sounding estimate re ects the fact that the increased health costs
imposed by smokers on others in group insurance and public programs are o set by their premature
death, which reduces the costs of health insurance for the elderly under Medicare and of de ned
bene t pensions, most notably Social Security. The Congressional Research Service updated this
analysis to 1995 and estimated externalities of 37 cents per pack (in current dolalrs), which is well
below the average level of state and federal excise taxation (76 cents per pack, according to Gruber
(2001)). Even this low gure is the subject of considerable controversy, as Viscusi (1995) claims
that smoking actually generates net positive externalities for society.
    However, these estimates may be too low for a number of reasons. The rst is the health costs
of secondhand smoke, arising through increased lung cancer and (even more importantly) cardiac
disease risk through exposure to the smoking of others. The size of the health costs of second
hand smoke are quite ambiguous and controversial. While Viscusi (1995) claims that there is little
credible evidence of signi cant costs associated with second hand smoke, Chaloupka and Warner
(1998) suggests that such costs may amount to as much as 70 cents per pack. A second issue
involves the case of pregnant women. Smoking leads to an increased incidence of low birthweight
babies, which imposes both short-run costs of medical care and long run costs of special education.
Evans, Ringel and Stech (1999) present a detailed calculation showing that these costs may amount
to 42 to 72 cents per pack. Of course, both of these cases raise the dicult issue of what share of
costs to the family from second-hand smoke (the predominant source of the damage from second
hand smoke) and to one's children from low birthweight should be considered internal and what
share external.

                                                  4
    Another consideration for policy-makers is the incidence of tobacco taxation; given an overall
government revenue requirement, excise taxation must be compared to other taxes in composing
a distributionally attractive revenue raising package. In fact, however, excise taxes on cigarettes
are very regressive. This is illustrated in Table 1, which is tabulated from the 1997-98 Consumer
Expenditure Survey (CEX), a nationally representative survey which provides the highest quality
and most comprehensive micro-data on consumption in the U.S. We use data from these two years
of the CEX, and measure real (in 1999 dollars) spending on cigarettes, real spending on all goods,
and real income. Since the data on income in the CEX are of poor quality, particularly at the
bottom of the income distribution, we compare spending on cigarettes from the CEX to incomes
measured from the Current Population Survey (CPS). So, for example, the cigarette expenditures
as a fraction of income in the bottom quartile is the mean expenditure on cigarettes in that quartile
from the CEX divided by the mean income in that quartile from the CPS.
    The rst column shows the distribution of cigarette expenditures as a share of income, by income
quartile. By this measure, cigarette taxes are indeed quite regressive. Cigarette expenditures
amount to 3.2% of incomes in the bottom quartile, but only 0.4% of incomes in the top income
quartile.
    This seeming inequity is much smaller than it appears when considered from the lifetime per-
spective, however. The lifetime burden of excise taxes is typically much smoother than the annual
incidence, since income levels vary more over a lifetime than smoking levels (Poterba 1989). We
consider lifetime incidence in two ways in the remaining columns of Table 1. The rst is to follow
Poterba (1989) and to use cigarette expenditures as a share of consumption expenditures (the ap-
propriate proxy for lifetime income in the life cycle model). The problem with this approach is that
if the lifecycle model does not hold in practice, as most empirical analyses suggest is the case for
the bulk of the U.S. population, then consumption is not an adequate proxy for lifetime income.
We therefore consider another proxy as well, educational attainment. In this case we divide the
sample into four attainment groups: High School dropouts; High School graduates with no college
education; those with some college but who did not obtain a bachelor's degree; and those who are
college graduates.
    In either case, the tobacco share di erence across income groups is much smaller. The expendi-
tures of the bottom group are now only about four times as large as those of the top group, rather
than eight times as large as in the rst column. Nevertheless, even using these permanent income
measures, excise taxes are more regressive than many other forms of revenue raising.

                                                 5
    A third consideration in setting excise taxes on cigarettes is the optimal distribution of com-
modity taxes. According to the classic Ramsey formulation, commodities should be taxed in inverse
proportion to their elasticities. We will ignore this consideration in the current paper, as it is de-
rived from a qualitatively di erent government optimization problem. While the Ramsey problem
consists of raising an externally given amount of revenue with the least distortion, we are concerned
with using taxes to eliminate distortions.
    Thus, the case for extending the excise tax on tobacco further appears quite weak, based at
least on traditional economic grounds. The average tax level of 76 cents per pack already exceeds
most estimates of the externalities associated with smoking, particularly if most of the damage
through second hand smoke and low birthweight infants is internalized through family decision-
making. And cigarette taxes are much more regressive than other means of revenue raising. But we
will argue below that under the alternative (more justi ed) time inconsistent version of addiction
modeling, there is a quite compelling case for higher excise taxes.

1.2 The Case for Time Inconsistency in Smoking
There are four types of evidence for time inconsistency in smoking behavior. The rst is laboratory
experiments. Laboratory experiments document overwhelmingly that consumers are time inconsis-
tent (Ainslie 1992, Ainslie and Haslam 1992, Thaler 1981, for example). In experimental settings,
consumers consistently reveal a lower discount rate when making decisions over time intervals fur-
ther away than for ones closer to the present, raising the specter of inter-personal con ict over
decisions that have implications for the future.
    The second is calibrating real world behavior against models with and without time inconsis-
tency, to assess which type of model does the best job of explaining observed patterns. For example,
Angeletos et al. (2001) show that a hyperbolic discounting model ts observed consumption and
savings patterns much better than an exponential one; in particular, the pattern of low liquid but
high illiquid wealth holdings is consistent with the self-control problems inherent in time incon-
sistent models. And Della Vigna and Malmendier (2001) show that the behavior of health club
members, such as paying a at fee (rather than a per use charge which almost always adds up to
less ex post), is best explained by time inconsistent models.
    The third is an econometric test in Gruber and Mullainathan (2001). Drawing on the model
developed below, they argue that one means of empirically distinguishing time inconsistent agents
from time consistent agents is the impact of cigarette taxation on their measured well-being. Time

                                                  6
consistent smokers will be made worse o by cigarette taxation, by the standard arguments that
underlie the Becker-Murphy model. But time inconsistent agents, as we model here, can be made
better o by higher taxes, as they provide the self-control device the agents demand. Gruber
and Mullainathan use data on self-reported well-being from the General Social Survey, matched
to information on cigarette excise taxes, to show that higher levels of excise taxes raise reported
well-being among smokers, but not among others, which provides some empirical support for the
time inconsistent model.
    This is only a limited set of evidence, and much more is needed before the time inconsistent
model will be accepted as the appropriate formulation of preferences. But it is important to note
that there is no evidence, psychological or other, that supports time consistent preferences over these
time inconsistent ones. This suggests that alternative formulations such as the one we develop in
this paper be taken seriously, particularly given the radically di erent implications for government
policy we show below.
    Since smoking is a short-term pleasure, and the psychological evidence indicates that time
inconsistency is most prevalent with short horizons, this formulation should be especially fruitful
in the context of addictive bads such as smoking. Our fourth source of evidence in favor of time
inconsistency comes from this particular application.
    Two key features distinguish time consistent and time inconsistent agents. The rst is the
use of commitment devices or self-control techniques. We distinguish a self-control device from
an alternative technology for smoking cessation, quitting aids: whereas quitting aids decrease the
disutility from not smoking, self-control devices lower the utility from smoking. Time consistent
decisionmakers might use a quitting aid, but in general they will not use a self-control device{with
time consistency, lowering the utility of an undesired alternative is irrelevant for decisionmaking.
But for some types of time inconsistent agents (what we label below sophisticated agents, who
recognize their own time inconsistency), self-control devices are valued as a means of combating
one's own time inconsistent tendencies.
    In the relatively small medical literature on self-initiated attempts at quitting smoking, the
voluntary use of self-control devices gures prominently. People regularly set up socially managed
incentives to refrain from smoking by betting with others, telling them about the decision, and
otherwise making it embarrassing to smoke (Prochaska, Crimi, Lapsanski, Martel, and Reid 1982).
Various punishment and self-control strategies for quitting are also widely studied in controlled
experiments on smoking cessation (Miller 1978, Murray and Hobbs 1981, and see Bernstein 1970

                                                  7
for a variety of \aversive stimulus" techniques), and they are recommended by both academic
publications (Grabowski and Hall 1985) and self-help books (CDC various years). In one study, for
example, subjects tore up a dollar bill for every cigarette they smoked above their given daily limit,
and reduced that limit gradually. Presumably, these experiments are incorporating self-control
devices because they are seen as the best option for helping individuals quit smoking, as could be
the case if individuals were time inconsistent.
    A second feature that distinguishes time consistent agents from time inconsistent agents is
an inability to actualize predicted or desired future levels of smoking. The former phenomenon
is speci c to a class of hyperbolic discounters whom we label naive below, in that they do not
understand that they cannot make consistent plans through time.
    In fact, unrealized intentions to quit at some future date are a common feature of stated smoker
preferences. According to Burns (1992), eight of ten smokers in America express a desire to quit
their habit. Unfortunately, these desires can be interpreted in a number of ways, and we are not
aware of any evidence for adults on their speci c predictions or intentions about future smoking
behavior. For youths, however, there is clear evidence that they underestimate the future likelihood
of smoking. For example, among high school seniors who smoke, 56 percent say that they will not
be smoking 5 years later, but only 31 percent of them have in fact quit ve years hence. Moreover,
among those who smoke more than 1 pack/day, the smoking rate ve years later among those who
stated that they would be smoking (72 percent) is actually lower than the smoking rate among
those who stated that they would not be smoking (74 percent) (U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services 1994).
    One might question the relevance of this argument; after all, as noted earlier, there is an
empirical literature which presumes to test the rational addiction model by documenting forward
looking behavior by consumers. Gruber and K}oszegi (2001) accept that smokers are forward-
looking; indeed, they develop even more convincing evidence than previous papers that this is the
case.1 But, as they highlight, forward looking behavior by smokers also arises in time inconsistent
models, so that this evidence does not necessarily support the Becker and Murphy model and
   1
    In particular, Becker, Grossman and Murphy (1994), among others, rely on smokers knowing about unannounced
price changes as much as one year in advance, assess the impact of these changes on sales and not consumption, and
develop results which are very sensitive to the assumptions of their estimation strategy. In contrast Gruber and
Koszegi (forthcoming) study the reaction of monthly cigarette consumption to tax increases which are legislatively
enacted but not yet e ective, and nd a much more robust reaction of current consumption to known future price
increases.


                                                        8
its normative implications. That is, this empirical literature tests one premise of the Becker and
Murphy model, showing that smokers are not fully myopic, but not the second key premise, time
consistency. And the evidence discussed above suggests that time inconsistency may be a better
assumption to adopt for modeling the smoking decision.
    Much of this evidence is consistent with at least two other recent models of individual decision-
making as well, Bernheim and Rangel (2001) and Gul and Pesendorfer (forthcoming, 2000). Both
of these papers rule out an e ective tax policy essentially by assumption, therefore arriving at dif-
ferent policy implications than those developed below.2 There has been little attempt to distinguish
these models, although the evidence in Gruber and Mullainathan (2001) is more consistent with
our formulation than with these alternatives. It seems likely that behavior is some combination of
the three models, and the best model depends on the addictive good in question.3 In this paper,
we focus our attention on the consequences of hyperbolic discounting, acknowledging that future
work should try to appropriately distinguish and combine these alternative approaches.

2 Government Policy Towards Addictive Goods
2.1 A Consumption Model for Addictive Goods
To address the main questions of government intervention in the market for an addictive good, we
  rst need to introduce a model of individual choice in these products. We use the basic model
that we introduced in our earlier paper (Gruber and K}oszegi 2001). This model marries what are
in our opinion the two most important aspects of the consumption of addictive goods. First, as
documented in physiological and psychological studies, the instantaneous utility from consuming
a good such as cigarettes depends in speci c ways on past consumption of the same good. The
literature distinguishes two of these e ects: reinforcement and tolerance. Reinforcement means
that having consumed a cigarette in the past increases the \craving" for one today-it increases the
   2
     Bernheim and Rangel (2001) assume that in the \visceral" state when the agent overconsumes the drug, she is
not price sensitive. Gul and Pesendorfer (forthcoming, 2000), whose model is driven by disutility from temptation,
assume that the agent is tempted equally strongly by the drug for all possible prices, as long as she has enough wealth
to pay for it. These models do not deny a role for government intervention; for example, Bernheim and Rangel suggest
that the optimal policy would be to force individuals to place advance orders for addictive substances, in order to
mitigate the in uence of the \visceral" state.
   3
     For example, Bernheim and Rangel's (2001) model emphasizes the visceral factors in behavior, and assumes that
sometimes the drive to take drugs outpaces all rational optimization. This may be true for drugs like cocaine and
heroin, but probably not for cigarettes.

                                                          9
marginal utility of consumption. And tolerance refers to the notion that our body tends to \get
used to" drugs, and therefore it gets harder and harder over time to achieve the same \high"-one
needs to consume more and more of the good to reach the same level of utility. Both of these can
be captured in an instantaneous utility function of the form

                               Ut = U (at; ct; St) = v (at; St) + u(ct ):                        (1)

at and ct are the levels of consumption of the addictive and ordinary goods, respectively. Rein-
forcement and tolerance are incorporated into the utility function through the dependence of v on
St , the so-called stock of past consumption, a measure of the amount of past consumption of at.
St evolves according to
                                      St+1 = (1 , d)(St + at );                               (2)
where 0 < d < 1 is the depreciation rate of the stock. Reinforcement means simply that vaS (at; St) >
0, while the formal equivalent of tolerance is vS (at; St) < 0.
    The second important aspect of addictive goods consumption concerns the nature in which
instantaneous utilities are integrated into a global utility function. Suppose we are in a T -period
model. A time consistent, exponential discounter agent makes decisions at time t according to the
discounted utility function
                                              TX,t
                                                    i Ut+i :                                     (3)
                                              i=0
We will contrast this type of discounting with the alternative recently popularized by Laibson
(1997), quasi-hyperbolic discounting. For quasi-hyperbolic discounters, discounted utility becomes
                                                    TX
                                                     ,t
                                         Ut +              i Ut+i :                             (4)
                                                    i=1
  and  are usually assumed to be between zero and one. This formulation is intended to capture the
idea that decisionmakers might have self-control problems regarding the consumption of addictive
goods. Under this speci c form of time inconsistency, the discount factor between consecutive
future periods ( ) is larger than between the current period and the next one (  ). Thus, the
agent is \impatient" when faced with a choice between today and tomorrow, but she would like to
\become patient" in the future. The arguments for this formulation were presented above.
    In each period of her life, a quasi-hyperbolic discounter wants to be impatient for that period
and become patient later. This creates a con ict between the current self and the future ones{
which is the essence of the self-control problem. There are two extreme assumptions one can

                                                    10
make about how this con ict is resolved. One can assume naivite, in which the decisionmaker
is completely unaware that she will be impatient again in the future. Such an agent maximizes
the utility function 4 in each period, and changes her plans over and over again. At the other
extreme, one can assume sophistication, where the agent realizes that she will change her mind and
she behaves strategically according to this. Formally, the successive intertemporal selves play the
subgame-perfect equilibrium in an extensive-form game, in which the choice variable of each self is
consumption in that period.
    To complete the setup of the model, let pt be the price of the addictive good in period t, and
denote income in period t by It. To make it easier to solve our model for sophisticated quasi-
hyperbolic discounters, we assume that there are no savings: the income It is consumed in each
period.
    Based on simple examples and intuition, there is reason to believe that relaxing our liquidity
constraint assumption would actually increase the optimal tax. If the agent was allowed to borrow
from future income, she would take advantage of the opportunity, and would do so partly to nance
consumption of the addictive good. Thus, the tax would have to o set the tendency to borrow in
addition to the tendency to overconsume the drug. But the agent's use of savings and addictive
goods consumption as a self-control device considerably complicates the analysis,4 and we have not
solved for the dynamics of our model with savings.
    For a more thorough introduction of this model, see Gruber and K}oszegi (2001); for a contrast
of sophistication and naivite, see O'Donoghue and Rabin (1999a). In an important paper on this
topic, O'Donoghue and Rabin (2000) speci cally consider the e ects of sophistication and naivite
for addiction. Their main insight is that in an environment where agents face occasional strong
urges to consume the addictive good, naifs are more likely to get severely addicted. Intuitively,
naifs start consuming the good, believing that they will quit soon, but then procrastinate in doing
so. O'Donoghue and Rabin's model uses a discrete-choice setup, however, which allows only a
crude analysis of price e ects and taxation, so that they are unable to analyze the implications for
optimal government policies.
    In Gruber and K}oszegi (2000), we solve for the Euler equations for the three types of consumers,
time consistent agents, naive hyperbolic discounters, and sophisticated hyperbolic discounters. For
   4
     In particular, the agent may want to deprive herself of savings, so that the future self cannot a ord the addictive
good. Conversely, if, for example, being addicted decreases the agent's tendency to spend too much, she may want
to `overaddict' herself to improve her savings behavior.


                                                          11
future reference, we quote the sophisticates' rst-order condition here, which is valid as long as
utility functions and equilibrium strategies are di erentiable:

            va (at ; St) , pt u0(ct) =
                                                                                           
        = (1 , d) 1 + (1 , ) @at+1 (va (at+1; St+1) , pt+1u0 (ct+1)) , vs (at+1; St+1) : (5)
                                         @St+1

2.2 Ecient Policies Towards Addictive Goods
The goal of this section is to examine the implications of the quasi-hyperbolic framework for optimal
government policy. Of course, the question arises why we consider only government interventions
to combat self-control problems. If a sophisticated agent had access to an e ective private self-
control device, she would take advantage of it, reducing the value of a government intervention.
However, we nd it unlikely that fully e ective self-control devices can be found in this context.
Market-provided self-control mechanisms are probably undercut by the market mechanism itself:
although rms have a nancial incentive to provide self-control to agents, other rms have a nancial
incentive to break it down. For example, if a rm developed a self-control shot that causes pain
when the consumer smokes, another rm would have an incentive to develop a drug that relieves
these e ects for agents who temporarily want to get rid of their commitment. Other problems
arise in contracting setups. If there are ex post gains to be made, the future self might want to
renegotiate today's contract. But even if there are none, there is an ex post incentive to cheat on
the contract: smoking is hard to verify in court. This leaves us with privately provided self-control
mechanisms like betting with others or becoming involved in situations where it is very dicult to
smoke, but these mechanisms are likely to run into similar enforcement problems to those discussed
above.
    Government intervention in the market has its own problems. The large taxes implied by our
calibrations might create considerable black market and smuggling activity that undercut tax pol-
icy, just as incentives to cheat undercut private self-control devices. Our calibrations, therefore,
indicate the optimal level of corrective increase in the price of cigarettes, assuming that this cor-
rective increase can be enforced{either through public or through private channels. We will use the
shorthand of optimal taxation, but really this is the optimal combination of enforceable taxation
and private correction.
    As in our earlier paper (Gruber and K}oszegi 2001) and similarly to Becker and Murphy (1988),
we restrict attention to quadratic utility functions; this is done only to simplify the analysis. Thus,

                                                     12
the functions v and u take the form
                                                         aa 2                  ss 2
                        v (at; St) =    a at + s St +
                                                         2 at +   as at St +
                                                                               2 St
                           u(ct) =      c ct                                                           (6)

where a, as , and c are positive and s , aa, and ss are negative. The key parameter is
vaS (at ; St) = as , which measures the e ect of past consumption on the marginal utility of current
consumption. To ensure that rst-order conditions are sucient to nd the equilibrium in our
model, we assume that U (at; ct; St) is strictly concave, that is, we suppose its Hessian is negative
de nite.
    In this case, it is very easy to prove by backward induction that at is linear in St : at = tSt + t ,
where t and t are constants. The following theorem, quoted from Gruber and K}oszegi (2001),
establishes that for a general class of parameter values, marginal propensities to addiction are
stationary far from the end of the horizon, giving a consumption function at = sSt +s . Similarly,
at = n St + n for naifs and at = T C St + T C for time-consistent agents.

Theorem 1 Suppose           , U (at; ct; St) is strictly concave, and pt = p, a constant. Then,
                               1
                               2

limj !1 T ,j = s , where s is given as the unique solution on the interval (,1; , asaa ) of
                                                      as , aa
          s = , 1 +                                                                            (7)
                       , aa + (1 , d) [(1 + (1 , )s)( aas + as) , ass , ss ] :
                                        2



     Similarly, for close enough to 1, the constant in the agent's consumption function is (approx-
imately) stationary far from the end of the horizon (Gruber and K}oszegi 2000).
     Notice that in order to carry out our analysis, we assume that there are no income e ects. This
makes the analysis considerably simpler without a ecting the basic conclusions we reach. Without
income e ects, the price of the addictive good has no in uence on s . However, the social planner
can e ectively choose t by setting the appropriate taxes. If the social planner had a full set of
instruments{she could set the tax in each period at will{then she could achieve any combination
t 's in the di erent periods. We assume that the government is restricted to a set of tax instruments
such that (0 ; 1; : : :; t; : : :) 2 M  <1 , where M is closed according to the product topology.
     As in any model where di erent socially relevant actors have di erent tastes, a discussion of
optimal government policy must start with the setup of the social welfare function. In the context
of hyperbolic discounting, these actors are not separate individuals, but di erent intertemporal
incarnations of the same individual. For this application, we take the agent's long-run preferences

                                                    13
as those relevant for social welfare maximization. Since the discount factor applies to all future
periods, if the representative agent were to vote in a tax change today that is instituted starting
tomorrow, these are the preferences she would use in choosing the new tax rate.5 A hyperbolic
discounter would like to exert self-control on her future selves, but not on her current self, so she
would actually prefer a cigarette tax that becomes e ective only in the next period. Therefore, a
social welfare function that maximizes the exponentially discounted sum of instantaneous utilities
may be the most relevant for policy analysis.
    An alternative is to maximize the current self's utility, as when the tax chosen is e ective today.
This would decrease the optimal tax somewhat, because the agent would only want to tax her future
selves, not her current self. As long as is not very small and  is suciently large (so that the
agent cares about the future to a signi cant extent), this makes little di erence in our analysis.
    Thus, the social planner solves
                                        X
                                        1
                                  max        t [v (sSt + t ; St) + c (It , p(sSt + t ))]                   (8)
                              (t )2M t=0
                              s.t.S0; St+1 = (1 , d)(St + s St + t )

    In our earlier paper (Gruber and K}oszegi 2001), we consider the case when the government is
restricted to a tax  that is constant over time, and which is assumed to be passed through to
consumers one-for-one. 6
    This leads to t being constant over time, and consequently M = f(; ; ; : : :)j 2 <g. Then,
the rst-order condition for the optimal tax policy becomes
                        X
                        1                                            1      1 ,  (1 , d)  :
               (1 , )          t (va (at; St) , (p +  ) c ) =                                                   (9)
                        t=0                                        1 ,  1 ,  (1 , d)(1 + s ) c
It is easy to show that the optimal tax is positive: the derivative of 8 with respect to  at  = s
can be written in the form
                                    X
                                    1
                                           t(va (at; St) , p c +  (1 , d)VSs (St+1));                         (10)
                                    t=0
where V s (St) stands for the exponentially discounted utility from leaving stock St and consuming
according to the sophisticated consumption function from then on. A hyperbolic discounter agent
   5
     Interestingly, if the tax was instituted later than in the next period, the agent would actually vote in a higher
tax than what is implied by her long-term discount factor. This is due to the intertemporal substitutability of taxes,
discussed below.
   6
     Past experience suggests that cigarette excise taxes are passed through more than one-for-one; see Gruber (2001)
for a discussion of this evidence. This suggests that the optimal taxes presented below are overstated.

                                                             14
solves va(at ; St) , p c +  (1 , d)VSs (St+1 ) = 0, and since by assumption VSs (St+1) is negative, the
above derivative is negative for < 1. Therefore the optimal  is lower than s , and consequently
the optimal tax is greater than zero. Since we assumed that there are no consumption externalities,
this conclusion contrasts with the implications of a rational addiction framework: that optimal taxes
on cigarettes should depend only on their externalities. In our formulation, optimal taxes depend
on their internalities as well, and so are positive so long as such internalities exist.
     There are several important additional implications of this framework for the optimal taxation
of addictive goods. First, since the optimal tax is positive for < 1, the left-hand side of the
equation 9 is positive. But va(at ; St) , (p +  ) c > 0 means that the addiction is harmful{higher
consumption lowers utility from future periods. Therefore, at least in an average sense, the optimal
tax is not so large so as to make the addiction harmless on the margin. The reason is that the tax is
there to correct a marginal self-control problem. If there was no self-control problem (on average),
there would be nothing to correct{the agent's di erent intertemporal selves would not disagree, so
the losses to consuming more would be second-order. But then, the selves would be consuming too
little, since their private costs are higher than the social costs due to the tax.
     Second, we can determine the dependence of the optimal tax on S0 . For any t, the total derivative
of va (at; St) with respect to St is aa s + as . This is greater than zero because s < T = , aa  as .

Therefore the derivative of the left-hand side of equation 9 with respect to S0 is positive, and so
the optimal tax is increasing in the level of initial addiction. The reason for an optimal tax that
is increasing in S0 follows from the nature of the tax. It is solely a \self-control tax," a tax that is
intended to aid in overcoming the agent's self-control problem. As such, it has to increase as the
self-control problem becomes more serious. And in our model the marginal harm done by smoking
more, and so the self-control problem, increases with S0.
     This observation has two relevant implications for policy. There is a potential problem in
implementing the optimal policy over time. Suppose the representative agent has reached her
steady state level of consumption before the tax is implemented. In the rst period of the new
regime{with the tax in place{the agent cuts back on her consumption, leading to a decrease in
the stock of past consumption. Thus, in the next period, the government wants to decrease its
tax rate. In other words, the government's tax policy is time inconsistent{without commitment on
the government's part, the agent will not believe that the government will carry through its plan,
undermining the e ectiveness of the policy. The key intuition for this result is that the government's
tax is not only intended to curb current, but also past consumption. Anticipating that the tax will

                                                   15
be high (and consequently that she will smoke less) tomorrow leads the agent to cut back today,
in order to reduce her craving tomorrow. But once tomorrow rolls around, the agent has already
cut back, and there is less reason to impose the high tax. It is sucient to \scare" the agent into
quitting{it is not necessary to actually carry out the threat. 7
    Relatedly, suppose that the government can set a di erent tax rate in period 0 and the rest of
the periods (and commit to this entire policy). If the agent has already reached her steady-state
consumption level when the tax is instituted, then the period-0 tax will be higher than the long-term
tax. This occurs exactly because the tax breaks the agent's habit, so S1 < S0 . For distributional
reasons, the traditional prescription is exactly the opposite. According to this traditional view, a
high up-front tax for cigarettes is undesirable because it hurts addicted consumers too much, and
these consumers tend to be disproportionately poor. But we show below that these distributional
considerations may be misplaced.
    Third, we can assess the implications for the time pattern of excise taxes if the government is
constrained from implementing the optimal pattern. Suppose that the government has a free hand
in choosing t , but has some restrictions in the choice of taxes in future periods. If the government
sets t in period t, and the choice does not a ect future taxes, then the rst-order condition for the
optimal choice of t is a variant of condition 9:
                            X
                            1                                                                                 !
   t   c   = ,(1 , )              k (1 , d)k (1 + s)k,1 [(v                         s
                                                                a(at+k ; St+k ) , p c ) + vs (at+k ; St+k )]
                            k=1
                               X
                               1
            , (1 , d)s             i (1 , d)i(1 + s )it+1+i c :                                          (11)
                               i=0
From this formulation, we can easily prove that if the good is addictive (s > 0), taxes in di erent
periods of time are substitutes. Suppose we increase t0 for some t0 > t. First, this has the
direct e ect of decreasing the right-hand side of the above expression. In addition, it decreases
consumption at t0 as well as before and after, decreasing both a and S in each of these periods. But
notice that the derivative of the right-hand side with respect at00 (where t00 > t) is , aa s , while
the derivative with respect to St00 is ,( as s + ss ). The former expression is clearly positive, while
the latter is positive by the concavity of the utility function, so an increase in t0 unambiguously
decreases t. And if we increase t0 for some t0 < t, the decrease in consumption pushes down St,
   7
    Once consumption of cigarettes has reached the (optimal) steady state, the time inconsistency problem disappears.
In steady state, new smokers enter the population as others leave, but the overall distribution remains the same.
Therefore, there is no reason to change the tax. But according to our calibrations below, we are far from the optimal
steady state, so time inconsistency is likely to be a problem for a while.

                                                          16
decreasing the optimal tax in period t.
     Once again, this is a consequence of the intertemporal complementarity in consumption levels.
In order to induce the agent to consume less in period t + 1, the government can use other tools
than the tax in that period. It can increase the tax in period t as well, since that will decrease
the stock of past smoking inherited in period t + 1. In addition, and perhaps more surprisingly,
it can also instead increase the tax in period t + 2, changing the agent's expectations about the
future: since she expects to have to cut back in period t + 2, she starts by cutting back in period
t + 1. Thus, just as the standard Ramsey model would suggest that we \overtax" complements of
untaxed goods such as leisure, the complementarity of smoking in di erent periods suggests that
we \overtax" smoking in some periods if taxation is more dicult in others. For example, if it
is politically infeasible to optimally tax adult smoking, but politically attractive to reduce youth
smoking, the substitutability of tax policy over time suggests over-taxing youth smoking.
     This point raises a novel justi cation for the type of \clean air regulations" that exist in almost
all states in the U.S., banning smoking in public places such as private workplaces, restaurants,
bars, or grocery stores. The traditional justi cation for such regulations is reducing exposure to
second-hand smoke, but this justi cation is somewhat weakend by the lack of convincing evidence
of health damage from such exposure (Viscusi,1995). But if our model is written over space{which
is isomorphic to writing it over time as long as agents are in a given place at a given time{and if it is
impossible to regulate smoking in private homes, then over-regulating (or even restricting) smoking
in observable public places can be justi ed.8 That is, since smoking is a complement across spaces,
then taxes across spaces are substitutes. So if we are undertaxing in one space, we may want to
overtax in other spaces. In that sense, clean air restrictions are not only protecting others from the
smoker; they are also part of a package of tools to protect the smoker from himself.
     Fourth, similar conclusions hold for naive quasi-hyperbolic discounters, but there is an impor-
tant qualitative disctinction. In that case, the tax not only corrects a self-control problem, but also
a misperception problem{the agent is wrong in predicting her future behavior. This has a very
important implication for optimal taxation. Whereas in the sophisticated case taxation that elimi-
nates all harmful consumption can never be justi ed, even if the good is very addictive and people
   8
    If the decisionmaker's chosen location depends on the regulatory policy, our result has to be quali ed somewhat.
For example, if the regulation leads the agent to go outside to smoke, there is no one-to-one map between space
and time, even for the purposes of our model. Of course, to the extent that such substitution is possible, \clean air
regulations" are less e ective.


                                                         17
have severe self-control problems (low 's), it might be the best policy for the naive case. Thus, if
adults are sophisticated, then only taxation, and never a complete ban, of smoking is justi ed for
them. If youths are naive, a ban might be appropriate, even if they are aware of the negative health
consequences of smoking. Interestingly, however, there is a force that tends to make the optimal
tax lower for naifs. Since n  s (lemma 2 in the appendix), reducing consumption today will
have a greater e ect on future consumption for naifs than for sophisticates. Thus, taxation has a
more detrimental e ect on future revenues, decreasing the optimal tax. We return to this e ect in
the calibration section.
    Finally, it is interesting to note how this framework di ers formally from one with interpersonal
externalities. It might seem that each self's failure to take full account of the future harm of
consumption is equivalent to an externality, and the theory (of Pigouvian taxation) developed for
that case should apply. This is not the case. Even when the government has access to a full set of
instruments (that is, it can set taxes di erently in di erent periods as it wishes), there is no easy
interpretation of the optimal period-speci c tax as being equal to the marginal externality caused
by extra consumption. More speci cally, and contrary to what one might think, the tax is not equal
to 1 , times the marginal e ect of a higher stock. This is true for both naifs and sophisticates,
but for di erent reasons.
    For sophisticates, the reason is the \incentive e ect" discussed in Gruber and K}oszegi (2001).
Even when future selves are consuming in an optimal way from the long-run self's point of view,
a sophisticated self feels that they are not: since she sees higher prices than the social ones, the
level of consumption that is just right given the true cost of the good seems too high for her.
Therefore, she feels a need to exert control on the future selves by consuming less. This e ect helps
the government, and so the optimal tax is less than 1 , times the marginal externality.
    Naifs, on the other hand, are not driven by the incentive e ect. However, even with optimal
corrective taxes, they tend to underestimate how much they will consume in the future. By adjacent
complementarity, this \optimism e ect" induces them to consume less today, which again helps the
social planner's cause and reduces the optimal tax.
    Both of these e ects depend on the intertemporal complementarity of consumption. Therefore,
strikingly, the optimal tax on an addictive harmful good is lower than the tax on an equally harmful
good that is not addictive.




                                                 18
2.3 Incidence of Taxes on Addictive Goods
In this section we argue that the traditional economic methods for incidence analysis are incomplete
for addictive goods in the presence of time inconsistency. We also propose an alternative incidence
measure, based on what we believe is the goal of incidence analysis.
    Broadly speaking, the goal of incidence analysis is to determine who is \hurt" by di erent tax
policies. For an economist, the appropriate measure for this analysis is utility{how the tax policy
a ects each person's utility in society. For example, when we say that an increase in the tax on
gasoline would be borne heavily by low-income consumers, we (should) mean that if the tax was
instituted, their utility would be seriously a ected.
    So why is incidence traditionally done in terms of prices and quantities consumed? The reason
is the envelope theorem. Consider a consumer facing a maximization problem of the form

                                 maxq ;:::;qn U (q1; :::; qn)
                                      1


                                    s.t.       p1q1 + ::: + pn qn  W                          (12)

We know that the derivative of the maximum in this problem with respect to p1 is , c q1 , where c
is the Lagrange multiplier on the constraint. That is, for a maximizing consumer, the utility e ect
of a small price increase is equal to the product of the price increase, the quantity consumed, and
the marginal utility of wealth. Thus, for standard utility maximizers, incidence analysis in terms
of prices and quantities is justi ed.
    The same is almost true for a time consistent consumer of addictive goods. For simplicity,
assume that the price is constant: pt = p. Then, the derivative of self t's discounted utility with
respect to p equals
                            , c at , cat+1 , c 2at+2 , ::: , c T ,taT :                      (13)
Once again, the utility impact of a price increase depends on the marginal utility of wealth and
the amounts consumed. As for any good that is consumed in multiple periods, the utility cost of
a cigarette tax depends not only on current, but on future consumption as well. The only wrinkle
is that for non-addictive goods it is reasonable to say that current consumption is an unbiased
measure of future consumption, whereas for addictive goods, consumption often tends to increase
until the individual reaches her steady-state level of consumption.
    For quasi-hyperbolic discounters, the envelope theorem does not hold in the above form, so
standard incidence analysis fails to capture the utility cost of taxation. Once again we focus here

                                                  19
on the more complicated case of sophisticates, and mention only brie y how our results di er for
naifs. In addition, as in section 2.2 we evaluate incidence in terms of the agent's discounted utility
according to her long-term discount factor  .
    Some arithmetic reveals that the derivative of the agent's discounted utility with respect to p is
                           0T           1
                            X                   X
                       , c @  j ,t a j A , 1 ,
                                                T       @a
                                                   j ,t j (va(aj ; Sj ) , p c ) :               (14)
                                                        @p
                        | j t{z   =
                                         } | j t       =
                                                           {z                  }
                         standard term          self-control adjustment
The rst sum in this expression is similar to what we had in the time consistent case: since the
agent now has to buy her consumption at a higher price, her utility is a ected by the extra cost
of this. The additional term, which we call the \self-control adjustment" to incidence, is new.
It captures the value time-inconsistent agents attach to the self-control tool provided by a higher
price. Each self consumes \too much" from the long-run self's point of view, so the price-induced
decrease in consumption increases discounted utility. This term is absent in the time consistent
case because each self consumes \just the right amount" from the long-run self's point of view.
    By repeated application of the sophisticates' rst-order condition 5, we can rewrite a key part
of the self-control adjustment:

       va (aj ; Sj ) , p   c   = , (1 , d)vS (aj +1 ; Sj +1 )
                               , (1 , d)  (1 + (1 , )j ) vS (aj ; Sj )
                                           2 2
                                                                 +1   +2   +2


                               , (1 , d)  (1 + (1 , )j ) (1 + (1 , )j ) vS (aj ; Sj )
                                           3 3
                                                                 +1             +2   +3   +3


                               , :::                                                     (15)

   We will use expressions 14 and 15 to study the self-control adjusted incidence of cigarette
taxation. But even though our analysis is motivated by data on cigarette consumption, the methods
are applicable to other goods as well. We once again restrict ourselves to the quadratic utility
function setup introduced in section 2.2.
    We will need the following preliminary lemma for our analysis:

Lemma 1        1. t is decreasing in for each t.
  2. t is decreasing in  for each t.
  3. t is increasing in t.


                                                      20
   Proof. Appendix. 2
    We are now ready to discuss our main results. First, for any good that is harmful and addictive,
this self-control adjustment will be positive, so that the incidence is lower than in the time consistent
case. Moreover, for a wide range of parameter values this adjustment will actually be larger than
the standard incidence e ect, so that incidence is not only reduced but reversed; that is, taxes are
bene cial on net.
    Next, notice that the right-hand side of equation 15 depends on the constants si in the agent's
consumption function. Thus, the self-control adjustment is larger if si > 0{when the good is
addictive as opposed to merely harmful. Surprisingly, for a person su ering from self-control
problems, the taxation of addictive harmful goods imposes less of a burden than the taxation of
goods that are exactly as harmful but not addictive. The reason is that the consumption of a harmful
addictive good imposes two kinds of future costs; it causes direct harm and triggers an increase in
future consumption, which is too high anyway. In a sense, consuming a harmful addictive good
makes the future self-control problem regarding this good worse, because it increases the short-run
desire to consume and pushes the costs into the future. Both of these e ects are bad from a long-
run perspective, and a quasi-hyperbolic discounter does not take either of them suciently into
account.
    This result is all the more striking given our earlier claim that addictiveness decreases the
optimal tax. The di erence is driven by the revenue side of the government's problem. Inducing
the agent to reduce smoking decreases her future consumption as well, eroding the government's tax
base. Incidence analysis does not take this into account, whereas optimal taxation does, creating
the opposite implications of addictiveness.
    The conclusion that the true burden of taxation is lower for addictive harmful goods is true for
naifs as well, albeit in a somewhat di erent form. For naifs, the fact that future selves respond
to an increase in stock by consuming more has no negative implications for perceived discounted
utility{since they believe that future selves will behave optimally, such an increase in consumption
is just an optimal response to current consumption. Thus, there is no sense in which naifs do
not take the addictiveness of the good suciently into account. Rather, their problem stems from
perception: since they do not know that the future selves will consume too much, they fail to realize
that current consumption just exacerbates this overconsumption problem.
    One diculty with giving crisp conclusions about incidence in this model is that the marginal
damage vS (at ; St), through its dependence on consumption and the stock, depends on the other

                                                   21
parameters of the model. Our (theoretical and empirical) knowledge of these changes is limited, so
we abstract from them in the rest of our discussion and in the calibration.
     Ultimately, our interest is in exploring the implications this incidence adjustment for the regres-
sivity of cigarette taxation. In the context of our model, there are four reasons why the magnitude
of this adjustment might di er for the poor and the rich. First, the self-control adjustment in
expression 14 is proportional to the price responsiveness of the agent. Thus, as long as < 1,
more price elastic consumers bear less of the \true" burden of taxation. The intuition is simple:
since the agent consumes too much in each period, the price hike increases utility by restraining
the overconsumption. This self-control is more e ective if the agent is more responsive to price
incentives. As we document below, the poor are much more price sensitive than the rich in their
smoking decisions. Thus, this factor will tend to reduce the regressivity of excise taxation, all else
equal.
     The remaining three factors all relate to a critical question that has been unanswered by the
literature on smoking: why do the poor smoke more? One reason may be that lower-income
individuals smoke more mostly because they have a lower . In this case self-control incidence
adjustment is unambiguously larger for them, and therefore the regressivity of cigarette taxes is
overestimated in standard analysis. The rst, direct e ect of a decrease in is an increase in the
multiplier 1, in the second term in expression 14. The intuition is obvious: if is lower, each
self is ignoring more of the future harm she causes by smoking more, and therefore a decrease in
consumption is more valuable. In addition, equation 15 indicates that there is an indirect e ect
as well, coming from the fact that the good is addictive. As we have noted above, the harm from
current smoking is not restricted to the direct health costs of smoking, but includes the cost of
induced future smoking as well. This cost is higher if is lower, since in that case the future selves
are making a worse decision. Exacerbating the problem is that si is greater for agents with a lower
  ; therefore, the e ect of current consumption on future consumption, which the current self is not
suciently taking into account, is higher.
     On the other hand, another reason why the poor might smoke more is that they have the same
level of time inconsistency as the rich (the same value of ), but a lower long run discount factor
(a lower  ). In fact, if the poor have a lower  , then, all else equal, the burden of taxes falls more
heavily on them. Lowering  has the direct e ect of decreasing the right-hand side of equation 15,
thus decreasing the self-control adjustment. With the future \less important," each intertemporal


                                                  22
self ignores part of a less important thing, and so the tax is less desirable on self-control grounds.9
Lowering  also lowers the dollar value of damage people attach to consuming cigarettes, since this
damage tends to come at the end of life, further raising incidence. Though the standard incidence
measure is also lower when  is lower, the sum-total of these e ects on the multiplicative adjustment
is greater in relative terms. The conclusion might be surprising: if the poor's higher smoking rate
comes from a smaller short-term discount factor ( ), then a cigarette tax is not as regressive as
currently believed, while if it comes from a lower long-term discount factor ( ), then such a tax is
even more regressive than recent estimates, all else equal.
    If lower-income individuals smoke more because they attach a lower value to life, once again we
have to conclude that their self-control adjustment is smaller. We model a decrease in the value
of life as an increase in s , which reduces the marginal harm from smoking. An increase in s
does not a ect st for any t, so from equation 15, a decrease in the marginal harm of a cigarette
decreases the value of the self-control gain a price increase achieves. The intuition is simply that a
person who places a lower value on life cares less about self-control aimed at protecting that life,
decreasing the self-control adjustment.10
    Thus, in summary, the impact of the self-control adjustment to standard incidence measures
is unclear. The adjustment itself will tend to lower incidence, and it will do so more for groups
where smoking is more price sensitive (which is true for the poor). But on the other hand, this
adjustment is reduced as  is lower and the value of life is lower, both of which are also potentially
true for the poor. In the next section, we turn to a calibration exercise which can help assess the
relative importance of these o setting in uences.

3 What Di erence Does It Make?
The previous sections discussed some of the qualitative theoretical implications of a hyperbolically
discounted utility function for eciency and incidence analysis. In the current section we attempt
to quantify these implications, using available information and otherwise assessing the sensitivity
   9
      An e ect acting in the opposite direction arises from the addictiveness of the good: lowering  increases sj .
Therefore, current consumption exerts a larger in uence on future consumption, and the fact that the intertemporal
selves are not taking this suciently into account makes the tax easier to bear. However, the former (direct) e ect
of a decrease in  always outweighs the latter (indirect) e ect. The proof is omitted, but is available upon request.
   10
      As we note below, a related reason that the poor may smoke more is because smoking is less damaging when life
is shorter, since fewer years of life are lost. This operates in a parallel fashion to the lower value of life point.


                                                         23
to parameter variation.
    In order to carry out the analysis, we make three simplifying assumptions in addition to working
with a quadratic utility function. First, we assume that decisionmakers start o from a steady-state
consumption level: at does not depend on t. Second, we ignore end-of-life e ects operating through
t and the price elasticity of consumption. Third, we assume that the disutility associated with
smoking, vS (at; St), is constant.11; 12 Let hS denote the money equivalent of the per-period future
marginal utility of an extra cigarette (so it should be negative.) This accounts for the pure disutility
e ect of the stock, but not the impact of current consumption on future smoking decisions.

3.1 Calibrating Optimal Taxes
In this section, we attempt to calibrate the model from Section 2 in order to calculate an actual
optimal tax for sophisticated agents. Starting from equation 9 for the optimal tax, substituting
equation 15, and then setting hs = vs (atc;St ) for each t gives

                  (1 , ) 1 ,  (1 , d (1 , d)          (, hS ) =
                                                                       1 ,  (1 , d) :                            (16)
                                       )(1 + (1 , ) )
                                                     s           1 ,  (1 , d)(1 + s )
    In our calibration, we will use the combined discounted damage of a cigarette in all future
periods, HS = 1,(1(1,,d)d) hS . Rewriting the above expression

                               =
                                       1 ,  (1 , d)(1 + s ) (1 , )(,H ):                                        (17)
                                                                        S
                                    1 ,  (1 , d)(1 + (1 , )s )
    One diculty with estimating the optimal tax is parameterizing HS . Clearly, there is a lot of
disutility associated with smoking that is hard to quantify, such as that from constant coughing
and increased vulnerability to various illnesses. We will ignore all these, and assume that the
only disutility from smoking is in the increased chance of early death. Viscusi (1993) reviews the
  11
     This assumption is not inconsistent with the assumption of addictiveness of cigarettes. There seem to be two
di erent stocks relevant for smoking: `addictiveness' stock and `health' stock, with di erent depreciation rates.
Addictiveness depreciation, which (loosely speaking) measures how long a cigarette consumed today a ects craving
in the future, appears quite fast. On the other hand, the health e ects of that cigarette last much longer. Thus,
while the addictive process might be governed by the addictiveness stock for which marginal utility is not constant,
most of the important long-term e ects could come from the health stock for which marginal utility is constant. For
simplicity, we do not model behavior with two stocks of past consumption, but instead assume that vS is constant.
  12
     A possible non-linearity is that quitting completely has an extra health bene t relative to just reducing smoking
to a low level. In as much as this is true, our incidence adjustment is understated: since the observed price elasticity
in consumption is partly on the participation margin, assuming a linear vS understates the self-control bene ts of
taxation.

                                                          24
literature on life valuation and suggests a consensus range of 3-7 million 1990 dollars for the value
of a worker's life; choosing the midpoint value and expressing it in current dollars gives a gure of
$6.8 million. Presumably, this is a present discounted value for all remaining years. We assume that
the average worker is 40 years old and would live to age 79 if a nonsmoker, and use a 3% discount
rate to calculate the implied value of a year of life at each age from these facts. We use the fact that
smokers die on average roughly 6 years earlier from Cutler et al. (2001), and compute for each age
15-73 the PDV of the cost of losing 6 years at the end of life. We then take a weighted average of
these costs at each age, where the weights are the share of cigarettes smoked at each age from the
May 1999 Current Population Survey Tobacco Use Supplement, a nationally representative survey
of smokers. Finally, we divide this weighted average by the average number of cigarettes smoked
over one's lifetime; that is, we assume that average and marginal damage is equal. 13
     At these gures, the cost in terms of life years lost per pack of cigarettes is $35.64. Of course,
this gure will vary with the agent's  that we are considering; since costs are at the end of life,
they will fall as  falls. But it is an enormous gure for any reasonable  , and is on the order of
100 times as large as estimates of the interpersonal externalities from smoking.
     There are several o setting biases to using this gure as an estimate of the damage per pack.
This estimate is too high to the extent that smokers value their lives less than nonsmokers. 14
On the other hand, this estimate is too low to the extent that we have ignored all non-mortality
related damage due to smoking. Smoking not only shortens lives but lowers quality of years spent
alive as well through reduced health. Moreover, our quasi-hyperbolic framework implies that the
hedonic valuation estimates of a life that we are using are too low. Under hedonic analysis, life
valuations are backed out of revealed preference in the market. With quasi-hyperbolic discounting,
this approach is theoretically unfounded: agents are not maximizing their discounted utility, so
  13
      Age 79 and the use of 6 years of reduced life re ects an averaging of e ects for men and women. The average
cigarettes smoked over the lifetime (19,418) is derived by subtracting the average starting age of current smokers
(age 17) from age 73, multiplying by 365, and then multiplying by average cigarettes per day smoked among daily
smokers (19). Note also that it is unclear whether the reference point for mortality reduction should be the rst pack
smoked (so that mortality reductions come from the perspective of age 79), the last pack smoked (so that they come
from the perspective of age 73), or in between. We use the sum of damage over ages 73-79 as an average.
   14
      The evidence in Viscusi and Hersch (2001) suggests that this is true, in that the compensating di erentials that
smokers require for risky jobs are lower than the di erentials required by nonsmokers. But, as they discuss at length
in their article, their estimate of the reduced value of injury for smokers, approximately 50%, re ects both the demand
side role of preferences and the supply side response of the labor market to those preferences. So it is unclear how
large the pure downward risk preference adjustment should be.


                                                          25
market behavior will in general not re ect true valuations. Unless the only job-related risk faced by
the worker is concentrated in the current period and the worker is completely liquidity constrained,
quasi-hyperbolic discounters will accept a compensating di erential that is \too small" relative to
the true long run value of their life, because they are excessively tempted by the short-run rewards
from accepting the risks.
     In Table 2, we present a set of calibrations for the optimal tax for a variety of values of ,
 , d and s. As in our previous paper (Gruber and K}oszegi 2001), we take the relevant period
length to be one month. We consider a range of values of of 0.6 and 0.9. = 0:6 parameterizes
a very serious self-control problem, albeit one we believe could well apply to smoking. Kirby and
Herrnstein (1995) nd weekly discount rates of 10 to 30 percent, while Thaler's (1981) estimates
indicate monthly discount rates of 20 to 30 percent. Given this evidence, = 0:9 represents a
mild self-control problem. We also assess the sensitivity of our results to varying  between 0.9 and
0.97 (on an annualized basis); a 10% long run annual discount rate is quite substantial discounting,
while 3% is more similar to that typically used in public policy analysis. Physiological and empirical
evidence suggests that s is fairly high for smoking. Evidence is less clear on the depreciation rate.
As the results are fairly linear with respect to variations in  and , but not so with respect to d
and s , we show the full range of taxes for d and s , and for two values of and  each.
     As Table 2 shows, the results are quite sensitive to parameter values. To x ideas further,
Gruber and K}oszegi (2001) use their data on the timing of response to tax rate changes to rule out
combinations of high s and low d. As discussed in more detail in that paper, such a combination
would imply a very slow adjustment to steady state smoking levels{even long after the price change,
agents should be reducing their consumption from period to period. But they observe fairly quick
adjustments to steady state smoking levels after taxes change, de nitely ruling out combinations
such as d = 0:5 and s = 0:9, and compatible with a combination of d = 0:6 and s = 0:7.
     At d = 0:6 and s = 0:7, the optimal tax is very large for all of the combinations of and 
shown in Table 2. The optimal tax is $2 for = 0:9 and  = 0:97; it rises $9.37 for = 0:6 and
 = 0:97. Thus, lower leads to a higher optimal tax, as the internalities rise with the extent of
time inconsistency. We also nd that the optimal tax is $1.02 for = 0:9 and  = 0:9; and it is
$4.76 for = 0:6 and  = 0:9. Lowering  has three e ects on the optimal tax. First, a lower 
reduces the long run revenue cost to the government of driving down smoking, which raises the
optimal tax. Second, a lower  reduces the discounted distortion from addicting future selves to
smoking, lowering the optimal tax; the mistakes made by future selves are less important today as

                                                  26
 decreases. Third, a lower  lowers the present discounted value of damage done at the end of life,
lowering the optimal tax. Calibrations reveal that the rst e ect outweighs the second (e.g. when
value of life e ects are ignored, the optimal tax rises as  falls), but that the third e ect swamps
either of the rst two, leading to lower optimal taxes as  falls.
    Most importantly, in all cases,the optimal tax is very large relative to externalities. This is not
surprising given that the internal damage from smoking is as much as one hundred times as large
as the estimates of externalities. Thus, for even small deviations from the time consistent case,
there are enormous self-control gains from higher prices of cigarettes.
    The optimal tax would be lower for an alternative social welfare function, which maximizes
utility according to the preferences of the self when the tax change is instituted, thus using a
quasi-hyperbolically discounted welfare function. With the exponentially discounted social welfare
function that we use, the social planner wants to correct every self's self-control problem, including
self 0's, whereas with hyperbolic discounting self 0 wants to respect her own preferences and just
correct future selves' behavior. But the di erence is not large so long as  is close to one and is
far from zero.

3.2 Calibrating Tax Incidence - Theory
We next turn to a calibration of tax incidence in our model. As with eciency, incidence is
potentially quite di erent in the time inconsistent formulation.
    Setting t = s and vS (at; st) = vS , expression 15 becomes
                   va (aj ; Sj ) , p c = (1 , d)vS
                                                       1 , [(1 , d) (1 + (1 , )s )]T ,j :              (18)
                                                         1 , (1 , d) (1 + (1 , )s)
Using the above and setting at = a, expression 14 for the utility-based measure of incidence becomes
(for self 1)
                                 X                                                             !
            1 , T      1   ,      T
                                          , 1 @a            1 , [(1 , d) (1 + (1 , )s)]T ,j
       , c 1, a,                      j
                                              @p
                                                 (1 , d)vS 1 , (1 , d) (1 + (1 , )s ) ;               (19)
                                 j =1
which can be rewritten as
     1 ,  T                       @a                1                 1 , T       1 ,  [(1 , d )(1 + (1 ,   ) s)]T !
, c 1 ,  a,(1, )(1,d)vS @p 1 , (1 , d)(1 + (1 , )s) 1 ,   + T 1 , (1 , d)(1 + (1 , )s) :
                                                                                                          (20)
                                                                       T
Finally, this expression has a more convenient form as , c 11,, a times:
                 ,       
1 , (1 , )(1 , d) p , @p a 1 , (1 , d) (1+ (1 , )s)
                  vS @a p
                                                                                                                    (21)
                  c | {z } |             {z           }
                                        horizon-independent e ect
                                                     27
                  ,       
                   vS @a p  T (1 ,  ) 1 , [(1 , d)(1 + (1 , )s)]T
   , (1 , )(1 , d) p , @p a 1 , T  1 , (1 , d)(1 + (1 , )s)  1 , (1 , d)(11+ (1 , )s) :
                   c | {z } |                                  {z                           }
                                                             length-of-horizon e ect
The quantity , c 11,,T a is the traditional measure of tax incidence in a dynamic framework{it is
simply the product of consumption, the marginal utility of income, and a horizon term depending
on how long the tax a ects the agent. Therefore, expression 21 gives a multiplicative factor that can
be used to adjust our traditional measures of the regressivity of cigarette taxes when we want to use
a utility-based incidence measure for quasi-hyperbolic discounters. In other words, the di erence
in the magnitudes of these adjustment factors across income groups tells us the degree to which
the usual incidence measures are \o " when the utility gains from extra self-control are taken into
account.
     The latter term in expression 21 can be decomposed into two terms, one that does not depend
on T and one that does. This allows us to immediately assess the relative importance of length-of-
horizon e ects of incidence relative to other e ects in the model. Note that this term is less than
          T , (1,)
           1
                             times the horizon-independent term. Suppose that the average smoker's
(1, T )(1,(1,d)(1+(1, )s)

horizon is 25 years{this smoker is 40 years old, and will live to age 65. Even for relatively large
 's, the above term will be small. For example, for  = 0:95, and assuming = 0:6, d = 0:5, and
s = 0:9{the combination in our range of parameter values that maximizes the relative importance
of the length-of-horizon e ect{it is equal to only about 3.7% of the horizon-independent e ect. In
addition, the di erences in this term between income groups will be even smaller, since the di erence
in life expectancy between income groups is low. Therefore, we work with a formula that ignores
the length-of-horizon term.
     As in our optimal tax analysis, we calculate the dollar value HS of the extra mortality risk gen-
erated by consuming an extra pack of cigarettes. This gives the nal expression for the adjustment
factor:
                                      HS  @a p 
                        1 , (1 , ) p , @p a 1 , (1 ,1d,)(1
                                    ,                              , d)
                                                                (1 + (1 , )s)                   (22)
                                       | {z }
                                            
    With the simplifying assumptions we made for sophisticates, we can put the self-control ad-
justment in a convenient form for naifs as well, and we do so in the Appendix. As we show there,
we get a much larger adjustment to standard incidence for naifs. The intuition for this result
derives from naifs' misperception about their future behavior combined with the addictiveness of
the good. Since the good is addictive and future selves do not consume optimally, an increase in

                                                 28
current consumption not only decreases future utility, but sparks further increases in consumption
that are also harmful. Since naifs believe that their future selves will behave optimally, they do not
take this into account, whereas sophisticates do (albeit only partially). This e ect is aggravated by
the fact that naifs are more responsive to increases in the stock of past smoking anyway. Thus, a
price increase that forces the agent to consume less is more bene cial for a naif. Another way to
put this di erence is that the tax acts partially like an incentive e ect: by decreasing the current
self's consumption, it decreases future selves' consumption as well. Since sophisticates' behavior is
already shaped by the incentive e ect, a tax is less bene cial for them.
    Our calculations in the appendix do ignore the \optimism" e ect for naifs described earlier, by
making vS constant. Although we have no way of estimating this optimism e ect, we can prove
that it is not as large as the incentive e ect operating for sophisticates, and thereby that incidence
is unambiguously lower for naifs than for sophisticates (e.g. the incidence adjustment would be
even larger for naifs that what is presented below). 15 Although incidence is unambiguously lower
for naive agents, we should emphasize that this does not imply a higher optimal tax for them. Since
n  s , breaking a naive agent's addiction has a more detrimental e ect on future revenues than
does breaking a sophisticate's addiction. Incidence analysis does not take this into account, but
optimal tax analysis does.16

3.3 Calibrating Tax Incidence - Parameters
The calibration of incidence involves not only the preference parameters discussed above, but some
new parameters as well. Moreover, when discussing distributional issues, it becomes critical to
then consider the distribution of these parameters as well. In this section we bring evidence to bear
on several of these underlying parameters and how they di er along the income distribution, and
discuss our assumptions on the remaining parameters.
    A central variable for computing incidence is the price elasticity of demand for cigarettes, and
  15
     We can compare the optimism e ect to the incentive e ect by thinking of both as price increases. The incentive
e ect acts as a current price increase, because the agent realizes that current consumption triggers future harmful
consumption. The optimism e ect, on the other hand, acts as a future price increase, because the agent believes that
future selves will perceive a higher health cost from smoking than they actually will. Using the results in our earlier
paper, we can study how the agent responds to these price changes. It turns out that since naifs underestimate the
addictiveness of cigarettes (lemma 2), the optimism e ect is lower. Therefore, incidence of taxes is lower on naive
agents, although we do not know exactly how much lower.
  16
     Without the optimism e ect, the optimal tax for naifs is simply ,(1 , )HS , the Pigouvian corrective tax


                                                          29
in particular how it varies across income groups. Standard micro-data estimates for the elasticity
of consumption center around -0.45, and the previous literature has indicated that the elasticity
is much higher for lower than for higher income smokers. For example, Evans, Ringel and Stech
(1999) estimate the elasticity for those with missing income (which they presume to be on average
a very low income group) is -0.73, for those below median income is -0.53, while it is -0.13 for those
above.
    We provide updated estimates of elasticities and their distribution by matching to the CEX
data from 1980 through 1998 information on cigarette prices and taxes in each state in each survey
month.17 We then estimate models of cigarette expenditures as a function of price, instrumented
by excise tax; as discussed by Gruber and K}oszegi (2001), such an instrumental variables strategy
is required because there may be state-speci c pricing that is endogenous to cigarette demand. We
control in our model for a set of demographic characteristics (age, education, sex, and race of the
household head; dummies for number of persons in the household), and a full set of state dummies,
year dummies, and calendar month dummies.
    The results of this exercise are shown in Table 3. The coecient estimates show the impact
of a one dollar price increase on expenditures; the standard errors are in parentheses. Below each
estimate is the elasticity of the quantity of cigarettes consumed with respect to price implied by this
consumption response, at the mean price and quantity.18 Across the full sample, each dollar price
increase leads to an increase in cigarette expenditures of only 16.8 cents, for an implied elasticity
of -0.66. This is larger than the traditional estimated elasticity of -0.45 for cigarette expenditures,
but it is very close to the estimates using more recent data in Gruber and K}oszegi (2001).
    Across groups, we see a clear pattern of higher price sensitivity for lower income, consumption, or
education groups. In every case, for the bottom group expenditures decline as price rises, implying
an elasticity of less than minus 1. For income categories, the elasticities decline monotonically
as income rises, with a top elasticity that is roughly one third that of the bottom group. For
consumption and education categories, the decline is monotonic to the third category, but elasticities
then increase again for the top group.
    While we discussed above our computation of the health damage from a pack of cigarettes, we
  17
     Data on taxes and prices by state are from Tobacco Institute (1999). Taxes are measured monthly using infor-
mation on state excise tax histories; prices are measured annually each November, so we take a weighted average of
the past and future November prices in assigning a price to each month.
  18
     The elasticity implied by the estimated response of total consumption is ( =q) , 1, where is the estimated
coecient and q is the sample mean of expenditure.


                                                       30
now need to assess how this varies by group. This in turn has two components: di erences by
group in the value of a life; and di erences by group in the marginal damage of smoking. The only
evidence on the former comes from Viscusi and Evans (1990), who use survey evidence on the value
of injuries to estimate an income elasticity of one. Applying this same income elasticity to deaths
would imply that the value of life for the lowest income quartile is only 10% that of the highest
income quartile.
    While we will consider estimates that use this income elasticity, there are at least two strong
arguments for using values of life that are much closer across groups. First, public policy goals
are fundamentally predicated (at least in principle) on equal valuations of life across groups. No
analysis of policy in the U.S. of which we are aware uses varying valuation of life across income or
demographic groups for computing costs and bene ts. Our tax is a self-control tax, so in principle it
should use the agent's own valuation of their life. But, even if those valuations di er, public policy
may want to correct for those di erences in using more equal life values for computing optimal
taxes. Of course, if this is the case, taxes are less regressive than our estimates below, even less
than those that assume equal valuations of life. A tax on the addictive good not only corrects
low-income agents' self-control problem, but also their relative undervaluation of life, and so is
more bene cial for them.
    Second, such massive di erences in the value of life are inconsistent with observed smoking
behavior. Evans, Ringel and Stech (1999) show that smoking rates in the top income quartile are
about one-half those in the bottom income quartile. While this di erence is large, it is quite small
relative to what would be implied by a unitary income elasticity of value of life, assuming that
all other parameters are the same across income or education groups. Suppose, for example, that
the value of life for individuals in the bottom quartile is 75% of that of those in the top quartile,
a number that would be large according to Viscusi and Evans' (1990) estimates. Given that we
estimate the average damage from cigarettes to be $34.86, a reasonable pair of valuations would
be $40 for the rich and $30 for the poor. Given our elasticity estimates{which are admittedly
derived from small price changes{a $10 di erence in prices should lead to a much greater di erence
in consumption levels than we actually observe. According to the elasticity of the top quartile
(-0.387), a $10 price increase (o the mean price in this period of $2 per pack in our CPS data)
should lead agents to cut their consumption by 194%, yet smoking is 50% as high among the highest
income as the lowest income groups. Even if we accept that responses to small price changes cannot
be extrapolated to make conclusions about large price changes, it is unlikely that smokers would

                                                 31
only cut their consumption by 50% were the price of cigarettes to increase to $13 per pack today.19
    There is, to date, little evidence on the latter question of how the marginal damage of smoking
di ers by income group. The di erential impact of smoking by group is unclear ex ante. On the
one hand, since lower income groups live for fewer years, there are fewer years of life lost from a
shift up in the hazard curve of death. On the other hand, to the extent that the damage from
smoking interacts with other disease, there could be more damage to lower income groups who are
in worse health for other reasons as well. Given the lack of evidence, we subsume this point in our
variation in the value of life.
    There is also little evidence on the di erence in preference parameters across income groups.
We therefore assume that preference parameters are the same. Given the evidence presented above,
we will present all calibrations for d = 0:6 and s = 0:7. In fact, we nd that the basic pattern of
our results is not sensitive to the values chosen for these parameters. We will consider the range of
  and  used in Table 2.

3.4 Calibrating Tax Incidence - Results
Putting together the results of the last two subsections, Table 4 shows our results for incidence.
There is one panel for each income de nition (current income, expenditure, and education). In
each case, we use the estimated elasticities from Table 3 by group, and we use three ranges of
value of life: the range implied by an income elasticity of one, where we use the ratio of income or
expenditure in each category to the top category to get relative life value; a second case where we
use relative life value of 0.5, 0.667, 0.883, and 1; and a nal case where we assume equal life values
(and, implicitly, relative health damages from smoking).
    The gures in the table represent the incidence of a $1 tax per pack of cigarettes, as a share of
income in panels 1 and 3, and as a share of consumption in panel 2. Ex ante incidence is shown in
the rst column of each table, and the proportions replicate Table 1. The remainder of the results
show incidence after applying our time inconsistency adjustment.
    Two notes about interpretation. First, in many cases below, we nd that our adjustment
actually reverses incidence, which we will show as a negative burden; that is, the corrective bene ts
  19
    It is not clear whether the values of life exhibited by the agents should be multiplied by when considering the
total price of a cigarette. On the one hand, if the estimates represent the true long-run valuations of life, people will
discount them by when making decisions. On the other hand, as we have mentioned, the short-run impatience
would also a ect the behavior on which estimates of the value of life are based. Therefore, they already incorporate
  in some way.

                                                           32
are so large for that parameter combination that the tax is a bene t, so that a larger negative
number implies a larger bene t. Second, in some cases below we nd that the ratio of the burden
on the poor relative to the rich grows, but the absolute gap between the two narrows. It is not
clear whether this is appropriately interpreted as a rise or a reduction in the regressivity of the tax.
     For the income concept shown in panel 1 of Table 4, taxes are the most regressive ex ante,
with the burden on the lowest income group almost ten times that on the highest. In the rst set
of columns, we show the adjusted incidence measure for = 0:9 and  = 0:97. For this modest
deviation from time inconsistency, we nd that the implications of the adjustment for incidence
depend on the distribution of values of life. In the case where the poor have a very low value of
life relative to the rich (column 2), this adjustment worsens a ratio measure of regressivity, but
narrows the absolute gap. For the medium set of life values, regressivity is reduced both relatively
and absolutely. And for the case of equal life values, the tax becomes progressive, having a bene cial
impact for the lowest group, with small positive incidence on other groups. This represents the
e ects of the more elastic smoking decision among the lowest income smokers.
     Varying has an enormous e ect. For = 0:6, taxes are now bene cial for every group, and
much more so for the lowest income group so long as life values are not too unequal. For equal life
values, the adjustment implies an enormous bene t to the lower income group, with large bene ts
for the next two groups and modest bene ts for the top group.
     The next two panels vary  . A lower value for  signi cantly mitigates the self-control adjust-
ment, for the reasons discussed earlier. For low values of life, and = 0:9, there is little change in
regressivity. But regressivity is reduced as life values become more equal, although the tax remains
regressive in the third panel even with equal values of life. But for a lower = 0:6, taxes are
progressive so long as the value of life of the poor is not too low, even with this lower  = 0:9.
     When distribution is analyzed in expenditure terms, in panel 2, the impacts of the adjustment
are less dramatic. Indeed, for the lowest value of life case with = 0:9 and  = 0:97, regressivity is
constant in absolute terms and worsens in ratio terms. But once again we nd that so long as either
we use the medium or high ratios of life values, or set lower, we reduce or reverse regressivity.
     Perhaps the strongest ndings are obtained for the education distribution in panel 3. This is
because the income di erences are much more modest by education group, so that our low life value
case (using the implied income elasticity of -1) yields much more uniform life values by group than
the other two tables. In this case regressivity is everywhere reduced in both ratio and absolute
terms, or reversed through more bene cial taxes on lower income groups.

                                                  33
     Thus, while these calibrations are sensitive to parameter values and assumptions, the overall
message is clear: so long as the poor do not have life values and/or marginal damage from smoking
very far below the rich, and so long as their long run discount rate  is not much lower (or,
if it is, their is lower as well), the regressivity of cigarette taxes is reduced for sophisticated
time inconsistent smokers. For more equal values of life and higher degrees of time inconsistency
regressivity is generally reversed, with larger bene ts from cigarette taxation for lower income
groups. That is, the same forces which lead us to a large optimal tax on cigarettes lead as well
to the conclusion that cigarette taxes do not necessarily impose burdens on smokers, and that the
bene ts of taxation are largest for those low income groups that smoke the most and have the most
price sensitivity. Moreover, if lower income groups are more naive, as some analysts suggest, then
the conclusions here are strengthened, as we can prove that incidence is even lower on naive than
on sophisticated time inconsistent consumers.

4 Conclusions
Appropriate government policy towards addictive bads such as smoking has been, and will continue
to be, a major source of debate among both policy makers and academics. Cigarette excise taxes
have risen dramatically over the past decade relative to the recent past, yet taxes have only recently
returned to their real level of the mid-1950s, and the share of taxes as a percentage of price remains
well below its historical levels (Gruber, 2001). And in just the past ve years we have seen a
massive payment from the tobacco industry to the states, and an attempt at a comprehensive
tobacco regulation bill at the federal level.
    Economists should be important participants in the debate over government policy in this arena.
The guidance provided by economists to date has been guided by the notion that smoking decisions
are made in a rational, time consistent fashion along the lines of the Becker-Murphy model. But
available evidence, albeit quite weak by empirical economics standards, does not support this
formulation. The purpose of this paper was to write down a model which was more consistent with
the available evidence. Our model deviates in only one way from the Becker Murphy formulation,
by introducing speci c time inconsistent preferences. We then assess the di erential implications
of this model for analyzing government policy towards smoking.
    We nd that this change in the model has radical implications for government policy, since
government regulation provides a commitment device that is valued by time inconsistent consumers.

                                                 34
First, we estimate that the optimal tax on cigarettes, above and beyond externalities, is at least $1
per pack, and quite likely much higher. We also nd that taxes should be high up front, in order
to break addiction, but that this can lead to government time inconsistency problems. With a
constrained time pattern of taxes, taxes can be used as substitutes over time; likewise, they can be
substitutes over space, suggesting a novel justi cation for clean air regulations that limit smoking
in public places.
    Second, we show that the traditional conclusion that cigarette taxes are regressive is reduced,
and most likely reversed, once the self-control bene ts of taxes are accounted for. We develop an
adjustment to the standard measure of tax incidence which accounts for these bene ts. We note
that, while lowering incidence overall, this adjustment does not unambiguously reduce regressivity;
that depends on the relative price sensitivities, values of life, degree of time inconsistency, and
degree of impatience across income groups. But our calibrations show that, given the much higher
price elasticities of lower income smokers, in almost all cases taxes on cigarettes are much less
regressive and in some case are indeed progressive.
    One concern about this model and this set of conclusions is that it presents a \slippery slope"
towards justifying excessive regulation of a host of economic behaviors, ranging from smoking and
drinking to driving and fast food consumption. But there are at least three reasons why smoking
is a more appropriate platform for our model than other behaviors. First, there is signi cant
casual evidence (and the one econometric study of Gruber and Mullainathan (2001)) to suggest
that smoking decisions are taken in a time inconsistent fashion. Second, smoking is clearly harmful
at all levels, and the harm rises monotonically with the amount consumed; drinking, for example,
is sometimes argued to be bene cial at low levels of consumption, and only harmful at very high
levels. Finally, the internal costs of smoking dwarf its external costs; the vast majority of harm
done by a smoker is to himself or herself. At standard values of the value of a life/year, we estimate
above that a pack of cigarettes costs $35.64 in terms of lost life expectancy, roughly 100 times the
level of externalities from smoking. This suggests that simply relying on externalities to determine
optimal policy can lead to very large mistakes; in other words, this is a place where getting the
model right matters a lot. We think that it is valuable to consider the implications of models such
as this in other arenas; but the argument for doing so in the context of smoking is most strong.
    Of course, the empirical evidence for time inconsistency in smoking remains weak, and much
more work is needed here. At the same time, the fact that there is no empirical support, or even
laboratory support, for exponential discounting in this or related contexts suggests that alternative

                                                 35
models of the type that we have derived be taken seriously. The important general point is that,
when standard public nance analyses suggest that the tax on addictive bads is simply equal to their
external costs, and that such taxes are highly regressive, those analyses are implicitly embracing a
rational addiction model. Given the enormous magnitude of the internal costs to smoking, however,
alternative models such as ours must be considered in designing regulatory policy towards addictive
goods.

A Proofs
Lemma 1       1. t is decreasing in for each t.
  2. t is decreasing in  for each t.
  3. t is increasing in t.

   Proof. Since the utility function is quadratic, we have
                              St+1 = (1 , d)(St + at ) = (1 , d)(St + tSt + t )                       (23)
                  at+1 = t+1St+1 + t+1 = t+1(1 , d)(St + t St + t ) + t+1                         (24)

Plugging this into the sophisticates' rst-order condition, equation 5, and assuming pt = p in each
period:

               a + aa (tSt + t ) + as St , p c       =
         = (1 , d) [(1 + (1 , )t+1)[ a +            aa(t+1(1 , d)(St + tSt + t ) + t+1 )
         +     as (1 , d)(St + t St + t ) , p c ]
         ,     ( s+     as (t+1(1 , d)(St + t St + t ) + t+1 ) + ss (1 , d)(St + tSt + t ))]      (25)

The above has to be true for all St , so the coecient of St in the expression has to be zero. After
`some' manipulation, this implies
                                                       as , aa
      t = ,1 +                                                                                         (26)
                  ,   aa +  (1 , d)
                                   2   [(1 + (1 ,   )t+1)( aat+1 + as ) ,       as t+1 ,      ss ]
   De ne the function fs () according to equation 26. We will prove that
   {fs (T ) < T = , asaa .
   {f (,1) > ,1.

                                                       36
    {fs is continuous and increasing on (,1; T ).
    {fs is decreasing in and  .
    These are sucient to establish all parts of the lemma.
    First, notice that the second term of fs () is the reciprocal of a quadratic with a negative
coecient on 2. Then if this term is positive for two points on the real line, it is also positive
in-between these two points. Moreover, it is easy to show that on the interval where this term is
positive, fs is strictly convex.20 Therefore, it is sucient to show that fs (,1) > ,1, T > fs (T ) >
,1, and that fs0 (,1)  0. The rst two ensure that we are on the continuous and strictly convex
section of fs , and the last one (together with convexity) ensures that fs is increasing on (,1; T ).
    The rest is just carrying out the above. We have
                                                                 as , aa
                       fs (,1) = ,1 +                                                       > ,1                             (27)
                                               ,   aa +    (1 , d)2[, aa + 2 as , ss ]
as both the numerator and the denominator are positive in the second term. Proceeding,
                                               as
                                                                          as , aa
                  fs (T ) =             fs            = ,1 +
                                              , aa            , aa + (1 , d)2[, asT         ,     ss ]
                                            as ,  (1 , d) [, as T , ss ]
                                                          2
                             =           , aa + (1 , d)2[, as T , ss ] :                                                   (28)

This being < T = , asaa is equivalent to , as T , ss > 0. But the latter can be rewritten as
 as < ss aa, and since owing to the concavity of U (at ; ct; St) we have as < ss aa , this inequality
 2                                                                       2


holds. , as T , ss > 0 also implies that the second term is positive, so that f (T ) > ,1.
   Moving on,

              fs0 () = ,
                                         ( as , aa)(2(1 , ) aa + aa + (1 , 2 ) as )                             ;           (29)
                            [,       aa  (1 , d)2[(1 + (1 , ))( aa + as ) , as  ,
                                       +                                                                ss ]]2
which gives
                                                                  as , aa
                                                                                                                        2
       fs0 (,1) = ,(1 , 2 )
                                     ,    aa +  (1 , d) [(1 + (1 , ))( aa + as ) ,
                                                        2
                                                                                               as  ,       ss ]
                                                                                                                  0:        (30)

   Finally, we prove that fs (t) is decreasing in and  . For  , this is quite simple: the term
multiplying  in the denominator is positive since t  T and the utility function is strictly
    The second derivative of the reciprocal of a quadratic q is , q q ,q4q(q ) , which is positive as long as q is positive
  20
                                                                   2   00   0 2


and concave.



                                                             37
concave. It takes slightly more work to prove that fs (t) is decreasing in . The derivative of the
denominator with respect to is a positive constant times

                                              ,[ aat + 2 ast +
                                                       2
                                                        +1                  +1        ss ]:                             (31)

Notice that this is equal to
                                                 0                          10        1
                                         ,(t 1) B
                                               +1@           aa        as   CA B@ t CA ;
                                                                                      +1
                                                                                                                        (32)
                                                             as        aa             1
which is greater than zero since the utility function's Hessian is negative de nite.
   This completes the proof. 2

Theorem 2            n  s  T C .

       Proof. To prove s  T C , de ne fT C as fs except with = 1. The di erence between
the denominators of the second terms of fs and fT C , ignoring the positive multiplicative constant
 (1 , d)2, is
                                                            0                                            10 1
                                                          BB                               aa     as   0 CB  C
                                                                                                         C BB CC
  (1 , )[ ( aa + p cc ) + 2 as  + ss ] = (1 , )( 1 p) B
                 2          2
                                                           B@                              as     ss   0 C
                                                                                                         CA B@ 1 CA  0 (33)
                                                                                           0      0    cc     p
by the concavity of U (at ; ct; St). This implies that for any  2 (,1; T ), fs () > fT C (), and thus
s  T C .
    To prove the inequality n  s , let us introduce relevant value functions for sophisticates
and time-consistent agents:
                                                         TX
                                                          ,t
                                         V s (St+1 ) =          i U (ast+i ; cst+i ; Sts+i)
                                                        i=1
                                                       TX
                                                        ,t
                                      V T C (St+1) =          i U (aTt+Ci ; cTt+Ci ; StT+Ci );                         (34)
                                                       i=1
where the superscripts refer to the two di erent agents. Since the utility function is quadratic and
strategies are linear, both of these are quadratic in St+1 . Furthermore, it is clear that V T C (St+1) 
V s (St+1) for all St+1, so V T C (St+1 ) has at least as large a prime coecient as V s (St+1). In addition,
these coecients are negative 21.
     Agent i (i = n; s) solves
  21
       The easiest way to see this is to check that VSTC (St+1 ) = vs (aTC
                                                                         t+1 ; StTC
                                                                                 +1 ) is negative for a suciently high St+1 .



                                                                  38
                              max
                               at
                                  v (at; St) + u(It , pat) + V i ((1 , d)(St + at ));                     (35)
leading to the rst-order condition

                                  va (at; St) , pu0(ct) + (1 , d)VSi (St+1) = 0:                          (36)

Di erentiating this totally with respect to St gives
                         @at          vas (at ; St) +  (1 , d)2VSS  i (S )
                                                                          t+1
                             =
                         @St     ,vaa(at; St) , p u (ct) , (1 , d) VSSi (St+1)
                                                  2  00                  2

                                             vas (at; St) , vaa (at; St) , p2u00(ct )
                               = ,1 +                                                                     (37)
                                      ,vaa(at; St) , p2u00(ct) , (1 , d)2VSSi (St+1) :
Since vas , ,u00 , ,vaa , and ,VSS
                                i are positive constants, and ,V s  ,V T C , the above implies
                                                                SS     SS
n  s . 2


B Incidence Calibration for Naifs
When considering the e ect of a price increase on the utility of naive hyperbolic discounters, even
with the discount structure given, we can use at least two measures for their utility: when discounted
utility is evaluated according to their true instantaneous utilities and when it is evaluated according
to naifs' perceived instantaneous utilities. We believe that the appropriate measure for welfare
analysis is agents' true utility, so we calibrate the incidence of addictive goods taxation on naifs
using this measure. For a quadratic utility function, and ignoring lenghth-of-horizon e ects (taking
the horizon to be in nite), the derivative of a naif's exponentially discounted utility function with
respect to price p is then
        X
        1            1 @a "
                     X                             X
                                                   1                                                                           #
,   c          t at+  t   t (v (a ; S ) , p c ) +  k (1 , d)k (1 + n)k, [(va(at k ; St k ) , p c )n + vs (at k ; St k )]
                                                                               1

        t=1        t=1    @p a t t                  k=1
                                                                                        +    +                      +     +


                                                                                                 (38)
This expression is derived by considering the total utility e ect of changing the agent's consumption
in each period (through the change in price), including the utility e ect coming through changing
later selves' consumption levels. As before, we assume that the disutility from stock vS (at; St)
is constant. Let this constant be vS . Combining time-consistent agents' and naifs' rst-order
conditions, we then have
                                                           (1 , d)
                                va (at; St) , p c = ,                                            (39)
                                                       1 ,  (1 , d) vS :

                                                          39
Combining this with the rest of the above expression yields
        X
        1           1 @a 
                    X                     (1 , d)             (1 , d)        (1 , d)         (1 , d)n        
,              t at+ t t                             v  ,                ,
    c
        t=1             t=1   @p 1 ,  (1 , d)(1 + n) S   1 ,  (1 , d) S 1 ,  (1 , d) 1 ,  (1 , d)(1 + n ) S :
                                                                         v                                       v
                                                                                                     (40)
Rearranging gives
                                       X
                                       1                X1 @a                  (1 , d)
                               ,              t at +      t t (1 , )                               (41)
                                   c
                                       t=1              t
                                                        =1
                                                             @p        1 ,  (1 , d)(1 + n) vS :
If the agent started o in a steady state with at = a for all t, the multiplicative adjustment to
standard incidence is
                                                @a p ,hS
                                   1 , (1 , ) ,@p            (1 , d)
                                                   a p 1 ,  (1 , d)(1 + n )
                                                                               :                     (42)

The total discounted future utility cost of an extra cigarette, expressed in monetary terms, is
HS = 1,(1(1,,d)d) hS . Substituting this in the above yields our nal expression

                                   1 , (1 , ) ,@p
                                                @a p ,HS
                                                          1 ,  (1 , d)
                                                   a p 1 ,  (1 , d)(1 + n)
                                                                              :                      (43)

This expression is almost identical to the one for sophisticated agents, with two crucial di erences.
Naturally, the naifs' self-control adjustment features the naifs' responsiveness to stock, n . Perhaps
more surprisingly, the consumption response to an increase in stock is multiplied by 1 , for
sophisticates, and not for naifs. We prove in the appendix that n  s (theorem 2), so both of
these tend to decrease the multiplicative adjustment for naive quasi-hyperbolic discounters relative
to their sophisticated counterparts. Therefore, the incidence of a tax tends to be smaller on naifs
than on sophisticates.

References
Ainslie, G. (1992): Picoeconomics: The Strategic Interaction of Successive Motivational States
    within the Person. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Ainslie, G., and N. Haslam (1992): \Hyperbolic Discounting," in Choice Over Time, ed. by
    G. Loewenstein, and J. Elster, chap. 3, pp. 57{92. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Angeletos, G.-M., D. I. Laibson, A. Repetto, J. Tobacman, and S. Weinberg (2001):
    \The Hyperbolic Consumption Model: Calibration, Simulation, and Empirical Evaluation,"
    Mimeo, Harvard University.
                                                                    40
Barro, R. (1999): \Ramsey Meets Laibson in the Neoclassical Growth Model," Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 114, 1125{1152.
Becker, G., M. Grossman, and K. M. Murphy (1994): \An Empirical Analysis of Cigarette
  Addiction," American Economic Review, 84(3), 396{418.
Becker, G. S., and K. M. Murphy (1988): \A Theory of Rational Addiction," Journal of
  Political Economy, 96(4), 675{700.
Bernheim, B. D., and A. Rangel (2001): \Addiction, Conditioning, and the Visceral Brain,"
  Mimeo, Stanford University.
Bernstein, D. A. (1970): \The Modi cation of Smoking Behavior: An Evaluative Review," in
  Learning Mechanisms in Smoking, ed. by W. A. Hunt, pp. 3{41. Aldine Publishing Company,
  Chicago.
Burns, J. (1992): \Looking to the Future," in Special Report: Business and Health, ed. by J. Burns,
  pp. 21{22. Medical Economics Publishing.
CDC (various years): \You Can Quit Smoking," Tobacco Information and Prevention Source,
  Webpage: www.cdc.gov/tobacco.
Chaloupka, F. J. (1991): \Rational Addictive Behavior and Cigarette Smoking," Journal of
  Political Economy, 99(4), 722{742.
Chaloupka, F. J., and K. E. Warner (1998): \The Economics of Smoking," in The Handbook
  of Health Economics, ed. by J. Newhouse, and A. Culyer. forthcomming.
Della Vigna, S., and U. Malmendier (2001): \Self-control in the Market: Evidence from the
  Health Club Industry," Mimeo, Harvard University.
Diamond, P., and B. Ko} szegi (1998): \Hyperbolic Discounting and Retirement," Revise and
  resubmit, Journal of Public Economics.
Evans, W., J. Ringel, and D. Stech (1999): \Tobacco Taxes and Public Policy to Discourage
  Smoking," in Tax Policy and the Economy, ed. by J. Poterba, pp. 1{56. Cambridge, MA: MIT
  Press.


                                                41
Grabowski, J., and S. M. Hall (1985): \Tobacco Use, Treatment Strategies, and Pharma-
  cological Adjuncts: An Overview," in Pharmacological Adjuncts in Smoking Cessation, ed. by
  J. Grabowski, and S. M. Hall, pp. 1{13. National Institute on Drug Abuse Monograph 53.
Gruber, J. (2001): \Tobacco at the Crossroads: The Past and Future of Smoking Regulation in
  the U.S.," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15(2), 193{212.
Gruber, J., and B. Ko} szegi (2000): \Is Addiction `Rational?' Theory and Evidence," NBER
  Working Paper 7507.
        (2001): \Is Addiction `Rational?' Theory and Evidence," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  116(4), 1261{1305.
Gruber, J., and S. Mullainathan (2001): \Do Cigarette Taxes Make Smokers Happier?,"
  Mimeo, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Gul, F., and W. Pesendorfer (forthcoming): \Temptation and Self-Control," Econometrica.

Kirby, K. N., and R. J. Herrnstein (1995): \Preference Reversals Due to Myopic Discounting
  of Delayed Reward," Psychological Science, 6(2), 83{89.
Laibson, D. (1997): \Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  112, 443{477.
Laibson, D. I., A. Repetto, and J. Tobacman (1998): \Self-Control and Saving for Retire-
  ment," in Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, ed. by W. C. Brainard, and G. L. Perry, vol. 1,
  pp. 91{196. The Brookings Institution.
Miller, J. L. (1978): \Self-Control in the Elimination of Cigarette Smoking: Case Histories Using
  a Changing Criterion Design," Master's thesis, Western Michigan University.
Murray, R. G., and S. A. Hobbs (1981): \E ects of Self-Reinforcement and Self-Punishment
  in Smoking Reduction: Implications for Broad-Spectrum Behavioral Approaches," Addictive
  Behaviors, 6(1), 63{67.
O'Donoghue, T., and M. Rabin (1999a): \Doing It Now Or Later," American Economic Review,
  89(1), 103{124.


                                               42
         (1999b): \Procrastination in Preparing for Retirement," in Behavioral Dimensions of
  Retirement Economics, ed. by H. J. Aaron, pp. 125{156. Brookings Institution Press.
        (2000): \Addiction and Present-Biased Preferences," Mimeo, Cornell University.
Pesendorfer, W., and F. Gul (2000): \A Theory of Addiction," Mimeo.

Poterba, J. M. (1989): \Lifetime Incidence and the Distributional Burden of Excise Taxes,"
  American Economic Review, 79(2), 325{330.
Prochaska, J. O., P. Crimi, D. Lapsanski, L. Martel, and P. Reid (1982): \Self-Change
  Processes, Self-Ecacy and Self-Concept in Relapse and Maintanance of Cessation and Smok-
  ing," Psychological Reports, 51, 983{990.
Thaler, R. (1981): \Some Empirical Evidence on Dynamic Inconsistency," Economics Letters, 8,
  201{207.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (1994): Preventing Tobacco Use Among
  Young People: A Report of the Surgeon General. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention
  and Health Promotion, Oce on Smoking and Health.
Viscusi, W. K. (1993): \The Value of Risks to Life and Health," Journal of Economic Literature,
  31(4), 1912{1946.
Viscusi, W. K., and W. N. Evans (1990): \Utility Functions That Depend on Health Status:
  Estimates and Economic Implications," American Economic Review, 80(3), 353{374.
Viscusi, W. K., and J. Hersch (2001): \Cigarette Smokers as Job Risk Takers," Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 83, 269{280.




                                              43
                        Table 1: Distribution of Smoking Expenditures
    Quartile or Group           Income              Consumption          Education Groups
                                Quartiles            Quartiles
    Bottom Quartile /            0.032                  0.015                  0.014
     HS Dropouts
    Second Quartile /            0.014                  0.013                  0.013
       HS Grads
     Third Quartile /            0.009                  0.010                  0.008
      Some College
      Top Quartile /             0.004                  0.004                  0.003
      College Grads

Note: Table shows the share of income (in columns 1 & 3) or expenditure (in column 2) on
cigarettes. Data on consumption from CEX; data on income from CPS.
                       Table 2: Optimal Tax Calibrations for Sophisticates
                                                  $ = 0.9, *=0.97
                     d = 0.5          d = 0.6         d = 0.7          d = 0.8          d = 0.9
   8*s = 0.9          .41             1.53             2.28             2.82             3.24
   8*s = 0.7          1.16            2.00             2.57             2.99             3.31
   8*s = 0.5          1.88            2.46             2.86             3.16             3.39
                                                  $ = 0.6 , *=0.97
                     d = 0.5          d = 0.6         d = 0.7          d = 0.8          d = 0.9
   8*s = 0.9          2.32             7.54            10.37            12.15            13.37
   8*s = 0.7          6.00             9.37            11.35            12.65            13.57
   8*s = 0.5          8.94            10.98            12.26            13.13            13.77
                                                  $ = 0.9, *=0.9
                     d = 0.5          d = 0.6         d = 0.7          d = 0.8          d = 0.9
   8*s = 0.9          0.23             0.78             1.16             1.43            1.63
   8*s = 0.7          0.60             1.02             1.30             1.51            1.67
   8*s = 0.5          0.96             1.25             1.45             1.59            1.71
                                                  $ = 0.6, *=0.9
                     d = 0.5          d = 0.6         d = 0.7          d = 0.8          d = 0.9
   8*s = 0.9          1.29             3.85             5.25             6.13            6.74
   8*s = 0.7          3.09             4.76             5.74             6.39            6.85
   8*s = 0.5          4.55             5.56             6.19             6.63            6.95

Note: Table presents optimal internality taxes (in dollars) for various combinations of the rate of
depreciation (d), the impact of the past stock on current smoking for sophisticated hyperbolic
agents (8*s), the long run discount factor (*), and the short run discount factor ($), based on
authors calculations from equation (17) in the text.
                        Table 3: Price Sensitivity of Cigarette Expenditure
    Quartile or Group            Income               Consumption             Education Groups
                                 Quartiles             Quartiles
         Overall                                             0.168
                                                            (0.049)
                                                           [-0.661]
    Bottom Quartile /              -0.032                 -0.016                   -0.044
     HS Dropouts                   (0.078)                (0.059)                  (0.115)
                                  [-1.086]               [-1.050]                 [-1.080]
    Second Quartile /               0.144                  0.113                    0.045
       HS Grads                    (0.087)                (0.083)                  (0.096)
                                  [-0.699]               [-0.770]                 [-0.927]
     Third Quartile /               0.273                  0.414                    0.417
      Some College                 (0.113)                (0.104)                  (0.100)
                                  [-0.534]               [-0.311]                 [-0.107]
      Top Quartile /                0.341                  0.215                    0.175
      College Grads                (0.116)                (0.137)                  (0.082)
                                  [-0.387]               [-0.642]                 [-0.400]

Note: Table shows estimates of impact of cigarette prices on cigarette consumption levels.
Estimated impact on consumption is first number in each cell; standard error of that estimate in
parentheses below. Figure in square brackets is implied elasticity of quantity of cigarettes
consumed. First row shows full sample estimates; remaining rows show estimates by
income/expenditure/education categories. Estimates from CEX data over 1980-1998 period.
                                                                      Table 4: Incidence Calibrations
              (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)         (9)          (10)       (11)         (12)          (13)
 Group       Ex-                $ = 0.9, * = 0.97                     $ = 0.6, * = 0.97                     $ = 0.9, * = 0.9                      $ = 0.6, * = 0.9
             Ante
                        Low           Mid        Equal       Low           Mid         Equal        Low           Mid        Equal       Low           Mid         Equal
                        Value        Value       Value       Value        Value        Value        Value        Value       Value       Value        Value        Value
                                                                       Current Income Distribution
  Low        1.69        1.21         0.20       -0.58        -0.56       -5.30        -8.96         1.45         0.94         0.54       0.56        -1.82          -3.67
   2nd       0.71        0.37         0.17        0.09        -0.90       -1.82        -2.19         0.54         0.44         0.40       -0.10       -0.56        –0.75
   3rd       0.47        0.16         0.11        0.16        -0.98       -1.23        -1.00         0.31         0.29         .31        -0.26       -0.38          -0.27
   Top       0.18       -0.01         0.06        0.09        -0.73       -0.35        -0.23         0.08         0.12         0.14       -0.28       -0.09          -0.02
                                                                         Expenditure Distribution
  Low        0.83        0.48         0.12       -0.26        -0.80       -2.51        -4.26         0.65         0.47         0.28       0.01        -0.85          -1.73
   2nd       0.66        0.27         0.11        0.03        -1.16       -1.93        -2.31         0.46         0.38         0.34       -0.25       -0.65          -0.83
   3rd       0.49        0.31         0.27        0.30        -0.36       -0.54        -0.40         0.40         0.38         0.39       0.06        -0.03          0.04
   Top       0.22       -0.15         -0.01       0.04        -1.52       -0.86        -0.60         0.03         0.10         0.13       -0.65       -0.32          -0.19
                                                                          Education Categories
  HSD        0.75        0.11         0.09       -0.26        -2.24       -2.35        -3.98         0.43         0.42         0.24       -0.75        -.81          -1.63
  HSG        0.66        0.03         -0.01      -0.10        -2.27       -2.46        -2.91         0.34         0.32         0.28       -0.82       -0.91          -1.14
  SCL         0.4        0.35         0.34        0.35        0.15         0.11         0.15         0.37         0.37         0.37       0.27         0.25          0.27
  CLG        0.13        0.03         0.05        0.07        -0.33       -0.27        -0.17         0.08         0.09         0.10       -0.10           -0.07         -0.02
                                                                                                                                                             *s
Note: Table shows ex ante (column 1) and adjusted (columns 2-13) incidence of a $1/pack rise in the tax on cigarettes. All estimates are for d = 0.6 and 8 = 0.7; corresponding $
and * for each estimate is shown in top row. Within each set of columns, first column shows incidence with values of life dictated by elasticity of life value = 1; second column
shows case where value of life of lowest income group is half that of highest income group; and final column shows case of equal value of life. First panel shows incidence
calculations according to annual income quartiles; second panel shows calculations according to consumption quartiles; final panel shows incidence calculations according to
education groups. Table results from evaluation of equation (22) in text.
