                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        COLUMBUS’ EGG: THE REAL DETERMINANT OF CAPITAL STRUCTURE


                                                Ivo Welch


                                          Working Paper 8782
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8782


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2002




I thank Judy Chevalier, Eugene Fama, John Graham, David Hirshleifer, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes, Roni
Michaely, Gerard Hoberg, Sheridan Titman, and seminar participants at Yale for comments. Gerard Hoberg
provided terrific research assistance. The most recent version of this paper and author contact information
is available at http://welch.som.yale.edu/academics/. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Ivo Welch. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Columbus’ Egg: The Real Determinant of Capital Structure
Ivo Welch
NBER Working Paper No. 8782
February 2002
JEL No. G24



                                               ABSTRACT


        This paper shows that managers fail to readjust their capital structure in response to external stock
returns. Thus, the typical firm's capital structure is not caused by attempts to time the market, by attempts
to minimize taxes or bankruptcy costs, or by any other attempts at firm-value maximization. Instead,
capital structure is almost entirely determined by lagged stock returns (which, when applied to ancient
equity values, predict current equity value and with it debt equity ratios). Consequently, one should
conclude that capital structure is determined primarily by external stock market influences, and not by
internal corporate optimizing decisions.




Ivo Welch
Yale University
School of Management
46 Hillhouse Ave.
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
ivo.welch@yale.edu
      Columbus’ Egg is a myth in many non-English languages. Supposedly, at a
      dinner banquet in honor of Columbus’ discovery of the Americas, some guests
      claimed that anyone could have discovered a continent as big as the New World.
      In response, Columbus challenged them to balance an egg on the table. Every-
      one tried and failed. Columbus then cracked the egg on one side, so that it
      would easily stand. The point of this anecdote is to describe how difficult the
      obvious can be before it is pointed out.




I   Introduction

Inertia is often a difficult phenomenon for empiricists to measure. Observing the
same behavior as in the past can simply be due to the fact that the same behavior
that was optimal in the past continues to be optimal in the future. Thus, to test a
theory of inertia, it is important to identify a situation in which the empiricist can
measure the underlying causes that should cause an optimizer to change course.

    Capital structure, that is a firm’s choice of financing between debt and equity, is
a good candidate for testing inertia. Not only is there good data on firm’s financing
structure and well established theories to give guidance on optimal active firm be-
havior (Harris and Raviv (1991)), but if the firm does not respond by readjusting its
capital structure, its capital structure will be whipsawed by external market forces.

    Moreover, the whipsaw effect is opposite of that suggested by most economic
theories of firm value maximization. Firms which experience positive shocks to
their enterprise values should take on higher, not lower debt/equity ratios: ce-
teris paribus, firms being worth more are less likely to go bankrupt and thus have
lower expected bankruptcy costs. Weighing these lower expected bankruptcy costs
against any preexisting benefits of debt (e.g., from the tax shield), this increase in
enterprise value by itself should be sufficient to imply that the firm should readjust,
i.e., issue more debt in order to retain at least as high a debt/equity ratio as it had
before.1
   1
     “Opportunistic” managerial behavior may be an exception. Baker and Wurgler (2002) argue
that firms may issue more equity when share prices increase. However, our results will show that
opportunistic behavior is not a major determinant, either.



                                               2
   In contrast, an inert firm which does not respond to positive stock returns—
which causes an increase in its public market equity value—will mechanistically
find itself with a lower debt/equity ratio. Unlike many other behavioral finance hy-
potheses (but not all; see Benartzi and Thaler (2001)), the inertia hypothesis has a
specific quantitative prediction on the debt ratio: the inert firm’s debt-equity ratio
would change exactly according to the equity value change implied by its histori-
cal stock returns. This specificity of the behavioral alternative allows our paper to
both qualify and quantify the relative importance of inertia vs. a tax-bankruptcy
value optimization. Our paper is rather different from much other related economic
research, in that our definition of the inert capital structure ratio allows us to fo-
cus primarily on the quantitative instead of the qualitative dimension of the capital
structure choice problem.

   We find that firms experiencing increases in market value show no movement to
return towards their original debt ratio. Instead, firms’ capital structure is practi-
cally perfectly in line with that mechanistically induced by their stock returns. The
effect is long-lasting, at least 4 to 5 years. We can thus conclude that inertia is the
primary character of managerial behavior. In turn, this means that capital structure
is primarily determined exogenously by raw stock returns—and not by one of the
many favorite information and tax theories proposed by financial economists, such
as managerial optimization with respect to tax rates, bankruptcy costs, earnings,
profitability, or even market timing and the exploitation of undervaluation. These
theories stand up well in terms of normative value, but they have at best only minor
positive descriptive ability.

   Our paper intends not to take a stance on whether inertia itself is the outcome
of an agency problem, a memory problem (e.g., Hirshleifer and Welch (2002)), an
influence problem (e.g., Rajan and Zingales (2000)), financial transaction costs and
markets frictions (e.g., Fischer, Heinkel, and Zechner (1989), Leland (1994)), or a
near-rational or irrational behavior pattern (e.g., Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988),
Benartzi and Thaler (2001)). Thus, we leave the inertia hypothesis under the general
rubric of “behavioral finance,” which can cover both rational and irrational behav-
ior. For simplicity, we shall just name the two contrasting hypotheses “optimizing”


                                          3
(perhaps, better, “readjusting”) and “inert” behavior, respectively; even if there is a
sense in which inert behavior is likely to be itself the result of some optimization,
be it of firm value or managerial utility.

      Transaction costs deserve a special mention, though. In particular, it is plausible
that it is expensive for firms to issue equity to reduce their debt ratio in response to
falling enterprise valuation. However, a debt ratio can also be reduced by selling off
assets to pay off debt or by using former dividends to repurchase debt.2 More im-
portantly, we find inert behavior also when firms’ values increase, and issuing more
debt to repurchase equity is unlikely to incur dramatic transaction costs. Never-
theless, as just mentioned, one can relabel inertia to be equivalent to some form of
transaction costs, be they real or imaginary. Although Titman (2001) agrees with
practitioners that the direct financial capital structure rearrangement transaction
costs are small in the United States, simple back-of-the-envelope-calculations (in
Section III.B) point out that this may or may not be the case.

      Our personal view is that the evidence is consistent with some (avoidable) trans-
action costs, plus a dual perspective: First, managers may not want to repurchase
equity to issue more debt when their equity value has recently increased, be it be-
cause they fail to recognize the potential benefits of debt, be it because they feel
their equity is now overvalued, or be it that they are now harder to dislodge.3 Sec-
ond, managers may want to issue more equity to retire debt when the firm falls on
hard times, i.e., when their equity value has dropped. It may be at precisely these
times that they feel that their equity is undervalued and thus that issuing more
equity is not in their interest.

      In sum, corporate theorists may want to take a more dynamic perspective. In
particular, there should be more focus on the sources and roles of frictions. But this
dynamic perspective, if it is to accurately describe firms’ capital structure policies,
will only be able to point out the obvious: non-action by managers. Editorializ-
  2
     Because equity values have already fallen significantly, this again should lead to an increase
in enterprise value, not a decrease. Thus, absent frictions, a debt-equity swap (e.g., with existing
creditors) is now optimal to avoid bankruptcy costs.
   3
     Zwiebel (1995) explicitly considers capital structure, arguing that positive value shocks en-
trench managers. This means that they have the ability to avoid fully rebalancing with its disci-
plinary implications.


                                                 4
ing even further, if contracting (not transaction!) costs are modest (Schwartz and
Watson (2000)), the natural solution to improving firms’ capital structure would be
for them to issue securities that convert into debt as their values increase and into
equity as their values decrease—the opposite of convertible securities.

   Our paper now proceeds as follows: Section II first belabors the use of book val-
ues instead of market values, if only to deflect the criticism that our market-based
measure has been chosen to suit our purpose. Thus, this section points out why
the book value of equity is a problematic estimate for the equity of a firm. Our pa-
per, like most economic theories, relies specifically on the market-value of equity,
not on the book market value of equity. The same section then defines our vari-
ables. Section III shows our main result in simple classification tables: past stock
returns seem to be the primary determinants of observed market-based debt ratios.
Section IV uses regressions to decompose capital structure into inertia and readjust-
ment (towards the prior capital structure). Consequently, any readjustment, even
if only to the original level, is fully attributed to optimization. This section also
explores the longevity of the influence of past equity movements before managers
begin to take readjustment actions. Even over a 5-year horizon, we find barely
any evidence that managers counteract the influence of stock returns. Section V
adds some other variables popular in the literature to our regressions, such as tax
rates, uniqueness, growth opportunities, and profitability. It also introduces herd-
ing towards industry ratios. The three most important non-inertia components are
industry herding, stock return volatility, and tax rates, even though all three are
dwarfed in importance by simple inertia. If nothing else, our study shows that
the variables prominently featured in some other studies as explanators of capital
structures—specifically uniqueness measures, profitability ratios, and book/market
values—seem to function only through their mechanistic correlation with (past) re-
turns and equity capitalization. Once we include our mechanistic inertia debt ratio,
these variables lose their power. Section VI puts our results into the context of the
literature. Section VII concludes.




                                         5
II    Data

There is only one proper measurement of value, and this value is market-value—not
book value. We are not aware of any economic theory of firm-maximization that
applies to book value rather than market value.

     This paper predicts the debt ratio, defined as the level of long-term debt plus
debt in current liabilities (in short, “debt”), divided by the sum of the level of debt
and the market level of equity. Our results hold if we choose the level of equity
as the numerator (which is just one minus our measure), or even if we predict the
equity level divided by accounting assets. The important aspect is that we use the
market-value of equity, not its book-value. Because a number of papers have used
the book value of equity—often with contradictory conclusions—it is important to
first describe in detail why the book value is not a great variable—if only to defend
ourselves against the accusation of having cherry-picked our use of the market-value
of equity as our measure.



A     Equity Book Value vs. Equity Market Value

In plainest terms, the book value of equity is a “plug” number used to balance the
right-hand and left-hand sides of the balance sheet. As such, it has little economic
significance in itself. It is the result of numerous accounting rules that have little to
do with true economic value and all to do with rote computations based on lagged
accounting variables.

      Book Equity   =   Retained Earnings + Capital Surplus
                    +   Common Stock + Treasury Stock
     Dividing both sides by the book value of equity, a variance decomposition reveals
that changes in retained earnings (overwhelmingly changes in earnings themselves)
are more important than changes in the capital surplus (overwhelmingly changes
in active capital structure policy). About half of the book value of equity that some
papers have tried to explain is simply past profitability, the other half is past ac-
counting adjustments, mostly but not exclusively reflecting active issuing activity.


                                           6
   A variance decomposition of total accounting assets (the denominator in the
commonly used debt/asset ratio used in some papers) shows that the book value
of equity is its most important component (which, as just pointed out, is at least
half past earnings). Long-term debt is about one-fifth as important, followed by
other components. (This makes sense if debt policy is constant, because one would
not expect debt to have as drastic swings in value as equity.) In sum, explaining
changes in the ratio of book value of debt over total assets predicts multiple factors,
including changes in earnings.


                                  Insert Table 1 Here:
            Selected Firms: Equity Book and Market Values and Total Book Assets



   It is worthwhile to point out some of the non-sensical values that a book-value
of equity can take. Table 1 displays the book value of equity, market value of
equity, and book value of assets for selected firms. For example, Sky Broadcasting
appeared on the Compustat tapes in 1995 with a book value of equity of negative
1.2 billion dollars, even though its market cap was 495 million dollars. Caremark
dropped in value in 1998, but even in 2000, its book value of equity continues to
be negative while its market capitalization has increased back to 3 billion dollars.
Cablevision has yet to obtain a positive book value of equity, despite having a market
capitalization of over 11 billion dollars in 2000. The table also shows that increases
in market value are not equivalent to increases in book value.

   A researcher using book-equity based ratios could find that some firms have
negative debt-equity ratios. Naturally, when a ratio denominator can be negative, it
can also sometimes take values small enough to blow up the ratio. These problems
can make such firms potentially influential observations in any regression.


                                  Insert Table 2 Here:
               Correlations: Book Values of Equity vs. Market Values of Equity



   In Table 2, we compute correlations among equity book values, equity market
values, and debt. The variables are normalized by assets—unfortunately, we cannot


                                             7
compute correlations between percentage changes of book values and market val-
ues, because 2.6% of small firms have negative equity values (1.2% for large firms).
We also include tiny firms (i.e., firms which one year prior had a market capital-
ization in million dollars that was less than the level of the S&P500, divided by 10),
even though these firms are deliberately excluded from our study later (see Page 12).
These firms may have been included in other studies.

   Table 2 shows that the (asset-adjusted) market value of equity has only mild
correlation with the (asset-adjusted) book value of equity. However, as (lagged)
firm size increases, this correlation increases (naturally, partially caused by the
persistence of value and the selection rule itself). Appendix A shows that a debt ratio
based on the book-value of equity is even incapable of explaining a simultaneous
debt ratio based on the market-value of equity. Equally of concern is the fact that
debt ratios correlate much better with book values than with market values. In
addition, a researcher tracking the influence of equity values using book rather than
market values faces another systematic problem: when firms grow, it is conceivable
that changes in the meaning of the variables can themselves become important (as
Table 2), in addition to the sought-after changes in firms’ capital structure policies.

   There are some things that can be said in favor of the book value of equity:
First, when it is used as a lagged predictor, e.g., in forecasts of future stock returns
using lagged Q-ratios or book/market ratios (as in Fama and French (1992); see
also Weaver and Weston (2001)), the book value is as valid as any other known
variable. In this context, its use is reasonable, even if it is not entirely clear what it
really means, and how it is distorted in cross-section. Second, as Shyam-Sunder and
Myers (1999) point out, the market value of equity reflects both current business
value and growth options. If, and this is a big if, the book value of equity reflects
current business value, then the book value of equity might have better reflected the
borrowing ability of businesses, especially in the past. If the concern is that book
values are more reflective of potential tax deductions, perhaps a better approach
would be to focus only on firms that have a book value at least as high as their
market value. This approach may offer the best of both worlds: the firm value may
be less due to not-yet-realized growth options, but the firm value itself (and changes


                                            8
therein) would be measured accurately. In Table 11, we find no evidence for our
study that firms with high book values (and those profitable enough to use the tax
deduction of interest immediately) react any differently. Third, perhaps managers
know something that markets do not. Thus, book values could be more permanent
predictors of market value than market value. Aside from the obvious efficient
markets problem, we find in Table 8 that managers show no difference in inertia
when they experience subsequent stock return reversals than when they experience
subsequent stock return continuation. Stock prices are first and foremost random
walks, and not mean-reverting. In any case, capital structure shows no predictive
ability of future equity value reversals.



B   The Data and Variables

Define the actual debt ratio as

                                              Dt
                                  ADRt ≡                 ,                           (1)
                                            Dt + Et

where Dt is the book value of debt, defined as the sum of long-term debt and debt
in current liabilities (Compustat items [9]+[34]), and Et is the market value of equity
(computed from CRSP as the number of outstanding shares times price). (In Table 9,
we explore other debt definitions, using also accounts payables [70] and convertible
securities [79].) ADRt is our dependent variable.

    Define the inert debt ratio that will result if the firm does nothing, i.e., neither
issues nor retires debt or equity, as

                                              Dt−1
                       IDRt−1,t ≡                                 ,                  (2)
                                    Dt−1 + Et−1 · (1 + Rt−1,t )

where Dt−1 and Et−1 are as defined above, and Rt−1,t is the external stock return
experienced by the firm’s equity from t − 1 to t, as obtained from CRSP. (Prices were
cross-checked with those reported by Compustat item [199].) Note that our market
value at time t − 1 grossed up by the stock market return from t − 1 to t can be
different from the market value of equity at time t. The differences are dividend


                                             9
payments, share repurchases and equity issuing activity. For example, if the firm
pays dividends, the IDR variable will be based on a higher imputed equity value
(lower debt ratio) than on its actual equity value (higher debt ratio). By design, IDR
moves mechanistically with equity (enterprise) value changes, and not with manage-
rial capital structure choices. Even though IDR relies on lagged capital structure,
the stock return causes IDR’s subscript to read from t − 1 to t.

   Our definition of IDR has the shortcoming that it ignores that the market and
book values of debt are also different, but cross-sectionally heterogeneous changes
in debt value are much smaller than cross-sectionally heterogeneous changes in
equity values. Thus, they are likely to be minor in a cross-sectional study (see also
Bowman (1980)).

   Our tests basically boil down to asking the question of whether ADR1 (timed at
t = 1) is better predicted by its own lagged value ADR0 , or whether it is better pre-
dicted by IDR0,1 . Under the NULL hypothesis of optimizing—or at least deliberate—
behavior, lagged ADR should reflect a target that managers wish to achieve and thus
wish to readjust to.

   Finally, we also entertain additional variables, some suggested by the existing
literature:


Uniqueness Titman and Wessels (1988) finds that measures of uniqueness help
      explain capital structure. We follow their definitions:

        • RD0 /SLS0 : The ratio of R&D [46] as a function of sales [12]. When missing,
              in relevant regressions, the firm-year is ignored.

        • SLEXP0 /SLS0 : Selling expense [189] divided by sales [12].

Taxes The tax-bankruptcy tradeoff is perhaps the defining tradeoff of normative
      capital structure theory. We explore the role of

        • TAXRATEG
                 0 : The tax rate, kindly provided by John Graham and used in

              his papers described below in more detail. (The “B” version is based on
              income before interest expense [as in Graham, Lemmon, and Schallheim


                                             10
          (1998), and predicts better]; the “A” version is based on income after
          interest expense).

        • TAX0 /(EARN0 +TAX0 ): A more naive tax-rate, defined as total income taxes
          [16] (or [317]), divided by earnings plus total income taxes ([53]·[54]+[16]).
          This variable is truncated to lie within –1 and +2 in order to reduce the
          influence of some extreme observations.

        • TAX0 /TA0 : Taxes paid, defined as income taxes [16] (or [317]), divided by
          total assets [6].

Profitability and Growth Profitability and growth have been a variable of some im-
     portance in the empirical literature (e.g., Titman and Wessels (1988)). The
     most common definitions are

        • OI0 /SLS0 , the ratio of operating income [13] divided by sales [12]

        • OI0 /TA0 , the ratio of operating income [13] divided by total assets [6]

        • BVE0 /MVE0 , the ratio of the book value of equity [60] divided by the market
          value of equity (where book value is used as a a lagged and thus admissible
          predictor), is often used as a measure of growth opportunities.

     We also tried some other definitions, not reported in the tables, but described
     in the text.

Firm and Equity Volatility Firm volatility (FVOL−1,0 ) and equity volatility (EVOL−1,0 )
     are computed as the simple standard deviation of log-returns over the 12
     months preceding the measurement period, using CRSP data. Firm volatility is
     computed by adjusting equity volatility with end-of-period capital structure.

Industry Herding Perhaps, managers are inclined to adjust towards their own in-
     dustry ratio (Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer, and Welch (1998) provide an overview
     over some of the voluminous herding literature). Thus, we compute average
     debt ratios in year 0, either over 2-digit SIC industries or over 3-digit SIC in-
     dustries. (The industry includes the firm itself.) Our variable is the difference
     between the firm’s debt ratio and this industry’s debt ratio. The variables are
     called IARD0 2d and IARD0 3d , respectively.

                                          11
        We sometimes report NR0,1 , the S&P index adjusted return; and %∆V0,1 , the per-
cent change in the total value of the firm (the sum of debt and the market value of
equity).

        Finally, we exclude firm-years in which one year prior to their use the firm did not
have at least a market equity capitalization of the level of the S&P500 divided by 10.
In other words, to be included in year 2000 statistics, a firm with a December fiscal
year end would have had to have a market capitalization of at least $146.9 million
in December 1999 (the S&P500 index finished 1999 at 1,469.25). This selection rule
is introduced to avoid the concern that tiny firms are driving the results.



C       Descriptive Statistics

Our data is from the period 1975 to 2000, which is determined by the availability of
Compustat data. All variables are measured in percent, unless otherwise indicated.


                                     Insert Table 3 Here:
                                      Descriptive Statistics



        Table 3 provides the descriptive statistics for the variables used in this paper.
Firms typically have debt ratios of about 25% to 30%.4 Adding accounts payables
increases this figure by another 10%. Firms earn about 4% to 5% on assets after
depreciation, 12% before depreciation. They averaged about 3.7 times the size of
the S&P500 level, i.e., about $4 billion in market cap in recent years. However, the
median market cap is significantly smaller. Similarly, the firms’ accounting assets
averaged $4 billion, but only $400 million in median. 25% of our firm-years have
debt ratings, and of these, two-thirds are not of investment grade quality. Firms had
an average tax rate of 30-35%, and paid about 2.5 to 3.3% of their assets to Uncle
Sam.
    4
    The –18.9% reported for “long-term debt only” is not our mistake, but most likely a Compustat
error. It does not affect our results.




                                               12
      The uniqueness measures are problematic. They have means that are unreason-
ably high for all but tech firms. Mean R&D is 85.2% of sales,5 but median R&D is only
2.1%. Selling expenses are a bit more reasonable, with similar means and medians,
but huge outliers at the upper end.

      Firms in our sample increased in enterprise value (sum of debt and equity), either
through good performance or by raising capital, by about 10% to 20% per year. Raw
returns were about 11% to 17% per year, and about –1.6% to 3.6% after subtracting
the S&P500 index percent change.

      In terms of means, the market value represents about 1.2 times firms’ total ac-
counting assets, the book value of equity only about 0.4 times. However, in medians,
the difference is less pronounced, because book values have fewer outliers. Debt
represents about 20% of firms’ assets.



III     Simple Evidence

A Bivariate Tables

                                     Insert Table 4 Here:
         Categorized Average Value Change, Actual and Implied Debt Ratios, and Returns


      The main research question of this paper is whether IDR0,1 or ADR0 is a better
predictor of ADR1 , i.e., whether variations in debt ratios are caused primarily by
external stock returns, or by intentional managerial choices to readjust to their old
target ratio (or, preferably, to “over-rebalance” it to reach the new tradeoff opti-
mum).

      Table 4 categorizes all firm-years into deciles based on net returns NR0,1 in
Panel A; lagged debt ratio ADR0 in Panel B; implied debt ratio IDR0,1 (computed
from lagged capital structure and raw stock returns over the year) in Panel C; and
  5
    The mean is obviously driven by outliers. We have repeated our study with firms worth more
than the S&P (i.e., imposing a minimum market cap constraint of $1 billion), which eliminates the
outliers and provides a reasonable mean. The results reported later (i.e., that R&D has no marginal
influence) remain.


                                                13
current debt ratio ADR1 (the variable to be predicted in this study). Each panel dis-
plays ADR0 , ADR1 , IDR0,1 , and a set of variables measuring firm size change and
stock performance over the year (from 0 to 1).

   All panels show that implied debt ratio IDR0,1 lines up better with future debt ra-
tio ADR1 than does the lagged debt ratio ADR0 . This shows up strongest in Panel A—
which gives the best spread of returns (i.e., discrepancy between IDR0,1 and ADR0 )—
and in Panel D—which gives the best spread in the variable to be predicted. Spread-
ing either by ADR0 in Panel B or by IDR0,1 in Panel C does not offer as much power,
simply because these panels lump firm-years into the same categories too often.

   There is some mild evidence that firms that experience good times are more
likely to show a capital structure even more equity-heavy than implied by their
returns: if they actively adjust capital structure, they do not do so to rebalance it to
return to their earlier ratio or to adopt a higher leverage ratio. Instead, they seem to
move further away from their past leverage ratio (Baker and Wurgler (2002)). Firms
that experience bad times do show some rebalancing tendency. At least, when they
do adjust, they do so to nudge towards their earlier ratios. But first and foremost,
firms just do not adjust.


                                  Insert Table 5 Here:
          Value Change, Actual and Implied Debt Ratios, and Returns By Net Return:
             Equal Number of Firms per Year, December Firms Only, and Medians



   Table 5 implements some robustness checks on the equivalent tabulation of
Panel A in Table 4 (i.e., sorted by net returns NR0,1 ). In Panel A, we sort an equal num-
ber of firms from each year into each decile bin. In Panel B, we use only firms with
a fiscal year ending in December, thus avoiding some returns overlap. In Panel C,
we report medians instead of means within each cell.

   All panels support our basic assertion: firms’ capital structure seems to be driven
more by external stock returns than by a conscious return to a prior capital structure
(and certainly not by an intention to increase leverage as the firm grows).




                                            14
B   The Transaction Cost Interpretation Revisited

First, note that even for large changes in capital structure, firms do very little read-
justment. This indicates that inventory-type models (under which one should ob-
serve more readjustment for larger deviations from the optimum) are not likely to
be of significant explanatory power.

    We perform some rough conservative back-of-the-envelope computations to see
if financial transaction costs can account for the inertia. The median firm in our
sample had a market capitalization of about $500 million and a debt-ratio of about
25% (i.e., about $165 million in debt for $500 million in equity). Let us presume that
such a firm experienced raw returns such that its debt-ratio changed by 5%. Holding
market cap constant, this implies that its debt capitalization changed by about $40
million. If the firm paid as low an interest rate as 6% on its debt, interest would
come to roughly $2.5 million over one year. At the median tax rate of about 30%,
the adjustment represents a tax saving of $750,000 in the first year, $12 million if
it were a perpetuity. The first year tax savings represent about 1.8% of the market
capitalization of the debt. This is higher than the transaction costs for short-term
debt.   Still, it is legitimate to take the view that direct financial transaction costs
help explain the short-term inertia of corporations, especially those only moderately
affected by their equity returns. Financial transaction costs are less likely to explain
multi-year correction failure, especially among firms experiencing extreme stock
returns.

    Our paper considers inertia to be the outcome of many potential factors, ranging
the spectrum from rational transaction cost to behavioral irrationality (making it
cognitively expensive to react). It is these transaction costs which make the observed
corporate capital structure reflective primarily of outside stock returns, and less so
of an inside bankruptcy costs vs. tax costs tradeoff.




                                          15
IV     Decomposing Influences Using Regressions

A     Method

We can use regressions to decompose firms’ behavior into “readjustment behav-
ior” (the return to the previous debt ratio) and inert behavior. The test centers on
the question of whether IDRt−1,t offers marginal explanatory power in a regression
predicting ADRt


                   ADRt = α0 + α1 · ADRt−1 + α2 · IDRt−1,t + t        .              (3)


The hypotheses are


                Readjustment Hypothesis:            α1 ≥ 1 , α 2 ≤ 0                  (4)

                Perfect Inertia Hypothesis:         α1 = 0 , α 2 = 1                  (5)


Naturally, firms could also adopt a convex combination strategy.

     All regressions are ordinary least squares. Most (or all) of the explanatory power
derives from the cross-section of firms, not the time-series of years. When we report
“F-M” numbers, we mean the yearly averages of cross-sectional statistics. When we
report “pooled” numbers, we simply lump all firms into one large regression.

     All standard errors are White-Hansen heteroskedasticity adjusted. The F-M num-
bers report just yearly averages, even over the standard errors, which are thus most
likely overstated by a factor of 5 (because they are averages over 25 years). The
reason is that we have so many observations that the economic significance of the
coefficients is our first concern, not the statistical significance. The residuals in our
regressions have a nice bell shape, and seem generally well behaved.

     Because most of the power comes from the cross-section, we do not need to be
concerned about unit roots. If the regressions set the coefficient on ADR0 to be equal
to 1, it would mean that firms that had a high or low debt ratio in cross-section (i.e.,
relative) would continue to have a high or low ratio in cross-section the following



                                           16
year. Moreover, if the regression sets the α1 coefficient to 1, our regressions can
be interpreted to be similar to change regressions, as reported, e.g., in Baker and
Wurgler (2002).



B   The Base Regressions: Are Firms Rebalancing or Inert?

                                  Insert Table 6 Here:
                              Year By Year Base Regressions



    Table 6 reports the results of annual cross-sectional regressions based on Com-
pustat year classifications (a year is defined from the fiscal year reporting date.
Thus, a year begins in July and ends in June of the following year). In addition, the
table reports the averages of the cross-sectional statistics (loosely called F-M) and
the results of a pooled regression in which each firm-year is one observation.

    Table 6 shows that firms’ capital structure is primarily determined by the raw
stock return they experience, not by a return to a previous debt ratio. The coefficient
on IDR0,1 is close to 1 (100%). In contrast, firms show no tendency to counterbalance
market movements in order to return to their prior debt ratio. The coefficient on
ADR0 is practically zero. (Even if it is statistically significantly negative, it is eco-
nomically close to zero). The constant indicates that all firms showed a marginal
increase in debt ratios over the sample period. (Variables were not demeaned!) In
order to avoid any overlap in the stock returns, Panel B reports just the overall F-M
and Pooled statistics when we use only firms with December fiscal year ends. The
results are basically the same.




                                           17
C   Are Some Firms More Inclined To Rebalance?

                                  Insert Table 7 Here:
                     Pooled Regressions Categorized By Third Variables



    A reasonable question is whether firms tend not to return to their previous (pre-
sumably then optimal) capital structure because they do not need to: maybe they do
not pay attention, because they are too large too fail, or they are too profitable to pay
attention, or their tax rate is not high enough to reduce taxes, or their bankruptcy
risk is too low to be meaningfully influenced by value changes.

    Table 7 shows that there is some mild evidence that smaller and more unprof-
itable firms are less inert than larger and medium profitable firms. However, neither
a high tax rate, nor the credit rating (bankruptcy risk), the two primary variables
used in the theoretical literature, show much influence. If anything, it is low-tax
firms which are more inclined to readjust their capital structure towards prior lev-
els. One word of caution: “more inclined” is still not “very inclined.” The IDR0,1
coefficient is always above 90%, the ADR0 coefficient is never above 5%. The book
or value characteristic of the firm similarly does not matter.

    The last two panels of the table consider the role of firm volatility and equity
volatility. Because there is such a high correlation between firm size and volatility,
firms are first sorted into quintiles based on total assets, and then sorted (within
each group of five similar-sized firms) into the five volatility bins. This keeps firm-
size constant, and still retains a spread across volatility quintiles. There is some
mild evidence that firms that are more volatile are also more inert. However, the
effect is miniscule. Even the least volatile firms have coefficients of about 95%—and
practically no tendency to revert.




                                            18
D    Do Managers Fail To React Because They Know Something?

Perhaps managers do not target the market-based debt ratio because they believe
that market values are transitory. If this is the case, and managers have inside
information (so that this belief is justified), we would expect managers to be more
eager to embrace capital structure change if the value change later turns out to be
permanent. Thus, in the only classification using ex-post variables, Table 8 classifies
firms into a 5 by 5 grid based on current stock returns (used to compute IDR0,1 ) and
future stock returns. Firms in the left top and right bottom corners are those that
experience further changes in the same direction, and would thus benefit even more
from a proactive capital structure policy. Firms in the right top and left bottom
corners are those that experience return reversals, and would thus least benefit
from a more proactive capital structure policy.


                                 Insert Table 8 Here:
                            By Current and Future Net Returns



    Table 8 shows that firms experiencing reversals behave similarly to firms experi-
encing continuations. In the F-M regressions, there is some mild evidence that firms
that dropped for one year and then recovered display slightly lower inertia (contrary
to what would be the case if managers had expected the reversal). Firms that expe-
rience extreme returns with continuation thereof in the following year show almost
100% inertia. In the Pooled regressions, the firms that improved for one year and
then deteriorated displayed slightly higher inertia, but both firms that experience
extreme return continuations have higher inertia than firms that first experience
high return and then low returns.

    In any case, there is no dramatic difference among firms insofar as inertia is
concerned: if managers fail to act because they believe their stock market returns
to be transitory, the rationality of this belief is not borne out by the data.




                                           19
E   Does the Form of Debt Matter?

                                  Insert Table 9 Here:
                               Alternative Debt Definitions



    Another interesting question is whether the form of debt matters. After all, we
failed to have access to changes in the value of the underlying debt. It was comfort-
ing to know that even investment-grade, large firms (i.e., those firms which should
show practically no cross-sectional change in the value of their debt in response to
changes in the value of their equity) have similar coefficients.

    We also know that convertible debt is more like equity. Thus, we would be
further comforted if our method determined a lower IDR0,1 coefficient and higher
ADR0 coefficient when we determine a debt ratio based solely on convertible debt.
Indeed, Table 9 supports this conjecture. Interestingly, firms do not even seem to
adjust their short-term debt ratios in response to changes in their equity value, i.e.,
where one would expect debt changes to be easiest. Finally, the expansion of debt
to include accounts payables (a major source of variability in firms’ year to year
borrowing) also makes no difference.



F   How Long-lasting is Inertia?

In this subsection, we redefine our variables IDR and ADR to be based on capital
structure more than just one year ago. Necessarily, IDR is thus relying not on 1-year
raw returns, but on multiple-year raw returns:

                                      Dt−a
                     ADRt−a ≡                       ,                               (6)
                                   Dt−a + Et−a
                                             Dt−a
                     IDRt−a,t ≡                                    .                (7)
                                   Dt−a + Et−a · (1 + Rt−a,t )

This allows us to investigate how persistent the influence of external market returns
is, or whether firms eventually readjust in order to return to their former capital
structure.



                                           20
                                    Insert Table 10 Here:
                                    The Longevity of Inertia
                     / And the External Determination of Capital Structure



   Table 10 shows that ADR begins to show a positive coefficient after about five
years. That is, firms finally begin to show some tendency to try to nudge back
towards their past debt ratios. Still, despite a decline in its coefficient (and the
R 2 of the regression), IDR remains the dominant variable. Even after five years, a
time span during which the average equity size more than doubled, we can still
explain a remarkable 65% of the capital structure variation across firms! Finally,
after ten years, and an average quadrupling in equity value, and after the number
of observations has notably dropped off, the coefficient on IDR drops, albeit to a
respectable 50%. Both the intercept and the coefficient on ADR (about half of the
IDR coefficient) are beginning to play an important role. Thus, firms wish to re-
obtain some debt after their market capitalization has sufficiently increased after
about 10 years. The R 2 is still a respectable 50%, even though it is now driven by
both debt ratio variables, not just the inert ratio.

   An interesting thought experiment is to ask how much explanatory power can be
attributed to returns alone, without any prior knowledge of a firm’s debt ratio. That
is, even a firm with zero debt some years ago would be presumed to have started
with roughly a 40% debt ratio (the sample average),6 and a negative return would
thus incorrectly predict an even higher debt ratio next year—although this would
now no longer be the appropriate mechanistic ratio implication (which would still
be zero). (Naturally, representing lagged debt ratios alone, ADR is now likely to pick
up some power due to managerial nonaction.)

   Consequently, we repeated a regressions which considers how well raw returns
alone, without even any aid of the companies previous capital structure, can predict
capital structure. In a regression similar to that in Table 10, but with IDR replaced
with the handicapped variable (using the unconditional debt ratio as the starting
value for all firms), over a 5-year horizon, IDR still retains a coefficient of above 60%
   6
     Naturally, a regression using industry averages as starting points would do even better pre-
dicting future capital structure than the unconditional aggregate sample averages.


                                               21
on all horizons. However, now ADR gains some of the power previously allowed to
be allocated to either ADR or IDR. Thus, ADR obtains coefficients of about 90% on
the 1-year horizon and 70% to 75% on the 5-year horizon.




V    The Influence of Other Variables

                                 Insert Table 11 Here:
                              The Influence Of Third Variables



    Table 11 examines the role of other corporate reasons that may influence capital
structure, above and beyond the mechanistic influence of firms’ stock returns.

    Panel A examines whether taxes induce firms to lever up. The answer is yes.
Graham’s simulated tax variables perform quite well and are statistically significant.
A more naive tax/earnings rate is less significant. A tax/asset ratio (results not
reported) is insignificant.

    Panel B explores whether profitability or growth induce a firm to adjust its debt
ratio. In sum, we find no important influence of profitability or growth on debt
ratios. We also tried earnings over sales, as well as changes in all ratios. None had
any important influence on debt ratios. It appears as if previous papers’ findings
of significance of earnings are primarily due to their correlation with stock returns.
Firms with positive earnings are likely to also have experienced positive returns,
which in turn mechanistically lower their debt ratios. Similarly, the book/market
ratio of equity, an important variable in other studies, has no explanatory power
above and beyond the mechanistic influence of returns on capital ratios.

    Panel C explores uniqueness Titman and Wessels (1988). Again, there is no eco-
nomic significance here, even though there may be marginal statistical significance
for the F-M RD0 /SLS0 variable. (We also tried changes in uniqueness, and restricting
our data set to even larger firms, only. Neither resulted in significance.)

    Panel D explores the role of own volatility, both pure equity and implied firm
volatility. The regressions indicate that firms experiencing high equity volatilities


                                            22
lower their debt ratios. Although this influence does not moderate the importance
of inertia, it does hint that firms may not readjust towards their previous debt ratios,
but towards debt ratios conservative enough to be “in line” with their experienced
volatilities.

      Panel E explores a behavioral hypothesis: that firms are inclined to adjust their
capital structure towards that of their industry. Thus, our variable is the difference
between the firm’s own lagged debt ratio and the industry’s lagged debt ratio. The
negative coefficients on the IARD0 variables imply that firms are indeed inclined
to correct towards their industries’ debt ratios. The coefficients are always highly
statistically significant, and in terms of importance at least the equals of the tax
ratio coefficients.

      Thus we conclude that if there are any variables that induce firms to change
their capital structure, above and beyond what is caused by mechanistic changes
in firms’ stock returns, they are first the capital structure in firms’ peer industries
and firms’ own equity volatilities, followed by firms’ own tax rates (with higher
tax rates producing higher leverage).7 Other variables popular in the literature—
specifically uniqueness measures, profitability ratios, and book/market values—
seem to function only through their mechanistic correlation with (past) returns and
equity capitalization. Once we include our mechanistic inertia debt ratio, these
variables lose their power.
  7
     Not reported in the tables: When measured simultaneously instead of lagged, tax rate vari-
ables do not perform better. Other variables perform better or as well. Simultaneous profitability
variables do slightly better. RD0 /SLS0 has a coefficient of –3.7 when it is simultanous and retains
its reported standard deviation. Industry debt ratios perform about as well.




                                                23
VI     Related Literature

As far as we know, no study has entertained the use of stock returns to directly
compute the resulting capital structure. It is the singularly best variable describing
capital structure, and permits a quantitative and not just a qualitative test of inertia.

     The most prominent study of capital structure may well be Titman and Wessels
(1988). They predict debt (long-term, short-term, and convertible debt) divided ei-
ther by the market-value of equity or by the book value of debt. (Not surprisingly,
some of their results are sensitive to this definition.) Most of the factors they exam-
ined did not seem particularly robust even in their own study. Only “uniqueness”
(measured by R&D/sales, high selling expenses, and employees with low quit rates)
is consistently negative, with T -statistics of around –2 to –3. When they use the
market value of equity, profitability (operating income) matters. As pointed out, we
believe that this was a mechanistic relation because profitability is correlated with
stock return performance.

     Fischer, Heinkel, and Zechner (1989) use option pricing theory to explore the
role of transaction costs. They find that even small recapitalization costs lead to
wide swings in debt ratios. The study is not immediately comparable, because their
empirical section predicts capital structure ranges, not capital structure itself.

     Barclay, Smith, and Watts (1995) find that debt ratios are negatively related
to market/book ratios, but—like much of the literature—interpret this to reflect
growth opportunities which cause underinvestment concerns due to bankruptcy
risk. Although it is possible that firms are inert because they do not have to respond
(because these bankruptcy costs increase magically in the correct proportion), the
fact that we observe similar coefficient values among large firms with low leverage
(who are unlikely to go bankrupt), renders this perspective less plausible than the
simpler alternative of inertia. In addition, we find that book/market values disap-
pear as an important predictor once the mechanistic influence of stock returns on
debt ratios is accounted for.




                                           24
      Rajan and Zingales (1995) offer the definite description of OECD capital structure
in light of well-known theories. They, too, find a strong negative correlation between
market-book ratios and leverage—but also consider this to be evidence of a pro-
active choice.8

      Graham has produced a series of influential papers on the tax aspects of capital
structure. In Graham (2000), he laments that especially large firms seem to fail
taking advantage of the tax shelter provided by debt. Our own paper merely points
out that this is a symptom from some underlying cause of inertia: firms capital
structure is not driven by active considerations (tax or otherwise), but by external
market values. As firms become larger and larger, they continue to fail even in
returning to, much less in updating their debt ratio to where it should be. Graham,
Lemmon, and Schallheim (1998) use an almost identical dependent variable as we
do (except they add operating leases to the denominator). But they focus on tax
rates, and thus do not include our inertia variable as a control.9

      There is also a large literature on what determines the issuing activity of cor-
porations. This is a very interesting topic in itself. However, as our paper shows,
it is not that issuing activity is interesting because it is of prime importance as a
determinant of capital structure. Issuing activity could potentially be such a de-
terminant, but empirically it is not. Still, the theoretical hypothesized influences
for issuing activity are the same as for capital structure, and thus such studies are
related to our own. Further, a skeptic could take the view that knowledge that firms
issue and change retained earnings and dividends rarely, together with the fact that
equity returns are volatile, is equivalent to our own findings—and indeed it is. It is
just that noone has put the two together in trying to explain capital structure levels
as-of-yet.
  8
     Because Japan has an insignificant market-book coefficient, it would be interesting to see if
these firms are similarly inert. In addition, our finding that market-book ratios function only
insofar as they are picking up mechanistic changes in equity value applies only to U.S. data. It
would be interesting to find out whether this is also the case in their international sample.
   9
     Graham, Lemmon, and Schallheim (1998) do mention transaction costs as a reason for the
significance of a market-book ratio variable. Thanks to John Graham’s generous provision of his
simulated tax rate data, we were able to confirm his findings.




                                               25
      Our evidence is also in line with the survey evidence presented in Graham and
Harvey (2001): queried executives apparently care little about most theories of op-
timal capital structure. To the extent that they do care when actively issuing, man-
agers claim it is about financial flexibility and credit ratings for debt issues; and
about earnings dilution and past stock price appreciation for equity issues. On the
other hand, executives claim that they issue equity to maintain a target debt-equity
ratio, especially if their firm is highly levered. We find little evidence thereto. Gra-
ham and Harvey (2001) even imply our inertia hypothesis, asking executives for
the importance of rebalancing when their equity value changes—and find that ex-
ecutives attach no importance thereto. Managers also do not claim to be much
concerned with transaction costs.

      Baker and Wurgler (2002), Havakimian, Opler, and Titman (2001) and Shyam-
Sunder and Myers (1999) are the closest relatives of our paper. The first is interested
primarily in the role of stock returns on inducing issuing activity, while the latter
are interested in the readjustment towards an optimal capital ratio.

      Baker and Wurgler (2002) also investigates the influence of past market returns.
However, their point is to argue that past market returns influence the active fi-
nancing decisions of firms. This means that they do not explore the direct role of
the past stock returns themselves (just their induced financing choices) in what de-
termines firms’ capital structures. Our paper is not rejecting their view point. On
the contrary, we believe that firms may be acting just as Baker and Wurgler (2002)
suggest. Our point is merely that firms’ proactive behavior is merely the second-
order effect. Indeed, if the Baker and Wurgler (2002) effect had been of primary
importance in the set of firms in our study, we should have seen IDR coefficients
significantly above 1 (and negative ADR coefficients). But, the data do not suggest a
significant tendency of firms to “overshoot.”10,11
 10
     As already mentioned, the active timing hypothesis is also the primary “theory” not predicting
a constant or increasing debt ratio as firm value increases. Although this theory is a more difficult
test, given that the mechanistic relation is so strong, even this active theory is not going to be a
first-order determinant of capital structure levels.
  11
     We also tested if our tests mask expansion of firms in response to increasing equity returns:
after all, they could issue both equity and debt. In the top decile of firms experiencing high stock
returns, we found some minor evidence thereto. The emphasis is on minor.



                                                26
      Havakimian, Opler, and Titman (2001) find a mild tendency of firms to return
to a target debt-equity accounting ratio. But, they use only accounting ratios in
their first-stage regressions in an attempt to establish a target debt-equity ratio. By
using a market-based value of equity rather than a debt-asset ratio based variable,
and by introducing our direct inertia debt target ratio, we find that it subsumes al-
most all explanatory power of their variables as a determinant of economic capital
structure.12 Thus, we come to quite a different conclusion: we believe that there
is very little capital structure adjustment. In fairness, Havakimian, Opler, and Tit-
man (2001) are more interested in what firms ultimately choose to issue when they
choose to issue. And, like Baker and Wurgler (2002), they find that high stock re-
turns surprisingly lead firms to issue more equity, not more debt. We are more
interested with the failure to choose anything at all.13

      Shyam-Sunder and Myers (1999) are similarly interested in whether issuing activ-
ity leads to a return towards historical debt ratios (defined in term of book values).
They find little evidence that firms make proactive choices to return to their histor-
ical debt ratios.

      Finally, we can think of only one paper that is similar in spirit and domain to
our own: Thaler, Michaely, and Benartzi (1997) find that, in contrast to optimizing
theories of dividend payments, managers seem to pay dividends more in response
to past earnings than in response to an expectation of future earnings. Thus, their
actions are better explained as a non-rational behavioral status-quo bias. The ev-
idence presented in our paper is in line with a view of the CFO acting less in line
with value optimization and more in line with the status quo.
 12
     Their Table 3 regressions report OLS R 2 of about 0.4. Our debt ratio would probably not
assume all power if we used accounting capital structure. Then, again, it is not clear what the
accounting debt/asset ratio really means, as described in Section II.A.
  13
     Fama and French (1998) does not predict equity ratios, but firm value. (or firm value minus
assets) instead.




                                              27
VII    Conclusion

This paper has introduced a variable measuring inertia, which allowed us to explore
its magnitude, explanatory power, and longevity, rather than just its directional in-
fluence. In the capital structure context, inert behavior leads to debt ratios whip-
sawed by external stock returns. We found that firms showed little inclination to
try to counteract the whipsawing in order to return to an optimal (i.e., previously
chosen) debt ratio. The inertia effects are orders of magnitude greater than any
activist choices or any third variables proposed in the literature. Thus, we conclude
that firms’ capital structures reflect less a deliberate (tax-bankruptcy or timing) op-
timization policy than a primarily inert structure.


  Observed corporate capital structure is primarily driven by external stock
  returns, and not by managerial responses thereto (or to any other factors).


Capital structure is what it is simply because managers do not adjust their capital
structures in response to stock returns, which naturally typically accrue to and thus
increase firms’ equity values in the absence of rebalancing action.

   Consequently, to predict capital structure, “all” one needs to do is to predict
future raw returns. Or, put differently, if a corporate theorist wanted to use internal
corporate data to predict a firm’s capital structure, he must first and foremost be
able to predict the firm’s stock return with these variables.

   In contrast to inertia, most theories of capital structure optimization, which
trade off the default disadvantage against any advantage of debt, stand no chance.
In most such theories, growth (an increase in the firm’s equity or enterprise value)
should not induce a decrease but an increase in the firm’s leverage ratio. Such
theories of optimization are normative, but not descriptive: observed capital struc-
ture choice is inert to the point that we can usually detect practically no movement
towards such a more optimal capital structure in response to firm value changes.
Perhaps this is also why the average finance curriculum spends more time on opti-
mal theories than on describing the actual capital structure evidence.


                                          28
   Even though the viewpoint taken in this paper is rather radical, we doubt that,
once put forward, the argument comes as a big surprise. In the end, we hope that
this paper can justify its title: it offers a simple description for the main empirical
determinant of capital structure, an issue that researchers have hitherto struggled
with. (We still do not know why companies are so inert, of course.) In any case, our
paper has focused on the first-order determinant of observed capital structure in a
more direct fashion than any prior literature.




References
Baker, M., and J. Wurgler, 2002, “Market Timing And Capital Structure,” The Journal of Finance,
  57(1), forthcoming.
Barclay, M. J., C. W. Smith, and R. L. Watts, 1995, “The Determinants Of Corporate Leverage And
  Dividend Policies,” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 7(4), 4–19.
Benartzi, S., and R. Thaler, 2001, “Naive Diversification Strategies In Retirement Saving Plans,”
  American Economic Review, 91(1), 79–98.
Bikhchandani, S., D. Hirshleifer, and I. Welch, 1998, “Learning from the Behavior of others: Con-
   formity, Fads, and Informational Cascades,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12(3), 151–170.
Bowman, R. G., 1980, “The Importance Of A Market Value Measurement Of Debt In Assessing
  Leverage,” Journal of Accounting Research, 18(1), 242–254.
Fama, E. F., and K. R. French, 1992, “The cross section of expected stock returns,” The Journal of
  Finance, 47(2), 427–465.
         , 1998, “Taxes, Financing Decisions, And Firm Value,” The Journal of Finance, 53(3), 819–
  843.
Fischer, E. O., R. Heinkel, and J. Zechner, 1989, “Dynamic Capital Structure Choice: Theory And
   Tests,” The Journal of Finance, 44(1), 19–40.
Graham, J. R., 2000, “How Big Are The Tax Benefits Of Debt?,” The Journal of Finance, 55(5), 1901–
  1941.
Graham, J. R., and C. Harvey, 2001, “The Theory And Practice Of Corporate Finance: Evidence From
  The Field,” Journal of Financial Economics, 60, 187–243.
Graham, J. R., M. Lemmon, and J. Schallheim, 1998, “Debt, Leases, Taxes, And The Endogeneity Of
  Corporate Tax Status,” The Journal of Finance, 53(1), 131–162.
Harris, M., and A. Raviv, 1991, “Theory Of Capital Structure,” The Journal of Finance, 46(1), 297–
  355.
Havakimian, A., T. C. Opler, and S. Titman, 2001, “The Debt-Equity Choice: An Analysis Of Issuing
  Firms,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 36(1), 1–24.




                                                29
Hirshleifer, D., and I. Welch, 2002, “An Economic Approach To The Psychology Of Change: Amne-
  sia, Inertia, And Impulsiveness,” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 11(3), forth-
  coming.
Leland, H. E., 1994, “Agency Costs, Risk Management, And Capital Structure,” Journal of Financial
   Economics, 49, 1213–1252.
Rajan, R. G., and L. Zingales, 1995, “What Do We Know About Capital Structure: Some Evidence
  From International Data,” The Journal of Finance, 50(5), 1421–1460.
      , 2000, “The Tyranny of Inequality: An Inquiry into the Adverse Consequences of Power
  Struggles?,” Journal of Public Economics, 76, 521–558.
Samuelson, W., and R. J. Zeckhauser, 1988, “Status Quo Bias in Decision Making,” Journal of Risk
  and Uncertainty, 1, 7–59.
Schwartz, A., and J. Watson, 2000, “Economic And Legal Aspects Of Costly Recontracting,” working
  paper, Yale Law School.
Shyam-Sunder, L., and S. C. Myers, 1999, “Testing static tradeoff against pecking order models of
  capital structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, 51(2), 219–243.
Thaler, R. H., R. Michaely, and S. Benartzi, 1997, “Do Changes In Dividends Signal The Future Or
  The Past?,” The Journal of Finance, 52(3), 1007–34.
Titman, S., 2001, “The Modigliani and Miller Theorem and Market Efficiency,” working paper 8641,
   NBER.
Titman, S., and R. Wessels, 1988, “The Determinants Of Capital Structure,” The Journal of Finance,
   43(3), 1–19.
Weaver, S. C., and J. F. Weston, 2001, “A Unified Theory of Value Based Management,” working
  paper, UCLA.
Zwiebel, J., 1995, “Corporate Conservatism, Herd Behavior And Relative Compensation,” Journal
  of Political Economy, 103(1), 1–25.




A     Does A Book-Based Accounting Ratio Proxy For a Market-
      Based Accounting Ratio?

    Method        Variable        con.   IDR0,1    ADR0    Var   σc    σIDR   σADR   σV ar     N       R2
    F-M      Equity Book Value     2.0     93.6     –2.9   7.4   0.3    4.3    4.2    2.2        25   91.2
    Pooled   Equity Book Value     2.8     98.9     –2.2   0.1   0.1    0.8    0.8    0.1    45,494   90.4



Explanation: For a basic description, see Table 6. The debt ratio based on the book value of equity is now
the third variable, and it is contemporaneous with the debt ratio based on market value.

Interpretation: A book-value related debt ratio has no meaning as far as a market-value debt ratio is con-
cerned. It is not even a shadow of a proxy.




                                                  30
                               Table 1. Selected Firms: Equity Book and Market Values and Total Book Assets


       Firm     Variable 1984 1985     1986     1987   1988      1989   1990    1991   1992   1993   1994     1995    1996   1997     1998      1999       2000
       BSY       BVE      ·      ·      ·        ·        ·       ·      ·       ·      ·      ·      ·      –1,224   –944   –703     –502      –985        978
        Sky      MVE      ·      ·      ·        ·        ·       ·      ·       ·      ·      ·      ·        495    501    360           53        38     225
      Brdcstg     TA      ·      ·      ·        ·        ·       ·      ·       ·      ·      ·      ·        624    759 1,263       1,414 1,746          4,734
       CMX       BVE      ·      ·      ·        ·        ·       ·      ·       ·      ·      ·      ·        105    739         91 –1,144 –1,281         –969
       Care–     MVE      ·      ·      ·        ·        ·       ·      ·       ·      ·      ·      ·        535 3,304 4,404        1,045 1,010          2,872
      mark RX     TA      ·      ·      ·        ·        ·       ·      ·       ·      ·      ·      ·        355 2,266 2,891        1,862     771         686
       CVC       BVE      ·      ·      –38     –114      –274   –428   –702    –932 –1,250 –1,503 –1,819 –1,892 –2,374 –2,379 –2,612 –3,067 –2,530
       Cable–    MVE      ·      ·      396      549      701     329   138      319    344    662    572      672    416 1,334       5,388 9,801 11,258
       vision     TA      ·      ·      591      688 1,171 1,756 1,642 1,476 1,251 1,309 2,176 2,502 3,035 5,625                      7,061 7,130          8,273
        KR       BVE    1,149 1,189 1,030 1,009 –2,929 –2,966 –2,860 –2,749 –2,700 –2,460 –2,154 –1,603 –1,182               –785     –388       ·         2,683
       Kroger    MVE    1,770 2,174 2,617 1,979           700 1,203 1,222 1,733 1,321 2,158 2,817 4,620 5,866 9,367 15,501                       ·        14,497




31
                  TA    3,687 4,178 4,076 4,460 4,614 4,242 4,119 4,114 4,303 4,480 4,708 5,045 5,825 6,301                           6,700      ·        17,966
     MMEDC       BVE     249 –576      –580     –567      –537   –487   –433    –375   –291   –178    –77      ·       ·      ·        ·         ·          ·
       Multi–    MVE     612    331     451      589      847 1,066     790      806 1,196 1,274 1,072         ·       ·      ·        ·         ·          ·
       Media      TA     403    399     409      409      405     404   536      556    628    655    684      ·       ·      ·        ·         ·          ·
      OWC        BVE     842    945 –1,025      –809      –610   –435   –350 –1,076 –1,008    –869   –680     –212    –484   –441 –1,134        –881 –1,399
       Owens     MVE     946 1,117      544      648      890 1,011     649      920 1,514 1,902 1,410 2,283 2,219 1,824              1,922 1,059               45
      Corning     TA    1,732 2,366 2,195 1,590 1,596 1,924 1,807 2,106 2,126 3,013 3,274 3,261 3,913 4,996                           5,101 6,494          6,912
      QRAH       BVE    –128    –47         49 –1,564 –1,505      ·      ·       ·      ·      ·      ·        ·       ·      ·        ·         ·          ·
        AH       MVE     486    299     207      495      622     ·      ·       ·      ·      ·      ·        ·       ·      ·        ·         ·          ·
      Robbins     TA     648    706     839 1,025 1,075           ·      ·       ·      ·      ·      ·        ·       ·      ·        ·         ·          ·
        SE       BVE      ·      ·      ·        ·        ·       ·      ·     –1,210 –1,319 –1,248 –1,157    –881    –789   –722     –642      –560            82
       Seven     MVE      ·      ·      ·        ·        ·       ·      ·       782 1,243 2,767 1,845 1,358 1,217           871       781      730         917
       Eleven     TA      ·      ·      ·        ·        ·       ·      ·     2,596 2,045 1,999 2,001 2,081 2,039 2,090              2,416 2,686          2,742


     Units are in million of dollars, not cpi-adjusted.
                                 Table 2. Correlations: Book Values of Equity vs. Market Values of Equity

                              Tiny Firms           Small Firms         Medium Firms           Large Firms          Tapes≤5 Yrs
                               <s&p/10              >s&p/10                 >s&p                >s&p·10
                          MVE/TA     BVE/TA     MVE/TA     BVE/TA    MVE/TA     BVE/TA     MVE/TA     BVE/TA     MVE/TA    BVE/TA




32
              MVE/TA                       3%                  26%                  29%                   35%                  17%
              DEBT/TA          –6%      –55%       –21%      –62%       –21%       –56%       –26%        –59%      –16%      –65%


     Categorization of firms is made by market capitalization of the firm one year prior to the measurement. Firms with market values in
     million dollars above the level of the S&P500 divided by 10 are called “Large,” the rest are called “Small.” Thus, a firm had to have at
     least a market cap above approximately $115 million at the end of 2001 to be called “large.”
                                                                           Table 3. Descriptive Statistics

           Abbrev                         Description                          Mean       Std.Dev.        Min      Qrt1    Median    Qrt3       Max       Autocorr     N
                                                                                        Main Debt Ratios
            ADR1            Actual Debt Ratio                                   29.4          25.3           0.0     6.8     24.2     46.7       100.0        78.4   51,364
           IDR−1,0          Implied   Inertia   Ratio,   1   Year Prior         27.4          24.8         21.5     99.9      5.4       0.0        43.9       90.7   51,364
           IDR−2,0          Implied   Inertia   Ratio,   2   Years Prior        25.9          24.2         19.4    100.0      5.0       0.0        41.1       91.4   45,494
           IDR−3,0          Implied   Inertia   Ratio,   3   Years Prior        24.5          23.5         17.6    100.0      4.6       0.0        38.4       91.8   40,269
           IDR−4,0          Implied   Inertia   Ratio,   4   Years Prior        23.2          22.9         16.2    100.0      4.3       0.0        35.8       92.0   35,684
           IDR−5,0          Implied   Inertia   Ratio,   5   Years Prior        22.0          22.3         14.9    100.0      4.0       0.0        33.5       92.1   31,768
                                                                                Alternative Debt Definitions
          ADR+ACCT          Adding Accounts Payables                            37.2          28.1           0.0    12.7     32.4     56.6         99.9       93.2   50,421
           ADRCV            Convertible Only                                     2.5           8.9           0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0         99.4       82.1   46,004
           ADRLT            Long-Term Only                                      24.1          23.1         –18.9     3.4     18.1     38.5         99.9       89.3   51,364
           ADRST            Short-Term Only                                     11.0          19.0           0.0     0.3      3.0     11.6         99.9       88.1   51,364
                                                                                  Profitability and Growth
          OI0 /SLS0         Operating Income/Sales                              –45.0      4,846.6      –9918.0      8.4     14.4     23.9      1,113.7        6.5   49,995
          OI0 /TA0          Operating Income/TA                                  12.4         20.3     –1,177.2      6.7     12.9     18.7        660.0       79.7   50,117
         BVE0 /MVE0         Equity Book Value/Market Value/100                    1.4         14.5       –256.2      0.3      0.6      0.9      1605.4        50.2   51,346
                                                                                           Firm Size
       MCAP0 /SP5000        Market Cap divided by S&P Index                       3.7         14.4           0.1     0.2      0.6       2.2       579.7       94.7   51,364
         Assets0            (TA) Total Assets (in million $)                  3,911.9     20,263.4           0.2   116.4    408.2   1,841.9   902,210.0       98.1   51,364




33
                                                                                             Credit
           RISKY0           Not Investment Grade                                70.9          45.4           0.0     0.0      1.0       1.0         1.0       92.3   13,180
                                                                                             Taxes
        TAXRATEG    A       Graham’s Tax-Rate A                                 28.1          16.4         0.0      16.5     34.0     37.2         51.        71.5   35,169
                  0
        TAXRATEG    B       Graham’s Tax-Rate B                                 35.0          10.2         0.0       34.      35.     44.0         51.        77.9   33,883
                  0
     TAX0 /(EARN0 +TAX0 )   Naive Tax Rate                                      31.6          27.8      –100.0      24.3     36.4     42.7       200.0        23.4   51,259
          TAX0 /TA0         Asset-Normalized Taxes                               3.3           4.0       –54.1       0.5      2.5      5.2        46.2        66.3   51,306
                                                                                          Uniqueness
         RD0 /SLS0          R&D/Sales                                           85.2       3,760.6           0.0     0.4      2.1      7.1        4,865        7.4   23,929
        SLEXP0 /SLS0        Selling Expense/Sales                               27.4         147.1          –5.2    12.2     20.3     29.8     19,104.3       22.3   40,216
                                                                                        Industry Ratios
          IARD0 2d          Deviation from 2-digit SIC ADR                       –2.3         21.2         –64.3   –16.8     –6.3     10.3         82.1       89.4   45,494
          IARD0 3d          Deviation from 3-digit SIC ADR                       –2.5         20.2         –64.1   –15.9     –6.1      9.2         88.4       88.4   45,494
                                                                                Value Changes and Returns
           %∆V0,1           Corporate Value Change                             119.1          62.9         0.1      91.7    109.3    132.2      2,903.9        1.6   51,364
             R0,1           Raw Stock Returnt=0,1                               17.3          55.9       –99.1     –12.5     10.8     36.8      1,543.8       –0.5   51,364
            NR0,1           Raw Return0,1 – %∆s&p0,1                             3.6          54.9      –123.9     –25.4     –1.6     23.1      1,524.3        4.2   51,364
          EVOL−1,0          Equity Volatility (Log Returns)                     10.1           5.4         0.5       6.3      8.9     12.6         73.3       57.8   51,364
          FVOL−1,0          Firm Volatility                                      7.5           5.5         0.0       3.8      6.2      9.8         61.9       71.1   51,364
                                                                                  Background Definitions
          MVE/TA            Equity Market Value/TA                             123.7         258.9         0.0      33.1     67.0    133.5     13,933.0       77.1   51,364
           BVE/TA           Book Value/TA                                       43.8          25.3      –536.9      28.2     43.6     61.3        100.6       88.7   51,346
          TDBT/TA           Debt/TA                                             23.6          19.8         0.0       7.6     21.1     35.3        423.4       86.8   51,364
                          Table 4. Categorized Average Value Change, Actual and Implied Debt Ratios, and Returns

                  Panel A: Categorized by Net Return (NR0,1 )                 Panel B: Categorized by To Be Lagged Debt Ratio (ADR0 )


                ADR0 →    ADR1     ← IDR0,1   %∆V0,1    R0,1    NR0,1               ADR0 →    ADR1    ← IDR0,1   %∆V0,1    R0,1   NR0,1
          1      21.6      32.8        30.5     68.0   –49.6    –67.9           1     0.0       1.8        0.0    123.7    17.0    2.1
          2      25.8      32.0        29.7     88.8   –23.4    –39.8           2     1.5       4.1        1.7    122.5    14.6    0.6
          3      27.1      30.9        28.7     97.9   –10.2    –25.5           3     6.0       8.9        6.3    122.4    17.0    3.3
          4      28.4      30.9        28.8    104.5    –1.3    –14.9           4    12.2      15.3       12.3    121.7    16.2    2.3
          5      29.1      30.5        28.3    110.0     6.7     –5.9           5    19.2      21.6       18.9    120.0    16.3    2.5
          6      30.5      30.4        28.5    115.3    15.0      2.7           6    27.0      28.7       26.2    119.0    15.7    1.9
          7      30.7      29.5        27.7    121.4    23.5     12.0           7    35.7      36.3       34.2    117.8    16.9    3.2
          8      31.9      29.4        27.7    128.9    34.4     23.3           8    45.6      44.8       43.4    115.8    17.7    4.3
          9      30.8      26.7        25.1    145.1    52.3     40.8           9    58.3      56.4       55.4    115.0    19.1    6.3
         10      28.0      20.4        19.2    210.9   126.0    111.7          10    78.5      75.6       75.8    113.1    22.9   10.0

              Panel C: Categorized by Implied Debt Ratio (IDR0,1 )           Panel D: Categorized by To Be Predicted Debt Ratio (ADR1 )


                 ADR0 →    ADR1    ← IDR0,1   %∆V0,1   R0,1     NR0,1               ADR0 →    ADR1    ← IDR0,1   %∆V0,1    R0,1   NR0,1
           1       0.0       1.8        0.0    130.5   22.9       7.8           1     0.9       0.0        0.9    129.5    25.4    10.3
           2       1.7       3.6        1.4    136.2   28.0      13.0           2     3.1       1.8        2.6    133.4    29.1    14.0




34
           3       6.7       8.1        5.5    130.2   26.5      12.0           3     8.2       6.8        6.9    125.4    25.7    11.5
           4      13.2      14.1       11.3    124.1   22.9       8.5           4    14.6      13.3       12.5    122.5    23.8     9.4
           5      20.1      20.5       17.9    119.4   19.1       5.2           5    20.7      20.4       18.4    118.2    19.7     5.4
           6      27.9      28.1       25.4    117.1   17.9       4.3           6    27.7      28.3       25.6    114.3    16.3     2.7
           7      35.8      36.3       33.9    111.9   13.7       0.1           7    35.5      37.0       33.7    111.9    13.2    –0.2
           8      45.4      45.5       44.0    109.4   12.0      –1.1           8    43.9      46.9       42.8    111.3    10.6    –2.7
           9      57.0      57.8       56.7    108.2    9.1      –3.0           9    55.4      59.3       55.3    110.4     8.1    –4.0
          10      76.0      77.8       78.2    104.0    1.3     –10.3          10    73.8      79.7       75.8    114.1     1.6   –10.1

     Explanation: The sample are the 1975–2000 Compustat tapes, excluding tiny firms (see Page B). %∆V0,1 is the relative change in the
     enterprise value (market value of equity plus debt). ADR0 is the lagged debt ratio, defined as debt (the sum of long-term debt and debt
     in current liabilities) divided by debt plus the market value of equity. ADR1 is the current debt ratio, i.e., the variable to be explained.
     IDR0,1 is the implied debt ratio, i.e., the lagged debt ratio but with the market value of equity grossed up by the raw stock return over
     this current year (called R0,1 ). NR0,1 subtracts the return of the S&P500 index (without dividends) from the raw return. The table reports
     means. All variables are quoted in percent.

     Interpretation: The Implied Debt Ratio (IDR0,1 ) lines up much better with the Actual Debt Ratio (ADR1 ) than with the lagged debt ratio
     (ADR0 ). The clearest difference between the predictive abilities of the two measures emerges among firms with extreme returns (R0,1 )
     and when firms are sorted based on the value to be predicted (ADR1 ). Panel A: The implied debt ratio is a good predictor both on the
     top end and at the bottom end, even though firms seem to “correct” slightly when they experience good times (raise some debt) and
     “overshoot” when they experience bad times (raise some debt, too). Panel D: Firms predicted to have the highest debt ratio seem to
     raise their debt ratio even more than predicted by the implied ratio.
           Table 5. Value Change, Actual and Implied Debt Ratios, and Returns By Net Return:
                    Equal Number of Firms per Year, December Firms Only, and Medians

                      Panel A: Equal Number of Firms                                  Panel B: December Fiscal Year End Firms Only


               ADR0 →   ADR1     ← IDR0,1   %∆V0,1    R0,1    NR0,1                   ADR0 →   ADR1    ← IDR0,1   %∆V0,1    R0,1   NR0,1
          1     23.1     33.7        31.7     68.3   –48.0    –62.0               1    23.9     35.3       33.1     69.5   –49.3   –67.4
          2     25.5     31.6        29.4     87.4   –23.6    –37.5               2    27.9     34.0       31.6     91.2   –21.5   –38.5
          3     27.8     31.8        29.6     97.3   –11.0    –24.7               3    30.0     33.7       31.4    100.3    –8.1   –24.2
          4     29.2     31.8        29.6    103.6    –1.7    –15.3               4    30.8     33.1       31.0    105.4     0.1   –13.7
          5     29.5     30.8        28.6    110.1     6.6     –6.8               5    32.2     33.5       31.2    111.2     7.9    –4.8
          6     30.9     30.8        28.9    115.0    14.8      1.7               6    32.8     32.5       30.6    115.9    15.9     3.3
          7     30.7     29.5        27.6    122.5    23.9     10.7               7    33.3     31.9       30.1    120.6    23.5    12.0
          8     30.9     28.4        26.6    129.8    35.4     22.2               8    35.5     32.8       31.1    127.4    33.4    22.6
          9     29.7     25.5        23.9    146.2    53.7     40.0               9    34.0     30.1       28.2    141.3    49.9    38.8
         10     26.7     19.7        18.4    210.5   122.9    107.8              10    31.5     23.6       22.4    201.1   117.3   104.6




35
                                                                 Panel C: Medians


                                                  ADR0 →     ADR1     ← IDR0,1    %∆V0,1    R0,1   NR0,1
                                              1    14.3       29.1        24.7      67.1   –48.0   –61.2
                                              2    19.0       27.3        23.5      86.1   –22.6   –36.7
                                              3    22.0       28.0        24.5      94.7    –8.9   –24.6
                                              4    24.3       28.1        24.8     101.4     0.6   –15.1
                                              5    25.4       27.4        24.3     106.7     8.5    –6.1
                                              6    27.3       27.3        24.6     111.4    15.8     1.9
                                              7    26.8       25.6        22.9     117.9    24.4    10.0
                                              8    26.4       23.3        21.3     126.1    35.5    20.6
                                              9    24.4       19.7        17.4     140.7    54.3    38.0
                                             10    18.8       11.7        10.1     182.1   100.0    83.8



     Explanation: See Table 4.

     Interpretation: The main result from Table 4 is robust: the implied debt ratio (IDR0,1 ) lines up better with the actual debt ratio (ADR1 )
     than the lagged debt ratio (ADR0 ).
                            Table 6. Year By Year Base Regressions

                 year    con.   IDR0,1   ADR0     σc    σIDR   σADR    R2        N
                 1976     1.6   104.1     –4.3    0.3    4.5    4.2   95.7       804
                 1977     3.0     98.2    –0.4    0.3    6.1    5.9   93.5     1,292
                 1978     3.9     99.9    –1.9    0.3    5.1    5.2   92.2     1,414
                 1979     3.8   106.6     –7.7    0.3    3.9    3.9   93.2     1,498
                 1980     2.7   103.3     –5.1    0.3    3.1    3.2   93.6     1,535
                 1981     2.7   100.7     –2.3    0.3    3.0    3.0   93.2     1,511
                 1982     2.9   105.4     –8.6    0.3    3.2    2.9   92.0     1,580
                 1983     1.4   100.9     –4.3    0.3    3.5    3.3   91.0     1,652
                 1984     3.4     97.9    –2.6    0.3    4.9    4.7   88.0     1,763
                 1985     3.2     83.2    11.9    0.3    4.2    3.7   88.4     1,786
                 1986     4.0     86.0     7.3    0.3    4.3    4.2   84.3     1,839
                 1987     3.7     99.8    –6.0    0.3    4.2    4.5   86.3     1,844
                 1988     4.0     78.9    15.7    0.3    7.0    6.4   85.0     1,855
                 1989     3.4     99.2    –2.7    0.3    3.7    3.7   88.3     2,006
                 1990     3.0     92.3     3.8    0.3    4.5    4.8   91.0     2,010
                 1991     1.8     98.9    –2.9    0.3    7.0    6.5   92.2     1,932
                 1992     1.7   108.3    –12.2    0.2    3.5    3.5   91.6     2,018
                 1993     1.6     96.4    –0.2    0.2    5.6    5.3   92.0     2,204
                 1994     2.4     95.4     1.8    0.2    4.3    4.3   91.1     2,642
                 1995     2.9   102.5     –6.4    0.2    3.6    3.4   89.3     2,925
                 1996     2.3     89.9     7.1    0.2    4.7    4.4   89.9     3,124
                 1997     2.7     90.9     6.2    0.2    3.1    2.9   89.3     3,186
                 1998     3.7     99.4    –2.3    0.2    3.4    3.5   88.1     3,288
                 1999     3.2   108.0    –10.5    0.2    2.1    2.3   91.3     2,977
                 2000     2.4     96.6     0.8    0.2    2.3    2.3   91.4     2,679
                   F-M    2.9     97.7    –1.0    0.3    4.2    4.1   90.5        25
                Pooled    2.8     98.9    –2.1    0.1    0.8    0.8   90.4    51,364



                                  Panel B: December Firms Only


                 year    con.   IDR0,1   ADR0     σc    σIDR   σADR    R2        N
                   F-M    3.0     96.6     0.0    0.3    5.2    5.1   91.0    33,709
                Pooled    3.0     98.4    –1.6    0.1    0.9    0.9   90.8    33,709



Explanation: The sample are the 1975–2000 Compustat tapes, excluding tiny firms (see Page B).
The table presents the results of annual cross-sectional regressions predicting firms’ debt ratios
(debt divided by debt plus the market value of equity) with the “inert” debt ratio IDR (where the
lagged market value of equity is grossed up by the raw total stock return over the year) and the
firm’s own lagged debt ratio ADR. If firms follow an optimizing process in which higher firm
value should induce higher debt ratios, the coefficient on ADR should be 100 (percent). If firms are
entirely inert, which means that their debt ratio is driven mechanistically by stock returns, then the
coefficient on IDR should be 100 (percent). Fama-MacBeth statistics (F-M) report column averages.
Pooled Regressions (Pooled) simply use all observations, regardless of year, in one regression. All
standard deviations are heteroskedasticity adjusted.

Interpretation: Firms are practically inert. They show no tendency to return to their prior debt
ratios in response to changing firm values.    36
        Table 7. Pooled Regressions Categorized By Third Variables


                           Panel A: By Assets0 : Lagged Assets


       Assets0      con.    IDR0,1     ADR0      σc      σIDR       σADR      R2        N
       small 1       2.2      95.1       1.8     0.1      2.5        2.4     73.3    10,262
             2       3.0    101.4       –5.9     0.1      1.5        1.5     85.3    10,273
             3       3.5      99.8      –5.4     0.1      1.7        1.6     88.1    10,274
             4       3.5    100.0       –4.3     0.1      1.5        1.5     89.5    10,273
       large 5       3.5      98.0      –1.4     0.1      1.6        1.6     93.4    10,282



      Panel B: By MCAP0 /SP5000 : Lagged(!) Equity Cap Divided by S&P500


   MCAP0 /SP5000       con.     IDR0,1     ADR0        σc      σIDR    σADR      R2        N
          small 1       3.0       95.7      –0.8       0.1      1.5     1.5     88.2    10,272
                2       2.9       99.5      –4.0       0.1      1.6     1.5     89.2    10,273
                3       2.8       99.3      –1.9       0.1      2.1     2.0     91.3    10,273
                4       2.7     101.4       –3.3       0.1      1.5     1.5     92.1    10,273
          large 5       2.5     102.5       –3.7       0.1      1.8     1.8     92.3    10,273



     Panel C: By OI0 /SLS0 : Profitability (Operating Income Divided By Sales)


      OI0 /SLS0      con.     IDR0,1     ADR0      σc        σIDR     σADR     R2         N
     unprftbl. 1      3.0       93.9      –0.2     0.1        1.8      1.7    86.5     10,272
                2     3.1     102.9       –7.4     0.1        1.3      1.3    89.4     10,273
                3     3.0     104.4       –7.6     0.1        1.5      1.6    90.6     10,273
                4     2.4     100.1       –1.5     0.1        1.7      1.7    92.8     10,273
       prftbl. 5      3.1       98.3      –0.3     0.1        1.9      1.8    91.9     10,273



Panel D: By TAX0 /(EARN0 +TAX0 ): Tax Rate (Taxes Divided by Earnings Plus Taxes)


      TAXRATEG 0     con.     IDR0,1     ADR0      σc        σIDR     σADR     R2         N
       low-tax 1      2.4       92.8       3.1     0.1        1.8      1.7    90.3     10,272
               2      2.9     101.7       –4.0     0.1        1.4      1.4    91.6     10,273
               3      2.8     100.8       –3.2     0.1        1.7      1.6    89.7     10,273
               4      2.9     104.1       –6.6     0.1        1.7      1.7    89.6     10,273
      high-tax 5      3.1     100.7       –4.6     0.1        1.5      1.5    90.1     10,273




                                                 37
                                           (Table 7 continued)


                                Panel E: By BVE0 /MVE0 : Value vs Growth


             BVE0 /MVE0        con.     IDR0,1     ADR0      σc      σIDR     σADR        R2         N
               growth 1         1.9     100.0       –3.8     0.1      2.0      2.0       88.1     10,272
                       2        2.7     102.1       –4.3     0.1      2.2      2.2       84.6     10,273
                       3        3.5       99.0      –2.9     0.1      1.6      1.6       85.9     10,273
                       4        3.8       96.8      –1.7     0.2      1.7      1.6       87.0     10,273
                 value 5        3.9     100.3       –5.2     0.2      1.8      1.8       90.1     10,273



                                      Panel F: By RISKY0 : Credit Rating


           Credit Rating                   con.     IDR0,1     ADR0         σc    σIDR     σADR      R2        N
        Investment Grade (– BBB)            3.8       99.7      –7.7        0.4    1.8      1.8     85.5     3,344
    Non-Investment Grade (BB+ –)            3.3     100.3       –3.5        0.1    1.9      1.9     92.3     8,479



                      Panel G: By EVOL−1,0 : Asset-Adjusted Equity Volatility


              EVOL−1,0           con.     IDR0,1     ADR0      σc      σIDR       σADR      R2         N
            low volatility 1      2.5       97.6       0.9     0.1      2.2        2.1     91.5     10,273
                           2      2.7     100.3       -2.5     0.1      1.8        1.8     90.5     10,273
                           3      2.9       98.6      -1.9     0.1      2.1        2.0     89.8     10,273
                           4      2.9       99.8      -3.4     0.1      1.7        1.7     90.4     10,273
           high volatility 5      3.0       99.3      -4.1     0.1      1.3        1.3     90.1     10,272



                       Panel H: By FVOL−1,0 : Asset-Adjusted Firm Volatility


              BVE0 /MVE0         con.     IDR0,1     ADR0      σc      σIDR       σADR      R2         N
            low volatility 1      2.7       94.5       2.0     0.1      2.0        1.9     92.7     10,273
                           2      2.7       97.1      –0.2     0.1      1.5        1.5     90.7     10,273
                           3      2.7     100.7       –3.3     0.1      2.0        2.0     88.3     10,273
                           4      2.7       98.9      –1.4     0.1      1.6        1.6     84.8     10,273
           high volatility 5      3.0     102.5       –5.2     0.1      1.7        1.7     77.3     10,272



Explanation: For a description, see Table 6. This table differs in that it reports pooled regression
results by subcategories, based on firm-year observations one year prior. Asset-adjusted denotes
a sort first by size and then into bins based on volatility.

Interpretation: Low-tax, smaller firms show a mildly lesser tendency to actively deviate from their
inert implied debt ratio. However, even these firms fail to show a significant positive coefficient
on their own lagged debt ratio. Higher volatility firms (but not higher equity volatility firms) show
a mildly higher tendency to remain inert.

                                                       38
                                 Table 8. By Current and Future Net Returns


                                          Panel A: F-M Regressions


                                                      Current Returns


                                      Lowest       Low     Medium       High    Highest
                                       101.0       94.6       91.0      96.6       98.7
                           Lowest
                                        –9.1       –3.0        5.2       –3.1     –5.2
                                        84.6      119.2      105.1       85.1    107.5
                              Low
          Future Returns




                                         9.0      –22.8       –8.8       10.8     –12.8
                                       121.8       94.2       96.3      110.2      97.9
                           Medium
                                       –24.8        3.8        1.2      –12.8     –2.7
                                        66.5       69.9       77.8       82.6    110.2
                             High
                                        27.6       27.4       18.8       13.7    –12.5
                                        98.3       99.3       95.1      101.1    100.8
                           Highest
                                        –2.1       –1.7        2.2       –3.9      –3.3



                                         Panel B: Pooled Regressions


                                                      Current Returns


                                      Lowest       Low     Medium       High    Highest
                                        98.8       97.1       91.3      96.6       95.1
                           Lowest
                                        –5.9       –3.6        4.3       –2.1     –1.3
                                       113.7      124.8      121.8      109.9    103.3
                              Low
          Future Returns




                                       –17.5      –27.5      –24.2      –13.0     –7.4
                                       109.3      123.7      120.8      109.7    102.0
                           Medium
                                       –11.0      –24.2      –21.7      –11.4      –5.7
                                        82.5       99.6       96.9       91.2      95.1
                             High
                                        12.6       –1.4        0.7        6.2       2.5
                                       101.3       97.4       98.9      101.3      98.3
                           Highest
                                        –3.6        0.3       –0.7       –3.6      –0.5


Explanation: For a description of the underlying regressions, see Table 6. The classification is
based on the current net return (timed the same as the raw return used to compute IDR), and on
the subsequent year’s net return. The top number in each cell reports the coefficient on IDR0,1 ,
the bottom number in each cell reports the coefficient on ADR0 . The number of observations in a
cell ranges from 1,337 to 2,704. The constant, standard errors, and r-square are not reported due
to lack of space.

Interpretation: The table shows that firms that experience subsequent reversals (top right, bottom
left) are not economically significantly more inert.
                                                     39
                              Table 9. Alternative Debt Definitions


             Benchmark Case: Long-Term Debt and Debt in Current Liabilities (ADR)
             Method    con.    IDR0,1   ADR0    σc    σIDR   σADR    R2         N
                F-M     2.9      97.7    –1.0   0.3    4.2    4.1   90.5            25
             Pooled     2.8      98.9    –2.1   0.1    0.8    0.8   90.4        51,364

                              Adding Accounts Payables (ADR+ACCT )
             Method    con.    IDR0,1   ADR0    σc    σIDR   σADR    R2         N
                F-M     3.0      95.8     1.2   0.3    3.3    3.3   93.9            25
             Pooled     2.9      97.0     0.2   0.0    0.6    0.6   90.5        51,357

                                   Long-Term Debt Only (ADRLT )
             Method    con.    IDR0,1   ADR0    σc    σIDR   σADR    R2         N
                F-M     2.6      90.8     4.8   0.3    5.5    5.2   87.5            25
             Pooled     2.6      92.6     3.2   0.0    1.1    1.0   87.4        51,364

                                  Convertible Debt Only (ADRCV )
             Method    con.    IDR0,1   ADR0    σc    σIDR   σADR    R2         N
                F-M     0.4      83.0     7.4   0.1   17.8   16.7   75.8            25
             Pooled     0.4      84.4     5.6   0.0    3.6    3.4   76.1        45,832

                                   Short-Term Debt Only (ADRST )
             Method    con.    IDR0,1   ADR0    σc    σIDR   σADR    R2         N
                F-M     1.4      97.4    –2.7   0.2   11.9   11.3   82.9            25
             Pooled     1.4      94.7    –0.2   0.0    2.3    2.1   82.7        51,364



Explanation: For a description, see Table 6. This table differs in that it uses different definitions
of debt.

Interpretation: Because the value of convertible debt covaries with the value of equity, and because
we do not have market valuations for convertible debt, this table can only serve as a check for the
quality of the regressions. We should see lagged implied debt ratios (IDR) have lesser influence on
the ratio of convertible debt divided by convertible debt plus the market value of equity. Indeed,
this is borne out by these regressions.




                                                 40
      Table 10. The Longevity of Inertia
                / And the External Determination of Capital Structure


                                   Non-Overlapping Regressions
             Method        con.    IDRt−a,t   ADRt−a    σc    σIDR   σADR    R2        N
              1-Year F-M     2.9      97.7       –1.0   0.3    4.2    4.1   90.5        25
              2-Year F-M     5.5      96.3       –2.9   0.4    4.2    3.9   81.8        12
              3-Year F-M     7.0      87.1        4.6   0.4    4.3    3.9   76.1           8
              4-Year F-M     8.6      86.0        4.0   0.5    4.1    3.6   70.4           6
              5-Year F-M     9.6      84.1        6.7   0.6    4.0    3.6   68.6           5
            10-Year F-M    13.5       63.7      22.1    0.9    4.7    3.3   52.1           2
          1-Year Pooled      2.8      98.9       –2.1   0.1    0.8    0.8   90.4     51,364
          2-Year Pooled      5.4      97.7       –4.1   0.1    1.1    1.0   81.8     23,328
          3-Year Pooled      6.9      90.4        1.9   0.2    1.4    1.2   76.0     14,330
          4-Year Pooled      8.5      88.3        2.1   0.2    1.7    1.5   69.8      9,811
          5-Year Pooled      9.8      85.2        4.4   0.3    1.8    1.5   66.5      7,170
         10-Year Pooled    13.4       63.5      22.1    0.6    3.3    2.4   51.8      2,167

                                     Overlapping Regressions
             Method        con.    IDRt−a,t   ADRt−a    σc    σIDR   σADR    R2        N
              1-Year F-M     2.9      97.7       –1.0   0.3    4.2    4.1   90.5        25
              2-Year F-M     5.3      95.7       –1.9   0.4    4.0    3.8   82.4        24
              3-Year F-M     7.2      90.1        1.5   0.5    4.2    3.8   75.7        23
              4-Year F-M     8.4      84.0        5.8   0.5    4.3    3.7   70.5        22
              5-Year F-M     9.3      77.8      10.4    0.6    4.6    3.7   65.7        21
            10-Year F-M    11.8       50.0      28.4    0.8    6.0    3.7   46.9        20
          1-Year Pooled      2.8      98.9       –2.1   0.1    0.8    0.8   90.4     51,364
          2-Year Pooled      5.3      97.1       –3.1   0.1    0.8    0.7   82.2     45,494
          3-Year Pooled      7.1      91.6        0.2   0.1    0.8    0.8   75.2     40,269
          4-Year Pooled      8.3      84.6        5.2   0.1    0.9    0.8   69.6     35,684
          5-Year Pooled      9.2      77.6      10.2    0.1    1.0    0.8   64.5     31,768
         10-Year Pooled    11.4       48.3      29.6    0.2    1.5    0.9   46.7     17,850



Explanation: For a basic description, see Table 6. This table differs in that it predicts debt ratio
using debt ratios lagged by a years. Thus IDRt−a,t uses a year raw stock returns to gross up the a
year lagged debt ratio in a mechanistic fashion (determined by stock price movements).

Interpretation: IDRt−a,t continues to dominate lagged debt ratios even after five years. However
after about four years, companies begin to try to somewhat correct some of their capital structure
back to a prior ratio (not determined purely by the stock market change). Still, the coefficient of
ADR is far below that of IDR. Moreover, it is outright remarkable that 65% to 70% of the variation
in capital structure after 5 years can still be explained primarily by non-action.


                                                 41
                        Table 11. The Influence Of Third Variables

                                      Panel A: Tax Variables


Method        Variable             con.     IDR0,1    ADR0         Var        σc      σIDR     σADR    σV ar        N         R2
F-M              TAXRATEG
                        0A          1.3       99.7        –2.9        4.2     0.5      4.3      4.2     1.3             25   90.0
F-M              TAXRATEG
                        0B          0.3       99.4        –3.2        6.7     0.9      4.3      4.2     2.4             25   89.9
F-M      TAX0 /(EARN0 +TAX0 )       2.8       97.8        –1.1        0.3     0.4      4.2      4.1     0.7             25   90.5
F-M                  TAX0 /TA0      3.0       97.7        –1.2    –1.9        0.4      4.2      4.1     5.3             25   90.5
Pooled           TAXRATEG
                        0A          1.4     102.0         –5.3        4.2     0.1      0.8      0.8     0.3       35,169     90.1
Pooled           TAXRATEG
                        0B          0.8     101.8         –5.7        5.5     0.1      0.9      0.9     0.4       33,883     90.0
Pooled   TAX0 /(EARN0 +TAX0 )       2.7       99.0        –2.1        0.5     0.1      0.8      0.8     0.1       51,259     90.4
Pooled               TAX0 /TA0      2.8       99.0        –2.1        1.5     0.1      0.8      0.8     1.0       51,306     90.4


                                 Panel B: Profitability and Growth


Method    Variable      con.     IDR0,1    ADR0       Var        σc     σIDR        σADR     σV ar      N          R2
F-M        OI0 /SLS0     2.8      97.7       –1.1     0.1        0.3        4.2      4.1      0.3           25    90.5
F-M        OI0 /TA0      2.9      97.7       –1.1    –0.4        0.3        4.2      4.1      0.8           25    90.5
F-M      BVE0 /MVE0      2.9      97.7       –1.1     0.4        0.3        4.2      4.1      1.6           25    90.5
Pooled     OI0 /SLS0     2.8      98.8       –2.0     0.0        0.1        0.8      0.8      0.0     49,990      90.4
Pooled     OI0 /TA0      2.8      98.8       –2.0     0.1        0.1        0.8      0.8      0.1     50,130      90.4
Pooled   BVE0 /MVE0      2.8      98.8       –2.1     0.1        0.1        0.8      0.8      0.2     51,352      90.4


                                          Panel C: Uniqueness


Method    Variable       con.     IDR0,1     ADR0      Var        σc        σIDR     σADR     σV ar      N          R2
F-M        RD0 /SLS0      2.6     100.0       –4.0    –2.8        0.3        6.4      6.2      1.1           25    89.1
F-M      SLEXP0 /SLS0     3.0      98.6       –2.4    –0.4        0.3        4.5      4.5      0.4           25    89.5
Pooled     RD0 /SLS0      2.4     100.9       –4.5    –0.0        0.1        1.3      1.2      0.0     23,936      89.4
Pooled   SLEXP0 /SLS0     2.9      99.4       –3.0    –0.0        0.1        0.9      0.8      0.0     40,204      89.3




                                                     42
                                            (Table 11 continued)


                                               Panel D: Volatility



 Method     Variable       con.    IDR0,1     ADR0      Var      σc    σIDR   σADR    σV ar       N            R2
 F-M        EVOL−1,0         3.9    98.5       –2.2     –9.5     0.5    4.2     4.1    4.3            25   90.5
 F-M        FVOL−1,0         3.6    98.1       –2.3     –6.6     0.6    4.2     4.2    5.4            25   90.5
 Pooled     EVOL−1,0         4.0    99.9       –3.5    –10.4     0.1    0.8     0.8    0.7     51,364      90.4
 Pooled     FVOL−1,0         3.9    99.5       –3.9     –9.1     0.1    0.8     0.8    0.9     51,364      90.4



                               Panel E: Deviation from Industry Debt Ratio



 Method        Variable            con.     IDR0,1    ADR0      Var    σc     σIDR    σADR    σV ar        N         R2
 F-M        IARD0 2d 2-digit        0.5      98.3      5.7      –9.8   0.5     4.3     4.4     1.9             25   90.8
 F-M        IARD0 3d 3-digit        0.4      98.4      5.5     –10.7   0.4     4.3     4.3     1.8             25   90.8
                    2d
 Pooled     IARD0        2-digit    0.2      99.4      5.3     –10.5   0.1     0.8     0.9     0.4     45,494       90.8
                    3d
 Pooled     IARD0        3-digit    0.2      99.4      5.2     –11.2   0.1     0.8     0.9     0.4     45,494       90.9



Explanation: For a basic description, see Table 6. This table differs in that it includes one ad-
ditional variable, called a “third variable.” As indicated by time subscript 0, third variables are
lagged by one year (one financial statement).

Interpretation: Taxes: All tax variables correlate positively with debt ratio, in line with the theory.
The Graham simulated tax variable is the best predictor of debt ratio. However, tax rate is only
a mild predictor when compared with the implied debt ratio. Profitability and Growth: These
variables are not robustly important. Uniqueness: unimportant as a determinant of debt ratio.
Volatility: Firms that are more volatile tend to adopt lower debt ratios. Industry: Except for IDR,
the industry debt ratio appears to be the best predictor of a firm’s debt ratio: firms seem to try to
adjust towards their industry’s debt ratio.




                                                        43
