NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STOCHASTIC DISCOUNT FACTOR BOUNDS WITH CONDITIONING INFORMATION

Wayne E. Ferson
Andrew F. Siegel

Working Paper 8789
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8789

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2002
Wayne E. Ferson is the Pigott-PACCAR Professor of Finance, University of Washington and a Research
Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research [phone: (206)543-1843, fax: 685-9392,
http://faculty.washington.edu/apmodels]. Andrew F. Siegel is the Grant I. Butterbaugh Professor of Finance
and Management Science and Adjunct Professor of Statistics, University of Washington [phone: (206)5434476, fax: 685-9392, e-mail asiegel@u.washington.edu].We are grateful to Geert Bekaert, Ravi Jagannathan,
Jay Shanken, Guofu Zhou, and an anonymous referee for helpful comments. This paper has also benefited
from seminars at the 1998 European Finance Association Meetings, the July, 1998 National Bureau of
Economic Research Asset Pricing Program, the January, 1999 American Finance Association, and at the
following Universities: Arizona State, London Business School, Louisiana State, Miami, Notre Dame, South
Carolina, Washington University, and the University of Washington. The paper was previously titled
iiOptimal Moment Restrictions on Stochastic Discount Factorsli. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Wayne E. Ferson and Andrew F. Siegel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Stochastic Discount Factor Bounds with Conditioning Information
Wayne E. Ferson and Andrew F. Siegel
NBER Working Paper No. 8789
February 2002
JEL No. G12, C31, D51

ABSTRACT
Hansen and Jagannathan (HJ, 1991) describe restrictions on the volatility of stochastic discount
factors (SDFs) that price a given set of asset returns. This paper compares the sampling properties of
different versions of HJ bounds that use conditioning information in the form of a given set of lagged
instruments. HJ describe one way to use conditioning information. Their approach is to multiply the
original returns by the lagged variables, and much of the asset pricing literature to date has followed this
ihmultiplicativel. approach. We also study two versions of optimized HJ bounds with conditioning
information. One is from Gallant, Hansen and Tauchen (1990) and the second is based on the
unconditionally-efficient portfolios derived in Ferson and Siegel (2000). We document finite-sample
biases in the HJ bounds, where the biased bounds reject asset-pricing models too often. We provide useful
correction factors for the bias. We also evaluate the asymptotic standard errors for the HJ bounds, from
Hansen, Heaton and Luttmer (1995).

Wayne E. Ferson
Department of Finance
Box 353200
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
and NBER

Andrew F. Siegel
Department of Finance
Box 353200
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
asiegel@u.washington.edu

-1-

1.

Introduction
Most asset pricing models can be represented in the form of a fundamental valuation equation:
E (mt Rt | Z t −1 ) = e

(1)

where R is a vector of gross (unity plus rate of) returns on traded assets, Zt−1 is a vector of
instruments in the public information set at time t−1 and e is a vector of ones. The standard asset
pricing models in finance specify the form of the random variable, mt, the stochastic discount
factor (see the review by Ferson, 1995). The elements of the vector mt Rt may be viewed as “risk
adjusted” gross returns. The returns are risk adjusted by “discounting” them, or multiplying by
mt, to arrive at the “present value” per dollar invested, equal to one dollar. A stochastic discount
factor is said to “price” the assets in R if Equation (1) is satisfied.
Hansen and Jagannathan (HJ, 1991) derive lower bounds for the variance of any stochastic
discount factor which satisfies the fundamental valuation Equation (1); such bounds may be used as
a prior diagnostic. If a candidate for mt, corresponding to a particular theory, fails to satisfy the HJ
bounds, then it can not satisfy the Equation (1).
Burnside (1994) describes classical hypothesis tests based on the distance between a
stochastic discount factor (SDF) and the HJ bounds. He evaluates the sampling properties of such
tests with a Monte Carlo simulation of the consumption-based model from Lucas (1978). Tierens
(1993) extends the simulation evidence to the Epstein-Zin (1991) model. Both studies find that
the sample SDF plots outside the sample HJ bounds too often when the model is true. However,

-2both studies limit their attention to cases where there is no conditioning information, so the
lagged instrument, Zt–1, is a constant.
This paper focuses on the use of conditioning information in the HJ bounds. For a given
choice of lagged variables, Zt–1, there are several ways to implement the bounds, but no previous
study compares the properties of the various approaches. Given Burnside’s (1994) and Tieren’s
(1993) evidence of biases in models with no conditioning information, an analysis of the
sampling properties of bounds with conditioning information is important.
We evaluate the finite-sample properties of HJ bounds with three approaches to conditioning
information: (1) the multiplicative approach suggested by HJ; (2) the optimal bounds of Gallant,
Hansen and Tauchen (1990); and (3) the efficient portfolio bounds, based on the unconditionally
efficient portfolios derived by Ferson and Siegel (2000). We also evaluate asymptotic standard
errors for the HJ bounds, derived by Hansen, Heaton and Luttmer (HHL, 1995). Our results show
that the use of conditioning information in the bounds is important, and the way in which
information is used is important. When sampling error is accounted for, bounds that use no
conditioning information have little economic content, while bounds that use the conditioning
information efficiently do have economic content. The optimized bounds have significantly more
economic content than the multiplicative bounds, once we adjust for sampling errors.
We document finite-sample biases in HJ bounds with conditioning information. The biases
imply that the bounds reject asset-pricing models too often. We argue that the magnitudes of the
biases are economically significant. The bias is the largest in the multiplicative approach and the
smallest for the efficient portfolio bounds.

-3We provide corrections for the finite-sample bias for each version of the HJ bounds. In
addition to correcting for bias in the location of the bounds, our adjustment produces bounds
with smaller standard errors. Our simulations show that the adjustments approximately remove
the bias in multiplicative and efficient portfolio bounds, but a bias remains in the Gallant, Hansen
and Tauchen (1990) bounds.
The paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we review the original HJ bounds. Bounds with
conditioning information are discussed in Section 3. We present the adjustments for finite sample
bias in Section 4. Section 5 describes the data that we use in our empirical examples and Section 6
provides the examples. Section 7 describes a simulation study into the properties of the various
methods for computing the HJ bounds. Section 8 considers the effects of nonnormality and
heteroskedasticity in the data. Section 9 evaluates the asymptotic standard errors of HHL. Section
10 offers a summary and concluding remarks.

2.

The Hansen-Jagannathan Bounds
We first consider the special case where the conditioning information is a constant, so the

expectations in (1) are unconditional.
Assume that the random column n-vector R of the assets’ gross returns has mean E(R)=µ and
covariance matrix Σ/ . When there is no conditioning information a stochastic discount factor is
defined as any random variable m such that E(mR)=e.
Proposition 1 (Hansen and Jagannathan, 1991). The stochastic discount factor m with
minimum variance for its expectation E(m) is given by

-4′
m = E ( m ) + [e − E (m )µ] Σ/ −1 ( R − µ) .

(2)

′
σm2 = [e − E ( m)µ ] Σ/ −1 [e − E (m)µ].

(3)

And the variance of m is

The proof is provided in Hansen and Jagannathan (1991).
Hansen and Jagannathan (1991) show that their bound is related to the maximum Sharpe
ratio that can be obtained by a portfolio of the assets under consideration. The Sharpe ratio is
defined as the ratio of the expected excess return to the standard deviation of the portfolio return.
If the vector of assets’ expected excess returns is µ − E ( m)−1 e and Σ/ is the covariance matrix,
the square of the maximum Sharpe ratio is µ − E ( m)−1 e ′ Σ/ −1 µ − E ( m)−1 e . Thus, from Equation

(3) the lower bound on the variance of stochastic discount factors is the maximum squared
2

Sharpe ratio multiplied by E ( m) .

3. Bounds with Conditioning Information
Recent papers refine and extend the HJ bounds in several directions.2 This paper focuses on
the use of given lagged variables, Z t , to refine the bounds. To understand how such conditioning

2

HJ (1991) show how restricting m > 0 can refine the bounds. Snow (1991) considers
selected higher moments of the returns distribution. Bansal and Lehmann (1997) derive
restrictions on E[ln(m)] that involve all higher moments of m and reduce to the HJ bounds if
returns are lognormally distributed. Balduzzi and Kallal (1997) incorporate the implications for
the risk premium on an economic variable. Cochrane and Hansen (1992) state restrictions in
terms of the correlation between the stochastic discount factor and returns, while Cochrane and
Saa’-Requejo (1996) bound the Sharpe ratios of assets’ pricing errors. Hansen and Jagannathan

-5information can refine the HJ bounds, let rt ≡ Rt − R0,t !e be the n-vector of excess returns, where

R0 is the riskless asset. We switch to excess returns in this section for intuition; in practice we
use gross returns to avoid the loss of information implied by excess returns. For excess returns,
Equation (1) says

E ( mt rt Z t −1 ) = 0 ,

(4)

E{[mt rt ] f ( Z t −1 )} = 0 for all functions f(•),

(5)

which is equivalent to:

where the unconditional expectation is assumed to exist. In other words, if we consider rt f ( Z t −1 )
to represent the excess returns of “dynamic trading strategies,” then the presence of the
conditioning information Z t −1 is essentially equivalent to the condition that E(mtrt) = 0 should
hold, not only for the original excess returns rt, but also for the dynamic trading strategies. The
larger is the set of strategies for which the condition is required to hold, the smaller is the set of

mt’s that can satisfy the condition and the tighter are the bounds.
When there is no conditioning information, f (!) is a constant and the SDF must price only the
original excess returns. HJ observe that Equation (4) implies E(mt rt ⊗ Zt−1)=0, choosing f (!) to be

the function I ⊗ Zt–1. This “multiplicative” approach has become a standard in the asset pricing
literature.

(1996) develop measures of distance between candidate SDFs and the m that would price the
assets. Hansen, Heaton and Luttmer (1995) develop asymptotic distribution theory for
specification errors on stochastic discount factors, where the HJ bounds are a special case.

-6HJ’s multiplicative approach is not an efficient use of the lagged instruments. Ferson and
Siegel (2000) derive unconditionally-efficient portfolios that have the maximum (unconditional)
Sharpe ratio that can be obtained from a given set of returns, with portfolio weights that may
depend on the conditioning information. Since the lower bound on SDFs is tighter when the
maximum Sharpe ratio is higher, such portfolios represent an efficient use of the conditioning
information. We use these results to construct efficient portfolio bounds, essentially choosing
f (!) to be the set of all portfolio weight functions. The portfolio weight functions are restricted
to sum to 1. Ferson and Siegel (2000) observe that the efficient portfolio weights are robust to
extreme signals about asset returns, which suggests that estimates of the efficient portfolio
bounds may have attractive sample properties.
Gallant, Hansen and Tauchen (GHT, 1990) provide a greatest lower bound from (1), which
implies that (5) holds for all functions f (!) . Bekaert and Liu (1999) show how to compute an
optimal bound in a multiplicative framework, where the bound is shown to reach the GHT bound
when the conditional moments are correctly specified. They point out that the GHT bounds are
invalidated when the conditional moments involved in their computation are incorrectly
specified.
In summary, the versions of HJ bounds that we study may be understood through Equation
(5). First are the multiplicative bounds of Hansen and Jagannathan (1991), who choose f(•) to be
an identity function. Second are the efficient portfolio bounds, where f(•) is a vector of portfolio
weights that may depend on Zt and sum to 1. Finally, the optimal bounds of Gallant, Hansen and
Tauchen (1990) require Equation (5) to hold for all functions f(•). Note that we take the
instruments as given; thus, we do not study how to choose Zt-1.

-7-

3.1. Efficient Portfolio Bounds
Ferson and Siegel (2000) derive portfolios that use the given conditioning information, Z, to
achieve unconditional mean-variance efficiency. These portfolios are used in our efficient-

′
portfolio (UE) bounds. Let x = x ( Z ) = ( x1 ( Z ),..., xn ( Z ) ) denote the shares invested in each of the
n assets, with the constraint that x′e=1. The observed gross return on the portfolio, RP = x′( Z ) R ,
has expectation and variance (using iterated expectations given Z to eliminate the unexpected
returns) as follows:

µ P = E[ x′( Z )µ( Z )]
σ2P = E {x′( Z ) [µ( Z )µ′( Z ) + Σ/ ε ( Z )] x ( Z )} − µ 2P ,

(6)

where µ ( Z ) denotes the conditional mean vector of the n returns, given Z, and Σ/ ε ( Z ) is the
conditional covariance matrix. Define the following constants:

 1 
α1 = E 

 e′Λe 

(7)

 e′Λµ( Z ) 
α2 = E 

 e′Λe 

(8)

Λee′Λ 



α3 = E µ′( Z )  Λ −
µ( Z )  ,

e′Λe 




(9)

where
−1

Λ = Λ ( Z ) =  E ( RR′ | Z ) = [µ( Z )µ′( Z ) + Σ/ ε ( Z )] .
−1

(10)

-8-

Proposition 2 (Ferson and Siegel 2000). Given unconditional expected return µP and n risky
assets, the portfolio having minimum unconditional variance is determined by the optimal
weights:

x′( Z ) =

Λee′Λ 
e′Λ µ P − α2

µ′( Z ) Λ −
+

e′Λe
α3
e′Λe 


(11)

The variance of the portfolio defined by x(Z) is


1− α3 2
α 22  2α 2
−
σ =  α1 +
µP +
µP
α3  α3
α3

2
P

(12)

The proof is given by Ferson and Siegel (2000).
To implement the UE bounds we must specify the conditional mean and variance functions,
µ(Z) and Σ/ ε ( Z ) . The efficient set constants α1, α2, and α3 are then estimated using sample
averages. If these moments are incorrectly specified the portfolio weight given by (11) will no
longer be efficient, but it still describes a valid dynamic portfolio strategy. The mean variance
boundary and Sharpe ratio constructed from the strategy provides a valid but inefficient bound on
stochastic discount factors in this case.
Fixed-weight combinations of any two portfolios on an unconditional mean-standarddeviation boundary can describe the entire boundary (Hansen and Richard, 1987). To form the
UE bounds we pick two “arbitrary” portfolios. One is the global minimum-variance portfolio,
which has the following mean and variance:
µ * = α 2 / (1 − α 3 ) .

(13)

(σ * ) 2 = α 1 − α 22 / (1 − α 3 )

(14)

-9This follows by choosing µ P to minimize the quadratic function for σ 2P , as given in (12). The
second portfolio is chosen by setting µP equal to an arbitrary target return. For a given {µP, σP}
hyperbola constructed from the two unconditionally efficient portfolio returns, the corresponding
HJ bound can be obtained using Equation (3). Here, Σ/ is a 2×2 matrix and µ is a two-vector of
the unconditional means of the two unconditionally efficient portfolios.

3.2. Optimal Bounds
This section provides a convenient, closed-form expression for the optimal HJ bounds that
were originally derived by Gallant, Hansen and Tauchen (1990). First, define the following
conditional-efficient-set constants, analogous to the efficient-set constants used in traditional
mean-variance analysis (see, e.g., Ingersoll, 1987):

α ( Z ) = e′Σ/ −ε 1 ( Z )e
β( Z ) = e′Σ/ ε−1 ( Z )µ ( Z )

(15)

γ ( Z ) = µ ′( Z ) Σ/ −ε 1 ( Z )µ ( Z )

Proposition 3: Optimal Hansen-Jagannathan Bounds (Gallant, Hansen and Tauchen,
1990). The stochastic discount factor m with minimum variance for its expectation E(m) that
satisfies E ( mR | Z ) = e is given by

′
m = ζ( Z ) + [e − ζ( Z )µ ( Z )] Σ/ −ε 1 ( Z )[ R − µ ( Z )]
where ζ(Z), the conditional mean of m given Z, is defined as

(16)

-10-


 β( Z )  

 E (m) − E 
 1 + γ (Z )  
β( Z )
1

ζ( Z ) = E (m| Z ) =
+


1 + γ (Z ) 1 + γ (Z ) 

1 

E



 1 + γ (Z ) 

(17)

and the unconditional variance of m is
2


 β( Z )  

 E (m) − E 
 1 + γ (Z )  
 β2 ( Z ) 
2

2
+ E [α ( Z ) ] − E 
− [ E (m)]
σm =


1 
1 + γ ( Z ) 
E

 1 + γ (Z ) 

(18)

A proof of Proposition (3) is available by request to the authors. The result may be verified
by computing E ( mR′ | Z ) = e′ using Equation (16) for m, which holds for any definition of

ζ ( Z ) . Then, note that any other stochastic discount factor with the same unconditional mean as
the m given by (16) can be expressed as m + ε where E (ε) = E ( εm ) = 0 , and thus its variance is
larger than the variance of m.
Equation (18) may be used directly to compute the optimal HJ bounds. As with the UE
bound, it is necessary to specify the conditional mean function µ(Z) and the conditional variance
function Σ/ ε (Z ) . The four unconditional expectations that appear in Equation (18) may be
estimated from the corresponding sample means, independent of the value of E(m). As
emphasized by Bekaert and Liu (1999), if the moments are incorrectly specified the result may
not be a valid bound on the variance of SDFs.

3.3. Discussion
The optimal bounds provide the greatest lower bound on stochastic discount factors. The UE
bounds incorporate an additional restriction to functions of the conditioning information that are

-11portfolio weights, which sum to 1.0 at each date. This reduces the flexibility of the UE bounds to
exploit the conditioning information, and thus they do not attain the greatest lower bound.
Intuitively, suppose there was only one asset. Then the restricted weight could not respond at all
to the conditioning information.
The additional restriction in the UE bounds may be understood in terms of the duality
between Hansen-Jagannathan bounds and the usual mean-standard deviation diagram for returns.
For a given value of E ( m) , the value of σ m on the HJ boundary is determined by the maximum
squared Sharpe ratio when the implicit risk-free rate is E ( m)

−1

− 1 . In the UE bounds the Sharpe

ratio for a given E(m) is achieved by a fixed-weight combination of the two unconditionally
efficient portfolios, weighted according to the fixed value of E ( m) . In the optimal bounds we
choose E ( m| Z ) for each realization of Z subject only to the limitation that E[E(m|Z)] is the fixed
E(m). This allows the minimization to obtain the unrestricted optimal bound.3
While the UE bounds do not attain the greatest lower bound, they are nevertheless
empirically interesting in view of two forms of “robustness.” The first, as emphasized by Bekaert

3

The difference between the two bounds may also be understood using the characterization
of mean-variance frontiers from Hansen and Richard (1987). If a portfolio minimizes
unconditional variance for a given mean, in the set of all returns that can be formed by trading
with Z, it is unconditionally efficient (UE). Hansen and Richard show such UE portfolios are also
conditionally mean-variance efficient (CE) for each realization of Z. Both the optimal and the UE
bounds are formed from CE portfolios. Hansen and Richard show that any CE portfolio return is
wt R1,t +1 + (1 − wt ) R2,t +1 , where R1,t +1 and R2,t +1 are two UE returns which are also CE. For a given
realization of Zt, each point on the conditional mean-variance boundary implies a corresponding
−1

risk-free rate  E ( m | Z t )  − 1 and a weight, wt. In contrast, all UE portfolio returns can be
formed as wR1,t +1 + (1 − w ) R2,t +1 , where w does not depend on Zt. In the UE bounds we fix w to
correspond to E ( m)

−1

−1.

-12and Liu (1999) is that the portfolio-based bounds remain valid when the conditional moments are
incorrectly specified. Second, Ferson and Siegel (2000) show that the UE portfolio weights,
unlike traditional mean-variance optimal weights, are “conservative,” in the sense that they avoid
extreme positions in risky assets when the conditional moments are extreme. The UE portfolio
weight, as a function of a conditional expected return, appears similar to the redescending
influence curves used in robust statistics. Thus, the UE weights should be robust to outlier
observations. These features may translate into robust sampling properties of the UE bounds.

4. Bias Correction
Consider first the case of no conditioning information, as in the fixed bounds. A simple biasadjusted estimator assumes normally-distributed returns, and is based on standard results for
exact finite sample distributions. Assume that T independent observations are made on the asset
vector R. When the sample average µ̂ and the sample covariance matrix S (dividing by T) are
used, we have the maximum likelihood estimate of the variance bound:
′
σˆ 2m = [ e − E (m)µˆ ] S −1 [ e − E (m)µˆ ] .

(19)

Assuming normality, the quadratic form in (19) has a noncentral chi-squared distribution, directly
related to the distribution of a maximum squared Sharpe ratio, studied by Jobson and Korkie
(1980). Using this distribution (also derived as a special case of Shanken 1982 and 1987, k=0) we
find the mean of σ$ 2m . The estimated variance is biased upward (i.e., the true variance is
overestimated). We solve for a transformation of σ$ 2m that is unbiased.

-13-

Proposition 4. If asset returns are multivariate normal, then the expectation of the estimated
variance of m in Equation (19) is given by

E ( σˆ m2 ) =

n
T
2
σm2
[ E ( m)] +
T −n−2
T −n−2

(20)

and an unbiased estimator of the variance is given by
2
 n+2 2 n
σˆ m2 , adjusted =  1 −
 σˆ m − [ E ( m )] ,
T 
T


(21)

in the sense that E (σˆ m2 ,adjusted ) = σ2m .
This expression reveals the importance of the number of assets, n, relative to the number of
time-series observations, T, for the determination of the bias. Approximately, the adjustment
shrinks the estimated variance towards the value − [ E ( m )] , shrinking by the fraction n/T.
2

While the finite-sample adjustment in Equation (21) is developed for the case of no
conditioning information, it may be applied to the multiplicative bounds of HJ. To see this, note
that Equation (1) implies:

E ( mt Rt ⊗ Z t −1 − e ⊗ Z t −1 | Z t −1 ) = 0 .

(22)

Dividing the components of Z t −1 by their unconditional means and then taking the unconditional
expectation implies:
E ( mt Rt ⊗ Z% t −1 ) = e ,

(23)

where Z%t −1 = Z t −1 ./ E ( Z t −1 ) and ./ denotes element-by-element division. Treating Rt ⊗ Z% t −1 as
the expanded set of “returns,” the multiplicative bounds are computed in the same fashion as the

-14fixed bounds. In the finite sample adjustment, n is taken to be the number of original assets times
one plus the number of lagged instruments. The adjustment in this case is approximate, as it
ignores the uncertainty due to the fact that E ( Z ) must be estimated by the sample means. In our
simulations we account for this uncertainty.
Building on Proposition 4, we provide approximate finite-sample bias corrections for the
optimal and UE bounds.

Proposition 5. If asset returns are jointly normal, conditional on Z, and the maximum
likelihood estimators for E ( R | Z ) and Σ/ ε ( Z ) are used to form σˆ 2m* in the UE or optimal
bounds, then an approximate bias-adjusted estimator is:
2
n
2
T −n−2 2
σˆ m2 *,adjusted = 
 σˆ m* −  E ( m ) + Var  E ( m | Z )
T
T
T



(24)

Proof: Both the UE and optimal bounds may be represented as the variance of a particular
SDF, m * , which may be expressed as

m* = E ( m | Z ) +  e − E ( m | Z ) µ ( Z ) ′ Σ/ ε ( Z )  R − µ ( Z )  .

(25)

The optimal and UE bounds differ in the specification of the E ( m | Z ) function. Computing the
variance of (25),



σ2 ( m *) = Var  E ( m | Z )  + E  e − E ( m | Z ) µ ( Z ) ′ Σ/ ε−1 ( Z ) e − E ( m | Z ) µ ( Z )  .



(26)

For an estimated bound we replace µ ( Z ) and Σ/ ε−1 ( Z ) with their MLE estimates, which results in

σˆ 2m* . Assuming conditional joint normality of the returns, given Z, we evaluate the right-hand

-15term of Equation (26). Using iterated expectations, we first evaluate the conditional expectation
given Z of the second term, taking E ( m | Z ) as given and using Proposition 4. Then, taking the
unconditional expectation of this result we arrive at the approximation
2
T
n

 2


 −2 
E ( σˆ m2 * ) ≅ 
 σ ( m *) + 
  E ( m ) + 
Var  E ( m | Z ) .
T −n−2
T −n−2
T −n−2

(27)

The approximation arises because we assume that the parameters in the E ( m | Z ) function are at
their probability limits in (27). Rearranging (27) as before we obtain the adjusted estimator.
Proposition 5 differs from Proposition 4 by the additional term,

( 2 / T )Var  E ( m | Z ) .

Consistent estimates of this term for the optimal and UE bounds are obtained as the sample
variances of the relevant expressions, evaluated at the MLE parameter estimates. For the optimal
bounds, E ( m | Z ) is specified in Equation (17). For the UE bounds, it can be shown that

 1 − E ( m ) µ P  Var  E ( RUE | Z )
| Z ) = 
,

σP
σ2P


2

Var  E ( mUE

(28)

where RUE is the portfolio formed with the weights given in (11), where µ P and σ2P are chosen
to correspond to the portfolio located at the point on the UE portfolio frontier tangent to a line
drawn from  E ( m )

4

−1

on the expected gross return axis.4

{

These values may be found by selecting µ P to maximize µ P −  E ( m )

is given by Equation (12).

} /σ

−1 2

2
P

, where σ2P

-16-

5. Data
We use three different data sets in our empirical illustrations. An annual and a quarterly data
set are constructed for comparability with Hansen and Jagannathan (1991). A monthly data set
provides an example representative of more recent asset-pricing studies. Summary statistics are
provided in Tables 1 and 2.
The annual data set used by Hansen and Jagannathan consists of real returns on a valueweighted stock index and short term real interest rates, from Shiller (1982). The annual data cover
the 1891-1985 period. The lagged instruments consist of a constant and the first lagged values of
the two real returns.5
The quarterly returns data also follow Hansen and Jagannathan, and they are the real, 3-month
holding period returns on Treasury bills with initial maturities of 3, 6, 9, and 12 months; a total of
four asset return series. The returns are computed from the yields reported in the Center for
Research in Security Prices (CRSP) Fama files for original-issue twelve-month bills. Real returns
are the nominal returns deflated by the component of the CPI relating to nondurable goods, as in
Ferson and Harvey (1992). The quarterly data cover the period from the third quarter of 1964
through the fourth quarter of 1987, which is the same as HJ. The lagged instruments, following HJ,
consist of a constant and the first lagged values of the real returns and real, per capita consumption
growth, which we obtain from the Commerce Department via Citibase.
Our monthly data set includes the total returns (price change plus dividends) on twenty five
industry portfolios from Harvey and Kirby (1996), measured for the period February, 1963 to

5

These data are published in Shiller (1989), Chapter 26, Tables 26.1-26.2.

-17December, 1994.6 The portfolios are created by grouping individual common stocks according to
their SIC codes and forming value-weighted averages (based on beginning-of-month values) of the
total returns within each group of firms. Table 2 shows the industry classifications for the 25
portfolios and their summary statistics. The instruments are: (1) the lagged value of a one-month
Treasury bill yield, (2) the lagged dividend yield of the Standard and Poors 500 (S&P500) index.

6. Empirical Results
In this section we present sample versions of the various HJ bounds. The “fixed” bounds use
no conditioning information, and so are determined by a fixed-weight combination of the basic
asset returns, as in Equation (2). We compute maximum likelihood estimates of the bounds using
the sample mean vector and covariance matrix. Under more general assumptions these are
consistent method-of-moment estimates.
To form the efficient portfolio and optimal bounds we must specify the conditional mean
function µ(Z) and the conditional variance function Σ/ ε ( Z ) . Initially, we simply regress the
returns on a constant and the lagged instruments. The fitted values of the regression are taken as

µ(Z) and the sample covariance matrix of the residuals is our estimate of the (fixed) conditional
covariance matrix. We estimate the portfolio constants α1 , α2 , and α3 , replacing the
unconditional expectations by the corresponding sample averages. For the optimal bounds, we
use Equation (18) to define the minimum variance boundary, where the unconditional
expectations are estimated by their corresponding sample means. For the UE bounds, we use

6

We are grateful to Campbell Harvey for providing the data.

-18Equation (11) to form two portfolios. One sets the target mean µ P equal to the grand mean of the
asset returns, the other is the global minimum variance portfolio, with target mean given by
Equation (13).

6.1. Economic Significance
Figure 1 illustrates the results of estimating the various bounds using the monthly data set
over the July 1963 - December 1994 period with no finite sample adjustments. A valid stochastic
discount factor must lie above the bounds, “in the cup.” The bounds using conditioning
information plot above the fixed bounds, illustrating that conditioning information allows one to
obtain a seemingly-more-powerful diagnostic, ruling out more stochastic discount factors. Also,
there are substantial differences between the various bounds, which suggests that the choice of
which bound to use is a substantive decision.

2

Standard Deviation of m

Multiplicative

Optimal

1

FFC

Fixed

FFU

0
0.97

UE

0.98

0.99

1.00

1.01

1.02

1.03

1.04

1.05

E (m )

Figure 1. Unadjusted HJ bounds from monthly data, July 1963 - December 1994
with the estimated conditional model (“FFC”) and unconditional model (“FFU”).

-19A striking feature of Figure 1 is that the sample multiplicative bound plots above the sample
optimal bound. The theory of Section 3 implies that this cannot occur, except as a result of
misspecification or finite sample error. Thus, the figure motivates a study of the sampling
properties of the bounds.
Figure 2 applies the finite sample adjustments to the bounds. Now the ordering of the
various bounds appears reasonable, with the optimal bounds plotting above. The effect of the
finite-sample bias adjustment to the multiplicative bounds appears substantial. This suggests that
there may be substantial finite-sample biases.

Standard Deviation of m

2
UE
FFC

Multiplicative
Optimal

1

Fixed

FFU

0
0.97

0.98

0.99

1.00

1.01

1.02

1.03

1.04

1.05

E (m )

Figure 2. Bias-adjusted HJ bounds from monthly data, July 1963 - December
1994 with the estimated conditional model (“FFC”) and unconditional model
(“FFU”).

The differences between the various bounds, and the effects of the finite-sample adjustment
appear substantial, but it is important to address the economic significance of these effects. Using
an example from the Lucas (1978) consumption-based model, we find that the consumption SDF is

-20so far outside the bounds that our results would not change inferences about the validity of that
model. A simple model of habit persistence, like the one used by HJ, produces a similar result.
However, when the SDFs of interest are closer to the bounds the results will be economically
significant. There are reasons to think that many interesting SDFs are close to the bounds.
Intuitively, the boundary of the admissible region for SDFs is formed from a combination of asset
returns. Many SDFs in the literature are also a combination of asset returns. To illustrate, we
consider the example of the “three-factor model” of Fama and French (1993, 1996).
Fama and French advocate a linear model in which three return factors describe the SDF. The
factors are a market portfolio return, the difference between the returns of a small-stock and a largestock portfolio (SMB) and the difference between a high and a low book-to-market portfolio
(HML). While there is some controversy over the justification for this model it has been popular in
recent studies.
A linear beta pricing model implies an SDF in which mt in Equation (1) is a linear function of
the factors (see Dybvig and Ingersoll, 1982, or Ferson and Jagannathan, 1996): mt = a(z) + B(z)'

Ft, where Ft is the vector of factors. Farnsworth et al (2000) estimate SDF formulations of the
Fama-French model using a monthly data set for July, 1963 - December 1994, only five months
shorter than our sample period, and we use their results here. Following Cochrane (1996) they
assume that the coefficients a(z) and B(z) are linear functions of the lagged instruments, a
Treasury bill and a dividend yield. In this case we have a conditional version of the model, which
we denote by “FFC” in the graphs. When a(z) and B(z) are constants, so that no lagged
instruments are used in forming the SDF, we have an unconditional model (“FFU”).

-21In Figure 1, with no bias adjustments, the Fama-French SDFs plot close to the fixed bounds
but below the bounds with conditioning information. While no standard errors are shown, if we
superimpose the sampling variation from the subsequent tables, it is likely that the model would
be rejected using the biased bounds with conditioning information.
In Figure 2, with the bias adjustments applied, the SDFs are the same as in the previous
figure.7 The SDFs now plot close to the multiplicative bounds. After bias adjustment one would
not reject the Fama-French SDF using the multiplicative bounds, as the SDFs are within two
standard errors of the adjusted bounds. This reverses the conclusion from Figure 1, illustrating
that the biases in the bounds are economically significant. Unlike the multiplicative bounds,
Figure 2 suggests that the optimal bounds would be likely to reject the Fama-French SDF. The
point FFC lies 2.02 standard errors below the optimal bound, while FFU is 4.15 standard errors
below.8 Thus, the choice between bounds with conditioning information is also a matter of
economic significance.

7

For some values of E(m) the adjusted σˆ 2m can be less than zero, and this occurs in Figure 2
for the fixed bounds. As we describe below, the fixed bounds have little economic content when
sampling variation is accounted for, which confirms the importance of conditioning information.
The local concavity of the fixed-bound curve for values of σ̂m near zero is explained by the fact
that the square root function has infinite slope at zero.
8

These examples ignore the sampling error in the location of the FFC and FFU points, and
should therefore be only taken as illustrative. See Burnside (1994) and Tierens (1993) for
examples that account for only this source of sampling error in specific SDF models.

-22-

7. Simulation Results
We conduct a simulation study of the sampling properties of the various bounds. The
experiments accommodate data that are dependent over time. For example, the monthly dividend
yields and lagged interest rates have first order sample autocorrelations in excess of 0.9, while
asset returns have smaller autocorrelations as may be seen in Tables 1 and 2. We focus on
capturing the autocorrelation of the lagged instruments. Using these instruments to model the
conditional means of the asset returns, the simulated asset returns inherit mild serial dependence.
We estimate a first-order VAR for the lagged instruments, and we use the estimated
coefficient matrix as parameters of the model. The parameters for the conditional means of the
asset returns are estimated by regressions on the lagged instruments. The residuals from the
VAR, U Z , and the deviations of the asset returns from their conditional means, U r , represent the
shocks in the model. We concatenate these as (U r ,U Z ) and compute the sample covariance
matrix as a parameter of the simulation. We generate the artificial shocks in the simulations by
drawing data with this covariance matrix, either from a normal distribution or by resampling
from the actual residuals. We build up the time series of the simulated instruments recursively
using the VAR coefficients and the simulated U Z shocks. We find that the artificial instruments
have autocorrelations very similar to the sample data. The artificial returns are formed as the
conditional means, evaluated at the values of the artificial instruments, plus an independent draw
from the U r distribution. (In a later section we explore the robustness of the results to more general
data generating schemes.)

-23In each simulation trial the bounds are estimated from a sample of artificial data, in the same
way that we estimate the bounds in the previous section. The estimated HJ curve may be described
in any given example by the values of the three coefficients, a, b, and c, as

σˆ 2 (m ) = a + b [ E (m ) − 1] + c [ E (m ) − 1] .
2

(29)

Thus, for each simulation trial we record the values of a, b, and c. We use 5,000 Monte Carlo
trials for each data set. For a given E ( m ) the values of a, b, and c, that summarize a simulation
trial, determine a value of σˆ 2m . The 5,000 values of σˆ 2m , one for each simulation trial, are used to
produce the summary statistics shown in the tables. The number of observations in each of the
artificial samples is equal to that of an actual data set. For example, in the quarterly data set each
of the 5,000 trials uses an artificial sample of 93 quarters, representing the four assets and
instruments. We conduct simulations corresponding to the annual, quarterly and monthly data
sets. Subsequent tables summarize the results of the simulations at E ( m ) = 1 . (Graphical
summaries showing a range of E ( m ) values are available by request to the authors).

7.1. A Benchmark: The “True” HJ Bounds
Since we do not wish to tie our results to a particular model economy (and corresponding SDF)
we use large-scale simulation to find the benchmarks against which the sampling properties are
measured. In order to determine the “true” bounds, we form artificial samples just like in the
simulations, but with one million observations. Values of the true bounds are the sample values in
the artificial sample with 1,000,000 observations. (Averaging across 100 simulations with 10,000
observations produces similar results.)

-24The true variance bounds are shown in Table 3, where the simulations use normally distributed
data. A comparison across the three panels shows that the bounds are the highest in the quarterly
data set. This reflects the high Sharpe ratios that appear in samples of Treasury bill returns,
consistent with HJ (1991).
Comparing the different bounds for the same data set confirms that, abstracting from sampling
error, the different bounds can produce vastly different results. For example, in monthly data the
multiplicative bound for σ2m is about three times the fixed bound. The optimal bound is almost four
times the fixed bound, suggesting that the way in which conditioning information is used also
makes a difference. The differences are also large in the quarterly data set. In the annual data, the
differences between the various bounds are relatively small.

7.2. The Location of the Sample Bounds
Table 3 reports the mean of the estimated bounds, σˆ 2m , taken across the 5,000 simulation
trials. Comparing these values with the true bounds shows the expected finite sample bias. All of
the bounds display an upward bias; i.e., the sample bounds are higher than the true bounds. Thus,
some valid stochastic discount factors are expected to plot outside of the sample HJ bounds. The
upward bias of the fixed bounds is consistent with the previous studies of Burnside (1994) and
Tierens (1993). Table 3 extends the evidence to the bounds with conditioning information. The
expected sample bounds range from 113% to 200% of the true bounds on σ2m .
Consistent with Propositions 4 and 5, the finite sample biases are more extreme where the
number of time series observations is small relative to the number of assets. For example the annual
data include 95 observations on 2 assets, and the ratio of estimated to true bounds is 113% to 129%.
The monthly data include 383 observations on 25 assets, and the ratio of estimated to true bounds is

-25159% to 200%. The quarterly data presents an intermediate case. In each data set the multiplicative
bounds have the largest bias; in the quarterly and monthly data the differences are substantial. The
ratio of the estimated to the true bound is slightly closer to 1.0 for the UE than for the optimal
bound.
The relation of the Hansen-Jagannathan bounds to the maximum squared Sharpe ratio provides
intuition for the extreme sampling bias of the multiplicative bounds, compared with the other
bounds. It is well known from the classical mean-variance analysis that portfolios based on the
usual MLE estimates of the mean returns and their covariance, tend to be biased in favor of
overstated Sharpe ratios. This intuition is reflected in Propositions 4 and 5. The bias is greater, for a
given sample size T, when more assets are included in the portfolio.9 Since the multiplicative
bounds create additional “assets,” the maximum Sharpe ratio and, thus, the bound on σ2m , is likely
to be more upwardly biased. The smaller finite-sample bias of the UE bound, in contrast, reflects
the robustness of UE portfolios, discussed by Ferson and Siegel (2000).

7.3. Bias Adjustment
Table 3 reports the averages of the bounds, adjusted for finite sample bias, taken across the
5,000 simulation trials (Adj. Mean). A comparison with the true bounds and the unadjusted means
shows the effectiveness of the adjustment to the location of the bounds. The expected adjusted
bounds range from 90% to 131% of the true bounds. The range is tighter in the annual data, where

9

See Frost and Savarino (1988), MacKinlay (1987), and Green and Hollifield (1992) for
illustrations.

-26all adjusted bounds are within 10%, and the widest in the monthly data, where the adjustment factor
is larger.
The adjustments provide a dramatic improvement in quarterly and monthly data, especially for
the fixed and multiplicative bounds. For example the adjustment reduces the quarterly
multiplicative bound bias from 71% to 8.5%, and the monthly multiplicative bound bias from
100% to −3% . It performs even better on the fixed bounds. Since we draw normally distributed
data in these simulations, the adjustment to the fixed bound would be exact if the data were
serially independent. In the multiplicative bound the products of normals imply nonnormal
dynamic strategy returns, which reduces the accuracy of the adjustment. (We consider nonnormal
and heteroskedastic artificial data below.)
The adjustments for finite sample bias also provide significant improvements in the location of
the optimal and UE bounds. Before adjustment, the biases of these bounds range from 28% to 59%
in the quarterly and monthly data. After adjustment the biases are roughly halved.

7.4. The Precision of the Bounds
The value of the bounds as a diagnostic tool also depends not only on their location, but also
on their precision. The simulations provide information on the sampling variation of the bounds.
Table 3 reports the standard deviations of the bounds, evaluated at E(m)=1, with and without
adjustment, taken across the 5,000 simulation trials. Recall that the adjustment approximately
shrinks the uncentered second moment of the stochastic discount factor, multiplying it by a factor
less than 1.0. This results in smaller standard errors. Thus, our finite sample adjustments provide
another benefit, in addition to reducing the bias in the location of the bounds. They also produce
bounds with greater precision.

-27Comparing the various bounds for a given data set, the fixed bounds have the smallest
standard deviations. Of course, they also have the smallest average values. Among the bounds
with conditioning information, the UE bounds always have the smallest standard deviations.
Thus one appeal of the UE bounds is their relative precision.
Table 3 shows that none of the bounds have much economic content in the annual data set.
Negative values of σ2m lie within two standard deviations of the true version of each bound. In
the quarterly and annual data sets the bounds do place substantive restrictions on σ2m . In these
data sets the bounds with conditioning information are much more restrictive of SDF variances
than the fixed bounds. In particular, the fixed bound in monthly data has virtually no economic
content, as the true bound is within two standard errors of zero. This result was also illustrated in
Figure 2.
The efficient portfolio and optimal bounds are more restrictive of SDF variances than the
multiplicative bounds. For example, in the monthly data set a value of σ2m = 0.128 is two
standard deviations below the true multiplicative bound. For the efficient portfolio bound the
corresponding value is 0.148, while for the optimal bound it is 0.173. In the quarterly sample the
UE and optimal bounds have even larger advantages. Thus, when we consider both the location
and the precision of the bounds, the efficient use of the conditioning information produces
markedly tighter bounds, relative to the standard multiplicative approach. This reinforces the
impression from Figure 2 that it is important to efficiently use the conditioning information in
variance bounds.

-28-

8. Effects of Nonnormality and Heteroskedasticity
The previous simulations use strong assumptions about the data generating process. These
include (1) normality and, consistent with normality, (2) homoskedasticity. There is evidence in
the literature inconsistent with each of these assumptions. In this section we explore the
robustness of the results to the use of alternative assumptions.
We conduct two experiments in which we generalize the data generating process by
progressively relaxing the assumptions (1) and (2). This provides information on how robust our
previous results are to alternative data generating schemes. For each experiment we conduct a
new large scale simulation to define a “true” bound, as the true bound may depend on the
specification of the moments in the data generating process.

8.1. Nonnormality
In the first experiment we relax the assumption that the shocks in the data generating process
are normally distributed. Instead of drawing normally distributed shocks with a given covariance
matrix, we use an approach similar to the bootstrap (see, e.g. Efron, 1982). We resample vectors
from the sample of residuals (U r ,U Z ) , choosing dates randomly with replacement. The artificial
data are otherwise generated as before. The simulated data will be homoskedastic but not
normally distributed, on the assumption that the sample is not normally distributed.
The results of the first experiment are summarized in Panels A-C of Table 4. The true values
of the fixed-weight bounds are the same as in Table 3, because the fixed bound is a consistent
estimator and no lagged instruments are used. The true bounds that use lagged instruments are
affected only very slightly by nonnormality. The other results are also similar to those in Table 3.

-29Among the bounds with conditioning information, the multiplicative bounds have the largest
bias, and the UE bounds the smallest. The UE bounds have the smallest standard errors. Using
the true location and accounting for the standard deviations, the UE and optimal bounds are more
restrictive of the data than the multiplicative bounds. The performance of the finite sample
adjustment is consistent with our previous observations. Its performance is not degraded by the
nonnormality in the data.

8.2. Heteroskedasticity
Heteroskedastic data raises some new issues. First, the expected values of objects like

µ′ ( Z ) Σ/ ε−1 ( Z ) , which appear in both the optimal and UE bounds, will differ from their
expectations under homoskedasticity if the conditional mean and elements of the conditional
covariance matrix are correlated. Thus, the “true” locations of the bounds are expected to shift.
Second, the issue of correctly specifying the heteroskedasticity becomes potentially important. In
our previous simulations the artificial econometrician essentially uses the correct data generating
process, but needs to estimate the parameters. Under heteroskedasticity, the correct process may
not be obvious. If the wrong specification is used, the estimated optimal bounds may not be
valid, and the UE bounds will be inefficient. In our simulations we assume that the artificial
econometrician has correctly identified the data generating process to be the one we actually use.
However, the parameters of the process must be estimated on the artificial data. In this sense, the
experiment is symmetric with the previous cases. (See Bekaert and Liu, 1999, for cases where the
data generating process may be incorrectly specified.)
In the second experiment we allow for both nonnormality and conditional heteroskedasticity
in the data generating process. There are many ways to model conditional heteroskedasticity, and

-30we experimented with several alternatives. Given the large size of the conditional covariance
matrix (25 × 25 in the monthly data) relative to the number of time-series observations (383)
standard approaches such as ARCH and GARCH seem impractical.
We adopt a constant correlation structure for the conditional covariance matrix. The
correlations are taken from the sample correlation matrix of the regression residuals U r , formed
as in the first two experiments. The conditional standard deviations are modeled by regressing
the absolute residuals on the lagged instruments and saving the coefficients as parameters. For a
given draw of Z in the simulation the conditional standard deviation is the regression coefficient
applied to that Z, multiplied by

π / 2 . This approach is advocated by Davidian and Carroll

(1987) and is similar to the approaches of Ferson and Foerster (1994) and Schwert and Seguin
(1990). The conditional covariance is then formed as the constant correlation, multiplied by the
conditional standard deviations implied by the value of Z. Modeling the conditional
heteroskedasticity as described above, the generated data do not match the moments of the
sample data as closely as in the previous experiments. We shrink the estimated time-varying
covariance matrix towards the fixed covariance matrix to obtain a better match.10
Panels D-F of Table 4 show the results of the second experiment. Compared to the previous
experiments the locations of the true bounds are raised slightly in most of the cases. The ratios of

10

The regression model for the heteroskedasticity produces returns whose regression R2 on Z
are implausibly high. We therefore shrink the conditional variance matrix towards the
unconditional covariance matrix of the returns. In the annual and monthly data we use the simple
average of the two. This produces artificial returns that more closely match sample regression
results. In the quarterly data we find that a shrinkage factor of 0.5 is too small, and a shrinkage
factor of 0.9 toward the fixed covariance of U r is used.

-31the estimated to the true bounds, however, are similar. The biases vary from 15% to 107% across
the cases, and the relative performance of the different bounds is similar to that observed before.
The multiplicative bounds have the largest bias. The UE bounds have the smallest standard
deviations, among the bounds with conditioning information. The finite-sample bias adjustments
continue to perform well. The adjusted location of each estimated bound is within 11% of the
true bound in the annual and quarterly data, except in the case of the optimal bound in quarterly
data (18%). Even in monthly data the bias is cut in half, or better, by the adjustment. Accounting
for sampling variation, the optimal and UE bounds are more restrictive of SDF variances than the
multiplicative bound, confirming the importance of the efficient use of conditioning information
in the bounds.

9. Asymptotic Standard Errors
Hansen, Heaton and Luttmer (HHL, 1995) derive an asymptotic standard error for the
minimum second moment of a stochastic discount factor, in the case where there is no
conditioning information. In the appendix we modify their results to use asset returns instead of
asset prices and payoffs, and to accommodate arbitrary values of E ( m ) . A consistent estimator
for the asymptotic variance of σˆ 2m is obtained as the asymptotic variance of (1/ T ) ∑ φt , where

{

2

}

φt = −  αˆ ′ ( Rt − µˆ ) − 2αˆ ′  E ( m ) Rt − e  ,

(30)

where αˆ = S −1  e − E ( m ) µˆ  . We estimate the asymptotic variance of (1/ T ) ∑ φt using the
Newey-West (1987) estimator. The number of autocovariance terms is determined by examining

-32the sample autocorrelations of φt , and including the lags where the sample autocorrelations
exceed two approximate standard errors.11
Table 5 summarizes our evaulation of the sampling properties of the HHL asymptotic
standard errors for the fixed variance bounds.12 The “Empirical SD” and “Adjusted Empirical”
are the standard deviations from the simulations, repeated from the previous tables for
convenience. “Average Asymptotic” is the mean value of the HHL standard errors, taken over the
5,000 trials and “Adjusted Asymptotic” refers to the asymptotic standard error of the adjusted
bounds. The table shows that the asymptotic standard errors are fairly reliable in the annual and
quarterly data. They are understated, but by less than 10%, in each of the three experiments. In
the monthly data, where the number of time series (383) is small relative to the number of assets
(25), the asymptotic standard errors are less reliable. They are understated by almost 20% when
the data are homoskedastic, and by as much as 44% under heteroskedasticity. In the monthly data
the levels of the bounds are smaller numbers, on the order of 0.05 (versus 0.10 in annual and
quarterly data), so a given absolute error represents a larger percentage bias.

11

This criterion results in 12 lags in the monthly data, and zero lags in the annual and
quarterly data.
12

We also studied extensions of HHL’s results to the multiplicative and optimized bounds,
obtaining an approximate solution in the multiplicative case. Simulations showed that first-order
approximations are not sufficiently accurate to obtain a reliable standard error.

-33-

10. Summary and Conclusions
This paper offers a number of refinements and insights into the volatility bounds on
stochastic discount factors, first developed by Hansen and Jagannathan (HJ, 1991). When there is
no conditioning information the bounds are formed from fixed-weight combinations of the asset
returns, with weights depending on the sample mean and covariance matrix. In the presence of
conditioning information most studies in the literature have followed Hansen and Jagannathan,
multiplying the returns by the lagged variables and constructing bounds with these “dynamic
strategy” returns. We find that sample values of these bounds are upwardly biased, the bias
becoming substantial when the number of assets is large relative to the number of time-series
observations. This means that studies using the biased bounds run a risk of rejecting too many
models for the stochastic discount factor. We argue that the magnitude of the bias is
economically significant. We provide a finite-sample adjustment for this bias.
We compare Hansen and Jagannathan’s “multiplicative” approach with two alternative
approaches to the use of conditioning information. One approach, following Ferson and Siegel
(2000), is based on unconditionally mean-variance efficient dynamic trading strategies. We call
these the “efficient-portfolio” (UE) bounds. The second approach, based on Gallant, Hansen and
Tauchen (1990), provides the theoretically tightest possible bounds. We present a closed-form
solution for this “optimal” bound, which simplifies the implementation and analysis. We also
evaluate asymptotic standard errors for the HJ bounds, derived by Hansen, Heaton and Luttmer
(1995). Our simulation study leads to several conclusions.
(1) Multiplicative bounds are easy to use but they can be terribly biased. Our finite-sample
adjustment improves their specification, in the sense that the expected bias in the location of the

-34adjusted bounds is small. However, the sampling variation in the multiplicative bounds is larger
than in the other bounds with conditioning information, and the bounds are less restrictive of
SDF variances once sampling error is taken into account. If we could only use one version of the
bounds with conditioning information, we would eliminate the multiplicative bound, based on
these results.
(2) Optimal bounds are more difficult to implement than the multiplicative bounds, requiring
a specification for the conditional means and variances of the asset returns. The magnitudes of
the finite-sample biases are less than in the multiplicative case. The bias adjustment is the least
effective for these bounds. However, accounting for sampling error the optimal bounds are the
most restrictive of SDF variances. Based on these results we would prefer to use the optimal
bound in a setting where we had a high degree of confidence in the specification of the
conditional means and variances of the asset returns.
(3) Efficient-portfolio bounds are similar in complexity to the optimal bounds, also requiring
a specification of the conditional moments. However, unlike the optimal bounds they are
theoretically robust to an incorrect specification of the conditional moments (Bekaert and Liu,
1999). The UE bounds have smaller standard errors than either the multiplicative or the optimal
bounds. Using our adjustments, the finite-sample bias is smaller than in the case of the optimal
bounds. However, the UE bounds are not as restrictive of SDF variances as the optimal bounds.
Based on these results, we advocate the UE bounds in settings where robustness and precision of
the bounds are the important concerns.
(4) Asymptotic Standard Errors for the fixed bounds are mildly understated in our annual
and quarterly samples, by less than 10%. The degree of bias is worse when the number of assets

-35is large relative to the number of time series observations. In our monthly sample, where thelevel
of the bounds is a smaller number, the percentage bias is 20% or larger.

Appendix
Asymptotic Standard Errors: Fixed Bounds
This shows how we modify results from HHL (1995). They work in terms of asset prices and
payoffs, while we use gross asset returns, which are more likely to be stationary. Following HHL
(1995) consider the following two optimization problems.

Min Var (m) such that E ( mR ) = 1, E ( m ) = m0
m

{ (

}

)

σm2 ≡ Max − E [α′( R − µ)] − 2α′ ( m0µ − e ) .
α

2

(A.1)

(A.2)

The optimized values of the two problems are identical. To see this, recall that the stochastic
discount factor that solves (A.1) is of the form m = m0 + α*′ ( R − µ ) where α* = Σ/ −1 ( e − m0µ ) ,
as in Equation (2). From the first-order conditions to problem (A.2), the optimal value of α is
the same α* , and at this value

σ2m = ( e − m0µ )′ Σ/ −1 ( e − m0µ ) ,

(A.3)

which is also the solution to (A.1), as in Equation (3).
To obtain the asymptotic variance for the sample version of the bounds, define

{

2

}

φt (α) ≡ −  α′ ( Rt − µ ) − 2α′ ( m0 Rt − e )

(A.4)

-36Similarly let φˆ t (α) be the value of (A.4) when the sample mean, µ̂ , replaces µ , and let

αˆ ≡ S −1 ( e − m0µˆ ) be the optimum value of α , evaluated at the MLE estimates ( S , µˆ ) . We may
then express the sample estimate of the fixed bound as σˆ 2m = (1/ T ) ∑ t φˆ t ( αˆ ) , and the true value
as σ2m = E  φt ( α* ) . We use the following decomposition:

 1
1
 1

T ( σˆ 2m − σm2 ) = T   ∑ t φˆ t ( αˆ ) − ∑ t φˆ t ( α* )  +  ∑ t φˆ t ( α* ) − E  φt ( α* )   
T
 T

 T

(A.5)

The first term of (A.5) isolates the uncertainty due to the estimate of the optimal α , while the
second captures the time-series variation in φˆ t , given the population value, α* .
The first term of (A.5) converges in probability to zero under standard assumptions, and
therefore does not contribute to the asymptotic variance of the estimator. To see this, consider an
exact, second-order Taylor series expansion of (1/ T ) ∑ t φˆ t ( α* ) about (1/ T ) ∑ t φˆ ( αˆ ) . Since α̂
is optimal at the sample estimates, the first-order condition for problem (A.2) implies that the
first term in the Taylor expansion is zero. Using the second term of the expansion and the firstorder condition for problem (A.2), we have:
1
T
1

T  ∑ t φˆ t ( αˆ ) − ∑ t φˆ t ( α* )  =
T
2
T


{(e − m µˆ )′ − (e − m µ)′ Σ/ S}(αˆ − α* )
0

0

−1

(A.6)

The right-hand side of (A.6) is the product of two terms. The first converges in distribution to a
normal with mean zero under standard assumptions. The second term,

( αˆ − α* ) ,

converges

almost surely to zero. Thus, the product of the two terms converges in probability to zero.

-37The preceding arguments imply that the asymptotic variance of
asymptotic variance of

T ( σˆ 2m − σm2 ) is the

T (1/ T ) ∑ t φˆ t ( α* ) . We obtain consistent estimates of the asymptotic



variance by replacing α* with a consistent estimator, α̂ , as described in the text, and using the
time series of the φˆ t ( αˆ ) to estimate the spectral density at frequency zero.

References
Bansal, Ravi and Bruce N. Lehmann, 1997, Growth-Optimal Restrictions on Asset Pricing
Models, Macroeconomic Dynamics 1, 1-22.
Bekaert, Geert, and Jun Liu, 1999, Conditioning Information and Variance Bounds on Pricing
Kernels, working paper, Stanford University.
Balduzzi, Pierluigi, and Heidi Kallal, 1997, Risk Premia and Variance Bounds, The Journal of

Finance 52(5), 1913-49.
Burnside, Craig, 1994, Hansen-Jagannathan Bounds as Classical Tests of Asset-Pricing Models,

Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, vol. 12, no. 1, 57-79.
Cochrane, John H., 1996, A Cross-Sectional Test of a Production-Based Asset Pricing Model,

Journal of Political Economy 104(3), 572-621.
Cochrane, John H., and Lars P. Hansen, 1992, Asset Pricing Explorations for Macroeconomists,
in O. J. Blanchard and S. Fischer, NBER Macroeconomic Annual 1992, 7, 115-165.
Cochrane, John H., and Jesus Saa’-Requejo, 1996, Beyond Arbitrage: Good-Deal Pricing of
Derivatives in Incomplete Markets, working paper, University of Chicago.

-38Davidian, Marie and R. J. Carroll, 1987, Variance Function Estimation, Journal of the American

Statistical Association 82, 1079-91.
Dybvig, P. and J. Ingersoll, 1982, Mean variance theory in complete markets, Journal of

Business 55, 233-51.
Efron, Bradford, 1982, The Jackknife, the Bootstrap, and Other Resampling Plans, Society for
Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia, PA.
Epstein, L., and S. Zin, 1991, Substitution, risk aversion and the temporal behavior of asset
returns, Journal of Political Economy 99, 263-286.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1996, Multifactor Explanations of Asset Pricing
Anomalies, Journal of Finance 51, 55-87.
Farnsworth, H., W. Ferson, D. Jackson and S. Todd, 2000, Performance Evaluation with
Stochastic Discount Factors, working paper, University of Washington.
Ferson, Wayne E., 1995, Theory and Empirical Testing of Asset Pricing Models. Handbooks in

OR & MS, Vol. 9, Chapter 5. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Ferson, Wayne E. and Stephen R. Foerster, 1994, Finite Sample Properties of the Generalized
Methods of Moments Tests of Conditional Asset Pricing Models, Journal of Financial

Economics 36, 29-56.
Ferson, Wayne E., and Campbell R. Harvey, 1992, Seasonality and Consumption-Based Asset
Pricing Models, Journal of Finance 47(2), 511-552.

-39Ferson, Wayne E. and R. Jagannathan, 1996, Econometric Evaluation of Asset Pricing Models,
Chapter 1 (pp.1-30) in the Handbook of Statistics: vol. 14: Statistical Methods in Finance,
G.S. Maddala and C.R. Rao (editors), North Holland ISBBN: 0-444-81964-9.
Ferson, Wayne E., and Andrew F. Siegel, 2000, The Efficient Use of Conditioning Information in
Portfolios, forthcoming, Journal of Finance.
Frost, P. and J. Savarino, 1988, For Better Performance: Constrain Portfolio Weights, Journal of

Portfolio Management 15(1), 29-34.
Gallant, A. Ronald, Lars P. Hansen and George Tauchen, 1990, Using conditional moments of
asset payoffs to infer the volatility of intertemporal marginal rates of substitution. Journal of

Econometrics 45, 141-179.
Green, R., and B. Hollifield, 1992, When will mean variance efficient portfolios be well
diversified? Journal of Finance 47, 1785-1809.
Hansen, Heaton and Luttmer, 1995, Econometric Evaluation of Asset Pricing Models, Review of

Financial Studies 8(2), 237-274.
Hansen, L. P., and R. Jagannathan (1991). Implications of Security Market Data for Models of
Dynamic Economies. Journal of Political Economy 99, 225-262.
Hansen, L. P., and S. F. Richard, 1987, The Role of Conditioning Information in Deducing
Testable Restrictions Implied by Dynamic Asset Pricing Models. Econometrica 55, No. 3,
587-613.
Harvey, Campbell R. and Chris Kirby, 1996, Analytic tests of factor pricing models,
Unpublished working paper, Duke University, Durham, N.C.

-40Ingersoll, J. E., Jr., 1987, Financial Decision Making, Rowman & Littlefield: Savage, Maryland.
Jobson, J.D., and B.M. Korkie, 1980, Estimation for Markowitz Efficient Portfolios, Journal of

the American Statistical Association 75, 544-554.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr., 1978, Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy, Econometrica 46, 1429-1445.
MacKinlay, A. Craig, 1987, On multivariate Tests of the CAPM, Journal of Financial

Economics 18, 341-371.
Schwert, G. William, and Paul J. Seguin, 1990, Heteroskedasticity in Stock Returns, The Journal

of Finance 45, 1129-1155.
Shanken, Jay, 1982, An Analysis of the Traditional Risk-Return Model, Ph.D. Dissertation,
Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA.
Shanken, Jay, 1987, Multivariate proxies and asset pricing relations: Living with the Roll
critique, The Journal of Financial Economics 18, 91-110.
Shiller, Robert J., 1982, Consumption, asset markets and macroeconomic fluctuations, CarnegisRochester Series on Public Policy 17, 203-238.
Shiller, Robert J., 1989, Market volatility, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Snow, Carl, 1991, Diagnosing Asset Pricing Models using the Distribution of Asset Returns,

Journal of Finance 46, 955-983.
Tierens, Ingrid C., 1993, Pitfalls in Naive Implementations of the Hansen-Jagannathan
Diagnostic, working paper, University of Chicago.

-41-

Table 1. Summary Statistics
Consumption growth is the growth rate of seasonally adjusted U.S. real per capita expenditures for
consumer nondurable goods. All returns are deflated (real) returns stated as decimal fraction per
period, as described in the data section. Mean is the sample mean, σ is the sample standard
deviation, ρ1 is the first order sample autocorrelation and R2 is the R-squared value from a
regression of the variable on the lagged instruments. The lagged instruments in the quarterly data
set consists of a constant and the first lagged values of the consumption growth and the real return
series. In the annual data set, a constant and a single lag of the two returns are used as instruments.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Variable
Mean
σ
ρ1
R2
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Panel A: Annual Data Set: 1891-1985 (95 observations)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Consumption Growth

0.01815

0.03470

S&P 500 Real return
T-bill Real return

0.07835
0.02335

0.18986
0.09491

-0.1442
0.03646
0.31871

0.0195
0.0272
0.1217

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Panel B: Quarterly Data Set: 1964Q4-1986Q4 (93 observations)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Consumption Growth
3-month Bill
6-month Bill
9-month Bill
12-month Bill

0.00364

0.00997

0.06570

0.0381

-0.00653
-0.00649
-0.00619
-0.02429

0.01293
0.01492
0.01716
0.03974

0.37726
0.28553
0.19880
0.08040

0.21355
0.19919
0.17938
0.07763

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

-42-

Table 2. Monthly Returns and Instruments
Monthly returns on 25 portfolios of common stocks are from Harvey and Kirby (1996). The
portfolios are value-weighted within each industry group. The industries and their SIC codes are
in the following table. Mean is the sample mean of the gross (one plus rate of) return, σ is the
sample standard deviation and ρ1 is the first order autocorrelation of the monthly return. R 2 is
the coefficient of determination from the regression of the return on the two lagged instruments.
The sample period is February of 1963 through December of 1994 (383 observations).
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------σ
ρ1
Industry
SIC codes
Mean
R2
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

Aerospace
Transportation
Banking
Building materials
Chemicals/Plastics
Construction
Entertainment
Food/Beverages
Healthcare
Industrial Mach.
Insurance/Real Estate
Investments
Metals
Mining
Motor Vehicles
Paper
Petroleum
Printing/Publishing
Professional Services
Retailing
Semiconductors
Telecommunications
Textiles/Apparel
Utilities
Wholesaling

372, 376
40, 45
60
24, 32
281, 282, 286-289, 308
15-17
365, 483, 484, 78
20
283, 384, 385, 80
351-356
63-65
62, 67
33
10, 12, 14
371, 551, 552
26
13, 29
27
73, 87
53, 56, 57, 59
357, 367
366, 381, 481, 482, 489
22, 23
49
50, 51

1.0107
1.0094
1.0086
1.0097
1.0094
1.0109
1.0135
1.0117
1.0113
1.0089
1.0095
1.0097
1.0075
1.0108
1.0095
1.0095
1.0102
1.0114
1.0111
1.0106
1.0080
1.0085
1.0100
1.0078
1.0109

0.0644
0.0648
0.0631
0.0608
0.0525
0.0760
0.0662
0.0449
0.0524
0.0587
0.0581
0.0453
0.0610
0.0535
0.0584
0.0536
0.0518
0.0586
0.0693
0.0597
0.0559
0.0412
0.0613
0.0392
0.0614

0.13
0.08
0.10
0.09
-0.01
0.16
0.14
0.05
0.01
0.05
0.15
0.05
-0.02
0.01
0.11
-0.02
-0.02
0.21
0.13
0.15
0.08
-0.05
0.21
0.02
0.13

0.09414
0.06622
0.03665
0.06724
0.04625
0.08692
0.05069
0.03799
0.02134
0.06382
0.05912
0.07559
0.02885
0.05654
0.06550
0.03265
0.03931
0.10077
0.07523
0.04893
0.07575
0.03498
0.08511
0.05663
0.03930

Dividend yield
Treasury bill yield

na
na

1.631
3.8005

0.6909
0.9083

0.98
0.98

na
na

-43-

Table 3. Finite Sample Properties of Bounds on Stochastic Discount Factor Variances
For each bound, this table shows the mean and standard deviation of the lower bound on σ2m
taken across 5,000 simulation trials. The bound is evaluated at E ( m) =1. n is the effective
number of assets and T is the number of times series observations. Mean and Std. refer to the
unadjusted bounds, while Adj. Mean and Adj. Std. refer to the bounds adjusted for finite sample
bias. The true bound is based on large-scale simulation with 1,000,000 observations.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Adj.
Adj.
Type of Bound n T True Mean Std.
Mean
Std.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Panel A: Annual Data:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------fixed bound 2 95 0.197 0.223
0.103 0.194
0.099
mult
bound 6 95 0.211 0.273
0.121 0.190
0.112
UE
bound 2 95 0.203 0.248
0.108 0.216
0.104
optimal bound 2 95 0.212 0.265
0.115 0.232
0.110
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Panel B: Quarterly Data:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------fixed bound 4 93 0.488 0.561
0.193 0.488
0.182
mult
bound 20 93 0.914 1.564
0.414 0.992
0.319
UE
bound 4 93 0.915 1.167
0.306 1.051
0.287
optimal bound 4 93 1.144 1.509
0.336 1.369
0.315
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Panel C: Monthly Data:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------fixed bound
mult
bound
UE
bound
optimal bound

25
75
25
25

383 0.104
383 0.313
383 0.329
383 0.386

0.200
0.626
0.523
0.615

0.058
0.114
0.096
0.115

0.121
0.305
0.421
0.506

0.054
0.092
0.089
0.107

-44-

Table 4. Sensitivity Analyses
This table shows the true bounds, obtained by a large scale simulation with 1,000,000
observations, together with the mean and standard deviation of the bounds on σ2m taken across
5,000 simulation trials. Each bound is evaluated at E ( m) =1. Mean and Std. refer to the
unadjusted bounds, while Adj. Mean and Adj. Std. refer to the bounds adjusted for finite sample
bias.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Adj.
Adj.
Type of Bound
True Mean Std.
Mean
Std.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Experiment 1: Serially Dependent, Nonnormal Data
====================================================
Panel A: Annual Serially Dependent, Nonnormal Data
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------fixed bound
mult
bound
UE
bound
optimal bound

0.197
0.213
0.205
0.211

0.227
0.279
0.249
0.271

0.108
0.128
0.112
0.123

0.199
0.195
0.218
0.239

0.105
0.119
0.108
0.118

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Panel B: Quarterly Serially Dependent, Nonnormal Data
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------fixed bound
mult
bound
UE
bound
optimal bound

0.488
0.908
0.901
1.137

0.558
1.598
1.108
1.543

0.166
0.407
0.276
0.340

0.485
1.018
0.995
1.400

0.157
0.314
0.259
0.318

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Panel C: Monthly Serially Dependent, Nonnormal Data
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------fixed bound
mult
bound
UE
bound
optimal bound

0.104
0.300
0.321
0.384

0.203
0.628
0.509
0.612

0.061
0.120
0.098
0.124

0.123
0.307
0.408
0.509

0.057
0.096
0.091
0.116

-45-

Table 4. Sensitivity Analyses (Continued)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Experiment 2: Serially Dependent, Nonnormal, Conditionally Heteroskedastic Data
======================================================================
Panel D: Annual Serially Dependent, Nonnormal, Conditionally Heteroskedastic Data
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------fixed bound
mult
bound
UE
bound
optimal bound

0.201
0.223
0.213
0.219

0.233
0.295
0.264
0.276

0.112
0.137
0.117
0.124

0.204
0.210
0.232
0.243

0.108
0.126
0.112
0.119

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Panel E: Quarterly Serially Dependent, Nonnormal, Conditionally Heteroskedastic Data
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------fixed bound
mult
bound
UE
bound
optimal bound

0.494
0.995
0.898
1.138

0.572
1.538
1.017
1.487

0.172
0.386
0.260
0.331

0.498
0.972
0.910
1.348

0.163
0.298
0.244
0.309

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Panel F: Monthly Serially Dependent, Nonnormal, Conditionally Heteroskedastic Data
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------fixed bound
mult
bound
UE
bound
optimal bound

0.103
0.313
0.320
0.381

0.202
0.647
0.521
0.584

0.057
0.125
0.100
0.104

0.123
0.323
0.419
0.478

0.053
0.100
0.093
0.096

-46-

Table 5. Evaluation of Asymptotic Standard Errors
This table evaluates the asymptotic standard errors for the fixed variance bound, adapted from
Hansen, Heaton and Luttmer (1995), as in Equation (30). The variance bounds are evaluated at
E ( m ) = 1 . Empirical SD is the standard deviation of the estimated bound, taken over the 5,000
simulation trials. Adjusted Empirical is the standard deviation of the bias-adjusted bound.
Average Asymptotic is the average of the asymptotic standard error across the 5,000 trials.
Adjusted Asymptotic is the average asymptotic standard error for the bias-adjusted variance
bound, adjusted for finite-sample bias according to Equation (24).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Empirical
Adjusted
Average
Adjusted
Type of artificial data
SD
Empirical Asymptotic Asymptotic
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Panel A: Annual Data
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------normal
nonnormal, homoskedastic
nonnormal, heteroskedastic

0.103
0.108
0.112

0.099
0.105
0.108

0.100
0.102
0.105

0.097
0.099
0.101

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Panel B: Quarterly Data
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------normal
nonnormal, homoskedastic
nonnormal, heteroskedastic

0.193
0.166
0.172

0.182
0.157
0.163

0.174
0.154
0.157

0.165
0.145
0.149

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Panel C: Monthly Data
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------normal
nonnormal, homoskedastic
nonnormal, heteroskedastic

0.058
0.061
0.057

0.054
0.057
0.053

0.048
0.050
0.032

0.044
0.047
0.030

