NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PERFORMANCE EVALUATION WITH STOCHASTIC DISCOUNT FACTORS

Heber Farnsworth
Wayne E. Ferson
David Jackson
Steven Todd

Working Paper 8791
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8791

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2002
We are grateful to Mark Carhart, Martin Gruber, Campbell Harvey, Don Keim, Jennifer Koski, Robert Korajczyk and
Rudi Schadt for help with data, and to Mark Grinblatt, Phil Dybvig, Andrew Karolyi, Paul Irvine, Peter Knez, Jeff Pontiff
and Stephen D. Smith for comments. Bernard Yomtov worked closely with us on earlier drafts of the paper. This study
has also benefited from research workshops at the following universities and conferences: Alberta, Arizona State,
Berkeley, a Copenhagen Business School/Lund University joint workshop, Miami, North Carolina, the Norwegian
School of Management, Ohio State, Southern California, Texas at Austin, Vienna, Washington, the Atlanta Finance
Forum at Georgia State, the 1996 American Finance Association, the 1999 Asia Pacific Finance Association, the Fourth
Conference on Pacific Basin Business, Economics and Finance, the 1995 National Bureau of Economic Research
Summer Institute, the 1995 Northern Finance Association and the 2000 Utah Winter Finance Conference. Part of this
research was conducted while Ferson was a visiting scholar at Arizona State University and a National Bureau of
Economics Research Associate. Ferson also acknowledges financial support from the Pigott-PACCAR professorship at
the.University of Washington. Previous drafts of the paper were entitled, "Conditional Performance Evaluation." The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Heber Farnsworth, Wayne E. Ferson, David Jackson and Steven Todd. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Performance Evaluation with Stochastic Discount Factors
Heber Farnsworth, Wayne E. Ferson, David Jackson and Steven Todd
NBER Working Paper No. 8791
February 2002
JEL No. G12, G14, G23, C15

ABSTRACT
We study the use of stochastic discount factor (SDF) models in evaluating the investment
performance of portfolio managers. By constructing artificial mutual funds with known levels of
investment ability, we evaluate a large set of SDF models. We find that the measures of performance are
not highly sensitive to the SDF model, and that most of the models have a mild negative bias when
performance is neutral. We use the models to evaluate a sample of U.S. equity mutual funds. Adjusting
for the observed bias, we find that the average mutual fund has enough ability to cover its transactions
costs. Extreme funds are more likely to have good rather than poor risk adjusted performance. Our
analysis also reveals a number of implementation issues relevant to other applications of SDF models.

Heber Farnsworth
John M. Olin School of Business
Washington University in St. Louis
Campus Box 1133
One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
Tel: 314-935-4221
Fax: 314-935-6359
heberf@calvin.wustl.edu

Wayne E. Ferson
Department of Finance and Business Economics
School of Business Administration
University of Washington
Box 353200
Seattle, WA 98195-3200
Tel: 206-543-1843
Fax: 206-685-9392
and NBER

David Jackson
Carleton University School of Business
1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa K1S SB6
Ontario, Canada
Tel: 613-520-2600 x2383
Fax: 613-520-4427
djackson@business.carleton.ca

Steven Todd
Department of Finance
Loyola University
25 East Pearson, 12th Floor
Chicago, IL 60611
Tel: 312-915-7218
stodd@wpo.it.luc.edu

I. Introduction
The question of whether mutual fund managers can deliver expected returns in excess
of naive benchmarks has long been controversial. If fund managers can "beat the
market," it has implications for the efficiency of financial markets. If they
underperform, it has implications for the structure of the fund management industry.
From an investor's perspective, the problem is to choose from a large universe of
investment alternatives. For these reasons, measuring the investment performance of
fund managers remains an important research problem.
In this paper we study the use of stochastic discount factor (SDF) models in
evaluating the investment performance of portfolio managers. With this approach
abnormal performance is measured by the expected product of a fund's returns and a
stochastic discount factor. Specifying the SDF corresponds to specifying an asset-pricing
model.
A variety of models for SDFs have been developed in previous studies. Our
goal is to provide empirical evidence on the performance of a wide set of models,
using a common experimental design. This is important because inferences about
abnormal performance will generally depend on the SDF chosen. Some models may
attribute abnormal performance to particular types of naive trading strategies, and the
power to detect truly superior performance will differ across models.
We evaluate the models on a set of artificial mutual funds, where we control
the extent of market timing or security selection ability. We find the performance
measures are not highly sensitive to the choice of the SDF, excluding the few models
that perform poorly on our test assets. Many of the models are biased, producing small

Stochastic Discount Factors
negative alphas when the true performance is neutral. The average bias is about 0.15%
per month when the artificial fund selects stocks randomly. Previous evidence based
on SDFs that U.S. equity mutual funds have negative abnormal returns, reflects a
biased measure (Chen and Knez, 1996). Most of the models have sufficient power to
detect truly superior ability, and no single model vastly out performs the others.
We use the models to evaluate performance in a monthly sample of 188 equity
mutual funds. We find that the average mutual fund alpha, measured net of expenses
and trading costs, is no worse than a hypothetical stock-picking fund with neutral
performance. Since the artificial funds pay no transactions costs or management fees,
our results suggest that the average mutual fund has enough ability to cover these costs.
Thus, using a wide set of SDF models and more recent data, our findings are broadly
consistent with Jensen (1968), who used the CAPM. We also find that extreme funds are
more likely to have good, rather than poor, risk adjusted performance.
Our analysis produces a number of useful discoveries relevant to general
applications of SDF models. First, the performance measure for a given fund is
invariant to the number of funds in the system. Second, SDF models perform better
when a risk-free asset is included as a test asset, as this helps to identify the conditional
mean of the SDF. Third, when the SDF is based on traded factors, it is important to
require the model to "price" the traded factors. Finally, compared to their
unconditional counterparts, conditional models (i.e, those

that

used

lagged

instruments) deliver smaller average pricing errors for the returns of "dynamic
strategies" based on the instruments. However, the cost of these smaller average
pricing errors is larger variances for the pricing errors on the original test assets.

Stochastic Discount Factors
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews
performance evaluation with stochastic discount factors. Section III describes the
models and empirical methods. Section IV describes how we construct the artificial
mutual funds. Section V describes the data. Section VI presents results on the
estimation of the stochastic discount factor models and Section VII presents our
evaluation of the models in the context of fund performance evaluation. Section VIII
uses the models to evaluate performance in a sample of mutual funds, and section IX
offers concluding remarks.

II. Performance Evaluation with Stochastic Discount Factors
A central goal of performance evaluation is to identify those managers who possess
investment information or skills superior to that of the general investing public, and
who use these advantages to achieve superior portfolio returns. In order to identify
superior returns, some model of "normal" investment returns is required; that is, an
asset pricing model is needed. Modern asset pricing theory posits the existence of a
stochastic discount factor, m t+1, which is a scalar random variable, such that the
following equation holds:

E( mt +1 Rt + 1 − 1 Ω t ) = 0 ,

(1)

where R t+1 is the vector of primitive asset gross returns (payoff divided by price) and 1
is an N-vector of ones. Ω t denotes an information set available at time t and E(• Ω t )
denotes the conditional expectation. Virtually all asset pricing models may be viewed

Stochastic Discount Factors
as specifying a particular stochastic discount factor, m t+1. The elements of the vector
m t+1 R t+1 may be viewed as "risk adjusted" gross returns. The returns are risk adjusted
by "discounting" them, or multiplying by mt+1, so that the expected "present value" per
dollar invested is equal to one dollar. Thus, m t+1 is called a stochastic discount factor
(SDF). We say that a SDF "prices" the assets if equation (1) is satisfied.

A. Conditioning Information
Empirical work on conditional asset pricing uses predetermined information
variables, Zt, which are elements of the public information set Ω t . By the law of
iterated expectations, equation (1) holds when we replace Ω t with Zt, and we are
interested in equation (2):

E(mt+1 R t+1 - 1 |Zt)=0.

(2)

According to equation (2), it should not be possible to detect mispricings of the
primitive assets using only the information in Zt. A conditional approach to
performance evaluation allows a researcher to set the standard for what is "superior"
information by choosing the public information Zt. When Z t is restricted to a constant
we have an unconditional measure. With

an unconditional measure, any

information about future returns is assumed to be superior information that may
generate abnormal performance.

Stochastic Discount Factors
B. Measuring Performance
For a given SDF we define a fund's conditional alpha similar to Chen and Knez (1996) as:1

pt

≡ E( mt + 1Rp, t +1 Zt ) −1 ,

(3)

where one dollar invested with the fund at time t returns R p,t+1 dollars at time t+1. In
the case of an open-end, no-load mutual fund, we may think of R p,t+1 as the net asset
value return. More generally, if the fund generates a payoff V p,t+1 for a cost cpt > 0, the
gross return is Rp,t + 1 ≡ Vp ,t +1 cpt .
If the SDF prices the primitive assets,

pt t

will be zero when the fund

(costlessly) forms a portfolio of the primitive assets, provided the portfolio strategy
uses only the public information at time t. In that case R p,t+1 = x(Zt)'R t+1, where x(Zt) is
the portfolio weight vector. Then equation (2) implies that
pt

[

]

[

]

= E (mt + 1x( Zt )' Rt +1 Z t ) = x ( Zt )' E (mt + 1Rt +1 Zt ) = x ( Zt )'1 −1 = 0 .
In many models m t+1 is the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution for a

representative investor, and equation (2) is the Euler equation which must be satisfied in
equilibrium. If the consumer has access to a fund for which the conditional alpha is not
zero, he will wish to adjust his portfolio, purchasing more of the fund if alpha is positive
and less if alpha is negative. This generalizes the interpretation of the traditional
Jensen's alpha as a guide for marginal mean-variance improving portfolio choices.
1

Chen and Knez (1996) study an excess return conditional-alpha, E(mt+1rp,t+1 |Z t ), where rpt =R pt -Rft and R ft is a Treasury
bill return. Our definition of p is based on raw returns. The excess return alpha for a fund is simply the difference
between the raw return alpha of the fund and the raw return alpha of the Treasury bill. When the alpha of the bill is zero
the two are equal.

Stochastic Discount Factors
The SDF alpha can correctly indicate abnormal performance, but not without
further restrictive assumptions. In particular,

pt

depends on the SDF chosen, and the

SDF is not unique unless markets are complete. Thus, different SDFs can produce
different measured performance. This mirrors a problem in classical approaches to
performance evaluation, wherein performance is sensitive to the benchmark. Roll
(1978), Dybvig and Ross (1985), Brown and Brown (1987), Chen, Copeland and Mayers
(1987), Lehman and Modest (1987) and Grinblatt and Titman (1989) address this issue.
Given these ambiguities, it is important to assess the sensitivity of performance
measures to the specification of the SDF. Our goal in this study is to compare a number
of models in a unified setting.

III. The Models and Methods
A. The General Approach
We estimate SDFs using the Generalized Method of Moments (GMM, Hansen, 1982)
on the following moment conditions, which follow from equation (2):

E[ {mt +1 Rt + 1 − 1} ⊗ Zt ] = 0 .

(4)

The stochastic discount factors that we evaluate are listed below.

Linear factor:

m LFt+1

= a(Zt) + b(Zt)'F t+1,

(5)

= Zt'B (1,Ft+1')' .

Primitive-efficient:

m PEt+1

= M(Z t)'R t+1,

(6)

Stochastic Discount Factors
= ( M Z t )'R t+1.

Numeraire portfolio: m Nt+1

Bakshi-Chen:

m BSt+1

= [(AZt)'R 2,t+1 + (1-(AZt)' 1)R 1t+1 ]-1,

(7)

= exp{ Zt'C ln(R t+1)}.

(8)

In these equations, R t+1 is an N-element vector of the gross returns on a set of
primitive assets and Zt is an L vector of lagged instruments. A, B, C, and M denote the
parameters of the various models. In equation (7) we partition R t+1=(R 1,t+1 ,R 2,t+1 ), where
R 2,t+1 is an (N-1)-element vector. A brief description of each model appears below.
B. Linear Factor Models
Models in which m t+1 is linear in prespecifed factors are known as linear factor models.
The Capital Asset Pricing Model is one such model in which mt+1 is a linear function of
the market portfolio return (Dybvig and Ingersoll, 1982). Linear factor models can be
unconditional or conditional. In the conditional versions of the models, we follow
Dumas and Solnik (1995) and Cochrane (1996), and assume that the weights a(.) and b(.)
in equation (5) are linear functions of Zt. Thus, in equation (5) B is an L x (K+1) matrix
of parameters, where K is the number of factors. To identify the parameters, we require
N ≥ K + 1.
We consider two sets of linear factor models: one based on nontraded factors
(e.g. industrial production) and another based on traded factors (e.g. the S&P 500
index). For the traded factor models, we impose the restriction that the model price the

Stochastic Discount Factors
traded factors. 2 For both the traded and non-traded factor models, we impose the
restriction that the model price the risk-free asset.3
Typically, beta pricing models are estimated by least squares or maximum
likelihood methods, while SDF models use the GMM. In SDF models with nontraded
factors, Kan and Zhou (1999) show that GMM estimates of the risk premium for a
factor are imprecise relative to OLS or MLE estimates, when the mean and variance of
the factor are known. Jagannathan and Wang (2000) show that the efficiency of GMM
estimates of factor premiums can be identical to OLS when additional moment
conditions, identifying the mean and factor variance, are appended to the system. Our
empirical evidence shows how the pricing accuracy of SDF models can be enhanced
through ancillary moment conditions. We find, in experiments not reported in the
tables, that the precision of the traded-factor models' parameters is lower and the
pricing errors are much larger when the models are not forced to price the factors. The
non-traded factor models, in particular, are much less accurate when they aren't forced
to price the risk-free asset.

2

For example, in the unconditional CAPM, mt+1 = a + bR m,t+1 , where Rm,t+1 is the gross market return. Requiring the
model to price the market return and also a zero beta return we have:
E{[a+bRm,t+1 ]Rm,t+1 }=1 and E{[a+bRm,t+1 ]R0t+1}=1.
These two conditions identify the parameters a(.) and b(.) in equation (5) as functions of the first and second moments
of the market index and the zero beta return. Similar restrictions apply to multifactor and conditional models, as shown
by Ferson and Jagannathan (1996).
3

In other words, we impose the condition that E(mt+1RF t -1|Zt )=0, where RF t is the gross risk-free return. Since RFt is
included in Z t , this condition identifies the conditional mean of the SDF: E(mt+1|Z t ) = Rft -1.

Stochastic Discount Factors
C. Primitive-Efficient Stochastic Discount Factors
Consider a conditional projection of an m t+1 that satisfies equation (2) onto the vector
of primitive returns R t+1. The solution is:

m PEt+1 = 1' E(R t+1 R t+1'|Zt)-1 R t+1.

(9)

We call the stochastic discount factor m PEt+1 a primitive-efficient stochastic discount
factor. This term reflects the fact that m PEt+1 is a linear function of a conditionally
minimum-variance efficient portfolio. 4
We follow Chen and Knez (1996) and Dahlquist and Soderlind (1999), who
assume that the weights M(Zt) = 1' E(R t+1 R t+1'|Zt)-1 in equation (6) are linear functions
of Z t. Thus, M is an N x L matrix and L is the dimension of Z. The system is exactly
identified, with NL parameters and NL orthogonality conditions.5 With this
assumption, the primitive-efficient model is comparable to linear factor models, in the
sense that the conditional model is equivalent to a "scaled" unconditional model. By
multiplying the primitive assets by the lagged instruments, we form "dynamic

4

Specifically, the minimum variance portfolio has its target mean chosen to minimize the uncentered second moment
of the portfolio return. Grinblatt and Titman (1989) propose an unconditionally mean-variance efficient portfolio as a
benchmark for performance measurement. Chen and Knez (1996) develop primitive efficient SDFs for performance
evaluation and Dahlquist and Soderlind (1999) study their sampling properties by simulation. He, Ng and Zhang
(1998) specialize the approach to handle a large number of primitive assets.
5

The solution for M may, in this case, be obtained in closed form by manipulating equation (4). The solution is given
by:
Vec ( M ) = ( HH ′ )

( Z ′ ⊗1N )1T ,

−1

where H is the NL x T matrix formed by putting the NL vectors ( Zt ⊗ Rt+1 ) in its columns, and Z is the T x K matrix
of the Zt 's. We require T > NL to invert the (HH') matrix.

Stochastic Discount Factors
strategies." The conditional model will price these dynamic strategies in the sample, by
construction.

D. Numeraire portfolios
Long (1990) proposes a model in which the SDF is the inverse of the gross rate of
return on a "numeraire portfolio." He shows that if there are no arbitrage
opportunities, then s o m e numeraire portfolio exists. Kang (1995) uses a numeraire
portfolio to evaluate fixed income mutual funds and Hentschell, Kang and Long (1998)
use the approach for international bonds. We estimate numeraire portfolios using
equation (7). R1t+1 is the first primitive asset, which we take to be the Treasury bill, and
A is an (N-1)xL matrix of parameters. In the conditional version of the model, we
assume that the weights are linear functions of the lagged instruments. Here, the SDF
is a nonlinear function, and the conditional model is not equivalent to an
unconditional model applied to the dynamic strategy returns, ( Rt +1 ⊗ Zt ) .6

E. The Bakshi-Chen Model
Bakshi and Chen (1998) propose a model in which the SDF is an exponential of a
linear function of the log returns on the primitive assets. This formulation has the
potential advantage that the SDF is constrained to be positive. The existence of s o m e
6

The moment conditions of (7) must be modified because the gross asset return matrix multiplied by the numeraire
portfolio has a linear combination of columns that is nearly a vector of ones, and the GMM weighting matrix is
singular. To resolve this problem we use N-1 primitive assets in the formation of the numeraire portfolio, and we ask
the SDF to price N primitive assets. (In joint estimation with a fund, we use N-2 of the primitive assets in forming the
numeraire portfolio.) We also follow Long (1990) and Kang (1995) by using nonlinear least squares, where the GMM
weighting matrix is the identity matrix. Such estimates are consistent but not efficient. We experimented with a full
GMM approach but found the estimates to be numerically unstable; this is one practical disadvantage of the numeraire
portfolio approach.

Stochastic Discount Factors
strictly positive SDF is equivalent to a lack of arbitrage opportunities in a perfect
market. (Lack of arbitrage does not require that all SDFs are strictly positive.) The
Bakshi-Chen formulation, like the numeraire portfolio model, is nonlinear in the
primitive asset returns.7

F. Measuring Mutual Fund Performance
Our approach for estimating alphas is to form a system of equations as follows:

u1t = [m t +1 Rt +1 −1] ⊗ Zt
u2 t =

p

− mt +1 Rp,t +1 +1

(10)

The sample moment condition is g = T −1∑ t (u1't ,u2't )' . We

use the GMM to

simultaneously estimate the parameters of the SDF model and the fund's alpha. The
parameter

p

is the mean of the conditional alpha, defined by equation (3). Thus, we

examine the average performance of a fund.8
A potential problem with this simultaneous approach is that the number of
moment conditions grows substantially if many funds are to be evaluated. We
therefore estimate the joint system separately for each fund. 9 Separate estimation is

7

We experimented with imposing nonnegativity in the other models, using a differentiable approximation to the
function Max(0,m) that was proposed by Bansal, Hsieh and Viswanathan (1993). This produced numerically unstable
estimates and dramatically increased the pricing errors. We also examined exponential models, similar to Bakshi and
Chen (1998), using our three traded and four nontraded factors. These models performed much worse than the models
which use the primitive assets to form the SDF.
8

9

For a discussion of time-varying conditional alphas, see Christopherson, Ferson and Glassman (1998).

We evaluated a simpler two-step approach where the SDF is estimated in a first step, and the fund abnormal return is
measured in the second step by simply multiplying the gross fund return by the fitted SDF and subtracting one. The

Stochastic Discount Factors
not restrictive, however. We show in the Appendix that the estimate of a fund's alpha
and its standard error are invariant to the number of funds in the system. Thus,
estimating the system for one fund at a time is equivalent to estimating a system with
all of the funds simultaneously.

IV. Artificial Mutual Funds
We construct artificial mutual funds with varying amounts of known performance,
using stock returns from the CRSP data files, for the sample period July 1963 through
December, 1994. We characterize the funds as either stock pickers or market timers. A
stock-picking fund gets noisy signals about the "non-market" component of the future
returns of many stocks, and selects securities on the basis of these signals. An artificial
market-timing fund receives a noisy signal about the future return of the Standard
and Poors 500 index, and invests in the index or in Treasury bills. 10 When the signals
are completely random, the managers have no ability. We use this case to evaluate the
performance statistics under the null hypothesis of no abnormal performance. Then,
we evaluate the various measures given known levels of ability.

average performance is the sample mean of the abnormal return. Such two-step estimators are consistent, but the
standard errors do not account for the first stage estimation error in the parameters of the SDF. We found that the twostep approach is remarkably less efficient than the joint estimation procedure.
10

This abstraction of market timing is consistent with Merton and Henriksson (1981) but it does not capture the range
of trades that may actually be employed by market-timing funds. Our objective in drawing this characterization is partly
to provide artificial returns that are likely to have different properties from those of our artificial stock pickers; hence, the
extreme strategy of shifting between the market index and cash.

Stochastic Discount Factors
A. Artificial Stock Pickers
An artificial stock picker starts with a value weighted portfolio of 200 stocks randomly
chosen from the largest 1,000 companies, ranked by market value as of January, 1963.
We run the model from January through June and discard the first six months, using
the returns for July, 1963-December, 1994 in the analysis. The portfolio is updated
monthly, with buy and sell candidates chosen according to the following model:

SIGNALi ,t − 1 =

it

+ (1 −

) Φ ( it )

(11)

Here, the signal received for stock i at time t-1 is a convex combination of an
information term,

it

, and a noise term, Φ

determined by the parameter,

(0 ≤

( it ) .

The quality of the signal is

≤ 1) . The information term for stock i is the

residual for the next month from a market model regression: rit =

i

+ irmt +

it

where

rmt is the CRSP value-weighted market return in excess of a one-month Treasury bill.
The noise component of a stock picker's signal is the product of an independent N(0,1)
random variable, Φ , and the standard error of the market model residual
i,

( it ) .

A manager with perfect stock picking ability

(

it

for firm

= 1) observes the market

model residual one period ahead. A stock picker with no ability

(

= 0) observes a

random signal.
For later interpretation of the empirical results, it is useful to relate the
parameter,

, to a common measure of investment information. Active portfolio

managers use the information coefficient, IC, defined as the correlation between the
signal and subsequent returns. (See, for example, Grinold and Kahn, 1995.) Here, the

Stochastic Discount Factors
correlation between the signal and the security specific return,
Thus, if

= 0 the correlation is zero and if

it

, is

2

+ (1 −

)2 .

= 0.8 the correlation is 0.97. We find below

that the best performing actual mutual funds (those in the upper 5%) have performance
similar to artificial mutual funds with

values of 0.20 to 0.25, or IC values of 0.24 to 0.32.

Each month, the artificial stock picker receives a signal for each stock in the
available universe, which includes all NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ stocks on the
CRSP files with stock prices larger than $2.00 per share. 11 Each month, the portfolio
manager turns over 6% of the value of the portfolio. 12 All stocks in the universe are
first ranked on the basis of their signals. Stocks within the portfolio with the smallest
SIGNAL values are sold, until 6% of the portfolio has been sold. Stocks outside the
portfolio with the largest SIGNAL values are purchased. The total number of stocks in
the portfolio is fixed at 200, so for each stock sold a new stock is added. When more
than one stock is purchased in a given month, the weights on the purchased stocks are
equal. The weights of stocks remaining in the portfolio evolve through time based on
the returns earned, with dividends reinvested.

B. Artificial Market Timers
It is well known that classical measures of alpha are biased and otherwise difficult to
interpret in the presence of market timing behavior [e.g. Grant (1977), Grinblatt and
11

We exclude low price stocks to keep the universe representative of equity mutual fund holdings, and to avoid the
extreme return patterns observed for such stocks. For missing data we assign a return of zero, with the following
exceptions. For delisted stocks with missing return data, (CRSP codes of 500 and 520-584), we follow Shumway
(1997) and assign a return of -30%. For liquidated stocks with missing return data (CRSP code 400), we assign a
return of -100%.
12

We arrived at this figure based on the 73% mean annual turnover of growth funds for the period January, 1976
through December, 1992 from the January, 1993 Morningstar, Inc. compact disk database.

Stochastic Discount Factors
Titman (1989)]. Specific market-timing models, such as Treynor and Mazuy (1966) and
Merton and Henriksson (1981), as well as their conditional counterparts developed by
Ferson and Schadt (1996) and Becker, et al (1999), rely on highly stylized assumptions.
No previous study has examined the performance of a collection of SDF models in the
context of known market timing ability.
Our artificial market timers invest in either the market index (Standard and
Poors 500) or a one month Treasury bill. The portfolio return for month t is therefore
equal to RFt + x t-1 rmt, where rmt is the excess return of the S&P 500 over that of the onemonth Treasury bill, RFt. The portfolio weight xt-1 is a binary variable given by:

xt −1 = I{0.5 ∗ ( 1+

} I {r

)<

mt

≤ 0} + I{0.5 ∗ ( 1+

where I{.} is the indicator function and

} I {r

)>

mt

> 0} ,

(12)

is an independent random variable,

uniformly distributed on the interval (0,1).
The parameter
information is perfect

(

,

(0 ≤

≤ 1) , measures the signal quality. When

the

= 1) , the manager invests the entire portfolio in the market

index if the return on the market portfolio in the next period is greater than the return of
the Treasury bill. Otherwise, the manager invests the entire portfolio in Treasury bills.
When the manager has no market timing ability
the market or bills, based on a coin flip.

(

= 0) , the portfolio is either 100% in

may be interpreted by the correlation it implies

between the portfolio weight, xt-1, and the indicator for a positive market excess return,
I{rmt>0}. If

= 0 the correlation is zero, and if

= 1 the correlation is 1.0. In between these

values the correlation depends on the value of p=Prob{rm>0}, but the value of

is a close

Stochastic Discount Factors
approximation to the correlation.13 We find below that the best performing actual
mutual funds (those in the top 2.5% to 5%) have performance measures similar to an
artificial market-timing fund with values of

equal to 0.55 to 0.6.

V. The Data
We use four different data sets in our study: primitive assets, economic factors,
instruments for public information, and mutual fund returns. A brief description of
each data set appears below. Details are provided in the appendix.

A. Primitive Assets
Primitive assets should reflect the returns available to investors and fund managers.
Of course, it is not practical to measure the entire universe of investment
opportunities. For this study, we consider nine primitive assets: a short-term risk free
security, two long-term bond returns, and stock portfolios that mimic large-cap, smallcap, value, growth, momentum and contrarian investment strategies. Value and
growth portfolios are motivated by Fama and French (1993, 1996); momentum and
contrarian portfolios are motivated by Grinblatt, Titman and Wermers (1995) and
Ferson and Khang (2000).

13

Let q ≡ Prob{ xt −1 = 1} = p∗ (1+

)

[

2 + (1− p ) ∗ 1− (1+

)

]

2 . Choosing p=0.57 (the frequency of positive excess

returns in our sample), the correlation between xt-1 and I{rmt >0} is given by

p(1− p ) q(1− q ) ≈

.

Stochastic Discount Factors
B. Economic Factors
We group the factors into "traded" and "nontraded" factors. For the nontraded factor
models we consider four factors: the rate of inflation and measures of growth for
money, industrial output and consumer spending. These factors are motivated by Lucas
(1978), Breeden (1979), Ferson and Harvey (1991) and Chan, Foresi and Lang (1996).
For our traded factor models, we consider three factors: monthly excess
returns on the S&P 500 index, a long-term government bond and a low-grade
corporate bond portfolio. These factors are similar to those used by Chen, Roll and
Ross (1986) and Ferson and Harvey (1991).
We also consider a three-factor model based on Fama and French (1993, 1996).
Here the factors are a market index and the return differentials between small and
large-cap stocks, and between high and low book-to-market stocks.
Finally, we consider an exact, three-factor version of the Arbitrage Pricing
Model (Ross, 1976). Here the factors are the excess returns on the first three asymptotic
principal components in a large sample of monthly stock returns. These factors are
similar to those used by Connor and Korajczyk (1988) and Ferson and Korajczyk (1995).14

C. Information Variables
Previous studies have identified a number of variables that are useful in predicting
security returns over time. We consider two instruments only: a short term interest

14

The principal components data are courtesy of Robert A. Korajczyk. We do not expand the set of primitive assets to
include the three principal components, in order to avoid the extreme colinearity that would result. Instead, when we
estimate the APT models we replace the SP500, low-grade bond return and contrarian portfolio with the three principal
components. We experimented with using the original nine primitive assets to estimate the APT models, and found
that the models performed more poorly when the principal components were not included among the primitive assets.

Stochastic Discount Factors
rate and a stock market dividend yield. These two variables have figured most
prominently in studies of mutual fund performance (see Ferson and Schadt (1996),
Ferson and Warther (1996) and Becker, et al., 1999).15
Table 1 presents summary statistics of our data. The correlations (not shown)
among the non traded factors range from -0.58 to 0.33; the correlation between the
lagged instruments is -0.05; the correlations between the nontraded factors and the
primitive asset returns range from 0.48 to -0.18. Most are in the range -.15 to +.20.

VI. Estimating the Stochastic Discount Factor models
In Tables 2 and 3 we evaluate the fit of the stochastic discount factor models in the
sample of primitive assets. The models are estimated using monthly data for the
period July, 1963 through December, 1994. The first row of the A panels reports results
for a constant discount factor model, in which the SDF is assumed to be fixed over
time, and equal to the inverse of the sample mean of the gross return of the
one-month Treasury bill. A constant-SDF model can be motivated by risk neutrality,
where the marginal rate of substitution of a risk-neutral investor (with time-additive,
state-independent utility) is constant over time. For our purposes, this provides a
simple point of comparison for the performance of the models.

15

In an earlier draft of this paper we considered an expanded list of instruments, including a lagged measure of the slope
of the U.S. Government term structure, a lagged yield spread in the corporate bond market (BAA versus AAA) and a
dummy variable indicating that the next month is January.

Stochastic Discount Factors
A. Summary statistics of the Average Pricing Errors
Table 2 presents summary statistics for the time-series of the fitted SDF's. The means
of most of the SDFs are close to the inverse of the mean of the gross Treasury bill
return, as can be seen by comparison to the constant SDF model. Thus, including the
one-month bill as a primitive asset is generally effective in controlling the mean of the
SDF. The four nontraded-factor model is the exception, where the mean of the SDF is
slightly above 1.0. As the complexity of the models increases (more factors are used, or
we move from an unconditional to a conditional model), the standard deviation of
the fitted SDF generally increases. Recall that for the linear factor and primitive
efficient models, a conditional model is equivalent to an unconditional model fit to
the primitive asset returns, and also the "dynamic strategy" returns obtained by
multiplying the primitive returns by the lagged instruments. Hansen-Jagannathan
(1991) show that the minimum variance of an SDF increases when the number of
assets increases, because the mean variance frontier can only expand as more assets are
included. Thus, it makes sense that the conditional SFD models could have larger
standard deviations.
The SDFs have more negative values when more factors are used. The four
nontraded factor model, for example, produces a large number. The conditional
models also have more negative values. More frequent negative values are expected,
other things equal, as the SDF becomes more volatile. However, negative values mean
that the SDF assigns positive prices to negative payoffs at some points in time. The
Bakshi-Chen model avoids negative SDF values, but at the cost of more variability.
While a larger variance of an SDF is useful, according to the equity premium puzzle of

Stochastic Discount Factors
Mehra and Prescott (1985), a more volatile SDF implies lower power to detect
abnormal performance.
The Hansen-Jagannathan (1997) distance measure is a summary of the mean
pricing errors across a group of assets. The measure may be interpreted, analogous to
Hotelling's T 2 statistic, as the maximum "t-ratio" of pricing errors for portfolios of the
primitive assets. Its advantage in our setting is that the standard error of the "t-ratio" in
question is not affected by estimation error in the SDF, as it depends only on the test
asset returns. Thus, there is no penalty or advantage to a volatile SDF. The HJ measure
may also be interpreted as the distance between the candidate SDF and one that would
correctly price the primitive assets. When the lagged instruments, Z, are used to form
dynamic strategy returns, and these are included, we have the conditional HansenJagannathan distance measure, denoted by "HJcon" in the table. When Z is restricted to
a constant and the dynamic strategies are not included, we have the unconditional
measure denoted by "HJun."16
Using the unconditional HJ distance all of the unconditional models, except
for the APT, have smaller pricing errors than would be obtained by the constant SDF
model, discounting the returns at a fixed risk-free rate. The primitive-efficient and
Bakshi-Chen models produce the smallest distances, essentially zero by construction.
The numeraire portfolio also produces a small unconditional measure. This does not
mean that these models will perform well for performance measurement. An out-ofsample evaluation is needed. The unconditional Fama-French model has a smaller
16

For a given set of test asset gross returns R, instruments Z and a candidate stochastic discount factor m, let
r = R ⊗ ( Z. E ( Z )) , where ./ denotes element-by-element division. The population value of the Hansen-Jagannathan
distance measure takes the quadratic form: E(mr-1)'{E(rr')-1} E(mr-1). We report the sample moment counterpart.

Stochastic Discount Factors
unconditional distance measure than the CAPM or three-factor model. The
unconditional four-factor model also has a small distance measure.
The conditional models generally produce larger unconditional HJ distances
than their unconditional model counterparts. In attempting to price the dynamic
strategies implied by the lagged instruments, the conditional models sacrifice some
accuracy on the primitive returns. We also examine the mean absolute pricing errors
on the primitive assets (not reported in the tables) and find they are larger for the
conditional models. This is consistent with Ghysels (1998).
The conditional models are estimated with the objective of pricing both the
primitive assets and the dynamic strategy returns. Given this objective, they should
perform better, in the sample, according to the HJcon measure. Table 2 shows that this
measure is smaller for five of the eight conditional models.
The conditional primitive-efficient and Bakshi-Chen models produce the
smallest conditional distances, essentially zero by construction. The largest conditional
distances appear for the numeraire portfolio, APT and Fama-French models. The
conditional version of the Fama-French model does not register an improvement
over the conditional CAPM, nor over the unconditional Fama-French model. This
indicates that the conditional Fama-French model does a poor job pricing dynamic
strategies, consistent with Ferson and Harvey (1999).

B. The Dynamic Performance of SDF Models
The HJ distances summarize the relative fit of different models to the cross-section of
test assets, but they provide no insight into the economic magnitudes of the pricing

Stochastic Discount Factors
errors for particular assets. Table 3 examines the dynamic performance of the models,
focussing on the individual primitive assets. While Rt+1 may be predictable based on Zt,
an SDF model implies that m t+1R t+1 should not be predictable using Zt. We run
time-series regressions of the model pricing errors, m t+1R t+1 -1, on the instruments Z t,
and report the sample standard deviations of the fitted values of the regressions. If the
standard deviations are small, the model "explains" the predictable variation in the
returns. Unlike the HJ distance measures, the standard deviations reflect no penalty for
a model that gets the average return wrong. Thus, the standard deviation is a pure
measure of the ability of the model to explain predictable variation in the returns,
analogous to the variance ratios in studies such as Ferson and Korajczyk (1995).17
The constant discount factor, which explains none of the predictability, is
shown as a point of reference. For example, the standard deviation of the predictable
returns for the S&P 500 is shown as 1.05% per month, while the standard deviation of
the raw return is about 4% (Table 1). This means that the R2 in a regression of the S&P
500 return on the lagged instruments is about (.01/.04)2 = 6%.
Panel A summarizes results for the unconditional models. None of the
models can explain the predictable variation in the fixed income returns (govt, junk,
tbill) better than a constant discount factor model. 18 It is hard to find factors that can
explain the dynamics of both stock and bond returns. A few of the unconditional
models explain a good fraction of the predictability in the equity portfolio returns. The
17

Kirby (1998) presents alternative tests based on restrictions to the coefficients of predictive regressions for returns and
dynamic strategies, and shows they are closely related to the HJ distance measure of the previous section. He also finds
that the Fama French (1996) model does not explain dynamic strategies very well.
18

Recall that for the APT models, the SP500, junk bond and contrarian portfolio are replaced by the first three
principal components.

Stochastic Discount Factors
unconditional four-factor model, APT, numeraire portfolio and primitive-efficient
models perform poorly. The product m t+1R t+1 in these models has larger regression
coefficients on Zt than R t+1 does.
Panel B of Table 3 presents results for the conditional SDF models. The
conditional primitive-efficient and Bakshi-Chen models produce standard deviations
close to zero. This is because the models are fit to make the expected product of the
errors with the lagged instruments equal to zero in the sample. In general, the
conditional models perform better than their unconditional counterparts. The
exceptions are the CAPM and Fama-French models. The Fama-French model
deteriorates substantially in its conditional version, again illustrating that it performs
poorly in the presence of dynamic strategies.
The results in Tables 2 and 3 suggest a refinement of the results of Ghysels
(1998). In the context of beta pricing models, Ghysels finds that conditional models
have larger mean squared pricing errors on the primitive assets than unconditional
models. Tables 2 and 3 are consistent with this finding. However, conditional models
have smaller pricing errors on the dynamic strategy returns, ( Rt +1 ⊗ Zt ) , and do a better
job of controlling the predictable components of the primitive asset returns. More
research is needed to compare the out-of-sample performance of conditional and
unconditional models along these dimensions (see Simin, 2000).

VI. Evidence on Artificial Mutual Funds
Table 4 presents summary statistics for the returns of the artificial mutual funds. Panel
A covers the stock pickers. When

= 0 , the stock picker's average return is 0.92% per

Stochastic Discount Factors
month, similar to that of the market index.19 With higher levels of ability, the average
return rises to more than 6.4% per month, at

= 0.8 . At the same time, the standard

deviation of return rises from about 5% to about 9% per month. The regression betas
on the S&P 500 rise from 1.05 to 1.33 as ability moves from

= 0 to

= 0.8 . As ability

increases, the portfolio favors stocks with increasingly positive market model
residuals. Such stocks tend to have larger standard deviations of return and also,
higher betas. The first order autocorrelations are about 0.20 for all ability levels, similar
to the autocorrelation of an equally weighted portfolio of small stocks.
Panel B summarizes the artificial market timers, for ability levels between
= 0.5 and

= 1. The beta of the timers' returns on the S&P 500 is always close to 0.5,

since the strategies hold the S&P 500 about half of the months and the Treasury bill the
other half. The standard deviations of return vary from 2.5% to 3.4% per month, and
the mean returns vary from 0.7% to 2.3% per month across the ability levels. The effect
of ability on the portfolio returns is not as great for the market-timing funds as for the
stock-picking funds. This makes sense, as a stock-picking fund is informed about many
stocks, and its errors can be partly diversified, while the timer has only a single,
market-wide signal. Due to sampling variation, neither the mean nor the standard
deviation of the timers' portfolio return is strictly monotonic in

. Successful market

timers may be considered to generate "underpriced" options (Merton and Henriksson,
1981). As timing ability increases, the market timers generate increasingly right-skewed
return distributions; thus the returns get more option-like. Such skewness creates
For = 0 , there is randomness in the portfolio returns due to the signal, diminishing in its effect as
approaches
1.0. To ensure representative values we run both the uninformed picker and timer for 100 trials, rank these on their
sample average returns, and report the figures for the median-return artificial funds.
19

Stochastic Discount Factors
problems for traditional approaches to performance evaluation, as discussed by
Jagannathan and Korajczyk (1986) and Leland (1999).

A. Performance of the Models with Artificial Funds
Table 5 summarizes the performance of the artificial mutual funds using the SDF
models. Panels A and B show the alphas and their t-ratios for the stock pickers. Perhaps
the most striking impression is that, with some exceptions, the performance results are
remarkably similar across the SDF models. This is interesting in view of the sensitivity
of beta pricing models to the performance benchmark, as documented by previous
studies.
Most of the models have a mild bias, producing negative alphas when

= 0 and

there is no abnormal performance. The average alpha for an uninformed stock picker is 0.19% per month for the unconditional models, and -0.12% for the conditional models.20
The typical standard error is about 0.10%. The conditional models tend to have smaller
biases, excepting the Fama-French factors, where the bias is slightly larger in the model's
conditional form. Among the linear factor models, the APT has the largest negative bias.
Chen and Knez (1996), using primitive-efficient models, find that mutual
funds have insignificant but negative abnormal returns. Using unconditional models,
they find the average alpha for 68 funds, 1968-89, is -0.09% per month. Our results

20

When we discuss averages across the models, we exclude the numeraire portfolio models from the calculations. We
repeat this exercise, where the artificial fund returns are computed without the Shumway (1997) adjustments for delisted
stocks. In this case the average alpha is -0.18% per month with the unconditional models, and -0.08% with the
conditional models.

Stochastic Discount Factors
using the artificial funds are similar, suggesting that their findings reflect a biased
performance measure.21
Dahlquist and Soderlind (1999) study primitive efficient models using weekly
Swedish data, 1986-95. They find no significant biases in the average pricing errors, but
they do find size distortions, where tests for the hypothesis that

p

= 0 reject the null

hypothesis too often.
When

> 0 the results in Table 5 provide information on the power of the

models to detect superior fund performance. 22 Most of the models are able to detect
superior performance at the higher ability levels

(

≥ 0.25) . The t-ratios in Panel B

indicate that the conditional models often have slightly higher power than the
unconditional models. The Fama-French model is an exception, where power is lower
in its conditional form. The four-factor model generates smaller t-statistics than the
other factor models when the ability levels are high. Also, the numeriare portfolio
estimates have huge standard errors, and thus low power, relative to the other
models.
Panels C and D of Table 5 show the performance measures for the artificial
market timing funds. Again, with a few exceptions the results are not highly sensitive
to the benchmark SDF. When the artificial timer switches randomly between the

21

Chen and Knez (1996) compute alphas for excess returns, Rp-Rf, whereas we use raw returns. Since the primitive
efficient models are exactly identified, the average pricing error of the Treasury bill is identically zero and the two alphas
are the same. In overidentified models the two alphas can differ. For example, in our linear factor models the average
pricing error for the one-month bill is 0.05% per month. This could explain a fraction of the negative bias that we find
for these models, but not the similar bias we find in the primitive efficient models. Furthermore, the 0.05% average
reflects a great deal of dispersion across the models, consistent with the large standard errors attached to the average
pricing errors.
22

Of course, a complete analysis of statistical power should use size-adjusted empirical critical values for the test
statistics. Our use of the term "power" here is therefore imprecise.

Stochastic Discount Factors
market and cash, the average unconditional alpha is 0.005% per month, and the
conditional alpha is -0.099%. The typical standard error is, again, about 0.10% per
month. Thus, the model biases, especially for the unconditional models, are
somewhat smaller in the face of uninformed market timing.
All of the models, except for the numeraire portfolio, can detect high levels of
ability. However, compared with the stock-picker results, we find smaller t-ratios for a
given IC. This is consistent with the smaller effect of

on the market timers' returns.

Most of the models have less power to detect market timing rather than stock picking
ability. There are also some differences in power across the models. The primitiveefficient SDFs have slightly smaller t-ratios than the average model at the higher
ability levels, and the four-factor models have markedly lower power.23
We conclude that no model for the SDF clearly dominates the others. The
worst performing models are the numeriare portfolio and the model with the four
nontraded factors. The poor performance of the latter model likely reflects the low
correlation of monthly stock returns with the economic variables. Given the
numerical instability of the numeraire portfolio model, its poor performance and large
standard errors may be expected. The relatively high computation costs of this model
present another disadvantage.

23

Dahlquist and Soderlind (1999) find that primitive efficient SDF models have low power, when the alternative
hypothesis of abnormal performance simply adds a constant amount to the portfolio return.

Stochastic Discount Factors

VIII. Using the Models to Measure Mutual Fund Performance
We use the SDF models to measure performance in a sample of open-ended mutual
funds that tries to control survivorship bias by including discontinued funds. The data
come from Elton, Gruber and Blake (1996), and include all funds that were categorized
as "common stock" funds in the 1977 edition of Wiesenberger's Investment
Companies, and that had at least $15 million in total net assets under management at
the beginning of 1977.24 Variable annuity funds (which are usually tied to insurance
products) and funds that place restrictions on the purchaser are excluded. The
remaining 188 funds are followed through name changes and mergers for the period
1977 to 1993. (See Elton, Gruber and Blake, 1996.) We believe that few of these funds
engage in active market timing. Therefore, we rely more on our results for the
artificial stock-picking funds in evaluating the actual funds' performance. The
monthly returns for the mutual funds reflect the reinvestment of dividends and
capital gains, and are net of most expenses, except front-end load charges and exit fees.
Summary statistics for the returns of the funds are presented in panel C of Table 1.
Table 6 summarizes the distribution of the mutual fund alphas under the
various models. We report the values at selected fractiles of the distribution across the
188 funds. By comparing these with the alphas in Table 5, where the degree of ability is
known, we interpret the results. Averaged across the models, the mean and median
alphas both round to -0.1% per month and the 10% tail cutoffs are nearly symmetric.
The 2.5% tails suggest mild left skewness. The Bonforoni p-values, based on the extreme
t-ratios in the sample, suggest that the extreme performing fund is more likely to have a
24

We thank Martin Gruber for graciously sharing these data with us, and Micropal for permission to use the data.

Stochastic Discount Factors
positive than a negative alpha. 25 Dahlquist and Soderlind (1999), in a weekly sample of
Swedish funds for 1991-95, find small positive alphas and mild right skewness. Their
sample suffers from survivorship bias, which is likely to affect both of these findings.
In Table 6 the distributions of the alphas for the actual mutual funds are not
highly sensitive to the SDF model, similar to what we found for the artificial funds.
Averaged across the models the average alpha for the median fund, is -0.06% per
month using unconditional models, and -0.09% using conditional models. The
average risk-adjusted performance of a typical mutual fund lies between that of an
artificial stock-picking fund with neutral performance, and an uninformed market
timer. With a typical standard error for alpha of about 0.1% per month, the differences
are not statistically significant. Thus, the overall impression is that the average mutual
fund performance is consistent with the null hypothesis of no ability.
These results are interesting in view of the fact that the artificial funds do not
pay transactions costs, while actual funds do. Bogle (1994) suggests that turnover and
expense ratios can be combined for a rough measure of the total expenses implicit in
mutual fund returns. He argues that 1.2% is a conservative estimate of the costs of a
round-trip trade. With turnover averaging 6% per month, he estimates typical trading
costs to average about 0.9% per year. Based on Morningstar data, the average expense
ratio for mutual funds over our sample period is about 1.08% per year. Adding these
two figures gives 1.98% per year, or about 0.17% per month. Based on the average
alphas, the typical mutual fund in our sample beats the uninformed stock picker, even
after covering these transactions costs. If we add back the 0.17% per month for
25

The Bonforoni p-value is the smallest tail area of the t-ratios for the 188 funds, multiplied by 188.

Stochastic Discount Factors
transactions costs, the typical fund's conditional alpha is significantly higher than
either type of artificial fund. Thus, the evidence is consistent with the view that the
average mutual fund manager has enough ability (or exerts enough effort) to cover
transactions costs and the expense ratio, which includes the management fee.
While the distribution of the measured fund performance is not highly
sensitive to the SDF model -- once the poorly performing models are excluded -- this
does not imply that the relative performance for individual funds is robust. Individual
fund alphas could shift position within the distribution, leaving the overall shape of the
distribution intact. To investigate this issue we compute a correlation matrix of the
individual alphas across the models. Each pair of models produces 188 pairs of
"observations" on funds' alphas. We compute the sample correlations for these 188
observations. We find that the correlations are often quite high. For example, the
correlation between the conditional and unconditional versions of the CAPM is 0.99.
The correlation is 0.84 between the conditional CAPM and the conditional primitive
efficient model. The lowest correlations are between the poorly performing models and
the others. For example, the correlations between the four nontraded-factor models and
the others are between 0.52 and 0.66. Most of the other correlations are in the 0.82-0.96
range. We conclude that the relative performance measured for the individual funds
tends to be highly correlated across the SDF models.

IX. Concluding Remarks
This paper studies the stochastic discount factor (SDF) framework for evaluating the
performance of mutual funds. We provide a comparison of a large number of asset

Stochastic Discount Factors
pricing models in a uniform experimental design. We find that no model for the SDF
clearly dominates the rest, but some models are clearly inferior. The worst performing
models are the numeriare portfolio and a linear factor model with four nontraded
economic factors. The choice between conditional and unconditional models presents
a tradeoff. Conditional models can deliver smaller average pricing errors for dynamic
strategies, and better control the predictability in pricing errors, but at the cost of larger
variances of the pricing errors on the primitive assets of the model.
We evaluate the models using artificial "mutual funds," where we control
the extent of market timing or security selection ability. The good news is that the
measured performance is not highly sensitive to the specification of the SDF, excepting
the few models we found to be clearly inferior. The bad news is that many of the SDF
models are biased, producing negative alphas when stock-picking performance is
neutral. The average bias is about -0.19% per month for unconditional models and 0.12% for conditional models. This is less than two standard errors, as a typical
standard error is 0.1% per month. However, the magnitudes suggest that previous
evidence (Chen and Knez, 1996) of negative abnormal mutual fund returns in SDF
models reflects a bias in the measure.
We use the models to evaluate performance in a monthly sample of 188 equity
mutual funds. These results update and generalize the evidence in the classic study of
Jensen (1968), who used the CAPM to conclude that a typical fund has neutral
performance, after accounting for expenses. We find that the average mutual fund alpha
is no worse than the hypothetical stock-picking fund with neutral performance,
although it is below the alpha of a hypothetical uninformed market timer by as much as

Stochastic Discount Factors
0.07% per month. These hypothetical funds pay no expenses. If we add back expenses of
about 0.17% per month to the mutual fund alphas, the average fund's performance is
higher than the hypothetical funds with no ability. Overall, we see no evidence that a
typical fund has poor performance after we adjust for model biases and expenses.

Appendix
Invariance of Performance Measures to the Number of Funds
Referring to the system (10), partition g = (g1 ', g2 ')' where g1 depends on only the
parameters of the SDF and g2 =

p

− h , where h = T −1∑ {mt +1Rp ,t +1 −1} , and the

dimension of g 2 is the number of funds in the system. Conformably partition V, the
asymptotic covariance matrix of g, where V 11 is the upper left block, etc. The GMM
weighting matrix is W = V -1 is also conformably partitioned. The GMM estimator for
the system chooses the parameter vector

g

g' W

to minimize g'Wg, which implies:

=0

(A.1)

The structure of this problem implies that a partition of g
according to g1 and g 2
(the rows) and the parameters of the SDF and p (the columns) is of the form:
g

 gd11
=
gd21

0
1

(A.2)

where gd11 and gd 12 are full matrixes. Solving for right hand partition of equation
(A.1), corresponding to

p

we obtain:

Stochastic Discount Factors

p

= h − W22−1W21g1

(A.3)

Standard expressions for partitioned matrix inversion allow us to write
W 22 = (V22 - V21 V 11 -1 V 12 )-1, and W 12 = - V11 -1 V 12 W 22 . Thus,

p

= h + V21V11−1 g1

Equation (A.4) shows that

p

(A.4)

reduces to h, which is the two step estimator described in

the text, when either of two conditions are satisfied. The conditions are (1) the
covariance between the moment conditions g 1 and g2 , V 12 is zero; or (2) the moment
condition g1 =0, which is satisfied when the SDF model by itself is exactly identified.
(This applies for the primitive efficient SDF model.) From (A.4) we can compute the
asymptotic variance of the estimators:

Avar( p) = Avar(h) + V21 V 11 -1 V 12 + 2 V21 V 11 -1 Acov(g1 ,h).

Equations (A.4) and (A.5) imply that the estimates of

p

(A.5)

and the standard errors for

any subset of funds is invariant to the presence of another subset of funds in the
system. To see this, partition
corresponding to

1
p

p

=(

1
p

,

2
p

) , and examine the partition of equation (A.4)

. The result is identical whether or not

2
p

is present. Similarly,

partition equation (A.5) to observe that the asymptotic variance of
same whether or not

2
p

is present.

1
p

is exactly the

Stochastic Discount Factors

Data Description
Our short-term risk free security is the one-month Treasury bill, from Ibbotson
Associates via the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). To represent longer
term fixed income assets we use the returns of an approximate 20 year U.S.
Government bond, from Ibbotson Associates, and the return of a low-grade corporate
bond from Blume, Keim and Patel (1991) series. We update this series (which goes
from February of 1926 through January of 1990) with the Merrill Lynch High Yield
Corporate Bond Index return, from the Salomon Center Newsletter (Spring and
Summer, 1993), and from the Wall Street Journal.26 Our large-cap strategy, and the
market portfolio in the CAPM, is the return on the S&P 500 index.
We form five additional primitive assets from common stock portfolios
constructed by Carhart, Krail, Stevens and Welch (1996).27 For each month Carhart et
al. group the common stocks on the CRSP tape into thirds according to each of three
independent criteria, producing 27 portfolio return series. The grouping criteria are (1)
the past return for months t-2 to t-12, (2) equity market capitalization, and (3) the ratio
of book equity to market equity. We form a small-cap portfolio by equally weighting
the nine portfolios with the lowest market capitalization. For the momentum
(contrarian) strategy we use an equally weighted average of the nine portfolios with
the highest (lowest) t-2 to t-12 returns, thereby controlling for book-to-market and firm
size. For the value (growth) strategy we use an equally weighted average of the nine
26

We are grateful to Don Keim for making the Blume, Keim and Patel (1991) data available to us.

27

These data are courtesy of Mark Carhart.

Stochastic Discount Factors
portfolios with the highest (lowest) book-to-market ratio, thus controlling for firm size
and past relative return effects.
Our nontraded risk factors include the rate of inflation and measures of growth
for money, industrial production and consumer spending. The inflation rate is the
monthly percentage change in the consumer price index, CPI-U, from Ibbotson
Associates via CRSP. The growth of money is per-capita, inside money (Citibase
FM2.monthly) less currency or M1 (FM1.monthly) divided by the total U.S. civilian
noninstitutional population (P16.monthly), deflated by the consumer price index, and
used in the form of the first difference of the logarithms. For industrial production we
use the continuously-compounded growth rate of the seasonally adjusted index number,
1992=100 (Citibase IP.monthly). Our measure of consumer spending is the monthly real,
per capita growth rate of aggregate personal consumption expenditures for consumer
nondurable goods (Citibase GMCN) plus services (GMCS), divided by the population.
Our traded economic factors include monthly excess returns on the S&P 500
index, and the long term government and corporate bonds described above. The
factors for the Fama and French model are formed from the small-cap, large-cap, value
and growth portfolios described above.
We use two lagged instruments for public information. The one-month bill
yield is from the CRSP riskfree files. The yield is calculated from the bid prices on the
last trading day of the previous month. We subtract from the 1-month yield the
average of its values for the previous 12 months, a simple form of stochastic
detrending. The dividend yield is the price level at the end of the previous month on

Stochastic Discount Factors
the CRSP value-weighted index of NYSE + AMEX firms, divided into the previous
twelve months of dividend payments for the index.

References
Bakshi, Gurdip and Zhi-wu Chen. 1998. Asset pricing without consumption or market
portfolio data. Working paper: University of Maryland.
Bansal, Ravi, and S. Viswanathan. 1993, No arbitrage and arbitrage pricing: A new
approach. Journal of Finance 48: 1231-1262.
Becker, C., W. Ferson, D. Myers and M. Schill. 1999. Conditional Market timing with
Benchmark investors. Journal of Financial Economics 52: 119-148.
Blume, M., Donald B. Keim and S.A. Patel. 1991. Returns and volatility of low-grade
bonds, 1977-1989. Journal of Finance 46: 49-74.
Bogle, John C. 1994. Bogle on Mutual funds: New perspectives for the intelligent
investor. Irwin. New York.
Breeden, Douglas T. 1979. An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with Stochastic
Consumption and Investment Opportunities. Journal of Financial Economics 7: 265-96.
Brown, Keith C. and Gregory D. Brown. 1987. Does the composition of the market
portfolio really matter? Journal of Portfolio Management Winter: 26-32.
Carhart, Mark M., R.J. Krail, R.L. Stevens and K.D. Welch. 1996. Testing the
conditional CAPM. working paper: University of Chicago.
Chan, Foresi and Lang. 1996. Does money explain asset returns? Theory and empirical
evidence. Journal of Finance 51:345-362.
Chen, Nai-fu, T. Copeland and D. Mayers. 1987. A comparison of single and multifactor
perforamance methodologies. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 22: 401-17.
Chen, Nai-fu, Roll, Richard R. and Ross, Stephen A. 1986. Economic Forces and the
Stock Market. Journal of Business 59: 383-403.
Chen, Zhiwu, and Peter J. Knez. 1996. Portfolio Performance Measurement: Theory
and Applications. Review of Financial Studies 9: 511-556..
Christopherson, Jon A., Wayne Ferson and Debra A. Glassman. 1998. Conditioning
manager alpha on economic information: Another look at the persistence of
performance. Review of Financial Studies 11: 111-142.

Stochastic Discount Factors
Cochrane, John. 1996. A cross-sectional test of a production-based asset pricing model.
Journal of Political Economy 104(3): 572-621.
Connor and Korajczyk. 1986. Performance measurement with the arbitrage pricing
theory: A new framework for analysis. Journal of Financial Economics 15: 373-394.
Connor, Gregory and Robert A. Korajczyk. 1988. Risk and return in an equilibrium APT:
applications of a new test methodology. Journal of Financial Economics 21: 255-289.
Dahlquist, Magnus and Paul Soderlind. 1999. Evaluating portfolio performance with
stochastic discount factors. Journal of Business 72: 347-384.
Dumas, Bernard, and Bruno Solnik. 1995. The world price of foreign exchange risk.
Journal of Finance 50: 445-480.
Dybvig, Philip H., and J.E. Ingersoll, Jr. 1982. Mean-Variance Theory in Complete
Markets. Journal of Business 55: 233-252.
Dybvig, Philip H., and Ross, Stephen A. 1985. Performance Measurement Using
Differential Information and a Security Market Line. Journal of Finance 40: 383-99.
Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber and Christopher R. Blake. 1996. Survivorship bias
and mutual fund performance. Review of Financial Studies 9:1097-1120.
Fama, Eugene F. and French, Kenneth R. 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on
stocks and bonds. Journal of Financial Economics 33: 3-56.
Fama, Eugene F. and French, Kenneth R. 1996. Multifactor explanations of asset
pricing anomalies. Journal of Finance 51: 55-87.
Ferson, W. and C. R. Harvey. 1991. The Variation of Economic Risk Premiums.
Journal of Political Economy 99: 385-415.
Ferson, W. and C. R. Harvey. 1997. Fundamental Determinants of National Equity
Market Returns: A perspective on Conditional asset pricing. Journal of Banking and
Finance 21: 1625-1665.
Ferson, W. and C. R. Harvey. 1999. Conditioning Variables and Cross-section of Stock
Returns, Journal of Finance 54: 1325-1360.
Ferson, W. and Ravi Jagannathan. 1996. Econometric Evaluation of Asset Pricing
Models. in the Handbook of Statistics vol. 14: Statistical Methods in Finance, G.S.
Maddala and C.R. Rao (editors), North Holland ISBBN: 0-444-81964-9.
Ferson, W. and Kenneth Khang. 2000. Conditional performance measurement using
portfolio weights: Evidence for pension funds. Working paper: University of Washington.

Stochastic Discount Factors

Ferson, W. and Robert A. Korajczyk. 1995. Do arbitrage pricing models explain the
predictability of stock returns? Journal of Business 68: 309-349.
Ferson, W. and Rudi Schadt. 1996. Measuring fund strategy and performance in
changing economic conditions. Journal of Finance 51: 425-462.
Ferson, W. and Vincent A. Warther. 1996. Evaluating Fund Performance in a Dynamic
Market. Financial Analysts Journal 52: 20-28.
Ghysels, Eric. 1998. On stable factors in the pricing of risk: Do time-varying betas help
or hurt? Journal of Finance 53: 549-574.
Grant, Dwight. 1977. Portfolio performance and the "cost" of timing decisions. Journal
of Finance 32: 837-846.
Grinblatt, Mark and Titman, Sheridan. 1989. Portfolio Performance evaluation: old
issues and new insights. Review of Financial Studies 2: 393-422.
Grinblatt, Mark and Titman, Sheridan, and Russell Wermers. 1995. Momentum
strategies, portfolio performance and herding: A study of mutual funds. American
Economic Review 85: 1088-1105.
Grinold, R., Kahn, R. 1995. Active portfolio management. Irwin Press, Chicago.
Hansen, Lars P. 1982. Large sample properties of the generalized method of moments
estimators. Econometrica 50: 1029-1054.
Hansen, Lars P. and Ravi Jagannathan. 1991. Implications of security market data for
models of dynamic economies. Journal of Political Economy 99: 225-262.
Hansen, Lars P. and Ravi Jagannathan. 1997. Assessing specification errors in stochastic
discount factor models. Journal of Finance 52: 557-90.
He, Jia, Lilian Ng and Chou Zhang. 1998. Asset pricing specification errors and
performance evaluation. Working paper: Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology.
Hentschel, Ludger, Jankoo Kang and John B. Long. 1998. Numeraire portfolio tests of
international bond market integration. Working paper: University of Rochester.
Jagannathan, Ravi and Robert A. Korajczyk. 1986. Assessing the market timing
performance of managed portfolios. Journal of Business 59: 217-236.
Jagannathan, Ravi and Z. Wang. 2000. Efficiency of the stochastic discount factor
method for estimating risk premiums. Working paper: Northwestern University.

Stochastic Discount Factors

Jensen, M. 1968. The performance of mutual funds in the period 1945-1964. Journal of
Finance 23: 389-46.
Kan, Raymond, and Guofu Zhou. 1999. A critique of the stochastic discount factor
methodology. Journal of Finance 54: 1221-1248.
Kirby, Chris. 1998. The restrictions on predictability implied by asset pricing models.
Review of Financial Studies 11: 343-382.
Kang, Jangkoo. 1995. Bond mutual fund performance evaluation: The numeraire
portfolio appraoch. Working paper: University of Rochester.
Lehmann, Bruce and David M. Modest. 1987. Mutual fund performance evaluation: A
comparison of benchmarks and benchmark comparisons. Journal of Finance 42: 233-65.
Leland, Hayne. 1999. Performance beyond mean-variance: Performance measurement
in a nonsymmetric world. Financial Analysts Journal 55: 27-36.
Long, John B. 1990. The numeraire portfolio. Journal of Financial Economics 26: 29-70.
Lucas, Robert. 1978. Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy. Econometrica 46: 1429-1446.
Mehra, R. and E. Prescott. 1985. The equity premium: A puzzle. Journal of Monetary
Economics 15: 145-162.
Merton, Robert C. and Roy D. Henriksson. 1981. On market timing and investment
performance II: Statistical procedures for evaluating forecasting skills. Journal of
Business 54: 513-534.
Roll, Richard. 1978. Ambiguity when performance is measured by the security market
line. Journal of Finance 33: 1051-1069.
Ross, S. 1976. The arbitrage theory of capital market asset pricing. Journal of Economic
Theory 13: 341-360.
Sharpe, William. F. 1964. Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under
conditions of risk. Journal of Finance 19: 425-42.
Shumway, T. 1997. The delisting bias in CRSP data. Journal of Finance 52: 327-340.
Simin, Timothy. 1999. The forecasting performance of asset pricing models. Working
paper, University of Washington.
Treynor, Jack, and Kay Mazuy. 1966. Can mutual funds outguess the market? Harvard
Business Review 44: 131-136.

Table 1
Summary Statistics
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------MEAN
STD
MIN
MAX
1
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------panel A: The primitive asset rates of return
sp500
govt. bond
low grade bond
one-month bill

0.0091133
0.0058926
0.0069866
0.0052717

0.0423373
0.0296860
0.0234560
0.0022346

-0.215200
-0.084100
-0.081000
0.002100

0.165700
0.152300
0.130000
0.013500

0.003994
0.051763
0.221632
0.937797

momentum
contrarian
value
growth
small

0.0147299
0.0081780
0.0139884
0.0085136
0.0119945

0.0532051
0.0532749
0.0523659
0.0529997
0.0574457

-0.288311
-0.216222
-0.262444
-0.265411
-0.294078

0.188122
0.324533
0.304667
0.191722
0.304522

0.114470
0.137965
0.165299
0.130837
0.205066

0.0042135
0.0024553
0.0012924
0.0007191

0.003228
0.008288
0.004751
0.005490

-0.0046000
-0.0424745
-0.0189459
-0.0163079

0.0181000
0.0334559
0.0181018
0.0318874

0.646433
0.366964
-0.167308
0.769596

0.0002039
0.0370277

0.013158
0.008048

-0.0562000
0.0251967

0.0489558
0.0612818

0.799197
0.973259

panel B: Economic variables
non-traded factors:
inflation rate
industrial production
personal consumption
real money supply

lagged instruments:
tbyld
vwyld

panel C: Mutual fund returns:
Equally-weighted portfolios sorted by sample mean returns (January, 1977 - December, 1993)
Lower 2.5%
Lower 2.5% - 5%
Lower 5% - 10%

0.00336927
0.00814162
0.00929043

0.056832
0.049622
0.043067

-0.2556400
-0.2543120
-0.2118689

0.1675400
0.1451120
0.1257611

0.040739
0.027890
0.043084

Median fund

0.01191584

0.047639

-0.2159600

0.1653800

0.081600

Upper 10% - 5%
Upper 5% - 2.5%
Upper 2.5%

0.01505460
0.01585514
0.01694441

0.051957
0.049884
0.059543

-0.2324656
-0.2325460
-0.2683660

0.1461400
0.1408760
0.1681320

0.080769
0.060769
0.054545

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Note.- The data are monthly from July of 1963 through December, 1994, a total of 378 observations (the lagged instruments
are known at the end of the previous month). For the mutual funds the sample period is January, 1977 through December,
1993 and there are 204 observations. The units are decimal fraction per month. 1 is the first order sample autocorrelation.

Table 2
Stochastic Discount Factor Models
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------E(m)

sd(m)

1 (m)

min(m) max(m) num(m<0)

HJun

HJcon

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Constant discount factor

0.995

0.000

0.000

0.995

0.995

0

0.144

0.319

0.994
0.994
0.989
0.995
1.010
0.995
0.995
0.995

0.071
0.081
0.225
0.145
1.220
0.380
0.521
0.423

0.004
0.084
0.234
0.091
0.208
0.094
-0.031
-0.009

0.733
0.688
-0.204
0.024
-2.760
-0.695
0.444
0.249

1.37
1.44
1.68
1.59
6.95
2.65
7.43
4.77

0
0
2
0
71
3
0
0

0.136
0.134
0.078
0.329
0.099
1.2E-25
0.008
3.7E-10

0.311
0.309
0.235
0.329
0.296
1.2E-25
0.300
0.052

0.989
0.994
0.979
0.985
1.020
0.995
0.995
0.995

0.218
0.291
0.565
0.228
2.060
0.566
9.220
0.677

-0.048
-0.039
0.098
0.128
-0.016
0.242
0.001
0.166

-0.576
-0.532
-5.450
-0.214
-6.440
-1.890
-117.0
0.007

1.80
2.09
2.43
1.78
7.79
2.47
75.2
5.67

3
6
11
3
96
16
53
0

0.172
0.179
0.164
0.346
0.035
1.7E-19
6.9E-7
7.2E-10

0.270
0.266
0.284
0.474
0.068
1.7E-19
1.080
1.9E-08

UNCONDITIONAL MODELS
SDF-CAPM (ucapm)
Three traded factors (u3fac)
Fama-French (uff)
APT (uapt)
Four nontraded factors (u4fac)
Primitive-efficient (upem)
Numeraire portfolio (unum)
Bakshi-Chen (ubc)
CONDITIONAL MODELS
SDF-CAPM (ccapm)
Three traded-factors (c3fac)
Fama-French (cff)
APT (capt)
Four non-traded factors (c4fac)
Primitive-efficient (cpem)
Numeraire portfolio (cnum)
Bakshi-Chen (cbc)

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Note. - Various models for stochastic discount factors (SDFs) are estimated using the equations in the text and monthly data
for July of 1963 through December 1994 (378 observations). The units of the returns are monthly decimal fractions. E(m) is
the sample mean, sd(m) is the sample standard deviation and 1 (m) is the first order autocorrelation of the estimated
stochastic discount factor. The primitive assets used in estimating the models are the Standard and Poors 500, a long term
government bond, a low-grade corporate bond, a one-month Treasury bill, and five portfolios grouped as described in the
text, according to lagged returns (momentum, contrary), book-to-market ratios (value, growth) and market capitalization
(small stocks). For the APT models, three asymptotic principal components replace the sp500, low-grade bond and
contrarian portfolios. HJun and HJcon are the Hansen-Jagannathan measures of misspecification. HJcon is the conditional
measure, which uses the returns and the lagged instruments, while HJun uses no lagged instruments. The lagged instruments
are the one-month Treasury bill yield and the dividend yield of the CRSP value-weighted stock index.

Table3
Dynamic Performance of Stochastic Discount Factor Models
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------SDF model Primitive Assets
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------sp500

govt

junk

momentum

contrary

value

growth

small

tbill

PANEL A: UNCONDITIONAL MODELS
Constant
discount factor

1.05

0.496

0.553

1.37

1.30

1.29

1.39

1.55

0.18

ucapm
u3fac
uff
uapt
u4fac
upem
unum
ubc

0.79
1.16
0.27
1.83
7.80
4.46
4.90
4.10

1.46
1.84
1.03
1.18
7.38
5.45
5.98
4.81

1.27
1.65
0.78
1.28
7.50
5.00
5.62
4.42

0.46
0.82
0.25
1.32
8.15
3.70
4.24
3.62

0.55
0.94
0.20
2.07
8.47
4.40
4.96
4.07

0.54
0.91
0.16
2.02
8.31
3.98
4.60
3.79

0.46
0.83
0.25
2.09
8.27
4.05
4.57
3.83

0.30
0.65
0.24
2.24
8.64
3.75
4.33
3.63

1.75
2.13
1.29
0.95
6.94
5.83
6.44
5.05

0.91
1.42
7.47
0.22
2.24
8.0E-9
0.21
6.3E-8

1.09
1.18
8.24
0.17
2.30
7.9E-9
0.21
6.3E-8

0.92
1.40
8.14
0.32
2.24
7.9E-9
0.15
6.4E-8

1.06
1.23
7.56
0.27
2.35
7.9E-9
0.19
6.2E-8

0.78
1.52
8.13
0.26
2.33
8.0E-9
0.34
6.3E-8

1.19
1.19
6.66
0.49
2.04
7.5E-9
0.35
6.6E-8

PANEL B: CONDITIONAL MODELS
ccapm
c3fac
cff
capt
c4fac
cpem
cnum
cbc

1.22
1.14
7.20
0.55
2.15
7.8E-9
0.38
6.3E-8

1.15
1.53
6.48
0.64
1.99
7.7E-9
0.12
6.4E-8

1.10
1.34
6.75
0.51
2.07
7.7E-9
0.25
6.5E-8

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Note.-Various models for stochastic discount factors (SDFs), denoted by m, are estimated using the equations in the text.
The standard deviations of the fitted pricing errors are shown in the table. The fitted pricing errors are the fitted values of a
regression of mt+1R t+1-1 on Z t , where mt+1 is the SDF, Rt+1 is the particular asset gross return and Z t is the vector of lagged
instruments. The primitive assets used in the SDF models are the Standard and Poors 500 index (sp500), the long term
government bond (govt), a low-grade corporate bond (junk), a one-month Treasury bill (tbill), and five portfolios grouped as
described in the text, according to lagged returns (momentum, contrary), book-to-market ratios (value, growth) and market
capitalization (small). In the case of the APT models, the SP500, junk bond and contrarian portfolios are replaced by the
three asymptotic principal components. The lagged instruments are the one-month Treasury bill yield and the dividend yield
of the CRSP value-weighted stock index. The symbols denoting the various models are the same as shown in Table2.

Table 4
Summary Statistics of Artificial Mutual Funds
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ability()

Mean

Std

Min

Max

1

SP500beta

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

PANEL A: ARTIFICIAL STOCK PICKERS
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80

0.0094926
0.0116396
0.0152671
0.0207156
0.0253968
0.0315279
0.0386342
0.0530149
0.0574245
0.0644359
0.0642396

0.0527125
0.0572638
0.0665882
0.0748688
0.0813125
0.0833675
0.0854730
0.0896819
0.0892648
0.0906787
0.0904048

-0.205859
-0.282882
-0.325791
-0.353136
-0.357061
-0.301477
-0.322398
-0.337816
-0.336422
-0.251885
-0.302697

0.222765
0.169699
0.266646
0.316370
0.303963
0.300201
0.296783
0.460395
0.406289
0.353727
0.364462

0.144480
0.212161
0.219904
0.241416
0.224202
0.259412
0.251474
0.198480
0.214116
0.200964
0.190315

1.05901
1.11825
1.20855
1.27060
1.33252
1.30099
1.30930
1.28819
1.33832
1.28475
1.32745

PANEL B: ARTIFICIAL MARKET TIMERS
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.0

0.0072781
0.0088169
0.0102663
0.0131346
0.0126723
0.0162635
0.0149506
0.0187121
0.0205448
0.0208255
0.0232471

0.0321722
0.0285112
0.0293961
0.0337522
0.0297808
0.0296212
0.0283264
0.0281571
0.0258198
0.0247428
0.0259912

-0.215200
-0.116979
-0.108228
-0.215200
-0.108228
-0.090300
-0.116979
-0.108228
-0.075913
-0.089058
0.002120

0.165722
0.165722
0.165722
0.165722
0.134300
0.165722
0.165722
0.165722
0.165722
0.134300
0.165722

-0.023750
-0.087784
-0.023375
0.005960
0.001528
-0.085124
-0.138601
-0.038624
-0.030016
-0.038660
-0.069138

0.572041
0.448242
0.482613
0.650919
0.506642
0.528737
0.475052
0.510130
0.465304
0.437822
0.513261

S&P500

0.0091133

0.0423373

-0.215200

0.165700

0.003994

1.00

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Note. - Monthly artificial mutual fund returns are generated for 378 months from July, 1963 through December of
1994. Panel A summarizes the properties of the returns for artificial stocks pickers with varying degrees of ability, .
When = 0 , there is no ability and when = 1 there is perfect ability, as described in the text. Panel B presents
summary statistics for the artificial market timing mutual funds. For comparison purposes the Standard and Poors 500
index return is shown on the last line. Std is the standard deviation of the monthly return, 1 is the first order
autocorrelation and SP00 beta is the regression coefficient of return on the Standard and Poors 500 index return.

Table 5
Estimates of Performance for Artificial Mutual Funds
Results of joint estimation of a stochastic discount factor model and the performance of an artificial mutual fund for the July, 1963-December, 1994 period (378
months). The ability level of the artificial fund is indicated by the parameter , as explained in the text. Umean and Cmean are the averages taken across the
unconditional and conditional models, respectively, excluding the numeraire portfolio models.

PANEL A: STOCK PICKERS: Estimates of Alpha
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------γ=

0

0.10

0.20

0.25

0.30

0.35

0.40

0.50

0.60

0.70

0.80

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Ucapm
Ccapm

-0.0017
-0.0112

-0.00079
-0.00089

0.00119
0.00098

0.00517
0.00483

0.00925
0.00867

0.01529
0.01435

0.02158
0.02104

0.0354
0.0372

0.0394
0.0390

0.04649
0.04666

0.04616
0.04579

U3fac
C3fac

-0.0017
-0.0012

-0.00079
-0.00097

0.00118
0.00133

0.00519
0.00534

0.00925
0.00873

0.01529
0.01463

0.02163
0.02145

0.0355
0.0373

0.0394
0.0392

0.04657
0.04695

0.04622
0.04561

UFF
CFF

-0.0019
-0.0007

-0.00058
-0.00128

0.00149
0.00129

0.00532
0.00491

0.00993
0.00901

0.01575
0.01417

0.02209
0.01957

0.0360
0.0375

0.0393
0.0397

0.04644
0.04627

0.04631
0.04605

UAPT
CAPT

-0.0021
-0.0025

-0.00165
-0.00205

-0.00002
-0.00048

0.00428
0.00384

0.0093
0.0086

0.01572
0.01397

0.02151
0.02095

0.0356
0.0355

0.0397
0.0397

0.04636
0.04534

0.04752
0.04791

U4fac
C4fac

-0.0022
0.0009

0.00028
-0.00126

0.00130
-0.00154

0.00303
-0.00149

0.00779
0.00526

0.01482
0.00958

0.01899
0.01549

0.0321
0.0322

0.0376
0.0345

0.04056
0.04177

0.04248
0.03845

Upem
Cpem

-0.0018
-0.0013

-0.00086
-0.00105

0.00125
0.00109

0.00529
0.00473

0.00936
0.00869

0.01519
0.01438

0.02158
0.02146

0.0357
0.0378

0.0394
0.0397

0.04637
0.04610

0.04617
0.04578

Unum
Cnum

0.0000
-0.2085

0.00000
-0.26184

0.00000
-0.02144

0.01165
-0.03494

0.00764
-0.19293

0.02249
-0.22835

0.02157
0.00510

0.0353
0.0000

0.0400
0.0000

0.04828
0.00000

0.04835
0.00000

UBC
CBC

-0.0021
-0.0009

-0.00091
-0.00018

0.00121
0.00177

0.00506
0.00521

0.00948
0.00967

0.01551
0.01447

0.02181
0.02212

0.0357
0.0378

0.0392
0.0403

0.04634
0.04665

0.04609
0.04707

-0.00192
-0.00124

-0.00075
-0.00109

0.00108
0.00063

0.00476
0.00391

0.00919
0.00837

0.01536
0.01365

0.02131
0.02029

0.03514
0.03647

0.03914
0.03887

0.04559
0.04568

0.04585
0.04524

Umean
Cmean

Table V, page 2

PANEL B: STOCK PICKERS: T-ratios for Alpha
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------γ=

0

0.10

0.20

0.25

0.30

0.35

0.40

0.50

0.60

0.70

0.80

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Ucapm
Ccapm

-1.782
-1.234

-0.810
-0.969

1.0306
0.8889

3.392
3.254

5.3597
5.1544

7.3395
7.1033

10.474
10.535

13.652
14.699

16.870
17.061

17.662
18.333

17.841
18.101

U3fac
C3fac

-1.801
-1.346

-0.818
-1.059

1.0370
1.2211

3.418
3.600

5.4096
5.1798

7.3992
7.2096

10.594
10.754

13.697
14.366

16.999
17.204

17.816
18.498

17.954
17.860

UFF
CFF

-1.892
-0.773

-0.575
-1.239

1.2941
1.1099

3.496
3.091

5.6197
5.0309

7.4028
6.4928

10.756
8.8363

14.004
14.114

16.754
16.446

17.465
16.976

18.046
17.193

UAPT
CAPT

-2.059
-2.776

-1.660
-2.209

-0.022
-0.447

2.897
2.703

5.6794
5.4236

7.5496
7.0883

10.514
11.141

13.640
14.421

17.550
18.043

17.376
17.888

18.676
19.472

U4fac
C4fac

-1.504
-0.429

0.085
-0.527

0.6646
-0.5638

0.941
-0.336

1.9786
1.1439

4.0348
1.5609

3.946
2.613

6.529
5.663

5.6697
5.4207

3.416
5.179

7.895
5.501

Upem
Cpem

-1.625
-1.199

-0.815
-0.998

1.0358
0.8826

3.452
2.849

5.2338
4.6608

6.9908
6.5091

9.807
9.137

14.035
13.681

16.443
15.667

16.795
15.948

17.226
16.099

Unum
Cnum

0.000
-0.002

0.000
-0.002

0.0000
-0.0001

0.006
-0.000

0.0035
-0.0015

0.0103
-0.0009

0.010
0.000

0.0144
0.0000

0.0170
0.0000

0.0221
0.0000

0.0235
0.0000

UBC
CBC

-1.852
-0.883

-0.862
-0.184

0.9977
1.4774

3.375
3.299

5.2879
5.4932

7.2364
7.0509

9.879
10.485

13.763
14.291

16.401
17.479

17.033
17.496

17.343
17.499

Umean
Cmean

-1.788
-1.236

-0.779
-1.026

0.8625
0.6527

2.996
2.637

4.9384
4.5838

6.8504
6.1449

9.4243
9.0716

12.76
13.034

15.2409
15.3315

15.366
15.759

16.426
15.961

Table V, page 3

PANEL C: MARKET TIMERS: Estimates of Alpha
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------γ=

0

0.55

0.60

0.65

0.70

0.75

0.80

0.85

0.90

0.95

1.0

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Ucapm
Ccapm

0.00058
-0.00094

0.0018
0.0021

0.0034
0.0028

0.0046
0.0057

0.0056
0.0054

0.00866
0.00649

0.0094
0.0075

0.0117
0.0097

0.0143
0.0121

0.0139
0.0135

0.0169
0.0150

U3fac
C3fac

0.00058
-0.00104

0.0019
0.0023

0.0034
0.0025

0.0046
0.0056

0.0056
0.0052

0.00872
0.00669

0.0095
0.0076

0.0117
0.0096

0.0143
0.0122

0.0139
0.0137

0.0169
0.0150

UFF
CFF

0.00052
0.00018

0.0022
0.0011

0.0039
0.0027

0.0046
0.0065

0.0055
0.0057

0.00872
0.00664

0.0097
0.0072

0.0117
0.0099

0.0144
0.0124

0.0136
0.0125

0.0169
0.0147

UApt
CApt

0.00089
-0.00083

0.0015
0.0011

0.0038
0.0028

0.0039
0.0042

0.0061
0.0057

0.00801
0.00667

0.0089
0.0073

0.0118
0.0098

0.0135
0.0119

0.0132
0.0129

0.0161
0.0148

U4fac
C4fac

-0.00097
-0.00310

0.0000
-0.0023

0.0038
0.0076

0.0064
0.0072

0.0067
0.0097

0.00750
0.00629

0.0071
0.0080

0.0095
0.0098

0.0120
0.0116

0.0125
0.0134

0.0148
0.0149

Upem
Cpem

0.00071
-0.00084

0.0019
0.0018

0.0035
0.0035

0.0050
0.0060

0.0056
0.0056

0.00873
0.00686

0.0091
0.0077

0.0117
0.0103

0.0142
0.0123

0.0138
0.0131

0.0169
0.0152

Unum
Cnum

0.00000
-0.25733

0.0039
-0.0291

0.0033
-0.0039

0.0044
-0.2497

0.0057
0.0000

0.01017
-0.19672

0.0076
-0.0200

0.0118
0.0000

0.0130
0.0000

0.0135
0.0000

0.0157
0.0000

UBC
CBC

-0.00196
-0.00042

0.0017
0.0026

0.0037
0.0026

0.0045
0.0063

0.0053
0.0057

0.00934
0.00716

0.0099
0.0084

0.0123
0.0095

0.0147
0.0129

0.0141
0.0138

0.0175
0.0157

Umean
Cmean

0.00005
-0.00099

0.0016
0.00124

0.0036
0.0035

0.0048
0.0059

0.0058
0.0061

0.00853
0.00669

0.0091
0.0077

0.0115
0.0098

0.0139
0.0122

0.0136
0.0133

0.0166
0.01504

Table V, page 4

PANEL D: MARKET TIMERS: T-ratios for Alpha
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------γ=

0

0.55

0.60

0.65

0.70

0.75

0.80

0.85

0.90

0.95

1.0

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Ucapm
Ccapm

0.5398
-1.6068

1.709
2.267

3.191
2.949

4.535
6.044

5.448
5.983

8.949
7.464

9.636
8.624

12.916
12.273

17.657
16.823

17.605
19.967

24.114
24.607

U3fac
C3fac

0.5313
-1.0687

1.708
2.386

3.149
2.616

4.466
5.752

5.374
5.484

8.997
7.590

9.649
8.417

12.796
11.658

17.396
16.377

17.404
20.129

23.856
24.186

UFF
CFF

0.4604
0.1707

1.896
1.005

3.472
2.364

4.546
6.119

4.958
5.214

8.571
6.866

9.972
7.694

12.069
10.506

16.486
15.076

15.493
14.803

22.860
21.684

UApt
CApt

0.7992
-0.8498

1.409
1.084

3.493
2.847

3.714
4.363

5.777
6.060

7.849
7.518

8.668
8.087

12.733
12.298

15.805
15.801

15.377
17.589

21.491
23.104

U4fac
C4fac

-0.5175
-1.3931

0.017
-0.765

2.174
3.011

2.931
2.421

3.385
3.536

4.692
3.099

4.747
3.600

4.4030
4.5043

6.2784
6.4141

9.6236
6.3667

8.9699
8.7328

Upem
Cpem

0.5271
-0.7176

1.423
1.512

2.659
2.963

4.303
5.418

4.270
4.835

7.233
6.579

8.265
7.620

10.177
10.170

14.317
14.689

13.047
14.857

19.888
22.035

Unum
Cnum

0.0000
-0.0035

0.003
-0.000

0.003
-0.000

0.004
-0.004

0.005
0.000

0.008
-0.006

0.006
-0.000

0.0098
0.0000

0.0107
0.0000

0.0113
0.0000

0.0129
0.0000

UBC
CBC

-2.0128
-0.4825

1.205
2.437

2.524
2.343

4.003
5.889

3.443
5.507

7.805
7.223

9.702
8.849

10.684
9.5886

15.562
16.574

11.639
19.231

21.708
24.016

Umean
Cmean

0.0467
-0.8497

1.338
1.418

2.952
2.727

4.071
5.144

4.665
5.2313

7.728
6.619

8.663
7.5558

10.825
10.143

14.786
14.536

14.312
16.135

20.4124
21.1949

Table 6
Tests with Mutual Fund Returns
Tests are based on 188 equity mutual funds and monthly data for the January, 1977 to December, 1993 period. The number of observations is 204. The
distribution of funds' alphas for each model are summarized by the values of alpha at various fractiles of the distribution for the 188 funds. Umean and Cmean
are the averages, taken across the unconditional and conditional models, respectively, but not including the numeraire portfolio models. The symbols denoting
the various models are the same as in Table III. The symbols denoting each model are the same as in Table III. Bonfor. Max. (Min>) are the p-values based on
the Bonferoni inequality using the t-ratios for the alphas and assuming a t distribution. These are the one-tailed areas, or p-values, associated with the maximum
(minimum) of the 188 p-values, multiplied by 188.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Bonfor.
Min.

Left
2.5%

Left
5%

Left
10%

Mean

Median

Right
10%

Right
5%

Right
2.5%

Bonfor.
Max.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Ucapm
Ccapm

0.089
0.519

-0.008
-0.008

-0.005
-0.005

-0.003
-0.003

-0.001
-0.001

-0.0007
-0.0008

0.001
0.001

0.002
0.002

0.002
0.002

0.000
0.000

U3fac
C3fac

0.059
0.551

-0.008
-0.008

-0.005
-0.006

-0.003
-0.004

-0.0007
-0.001

-0.0006
-0.001

0.001
0.0009

0.002
0.001

0.002
0.002

0.000
0.000

UFF
CFF

0.007
0.154

-0.009
-0.010

-0.005
-0.006

-0.003
-0.004

-0.0006
-0.001

-0.0004
-0.0008

0.002
0.002

0.002
0.002

0.003
0.002

0.000
0.000

UAPT
CAPT

0.161
0.032

-0.008
-0.009

-0.005
-0.006

-0.003
-0.003

-0.0008
-0.0011

-0.0006
-0.0008

0.0013
0.0013

0.002
0.002

0.003
0.003

0.000
0.000

U4fac
C4fac

1.000
1.000

-0.006
-0.010

-0.005
-0.008

-0.004
-0.005

-0.001
-0.002

-0.0007
-0.001

0.002
0.002

0.003
0.003

0.004
0.004

0.450
0.002

Upem
Cpem

0.746
0.580

-0.00781
-0.00950

-0.005
-0.006

-0.003
-0.004

-0.0008
-0.0012

-0.00067
-0.00094

0.0015
0.0013

0.002
0.002

0.0024
0.0023

0.000
0.000

Unum
Cnum

1.000
1.000

-0.00208
-0.00250

-0.0005
0.0114

0.000
0.024

0.0012
0.177

0.0051
0.2780

0.006
0.286

0.0064
0.290

1.000
1.000

UBC
CBC

0.183
0.066

-0.00852
-0.00956

-0.0051
-0.0062

-0.003
-0.004

-0.0006
-0.0012

0.0018
0.0015

0.002
0.002

0.0026
0.0021

0.000
0.000

-0.00501
-0.00617

-0.00314
-0.00385

-0.00075
-0.00121

-0.00058
-0.00089

0.002
0.002

0.002714
0.002488

Umean
Cmean

-0.00790
-0.00915

0.000
0.207
-0.00044
-0.00095
0.001514
0.001428

