                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   WITHIN STATE TRANSITIONS FROM 2-YEAR TO 4-YEAR PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS


                                         Ronald G. Ehrenberg
                                         Christopher L. Smith


                                          Working Paper 8792
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8792


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2002




Ehrenberg is the Irving M. Ives Professor of Industrial and Labor Relations and Economics at Cornell
University and Director of the Cornell Higher Education Research Institute (CHERI). Smith is a junior at
Cornell ’s School of Industrial and Labor Relations. We are grateful to the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation
and the Atlantic Philanthropies (USA)Inc for supporting our research through their support of CHERI, to
Assistant Provost Gary Blose from the State University of New York (SUNY)Office of Institutional Research
for providing us with much of the data used in our paper, and to Gary Blose, Associate Provost John Porter
of SUNY, Michael Matier, Director of Cornell ’s Office of Institutional Research and Planning and Professor
Richard Romano from Broome Community College, for their comments on earlier drafts. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.


© 2002 by Ronald G. Ehrenberg and Christopher L. Smith. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Within State Transitions from 2-Year to 4-Year Public Institutions
Ronald G. Ehrenberg and Christopher L. Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 8792
February 2002
JEL No. I2



                                              ABSTRACT

        Within many large states there are multiple 2-year and 4-year public institutions. Our paper
develops a methodology that can be used to help evaluate how well each 2-year public institution in a
state is doing in preparing those of its students who transfer to 4-year public institutions to successfully
complete their 4-year programs. Similarly, the methodology can be used to help evaluate how well each
4-year public institution is doing in graduating the those students from 2-year institutions who transfer
to it. The methodology is illustrated using data provided by the Office of Institutional Research and
Analysis of the State University of New York.




Ronald G. Ehrenberg                                               Christopher L. Smith
School of Industrial and Labor Relations                          School of Industrial and Labor Relations
Cornell University                                                Cornell University
256 Ives Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853-3901
and NBER
rge2@cornell.edu
    I.       Introduction

    Public higher education institutions enroll about 80% of American college and

university students. In the fall of 1996, 42% of freshmen enrolled in public institutions

and 55% of full-time freshmen in public institutions began their study at two-year

colleges. These proportions vary widely across states. However in a number of large

states, including California, Florida, New Jersey and New York, two-year colleges

provide the entry point to higher education for the majority of full-time first year students

enrolled in public institutions (table 1).

     We are likely to see a growing reliance on 2-year institutions in the years ahead to

meet the growing demand for higher education opportunities that is occurring in many of

our nation’s states. Middle range projections are that between 1999 and 2011, college

enrollments will rise by 20% with most of the growth in enrollment occurring in public

higher education.1 This growing demand for enrollments in public higher education is

occurring at the same time that state budgets are becoming increasingly tight because of

both the short-run financial impact of the recession that started in 2001 and of longer run

factors, including the increased demand for state funding for other public needs, such as

public elementary and secondary education, and the unwillingness of most states to

consider raising state taxes.2

    The likely growing importance of two-year colleges in the years ahead suggests that

higher education researchers and policymakers should increase their attention to them.3

Two-year colleges are as, or more, complex than their research university counterparts.

1
  See Gerald and Hussar (2001)
2
  See Ehrenberg (2000) for a more complete discussion of this point.
3
  Pascarella (1997) has also stressed the importance of researchers devoting more attention to two-year
colleges and their students


                                                     1
Their missions include adult education, providing contract courses for companies and

different levels of government, training students for careers, and preparing students for

transfer to 4-year institutions.4 Previous research by economists has addressed some of

these missions and asked if there is an economic payoff to taking some 2-year college

courses but not obtaining a degree, if the economic payoff to 2-year college courses is the

same as that to 4-year college courses, if there is a “sheepskin” effect from receiving a 2-

year degree and if the presence of 2-year public colleges in a state serves to increase or

decrease overall educational attainment of young adults in the state.5

    Our paper focuses on the last mission of the 2-year colleges, namely preparing

students to transfer to 4-year institutions. The method by which public higher education is

organized and governed varies widely across states and this might be expected to

influence the flow of students from 2-year institutions into and through completion of 4-

year institutions.6 In some states, for example New York (in both the CUNY or SUNY

systems) and Florida, 2-year and 4-year institutions are members of the same system.

Florida also has a common course numbering system that should also facilitate transfers.

In other states, for example Pennsylvania, some (but not all) of the 2-year public colleges

are branch campuses of the flagship public university, which also should be expected to

facilitate transfers. In still other states, for example Massachusetts, there are coordinating

boards for all public (and sometimes also private) higher education institutions in a state,

which in principle should also help to facilitate transfers. We know of no research that

4
  See Bailey (2002) for a more complete discussion of the multiplicity of roles that 2-year colleges play.
5
  See for example, Grubb (1993, 1995, 1997), Kane and Rouse (1995a, 1995b, 1999), Leigh and Gill (1997,
forthcoming) and Rouse (1995, 1999). Higher education scholars also have studied issues relating to 2-year
college students including their persistence in college and the effects that 2-year colleges have on their
students. Examples and surveys of the literature include Pascarella and Terezini (1991), Pascarella (1999),
Pascarella et. al. (1998) and Tinto (1993).
6
  Details of the governance relationships between 2-year and 4-year colleges, by state, are available from
the Center for Community College Policy at its web page http://www.communitycollege.org.


                                                    2
has looked at the optimal way to organize public higher education in a state to facilitate

transfers.

      Within many large states there are multiple 2-year and 4-year institutions. In 1998-99,

only 19 states had less than 15 public 2-year institutions. Of the 31 states with 15 or more

public 2-year institutions, only 3 had 5 or fewer public 4-year institutions.7 State

policymakers and system administrators should want to know how well each 2-year

public institution is doing in preparing those of its students who transfer to public 4-year

institutions in the state to successfully complete 4-year college study. Similarly, they

should want to know how successful each 4-year college in the state is in graduating

those students from 2-year colleges that transfer to it. This information could then be

used either in summative evaluations that relate to resource allocation decisions, or more

preferably, in formative evaluations in which knowledge of the best practices of the most

successful institutions are transmitted to their sister institutions in the state. That is, the

information could be used to help improve the performance of a state’s public higher

education system.

       Our paper uses data provided to us by the Office of Institutional Research of the

State University of New York (SUNY) to illustrate a methodological approach that can

be used to address these issues. While the methodology we develop is applied to data

from the SUNY system, the paper’s main purpose is to illustrate the methodology

because we the approach can be usefully employed in any state that has multiple public

2-year and 4-year institutions

      In the next section, we describe the SUNY system, discuss the data to which we have

been granted access and sketch out our methodological approach. Empirical findings are
7
    U.S. Department of Education (2000), table 246


                                                     3
provided in the following three sections and the sensitivity of our finding to the specific

model estimated and sample of data used are examined. Section VI presents a discussion

of the some of the conceptual and statistical limitations of our approach and the types of

data that, if available, would improve the analyses.



    II.      The Data and Our Methodology

    The State University of New York (SUNY) system consists of 64 institutions. These

include 4 university centers that confer baccalaureate, master’s, doctoral and first

professional degrees, 13 university colleges that offer baccalaureate and master’s degrees,

5 specialized colleges that offer instruction in a variety of specialized areas and

baccalaureate and higher level degrees, 2 stand alone health science centers, 5 statutory

colleges that are located on the campuses of private universities (Alfred and Cornell) that

offer the same range of degrees as the university centers, 30 2-year community colleges

and 5 colleges of technology that offer 2-year degrees.8

    During the past 15 years the proportion of the SUNY community college graduates

that received Associate in Arts (AA) or Associate in Science (AS) degrees in a year that

enrolled at a SUNY 4-year institution by the following fall has fluctuated between about

.22 and .27.9 Other AA or AS graduates enroll at a SUNY 4-year institution more than a

year after completing their 2-year degrees, or transfer to private colleges and universities.

Some SUNY 2-year college students enrolled in AA or AS programs transfer to SUNY 4-

year institutions prior to receiving their degrees and some SUNY 2-year college students

enrolled in other degree or certificate programs transfer to SUNY 4-year programs after,

8
 A listing of the institutions in each category appears in the appendix table.
9
 Office of Institutional Research and Analysis (2000), 263. The AA and AS are the 2-year degrees that are
designed to prepare students for transfer to 4-year academic programs.


                                                    4
or before, receiving their degrees.10 Finally some students transfer from private colleges

or universities in New York State, or from colleges and universities in other states, to

SUNY 4-year institutions.

     As a result of all these student flows, transfer students are a substantial share of

undergraduate students (new first year students plus transfer students) at all SUNY 4-year

campuses. Table 2 presents data on transfer students as a share of all new undergraduate

students in the fall of 1999 for each of the SUNY University Centers and University

Colleges that illustrate this point. Transfer students’ shares ranged from .201 at Geneseo

to .743 at Empire State.11 Most of the institutions had transfer shares between .3 and .5.

Because transfer students make up such an important component of the enrollment at

SUNY 4-year institutions, their progression through the system is of great concern to the

university system.

     We have been granted access to grouped data on the number of enrolled full-time

students who transferred from each SUNY 2-year community college or college of

technology to each SUNY 4-year university college, specialized college or university

center at the start of the 1995 and 1996 fall semesters. The data are grouped in each case

by the educational attainment of the students at the time of transfer. Specifically, we

know whether the students in a group had received a 2-year degree at the time of transfer,

or any other type of degree or certificate. We also have been given access to information

on the number of students in each group who had completed a 4-year degree, were still

10
   For example, of the 8,937 students transferring from SUNY 2-year institutions to SUNY 4-year
institutions in the fall of 1999, 3,247 had received AA or AS degrees, 1,249 had received Associate in
Applied Science (AAS) or Associate in Occupational Studies (AOS) degrees, and 4,441 transferred prior to
receiving any degree (Office of Institutional Research (2000), 219)
11
   Empire State College is a nontraditional higher education institution that provides innovative adult-
focused degree programs to students throughout New York State and beyond. Many of its students started
college immediately after graduation from high school, subsequently dropped out of those institutions, and
return to enroll at Empire State as older students.


                                                    5
enrolled at the 4-year institution, or had dropped out of the 4-year institution by three

years later (the falls of 1998 or 1999).12

     Let P1jh be the proportion of those individuals from 2-year college j who transferred to

4-year institution h in the fall of a year, who had received a 4-year degree by three years

later. Let P2jh and P3jh, respectively, be the analogous proportions that were still enrolled

in the 4-year institution in the fall three years later and that had dropped out by the fall

three years later. Our approach initially is to estimate equations (1) below in which each

proportion is specified to be a linear function of a vector of dichotomous variables d

indicating from which 2-year college the students transferred (dk equals one if the

students came from 2-year college k and zero otherwise), a vector of dichotomous

variables indicating to which 4-year institution the students transferred (er equals one if

the students went to institution r and zero otherwise), three dichotomous variables (degt,

dego and cert) indicating, respectively, whether the students in the group had each

received a 2-year degree designed to prepare students for transfer to a 4-year academic

program (an Associate in Arts (AA) or Associate in Science (AS) degree), another 2-year

degree (an Associate in Applied Science (AAS) or Associate in Occupational Studies

(AOS) degree), or a certificate of program completion prior to transferring (the omitted

category is the receipt of no degree or certificate prior to transfer), the distance, in miles,

between the 2-year college and the 4-year college and a dichotomous variable for the year

in which the transfer occurred. In this model ε is a random error term and the a’s, b’s and

c’s are parameters to be estimated.




12
   There is no way to distinguish in the data between individuals who permanently drop out of college from
individuals who have temporarily “stopped out” for academic or nonacademic reasons.


                                                    6
(1) Pijh = c0 + Σ akdk + Σ brer + c1degt + c2dego + c3cert + c4distjh + c5year + εijh        i=1,2,3



     The equation for the proportion of a group that had graduated by the fall three years

after transfer specifies that this proportion depends only on the 2-year college from which

students in the group transferred, the 4-year institution to which students in the group

transferred, whether students in the group had received a 2-year degree designed for

students planning to transfer, another 2-year degree, or a certificate of program

completion before transferring, the distance between the 2-year and 4-year institution and

the year in which the transfer occurred. The equations for the proportions of each group

that were still enrolled or had dropped out by the fall three years after transfer are

analogously specified.

     The distance variable is included because most 2-year college students live near the

2-year college at which they were enrolled and hence the distance measure is a measure

of the distance between the students’ homes and the 4-year college that they attended.

Greater distances from home usually imply greater monetary or psychological costs of

attending college and thus may lower the probability of graduating. The dichotomous

variable for the year of transfer is included because labor market conditions vary over

time and this may influence students’ decisions about times to degree and/or dropout.13

        To avoid collinearity problems, one of the d and one of the e must be excluded

from the model. Somewhat arbitrarily, we choose 2-year college that we denote by TAJ

to be the omitted 2-year institution and a 4-year institution that we denote by CS to be the




13
   For example, the average annual unemployment rate in New York State fell from 6.4% in 1997 to 5.2%
in 1999.


                                                  7
omitted 4-year institution.14 With these exclusions, the interpretation of the remaining a

and b coefficients are straightforward. For example, the estimate of ak in the proportion of

students in the group who graduate by the fall three years after transfer equation is an

estimate of how much higher or lower, the probability of a 2-year college transfer

student’s having graduated by the fall three years after transfer was if the student had

been enrolled at 2-year college k, rather than at 2-year college TAJ, holding constant all

of the other variables in the model (the student’s degree status at transfer, the 4-year

college to which the student transferred and the distance from the 2-year to the 4-year

institution). Similarly, the estimate of br in the graduation equation is an estimate of how

much higher or lower a student’s probability of graduating by the fall three years after

transfer was if he or she was enrolled at 4-year institution r, rather than at 4-year

institution CS, holding all of the other variables in the model constant. The a and b

coefficients in the proportions of students who are still enrolled in a 4-year SUNY

institution and had dropped out of the 4-year SUNY institution by the fall three years

after transfer can be similarly interpreted.

         Put simply, subject to qualifications that we discuss later, estimation of equations

(1) provide estimates of the relative effectiveness of each SUNY 2-year campuses in

preparing those of their students who transfer to SUNY 4-year institutions with the

backgrounds that they need to succeed at the SUNY 4-year institutions. Similarly, the

equations provide estimates of the relative success of each SUNY 4-year institutions in

retaining and graduating those SUNY 2-year transfer students that it enrolls.



14
  We emphasize that the choice of the excluded 2-year and 4-year institutions influences only the
interpretation of the coefficients of the included dichotomous variables in the models, not the relative
rankings of the institutions that we obtain below.


                                                      8
     III.    Initial Empirical Findings

     There are 36 SUNY 2-year community colleges and colleges of technology and 19

SUNY 4-year institutions represented in the database to which we were granted access.

Excluded from the database were the Health Science Centers, two of the Specialized

Colleges (Maritime, Optometry), and the four Statutory Colleges at Cornell University. 15

Each 2-year college transferred students to some, but not necessarily all of the 19 4-year

institutions, so there are less than 684 2-year college/4-year institution groups per year in

the data. However, for each group, there were up to four subgroups consisting of students

who had transferred from the 2-year to the 4-year institution with a 2-year degree

designed to prepare them to transfer (AA, AS), students with another type of 2-year

degree (AAS, AOS), students with a certificate of program completion, and students

without any degree or certificate. When all the subgroups were taken into account, our

sample consisted of 2107 grouped observations.

     Equations (1) were estimated by ordinary least squares. The coefficients of the 2-year

and 4-year institution dichotomous variables for each institution appear in tables 3 and 4,

respectively. Also included in the model were the dichotomous variables for the degrees

or certificates earned prior to transferring, the distance between the 2-year and 4-year

institutions that the student attended and the year of transfer (fall 1995 or fall 1996).

     Students that transferred with a 2-year “transfer” degree (AA or AS degree) already

in hand not surprisingly had about a .20 higher probability of receiving their 4-year

degree, a .07 lower probability of still being enrolled in the 4-year institution and a .13

15
   A list of the institutions in the sample is found in the appendix table. We also excluded Empire State
College from our analyses because it offers flexible programs of individualized curriculum to primarily
adult students and is not a residential college and the Institute of Technology at Utica-Rome because it was
in the process of transitioning from an upper division undergraduate institution to a 4-year undergraduate
program during the period.


                                                     9
lower probability of having dropped out of the 4-year institution by the fall three years

later, than students who transferred before earning any degree or certificate of program

completion, other variables held constant. Similarly transfer students that earned an AAS

or AOS 2-year degree had about a .15 higher probability of receiving their 4-year degree

within the three-year period, a .04 lower probability of still being enrolled, and a .11

lower probability of having dropped out of the 4-year institution, while transfer students

that had some other degree or certificate of program completion prior to transferring had

a .06 higher probability of graduating by the fall three years later, a .06 higher probability

of still being enrolled in school and a .12 lower probability of dropping out by the fall

three years later, all relative to students who transferred before receiving any degree or

certificate of program completion, other variables held constant. The distance variable

proved to be statistically significantly different from zero only in the still enrolled

equation with larger distances appearing to enhance the probability of still being enrolled.

Finally, the dichotomous variable for the fall 1996 entry cohort was negative in the drop

out equation, indicating that students who transferred in the fall of 1996 were less likely

to have dropped out three years later than students who transferred in the fall of 1995.

This may reflect the declining unemployment rate in New York State during the late

1990s, which may have facilitated part-time employment for students that needed to work

to help finance their educations.

    Table 3 shows the estimated impact on the probabilities, as of the fall three years after

transferring, of having graduated from a SUNY 4-year institution, of still being enrolled

in the SUNY 4-year institution and of having dropped out of the SUNY 4-year institution

for transfer students to each 4-year institution in the SUNY system, as compared to the




                                              10
probabilities for transfer students to 4-year institution CS. The identities of the

institutions in the sample are masked in the table by agreement with the Office of

Institutional Research at SUNY because the purpose of our paper is to illustrate the

methodology, not to draw normative conclusions about the success of any specific 4-year

SUNY institution in educating transfer students. As a result, the university centers, the 4-

year university colleges, the statutory colleges and the specialized 4-year colleges in the

sample have been randomly assigned the codes CA to CS.

   The findings in table 3 are quite striking. Attendance at 9 of the institutions – CA,

CC, CD, CF, CJ, CL, CO, CP and CQ –was associated with about a .10 to .45 statistically

significantly lower probability of graduating by the fall of three years after transfer, than

if the students had transferred to CS. In each of these cases transfer students also had a

higher probability of dropping out by the fall three years after transfer than did students

who transferred to UD. In 3 of these cases – CD, CF and CQ– attendance at the

institution was associated, other factors held constant, with a higher probability of still

being enrolled in the fall three years after transfer than if the student had attended CS.

   Transfer students who attended CF had by far the lowest adjusted probability of

graduating by the fall three years after graduation, other factors in the model held

constant. Their probability of graduating by the fall three years after transfer was over .44

lower than transfer students who had enrolled at CS. While this was partially due to their

having a .34 higher probability of still being enrolled, transfer students to CF also had

over a .12 higher probability of dropping out by the fall three years after transfer than did

transfer students to CS.




                                              11
    CR also had a higher transfer student drop out rate within three years after transfer

than CS did; this was associated primarily with a lower probability of still being enrolled,

not with a lower graduation probability.

    Only two of the SUNY 4-year institutions appeared to perform better than CS.

Transfer students who attended CB or the CG had higher statistically significantly higher

probabilities of graduating by the third year after transfer. However, transfer students to

CG also had a slightly higher probability of having dropped out by the fall of the third

year after transfer.

    Taken at face value, the results in table 3 suggest that by the falls of 1998 and 1999

some 4-year SUNY campuses had graduated a greater proportion of the 2-year SUNY

transfer students who transferred to them in the falls of 1995 and 1996 respectively, than

did other 4-year SUNY campuses. While part of the difference was due to the differing

speed at which transfer students progressed through their programs at the different 4-year

campuses, part was due to differences in transfer student dropout rates within 3 years of

enrollment at the different 4-year campuses. System officials and policy makers should

be interested in learning why these differences exist.

    The coefficients in table 4 similarly show the estimated impact on the probabilities of

having graduated from a SUNY 4-year institution by the fall three years after transfer, of

still being enrolled in a SUNY 4-year institution and of having dropped out of the 4-year

institution, of having transferred from each 2-year college of technology and each

community college in the SUNY system, all as compared to having transferred from TAJ.

Again the institutions’ identities have been masked and each college of technology and

community college has been randomly assigned an institutional code.




                                             12
   Many of the estimated coefficients are statistically insignificantly different from zero,

which means that one cannot distinguish the impacts of having transferred from the

corresponding institutions from those from having transferred from TAJ. However, a

number of statistically significant coefficients did occur.

   In particular the probability of graduating by the fall of 1998 appears to be about .100

to .200 lower for transfer students from TF, TG, TH, TK, TL, TP, TW, TAF and TAH. In

the case of TK and TAF, the lower graduation probability was associated with a higher

drop out probability. In contrast, for TG, TL, TW and TAH the lower graduation

probability was associated with a higher probability of still being enrolled. If measured

over a longer time period, the probabilities of graduation for transfer students from these

schools would not necessarily be lower than that for transfer students from TAJ. Finally,

transfer students from TAE appeared to have a higher probability of graduating from the

4-year SUNY institutions within three years of transfer and a lower probability of still

being enrolled, other factors held constant, than did transfer students from TAJ.

   If one takes our results at face value, policy makers and system administrators should

want to know why transfer students from the different 2-year SUNY institutions appear

to have different probabilities of completing their 4-year degrees and of dropping out

within three years after transfer. They might ask what policies have the institutions whose

former students have the best graduation record pursued and then disseminate

information about these policies to the other 2-year institutions in the SUNY system.

Similarly, system administrators and policymakers should want to know why transfer

students to different 4-year institutions have different graduation rate probabilities within




                                             13
three years and seek to disseminate information about what the best performing 4-year

institutions are doing to the other 4-year institutions.

    IV.     Controlling for Heterogeneity in the Preparation of Transfer Students

    The analyses presented above make use of a sample that consists of full-time transfer

students who graduated from 2-year degree programs designed to prepare them to

transfer to 4-year academic programs (AA and AS degrees), who graduated from other 2-

year programs (AAS and AOS degrees), who received certificates of program completion

or who transferred before receiving any degree or certificate. Dichotomous variables for

which degree or certificate of program completion that a transfer student received were

included as explanatory variables in the model to control for a student’s academic

preparation prior to enrolling in the 4-year institution.

    A weakness of this approach is that students without AA or AS degrees who transfer

to 4-year institutions may substantially differ in the number of credits that they are able to

transfer towards the 4-year degree. If systematically students in this category from one 2-

year college have earned fewer credits that apply towards their 4-year degrees than

students in this category from a second 2-year college, it would be reasonable to expect

that students from the first 2-year college would take longer to complete their 4-year

college program. However, our observing this result would be no reflection on the

performance of the first 2-year college, relative to the second, in preparing students for

transfer to 4-year colleges. Rather, it simply would reflect that students in the category

from the first college transferred with fewer applicable credits towards their 4-year

degrees than comparable students from the second college.




                                              14
    Similarly, if transfer students from 2-year colleges in this category who transfer to

one 4-year institution systematically have earned fewer credits that are applicable to their

degrees than transfer students from 2-year colleges in this category who transfer to a

second 4-year institution, it would be reasonable to expect that transfer students in this

category would, on average, take longer to receive their 4-year degree at the first 4-year

institution than at the second 4-year institution. However, our observing this result would

be no reflection on the performance of the first 4-year institution relative to the second 4-

year institution in educating this category of transfer students. It simply would reflect

systematic differences in the academic preparation of transfer students to each of the two

4-year institutions.

    One way to control for this problem is to include information on the number of

credits towards the 4-year degree that each student in our sample received at the time of

enrollment in our estimating equations. If such information were available in a state

university system’s information system, we would encourage researchers to use it.

However, in the absence of the availability of such data, a simpler approach is simply to

eliminate from the sample all of the individuals who transferred without receiving a 2-

year college degree specifically designed to prepare them for transfer to 4-year colleges

and to reestimate the models. We did the latter and the results are presented in tables 5

and 6. We must caution that when we did this the number of grouped observations in the

sample declined from 2107 to 762. Smaller sample sizes make it harder to “tease out”

statistically significant findings in the data.

    A comparison of the coefficients found in table 3 to those found in table 5 and of the

coefficients found in table 4 to those found in table 6 at first glance appear to suggest that




                                                  15
limiting the sample to transfer students who are graduates of AA and AS degree

programs leads to some differences in findings. For example, turning first to the results

for the 4-year institutions, the number of 4-year institutions whose fall 1995 and 1996

transfer students were estimated to have had a statistically significant lower probability of

graduating by the fall three years later than transfer students to CS drops from 9 to 4.

Similarly, the number that have statistically significantly higher drop out probabilities

than CS fall from 13 to 8.

    Also, when we turn to the results for the 2-year institutions, the number of institutions

whose transfer students appear to have a statistically significant lower probability of

graduating within three years than transfer students from TAJ decreases from 8 to 1.

While previously transfer students from only one institution, TAE, were judged to have a

statistically significantly higher graduation probability than transfer students from TAJ,

other factors held constant, when the restricted sample was used TAE was joined by TA

and TB in having higher estimated graduation probabilities.

    Do these results imply that it is important to control for heterogeneity in the types of

students transferring from the different 2-year institutions in analyses of these types and

that failure to do so may affect the conclusions of studies reached? Lest the reader

conclude that our methodology is very sensitive to the sample of transfer students

included in the analyses, we should emphasize that the comparisons above consider only

those estimated institutional coefficients that were statistically significantly different

from zero at at least the .10 level of significance. If instead we consider the point

estimates of each institution’s coefficients, without worrying about the coefficients’

statistical significance, a measure of how similar each coefficient estimate in table 3 is to




                                              16
the corresponding coefficient in table 5 (and similarly for the coefficients in tables 4 and

6) can be obtained from the Spearman rank correlation coefficient of the corresponding

coefficient estimates.

    The Spearman rank correlation coefficient of the estimated 4-year institutional

coefficients found in tables 3 and 5 for the probability of graduating by the fall three

years after transfer is .7897. This means that the ranking of which 4-year institutions are

most successful in graduating transfer students from 2-year colleges is actually very

similar in the two samples. Similarly, the corresponding Spearman rank correlation

coefficients for the probabilities of being enrolled in college and having dropped out of

college by the fall three years after transfer are .8620 and .7517, respectively, which

again means that the ranking of SUNY 4-year institutions on each of these two measures

are also very similar across the two samples. All of the values of these Spearman

correlation coefficients are statistically significantly different from zero at at least the .05

level, which means that we can reject the hypothesis that each of the rankings of the 4-

year colleges on these measures is not similar across the two samples.

    When we similarly compute the Spearman rank correlation coefficient for the

estimated 2-year institutional coefficients found in tables 4 and 6 for the probability of

graduating by the fall three years after transfer, it proves to be .7096. . The comparable

Spearman rank correlation coefficients for the probability of still being enrolled in

college three years after transfer is .6403. With 34 observations (2-year institutions) each

of these correlations is statistically significantly different from zero at the .05 level of

significance, which means that we can reject the hypotheses that the ranking of 2-year

institutions on these measures is not similar across the two samples. In contrast, the




                                               17
Spearman rank correlation coefficient of the probability of having dropped out of college

by the fall three years after transfer is only .2411, which is not statistically significantly

different from zero at even the .10 level. This means the ranking of 2-year institutions in

terms of their students’ drop out probabilities is not similar between samples.

    Interestingly, however, the correlation in each of the samples between a 2-year

institution’s rank on its transfer students’ graduation probability and its rank on their drop

out probability is close to zero. In contrast, its rank on their graduation probability within

three years after transfer is highly negatively correlated with its rank on their still being

enrolled in college within three years after transfer probability. Differences across 2-year

SUNY institutions in the probability that students from them who have transferred to

SUNY 4-year institutions graduate within 3 years reflect primarily the speed that they are

progressing towards a degree, not differences in drop out behavior. As such, the fact the

ranking of 2-year institutions on the drop out probabilities is not similar across samples is

of little consequence.

    V.      Controlling for Student Quality

         Graduation probabilities vary widely across the 4-year SUNY campuses present

in our sample for students who first enroll at each campus as a freshman. For example,

the 6-year graduation rates for the class entering as freshman in the fall of 1992 varied

from 29.68 to 82.22. Presumably these probabilities vary because of differences in the

academic quality and preparation of students admitted to and enrolling at each institution,

differences in the financial situations of enrolled students at each institution and

differences in the academic support that students receive from faculty and staff at each

institution. In fact the correlation across the SUNY 4-year institutions of the 6-year




                                               18
graduation rates for freshman in the fall of 1992 and the estimated institutional

dichotomous variables in our probability of completion equations is about .70. So our

estimates of the relative impact of the 4-year colleges in graduating 2-year college

transfer students to a large extent may reflects their success in graduating students who

enter initially as freshman.

        Similarly, our model implicitly assumes that transfer students from a given SUNY

2-year institution that enroll in different SUNY 4-year institutions are all roughly

comparable in academic preparation and quality. So, for example, if there are two SUNY

4-year campuses that are located near a given SUNY 2-year campus, it assumes that

students from the 2-year campus that transfer to each of the 4-year campuses are

comparable in academic quality. However, if the admissions standards for freshman

students, in terms of students’ academic records and test scores, at the first 4-year campus

are higher than the admission standards at the second 4-year campus, it is reasonable to

assume that the entrance standards for transfer students to the first campus will also be

higher than the admission standards for transfer students to the second. If differences in

admission standards for transfer students at SUNY 4-year campus mirror differences in

standards for freshmen at the SUNY 4-year campuses, the estimated coefficients of the

transfer student three year graduation rate, continued enrollment rate and drop out rate

probabilities that we report in tables 3 and 5 may simply reflect differences in the

academic preparation and ability of the transfer students at different 4-year institutions,

not differences in the academic support that students receive from faculty and staff at

different 4-year institutions.




                                             19
       In an ideal world, one would have information on the academic backgrounds of

the students who transfer from each 2-year to each 4-year college in terms of things like

grade point averages, fraction of courses for which transfer courses were granted and test

scores. In the absence of such data, an alternative approach to measuring the relative

effectiveness of a 4-year SUNY institution in graduating transfer students is the extent to

which their transfer students’ graduation rate exceeds the graduation rate of transfer

students at other 4-year SUNY institutions, after one controls for each institution’s 6-year

freshman graduation rate in the estimation. Implicitly this approach assumes that the

admissions standards for transfer students at each 4-year institution parallel the admission

standards for freshman students at the institution. That is, it assumes that those

institutions that have the highest admission standards for freshman also, in a relative

sense, have the highest admission standards for transfer students.

       To obtain such estimates, we reestimated our models for the sample of transfer

students that received AA or AS degrees before transferring, entering into each equation

as an additional explanatory variable the 6 year graduation rate of students who entered

as freshman at each 4-year institution. Data for freshman who entered in the fall of 1992

and 1993 were used for the fall 1995 and fall 1996 transfer students, respectively.

       The coefficients of the 4-year and 2-year college obtained from this estimation

appear in tables 7 and 8 respectively. The ranking of the 4-year institutions that one

obtains when this is done is quite different than the ranking that is one obtains from tables

3 and 5. For example, while transfer students who enrolled at CC, CJ and CO all were

estimated to have lower probabilities of graduating within 3 years than transfer students

who enrolled at CS in tables 3 and 5, in this specification they all have higher




                                             20
probabilities of graduating within 3 years. Indeed, the Spearman rank correlation

coefficient of the 4-year institution graduation probabilities is -.2230, which is not

statistically significantly different from zero. This result suggests that it is important to

control for student preparation and background in any attempt to evaluate the relative

performance of 4-year institutions within a state system in educating transfer students.

         However, inclusion in the model of the 6-year graduation rate for freshmen at

each 4-year institution does not alter the pattern of coefficients of the 2-year college

variables. For example, the results in table 8 suggest that, other factors held constant,

transfer students from TA, TX and TAE each had a higher probability of graduating

within three years and those from TI a lower probability of graduating within three years,

than did transfer students from TAJ.16 This is exactly the same pattern of findings that

appeared in table 6 when we did not control for the 6-year graduation rate of the 4-year

institution to which students transferred. Indeed, when we compute the Spearman rank

correlation coefficients across the 2-year institutions of the graduation probabilities, the

still enrolled probabilities and the drop out probabilities in the two tables, they are .997,

.999, and .999, respectively. This result was expected because the 6-year graduation rates

of freshmen at the 4-year colleges are uncorrelated with the 2-year college dichotomous

variables.

         Interestingly, once we control for the 6-year graduation rate of freshmen, the

ranking of the 4-year institutions on the probability that transfer students to them

graduate within 3 years is highly positively correlated with the share of an institution’s

new students that are transfer students (the data in table 2). Put another way, on average,


16
  Each of these results is statistically significantly different from zero at at least the .10 level of
significance.


                                                        21
the more important that transfer students are to a SUNY 4-year institution, the greater the

likelihood that they will graduate within 3 years.

        VI Concluding Remarks

        Our goal in this paper has been to describe a methodology that can be used within

any state system of higher education to evaluate how well each 4-year public institution is

performing in educating students who transfer to it from each 2-year public institution in

the state and how well each 2-year public institution is performing in preparing its

students who transfer to 4-year public institutions in the state to complete their programs

at the 4-year institutions. The estimates that we have obtained for the SUNY system in

New York State are meant only to illustrate the methodology and we have masked the

identities of the institutions for this reason. Our view is that rankings of this type are best

thought of as formative rather than summative. Rather than using them to reward, or

penalize, institutions, it would be more productive, at least in the initial years that they

are employed, for system administrators and policy makers to try to learn what the factors

are that cause some 4-year and 2-year institutions to “look better” on these measures than

do other institutions within the system. Once the factors are discovered, dissemination of

information about the actions taken by the “better institutions” that led to their success to

all institutions in the system would be beneficial.

        There are of course a number of ways in which our methodology can be

improved. For expository purposes we have used the simplest statistical model, a system

of linear probability equations, and estimated it using ordinary least squares. Inasmuch as

the sample sizes vary across the cells of the model (2-year college/4-year college/degree

at transfer), more precise estimates could be obtained using the method of weighted




                                              22
regression. In addition, the linear probability model does not take into account that each

of the probabilities can vary only between 0 and 1 and that there is an explicit ordering of

the probabilities (graduating is better than still being enrolled, which in turn is better than

having dropping out). Using a multinomial logit model takes the first into account, while

using either an ordered probit or logit model takes the second into account.17 We have in

fact estimated both multinomial logit and ordered logit models and the results we

obtained when these models were employed were very similar to those that we have

reported in the text.18

         The data that we use follows transfer student for only 3 years. If access to follow-

ups that span longer periods of time were available in a state system’s information

system, it would be possible to gain a better understanding of whether institutions vary in

their longer-run graduation and drop out probabilities.

         Evaluations of this type would ideally also be conducted using more cohorts

(entering classes) of transfer students. The small number of students found in many of the

2-year institution/4-year institution cells makes it difficult for our models to “tease out”

statistically significant differences across institutions. The increases in sample sizes

permitted by access to multiple cohorts of data would enhance the likelihood of being

able to observe differences across institutions. Use of multiple cohorts would also be

17
   See Jeffrey M. Woolridge (2002), pages 504 to 508, for a discussion of ordered probit and ordered logit
models.
18
   Results of these estimations are available from the authors on request. To give the reader an idea of how
similar they are to the results presented in the text, the spearman rank correlation of the coefficients of the
4-year institution dichotomous variables reported for the graduation rate equation in table 3 with the
coefficients of the 4-year institution dichotomous variables in the graduation rate equation that we obtained
using the same sample from the multinomial logit model is .970. The analogous rank correlations for the
samples and models used in tables 5 and 7 were .976 and .941, respectively. Similarly, the analogous rank
correlations for the coefficients of the 2-year institution dichotomous variables in the graduation rate
equations reported in table 4, 6 and 8, with the coefficients of the 2-year institution dichotomous variables
obtained from the graduation rate equations when the multinomial logit models were estimated were .829,
.748 and .782, respectively.


                                                      23
preferred because an institution’s “performance” could be judged on average over a

number of cohorts rather than from how the students in only one or two cohorts do.

        Rather than assuming, as we have done in tables 7 and 8, that the admission

standards and preparation of transfer students to each 4-year institution can be controlled

for by the 6-year graduation rate of students who initially enroll as freshmen at the

institution, it would be preferable to try to directly control for these variables. If data on

the academic backgrounds and information on each transfer student are not easily

available in a state system’s information system, information on the minimum grade

point average, or the average grade point average, for transfers, that each 4-year

institution has admitted in each year would be useful.

        As in many states, there is no system wide articulation agreement in New York

State that specifies the conditions under which students from a 2-year institution can

transfer to a 4-year institution. The success of transfer students coming from a SUNY 2-

year campus that transfer to a SUNY 4-year campus may depend upon the types of

articulation agreements, if any, that exist between the two campuses. Such agreements

often specify sets of required courses for transfer students wishing to major in certain

fields that must be accomplished before transfer, along with grade point averages that

must be maintained in these courses; transfer students may be better prepared for transfer

if such agreements are in place. Having detailed data on the nature of articulation

agreements between each 2-year campus and each 4-year campus within a state system,

whether each agreement is adhered to and the resources that each institutions applies to

advising potential transfer students from or to it would improve the analyses and aid in

the interpretation of the estimated institutional coefficients.




                                               24
        A final factor that may influence the ability of 2-year college transfers to progress

towards 4-year degrees is the financial background of the transfer students. If transfers

from one 2-year institution have greater “financial need” than transfers from a second 2-

year institution, it would not be surprising to find that the former have a lower probability

of receiving a 4-year degree and a higher probability of dropping out within three years

after transfer than do the latter. Similarly, if transfer students to one 4-year institution

have greater “financial need” than transfer students to a second 4-year institution, it

would not be surprising to observe that the former similarly have a lower probability of

receiving a 4-year degree and a higher probability of dropping out within three years of

transfer than to the latter. However, neither of these differences would reflect on the 2-

year colleges from the students came or the 4-year colleges to which they transferred. If

data in state system information systems permitted one to control for transfer students’

financial backgrounds, this would improve the analyses of this type.




                                               25
                                 References



      Thomas Bailey, “Community Colleges in the 21st Century: Challenges and

Opportunities” in P.A Gram and N. Stacey eds. The Knowledge Economy and

Postsecondary Education: Report of Workshop (Washington DC: National Academy

Press, 2002)

      Ronald G. Ehrenberg, “Financial Forecasts for the Next Decade”, The Presidency,

Spring 2000

      Debra Gerald and William J Hussar, Projections of Educational Statistics to 2011

(Washington DC: National Center for Education Statistics, 2001)

      W. Norton Grubb, “The Varied Economic Returns to Postsecondary Education: New

Evidence From the Class of 1972”, Journal of Human Resources 28 (Spring 1993): 365-

392

      W. Norton Grubb, “The Varied Economic Returns to Postsecondary Education: New

Evidence From the Class of 1972: Response”, Journal of Human Resources 30 (Winter

1995): 222-228.

      W. Norton Grubb, “The Returns to Education in the Sub-Baccalaureate Labor

Market, 1984-1990”, Economics of Education Review 16 (June 1997): 231-245

      Thomas J. Kane and Cecelia E. Rouse, “Labor Market Returns to Two- and Four-

Year College”, American Economic Review 85 (June 1995): 600-614 (1995a)

      Thomas J. Kane and Cecilia E. Rouse, “The Varied Economic Returns to

Postsecondary Education: New Evidence from the Class of 1972: Comment”, Journal of

Human Resources 30 (Winter 1995): 205-221 (1995b)




                                              26
   Thomas J. Kane and Cecilia E. Rouse, “The Community College: Educating Students

at the Margin Between College and Work”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 13 (Winter

1999): 63-84

   Duane E. Leigh and Andrew M. Gill, “Labor Market Returns to Community

Colleges: Evidence for Returning Adults”, Journal of Human Resources 32 (Spring

1997): 334-353

   Duane E. Leigh and Andrew M. Gill, “Do Community Colleges Really Divert

Students from Earning Bachelor’s Degrees”, Economics of Education Review

(forthcoming)

   Office of Institutional Research and Analysis, State University of New York,

Application and Enrollment Patterns of Transfer Students, Fall 1999 (Albany, December

2000)

   Office of the Provost and Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs, State University of

New York, “High School Graduation Status of Full-Time First-Year Students”, Statistical

Release No. 395 (November 21, 2000)

   Ernest T. Pascarella, “Its Time We Started Paying Attention to Community College

Students”, About Campus 1 (January/February 1997): 14-17.

   Ernst T. Pascarella, “New Studies Track Community College Effects on Students”,

Community College Journal 69 (July 1999): 8-14.

   Ernst T. Pascarella and Patrick T. Terezini, How College Affects Students: Findings

and Insights From Twenty Years of Research (San Francisco CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers,

1991)




                                          27
   Ernst T. Pascarella, Marcia Edison, Amaury Nora, Patrick T. Terezini and Linda

Sema Hagedon, “Does Community College Versus Four-Year College Attendance

Influence Student Educational Plans”, Journal of College Student Development 39

(March/April 1998): 179-195

   Cecilia E. Rouse, “Democratization or Diversion? The Effects of Community

Colleges on Educational Attainment”, Journal of Business Economics and Statistics 13

(April 1995): 217-224

   Cecilia E. Rouse, “Do Two-Year Colleges Increase Overall Educational Attainment?

Evidence From the States”, Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 17 (December

1998): 595-620

   Vincent Tinto, Leaving College: Rethinking the Causes and Cures of Student

Attrition, 2nd. Edition (Chicago IL: University of Chicago Press, 1993)

   U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Digest of

Education Statistics (Washington DC: 2000)

   Jeffrey M. Woolridge, Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data

(Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 2002)




                                            28
                          Table 1

Share of Freshmen Enrolled in Public Institutions in the Fall
      of 1996 Who Were Enrolled in 2-Year Colleges


                  All FT State                  All FT
  Alabama         .56 .50 Montana               .11 .09
  Alaska          .01 .01 Nebraska              .42 .34
  Arizona         .19 .16 Nevada                .57 .26
  Arkansas        .64 .49 New Hampshire .27 .20
  California      .78 .60 New Jersey            .62 .55
  Colorado        .45 .27 New Mexico            .29 .28
  Connecticut     .50 .31 New York              .58 .55
  Delaware        .35 .22 North Carolina .44 .34
  Florida         .65 .52 North Dakota          .27 .27
  Georgia         .48 .37 Ohio                  .36 .26
  Hawaii          .74 .60 Oklahoma              .48 .36
  Idaho           .36 .34 Oregon                .59 .45
  Illinois        .72 .56 Pennsylvania          .55 .43
  Indiana         .23 .15 Rhode Island          .49 .37
  Iowa            .71 .59 South Carolina .50 .41
  Kansas          .54 .42 South Dakota          .01 .01
  Kentucky        .30 .27 Tennessee             .45 .39
  Louisiana       .16 .12 Texas                 .59 .45
  Maine           .27 .25 Utah                  .59 .48
  Maryland        .59 .44 Vermont               .25 .15
  Massachusetts .56 .45 Virginia                .32 .23
  Michigan        .46 .30 Washington            .82 .72
  Minnesota       .47 .43 West Virginia         .15 .11
  Mississippi     .65 .61 Wisconsin             .48 .36
  Missouri        .36 .26 Wyoming               .71 .66
  U.S Total       .55 .42
  Source: Authors’ calculations from data contained in the
  WEBCASPAR System (All- all freshmen, FT- full time freshmen)




                             29
                                       Table 2

 Transfer Students As A Share of All New Undergraduate Students in the Fall 1999
             at SUNY 4-Year University Centers and University Colleges
_____________________________________________________________________
Albany              .375                  Geneseo         . 201
Binghamton           .271                 New Paltz        .401
Buffalo Univ.       .339                  Old Westbury     .533
Stony Brook         .431                  Oneota            .352
Brockport          .479                   Oswego           .359
Buffalo Coll.      .484                   Plattsburgh      .442
Cortland           .368                   Potsdam           .320
Empire State       .743                   Purchase         .291
Fredonia           .277
Source: Authors’ computations from data found in Application and Enrollment Patterns
of Transfer Students – Fall 1999, Report Number 6-00A, Office of Institutional Research
and Analysis, State University of New York, December 2000, part VII.




                                          30
                                                       Table 3
                                             (A)                             (B)                          (C)

                                  Graduated by the fall           Are still enrolled in the     Have dropped out by
                                    of 1998 (from '95              fall of 1998 (from '95       the fall of 1998 (from
                                  cohort) or in fall 1999         cohort) or in fall 1999        '95 cohort) or in fall
                                    (from '96 cohort)                (from '96 cohort)         1999 (from '96 cohort)
 Receiving institutions (impact
        relative to CS)           Coefficient      T-value        Coefficient      T-value     Coefficient      T-value
             CA                     -0.096          -2.48           0.034           0.90         0.060           2.33
             CB                      0.114           2.50           -0.138          -3.11        0.025           0.84
             CC                     -0.177          -4.37           0.037           0.93         0.139           5.16
             CD                     -0.265          -4.70           0.170           3.07         0.093           2.49
             CE                      0.035           0.91           -0.074          -1.94        0.036           1.38
             CF                     -0.443          -9.25           0.335           7.14         0.107           3.35
             CG                      0.107           2.46           -0.168          -3.94        0.057           1.98
             CI                     -0.029          -0.66           -0.075          -1.76        0.101           3.50
             CJ                     -0.169          -4.36           0.045           1.19         0.121           4.70
             CK                     -0.029          -0.72           -0.096          -2.44        0.129           4.86
             CL                     -0.160          -3.74           0.043           1.03         0.120           4.23
             CM                      0.111           1.08           -0.045          -0.45        -0.069          -1.01
             CN                     -0.043          -1.05           -0.048          -1.21        0.091           3.35
             CO                     -0.104          -2.64           -0.002          -0.05        0.104           3.97
             CP                     -0.163          -3.61           -0.002          -0.05        0.166           5.54
             CQ                     -0.175          -3.86           0.092           2.07         0.081           2.71
             CR                      0.013           0.33           -0.078          -1.98        0.062           2.34

* Also included in the model were dichotomous variables for whether the student in the group had
received an AA/AS ('transfer') degree, AAS/AOS ('non-transfer') degree, or an "other" degree before
transferring, a year indicator variable (whether the 95/98 or 96/99 cohort), and the distance between
the sending and receiving institutions (in miles).
n=2107 groups

                                  Summary Statistics                Mean        Standard Dev
                                   Fraction graduated               0.520          0.367
                                  Fraction still enrolled           0.364          0.345
                                  Fraction dropped out              0.117          0.231
                                  Observations: 2107




                                                             31
                                                     Table 4
                                            (A)                             (B)                         (C)

                                 Graduated by the fall           Are still enrolled in the    Have dropped out by
                                   of 1998 (from '95              fall of 1998 (from '95      the fall of 1998 (from
                                 cohort) or in fall 1999         cohort) or in fall 1999       '95 cohort) or in fall
  Sending institutions (impact     (from '96 cohort)                (from '96 cohort)        1999 (from '96 cohort)
       relative to TAJ)
                                 Coefficient      T-value        Coefficient      T-value    Coefficient      T-value
              TA                    0.087           1.57           -0.095          -1.76       0.007           0.18
              TB                    0.050           0.79           -0.094          -1.52       0.042           1.00
              TC                   -0.004          -0.07           -0.044          -0.85        0.046           1.31
              TD                   -0.029          -0.53           0.016           0.30        0.011           0.31
              TE                   -0.018          -0.28           0.009           0.15        0.007           0.17
              TF                   -0.107          -1.91           0.052           0.95        0.054           1.47
              TG                   -0.160          -2.44           0.135           2.10        0.023           0.53
              TH                   -0.094          -1.68           0.062           1.12        0.031           0.84
              TI                   -0.092          -1.57           0.082           1.42        0.010           0.26
              TJ                    0.006           0.10           -0.023          -0.38       0.025           0.62
              TK                   -0.126          -1.90           0.012           0.19        0.112           2.53
              TL                   -0.097          -1.76           0.083           1.54        0.014           0.39
             TM                    -0.042          -0.77           0.003           0.07        0.039           1.10
              TN                    0.001           0.01            0.029           0.51       -0.030          -0.77
              TO                    0.074           1.38           -0.091          -1.72       0.015           0.43
              TP                   -0.139          -2.25           0.073           1.21        0.064           1.56
              TQ                   -0.119          -1.50           -0.021          -0.27        0.138           2.63
              TR                    0.002           0.04           -0.027          -0.54       0.024           0.70
              TS                   -0.067          -1.07           0.018           0.29        0.048           1.15
              TT                   -0.051          -0.86            0.053           0.91       -0.004          -0.10
              TU                   -0.079          -1.37           -0.013          -0.23        0.092           2.38
              TV                   -0.095          -1.58           0.021           0.36        0.075           1.86
             TW                    -0.155          -2.31           0.115           1.75        0.037           0.83
              TX                    0.042           0.70           -0.094          -1.61       0.051           1.29
              TY                   -0.053          -0.96           0.011           0.20        0.056           1.53
              TZ                   -0.081          -1.33           0.046           0.77        0.033           0.83
             TAA                   -0.017          -0.33           -0.015          -0.29        0.035           1.02
             TAB                    0.051           0.90           -0.081          -1.48       0.030           0.81
             TAC                   -0.062          -1.22           -0.008          -0.15        0.069           2.03
             TAD                    0.044           0.76           -0.066          -1.18       0.026           0.69
             TAE                    0.117           2.12           -0.151          -2.80       0.033           0.91
             TAF                   -0.146          -2.52           0.044           0.78        0.100           2.59
             TAG                   -0.064          -1.15           0.028           0.52        0.034           0.94
             TAH                   -0.191          -2.37            0.216           2.73       -0.028          -0.51
             TAI                   -0.020          -0.37           -0.013          -0.25        0.035           0.96
n=2107 groups




                                                            32
                                                       Table 5
                                             (A)                             (B)                          (C)

                                  Graduated by the fall           Are still enrolled in the     Have dropped out by
                                    of 1998 (from '95              fall of 1998 (from '95       the fall of 1998 (from
                                  cohort) or in fall 1999         cohort) or in fall 1999        '95 cohort) or in fall
                                    (from '96 cohort)                (from '96 cohort)         1999 (from '96 cohort)
 Receiving institutions (impact
        relative to CS)           Coefficient      T-value        Coefficient      T-value     Coefficient      T-value
               CA                   -0.076          -1.23           0.025            0.41        0.051           1.72
               CB                    0.078           0.89           -0.109          -1.29        0.032           0.77
               CC                   -0.060          -0.92           -0.030          -0.47        0.094           3.02
               CD                   -0.338          -2.84           0.291            2.52        0.044           0.78
               CE                    0.132           2.05           -0.163          -2.60        0.030           0.98
               CF                   -0.342          -4.49           0.273           3.69         0.070           1.92
               CG                    0.147           2.26           -0.166          -2.63        0.019           0.62
               CI                   -0.003          -0.04           -0.039          -0.58        0.042           1.28
               CJ                   -0.026          -0.42           0.005            0.08        0.020           0.70
               CK                    0.021           0.33           -0.113          -1.84        0.093           3.09
               CL                   -0.129          -1.88           0.075           1.12         0.070           2.15
               CM                   -0.194          -1.14            0.208           1.26        -0.013          -0.16
               CN                    0.018           0.27           -0.068          -1.05        0.055           1.72
               CO                   -0.043          -0.68           -0.052          -0.84        0.096           3.14
               CP                   -0.052          -0.80           -0.043          -0.68        0.100           3.20
               CQ                   -0.154          -2.17           0.119           1.73         0.035           1.04
               CR                    0.044           0.71           -0.081          -1.35        0.037           1.23
* Also included in the model were a year indicator variable (whether the 95/98 or 96/99 cohort), and
the distance between the sending and receiving institutions (in miles).
n=762 groups

                                  Summary Statistics                Mean        Standard Dev
                                   Fraction graduated               0.615          0.339
                                  Fraction still enrolled           0.324          0.328
                                  Fraction dropped out              0.063          0.156
                                   Observations: 762




                                                             33
                                                         Table 6
                                               (A)                                (B)                         (C)

                                   Graduated by the fall               Are still enrolled in the    Have dropped out by
                                     of 1998 (from '95                  fall of 1998 (from '95      the fall of 1998 (from
                                   cohort) or in fall 1999             cohort) or in fall 1999       '95 cohort) or in fall
  Sending institutions (impact       (from '96 cohort)                    (from '96 cohort)        1999 (from '96 cohort)
       relative to TAJ)
                                   Coefficient       T-value           Coefficient      T-value    Coefficient      T-value
               TA                      0.161           1.83              -0.131          -1.54       -0.034          -0.80
               TB                      0.159           1.70              -0.153          -1.68       -0.012          -0.26
               TC                      0.007           0.08              -0.084          -0.99       0.072           1.73
               TD                      0.060           0.69              -0.051          -0.60       -0.014          -0.35
               TE                     -0.107          -1.01               0.105           1.02       -0.002          -0.05
               TF                      0.031           0.33              -0.035          -0.38       0.004           0.08
               TG                     -0.086          -0.89              0.034           0.36        0.048           1.03
               TH                     -0.122          -1.39               0.125           1.46       -0.009          -0.21
               TI                        *               *                  *               *           *               *
               TJ                      0.138           1.49              -0.141          -1.56       0.020           0.46
               TK                     -0.045          -0.41              -0.131          -1.24        0.169           3.27
               TL                      0.068           0.77              -0.032          -0.38       -0.037          -0.86
              TM                      -0.011          -0.12               0.018           0.20       -0.013          -0.30
               TN                     -0.011          -0.12               0.044           0.51       -0.036          -0.86
               TO                      0.044           0.50              -0.063          -0.73       0.014           0.32
               TP                      0.006           0.06               0.050           0.49       -0.061          -1.21
               TQ                     -0.284          -2.84              0.221           2.27        0.059           1.24
               TR                      0.022           0.25              -0.073          -0.87       0.047           1.13
               TS                     -0.019          -0.19              -0.044          -0.46        0.059           1.25
               TT                     -0.094          -1.04              0.063           0.71        0.026           0.61
               TU                      0.001           0.01              -0.002          -0.02        0.000          -0.01
               TV                     -0.059          -0.62               0.077           0.83       -0.023          -0.51
              TW                      -0.042          -0.41               0.046           0.45       -0.009          -0.19
               TX                      0.158           1.73              -0.156          -1.75       -0.008          -0.18
               TY                     -0.036          -0.40               0.034           0.39       -0.003          -0.07
               TZ                      0.032           0.35              -0.011          -0.12       -0.025          -0.56
              TAA                     -0.031          -0.36              0.010           0.12        0.030           0.72
              TAB                      0.022           0.23              -0.030          -0.31       0.002           0.05
              TAC                     -0.013          -0.15              -0.036          -0.45        0.046           1.15
              TAD                      0.039           0.44              -0.028          -0.32       -0.016          -0.39
              TAE                      0.166           1.92              -0.158          -1.88       -0.011          -0.27
              TAF                     -0.108          -1.07              0.053           0.54        0.049           1.01
              TAG                     -0.057          -0.58               0.109           1.15       -0.056          -1.21
              TAH                     -0.176          -1.35               0.211           1.67       -0.041          -0.66
              TAI                     -0.042          -0.48              0.041           0.49        0.002           0.05
n=762 groups
*TI had no transfers with a transfer degree in the 95/98 cohort




                                                                  34
                                                       Table 7
                                             (A)                             (B)                          (C)

                                  Graduated by the fall           Are still enrolled in the     Have dropped out by
                                    of 1998 (from '95              fall of 1998 (from '95       the fall of 1998 (from
                                  cohort) or in fall 1999         cohort) or in fall 1999        '95 cohort) or in fall
                                    (from '96 cohort)                (from '96 cohort)         1999 (from '96 cohort)
 Receiving institutions (impact
        relative to CS)           Coefficient      T-value        Coefficient      T-value     Coefficient      T-value
               CA                    0.253           1.94           -0.246          -1.93        -0.005          -0.07
               CB                   -0.056          -0.56           0.000            0.00        0.055           1.15
               CC                    0.411           2.32           -0.417          -2.42        0.015           0.18
               CD                    0.430           1.46           -0.340          -1.19        -0.085          -0.60
               CE                    0.251           3.28           -0.261          -3.50        0.010           0.28
               CF                    0.111           0.63           -0.099          -0.58        -0.007          -0.08
               CG                   -0.127          -1.10           0.058           0.52         0.065           1.18
               CI                    0.006           0.08           -0.046          -0.69        0.041           1.23
               CJ                    0.199           2.00           -0.179          -1.85        -0.017          -0.36
               CK                    0.158           2.00           -0.225          -2.93        0.070           1.85
               CL                    0.075           0.76           -0.093          -0.96        0.036           0.76
               CM                   -0.195          -1.16            0.209           1.27        -0.013          -0.16
               CN                    0.325           2.57           -0.321          -2.60        0.003           0.05
               CO                    0.270           2.13           -0.309          -2.51        0.043           0.70
               CP                    0.124           1.39           -0.188          -2.15        0.071           1.63
               CQ                    0.077           0.72           -0.071          -0.68        -0.004          -0.07
               CR                   -0.326          -2.27           0.223            1.59        0.099           1.43

* Also included in the model were the 6-year graduation rate for the originating institution, a year
indicator variable (whether the 95/98 or 96/99 cohort), and the distance between the sending and
receiving institutions (in miles).
n=762 groups

                                  Summary Statistics                Mean        Standard Dev
                                   Fraction graduated               0.615          0.339
                                  Fraction still enrolled           0.324          0.328
                                  Fraction dropped out              0.063          0.156
                                   Observations: 762




                                                             35
                                                         Table 8
                                               (A)                              (B)                        (C)

                                   Graduated by the fall            Are still enrolled in the    Have dropped out by
                                     of 1998 (from '95               fall of 1998 (from '95      the fall of 1998 (from
                                   cohort) or in fall 1999          cohort) or in fall 1999       '95 cohort) or in fall
  Sending institutions (impact       (from '96 cohort)                 (from '96 cohort)        1999 (from '96 cohort)
       relative to TAJ)
                                   Coefficient       T-value        Coefficient       T-value   Coefficient      T-value
               TA                      0.158           1.81            -0.129          -1.52      -0.033          -0.79
               TB                      0.156           1.67            -0.150          -1.65      -0.011          -0.25
               TC                      0.004           0.05            -0.082          -0.97      0.072           1.74
               TD                      0.060           0.70            -0.051          -0.61      -0.014          -0.35
               TE                     -0.110          -1.04             0.107           1.04      -0.002          -0.04
               TF                      0.033           0.35            -0.036          -0.40      0.003           0.08
               TG                     -0.083          -0.86            0.031           0.33       0.047           1.02
               TH                     -0.118          -1.35             0.122           1.43      -0.009          -0.22
               TI                        *               *                *               *          *               *
               TJ                      0.147           1.59            -0.148          -1.65      0.019           0.42
               TK                     -0.035          -0.32            -0.139          -1.33       0.168           3.23
               TL                      0.062           0.71            -0.028          -0.32      -0.036          -0.84
              TM                      -0.014          -0.16             0.020           0.23      -0.012          -0.29
               TN                     -0.009          -0.10             0.042           0.49      -0.037          -0.87
               TO                      0.046           0.52            -0.064          -0.74      0.014           0.32
               TP                      0.008           0.08             0.049           0.48      -0.061          -1.21
               TQ                     -0.286          -2.87            0.222           2.29       0.060           1.24
               TR                      0.019           0.23            -0.071          -0.85      0.047           1.14
               TS                     -0.015          -0.16            -0.046          -0.49       0.058           1.24
               TT                     -0.099          -1.10            0.067           0.76       0.027           0.63
               TU                     -0.005          -0.06            0.003           0.03       0.001           0.02
               TV                     -0.056          -0.59             0.074           0.81      -0.024          -0.52
              TW                      -0.037          -0.36             0.042           0.42      -0.010          -0.20
               TX                      0.154           1.68            -0.153          -1.72      -0.007          -0.16
               TY                     -0.034          -0.38             0.033           0.37      -0.003          -0.08
               TZ                      0.029           0.32            -0.009          -0.10      -0.024          -0.55
              TAA                     -0.034          -0.40            0.013           0.15       0.030           0.74
              TAB                      0.022           0.22            -0.029          -0.31      0.003           0.05
              TAC                     -0.012          -0.15            -0.037          -0.45       0.046           1.15
              TAD                      0.036           0.41            -0.026          -0.30      -0.016          -0.38
              TAE                      0.164           1.92            -0.157          -1.88      -0.011          -0.26
              TAF                     -0.117          -1.16            0.060           0.62       0.050           1.04
              TAG                     -0.058          -0.60             0.110           1.17      -0.056          -1.20
              TAH                     -0.177          -1.37             0.212           1.68      -0.041          -0.66
              TAI                     -0.042          -0.49            0.042           0.49       0.002           0.05
n=762 groups
*TI had no transfers with a transfer degree in the 95/98 or 96/99 cohort




                                                               36
                                Appendix Table

             The State University of New York (SUNY) System (Fall 2001)


    I.     University Centers (4) - Albany, Binghamton, Buffalo, Stony Brook

    II.    University Colleges (13) - Brockport, Buffalo State, Cortland, Empire State
           College, Fredonia, Geneseo, New Paltz, Old Westbury, Oneota, Oswego,
           Plattsburgh, Potsdam, Purchase

    III.   Specialized Colleges (5) – College of Technology at Farmingdaleb, Maritime
           Collegea, College of Optometrya, Institute of Technology at Utica-Romec,
           College of Environmental Science and Forestry

    IV.    Statutory Colleges (5) – College of Ceramics at Alfred and the Colleges of
           Agriculture and Life Sciencesa, Human Ecologya, Veterinary Medicinea and
           the School of Industrial and Labor Relationsa at Cornell

    V.     Community Colleges (30) – Adirondack, Broome, Cayuga County, Clinton,
           Columbia-Greene, Corning, Dutchess, Erie, Fashion Institute of Technology,
           Finger Lakes, Fulton Montgomery, Genessee, Herkimer County, Hudson
           Valley, Jamestown, Jefferson, Mohawk Valley, Monroe, Nassau, Niagara
           County, North Country, Onondaga, Orange County, Rockland, Schenectady
           County, Suffolk County, Sullivan County, Tompkins Cortland, Ulster County,
           Westchester

    VI.    Colleges of Technology (5) – Alfred, Canton, Cobleskill, Delhi, Morrisville

    VII.   Health Science Centers (2) – Brooklyna and Syracusea

a
  Not included in the sample
b
  Became a 4-year institution after 1995 and included as a 2-year college in the sample
c
  Enrolled only upper-division students in 1995 and 1996 and was not included in the
sample




                                            37
