NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPACT OF MONETARY POLICY ON ASSET PRICES

Roberto Rigobon
Brian Sack

Working Paper 8794
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8794

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2002

The authors would like to thank Andrew Ang, Antulio Bomfim, Darrel Cohen, William English, and seminar
participants at the Federal Reserve Board and the American Economic Association meetings for useful
comments. Comments are welcome to bsack@frb.gov or rigobon@mit.edu. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or members of its staff.

© 2002 by Roberto Rigobon and Brian Sack. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Impact of Monetary Policy on Asset Prices
Roberto Rigobon and Brian Sack
NBER Working Paper No. 8794
February 2002
JEL No. E44, E47, E52

ABSTRACT
Estimating the response of asset prices to changes in monetary policy is complicated by the
endogeneity of policy decisions and the fact that both interest rates and asset prices react to numerous
other variables. This paper develops a new estimator that is based on the heteroskedasticity that exists
in high frequency data. We show that the response of asset prices to changes in monetary policy can be
identified based on the increase in the variance of policy shocks that occurs on days of FOMC meetings
and of the Chairman's semi-annual monetary policy testimony to Congress. The identification approach
employed requires a much weaker set of assumptions than needed under the "event-study" approach that
is typically used in this context. The results indicate that an increase in short-term interest rates results
in a decline in stock prices and in an upward shift in the yield curve that becomes smaller at longer
maturities. The findings also suggest that the event-study estimates contain biases that make the
estimated effects on stock prices appear too small and those on Treasury yields too large.

Roberto Rigobon
Sloan School of Management
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive, E52-447
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
rigobon@mit.edu

Brian P. Sack
Division of Monetary Affairs
Federal Reserve Board of Governors
20th and C Streets, Mail Stop 73
Washington, DC 20551
bsack@frb.gov

1 Introduction

There is a considerable amount of interest in understanding the interactions between asset
prices and monetary policy. In previous research (Rigobon and Sack (2001)), we have found
that short-term interest rates react signi cantly to movements in broad equity price indexes,
likely re ecting the expected endogenous response of monetary policy to the impact of stock
price movements on aggregate demand. This paper attempts to estimate the other side of
the relationship: how asset prices react to changes in monetary policy.
This relationship is an important topic for several reasons. From the perspective of
monetary policymakers, having reliable estimates of the reaction of asset prices to the
policy instrument is a critical step in formulating e ective policy decisions. Much of the
transmission of monetary policy comes through the in uence of short-term interest rates
on other asset prices, as it is the movements in these other asset prices|including longerterm interest rates and stock prices|that determine private borrowing costs and changes
in wealth, which in turn importantly in uence real economic activity.
Understanding the response of asset prices to changes in monetary policy is also of great
importance to nancial market participants. Monetary policy has a considerable in uence
on nancial markets, as evidenced by the extensive attention that the Federal Reserve
receives in the nancial press. Thus, having accurate estimates of the responsiveness of
asset prices to monetary policy is an important component of making e ective investment
decisions and formulating appropriate risk management strategies.
Several diÆculties arise in estimating the responsiveness of asset prices to monetary
policy, though. First, short-term interest rates are simultaneously in uenced by movements
in asset prices, resulting in a diÆcult endogeneity problem. Second, a number of other
variables, including news about the economic outlook, likely have an impact on both shortterm interest rates and asset prices. These two considerations complicate the identi cation
of the responsiveness of asset prices under previously used methods.
To address these issues, we develop an estimator that identi es the response of asset
prices based on the heteroskedasticity of monetary policy shocks. In particular, we assume
that the variance of monetary policy shocks is higher on days of FOMC meetings and of the
Chairman's semi-annual monetary policy testimony to Congress, when a larger portion of
the news hitting markets is about monetary policy. We show that the shift in the variance
1

of the policy shocks on those dates is suÆcient to measure the responsiveness of asset prices
to monetary policy.
Our approach allows us to identify the parameter of interest under a weaker set of assumptions than required under the approach that other papers have taken in this context.
In particular, other papers have typically estimated ordinary-least-squares (OLS) regressions on FOMC dates, which has been called the \event-study" method. We show that the
event-study approach is an extreme case of our heteroskedasticity-based estimator in which
the shift in the variance of the policy shock is large enough to dominate all other shocks. In
contrast, the heteroskedasticity-based estimator that we develop requires only a shift in the
relative importance of the policy shock. Thus, our estimator can be used to test whether
the stronger assumptions under the event-study approach are valid, and, correspondingly,
the extent to which the event-study estimates are biased.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the problems of simultaneous equations and omitted variables in estimating the responsiveness of asset prices, demonstrating
that some bias may remain in the coeÆcients estimated under the event-study approach
unless some strong assumptions are met. Section 3 describes our identi cation approach
based on the heteroskedasticity of monetary policy shocks and compares the assumptions
needed to those required under the event-study approach. Section 4 demonstrates that the
identi cation method can be interpreted and implemented as a simple instrumental variables regression. Results on the responsiveness of stock prices and longer-term interest rates
to monetary policy using both the event-study and the heteroskedasticity procedures are
presented in section 5. Section 6 contains a discussion of alternative de nitions of policy
shocks, and section 7 concludes.
2 Event-Study and the Estimation Problem

The two main problems in estimating the interactions between monetary policy and asset
prices are the endogeneity of the variables and the existence of omitted variables. First,
while asset prices are in uenced by the short-term interest rate, the short-term interest
rate is simultaneously a ected by asset prices (primarily through their in uence on monetary policy expectations). Second, a number of other variables likely in uence both asset
2

prices and short-term interest rates, such as variables that provide information about the
macroeconomic outlook or changes in risk preferences.
These issues can be captured in the following simpli ed system of equations:
it = st + zt + "t
st = it + zt + t ;

(1)
(2)

where it is the change in the short-term interest rate and st is the change in an asset price.
Equation (1) represents a monetary policy reaction function that captures the expected
response of policy to a set of variables zt and to the asset price.1 We consider a case in
which zt is a single variable for notational simplicity, but the results can be easily generalized
to the case where zt is a vector of variables. Equation (2) is the asset price equation, which
allows the asset price to be a ected by the interest rate and also by the other variables zt .
In this paper we are interested in the parameter , which measures the impact of a change
in the short-term interest rate it on the asset price st. The variable "t is the monetary
policy shock, and t is a shock to the asset price. Those disturbances are assumed to have
no serial correlation and to be uncorrelated with each other and with the common shock zt .
This model is clearly an oversimpli cation of the relationship between movements in
interest rates and asset prices. It imposes no structure that might arise from an asset pricing
model. However, this is also an advantage, as it allows the interaction between the variables
to be fairly unrestricted. Similarly, VARs have often been used to capture the dynamics of
asset prices without having to impose many restrictions (see, for example, Campbell and
Shiller (1987)). In the current context, we can allow for more complicated dynamics by
adding lagged terms to equations (1) and (2), in which case estimating the responsiveness
amounts to (partially) identifying the VAR. However, we found that allowing for a richer
lag structure had little e ect on the results. Moreover, the above system of equations is
suÆciently rich to demonstrate the problems that arise in identifying the parameter .
As is well known, equations (1) and (2) cannot be estimated consistently using OLS due
1
Rigobon and Sack (2001) focus on the parameter measuring the response of monetary policy to the
asset price|the stock market in particular. Their results suggest that this parameter is positive and of the
magnitude that would be expected if the Federal Reserve were reacting to the stock market to the extent
that it a ects aggregate demand.

3

to the presence of simultaneous equations and omitted variables. The simultaneity problem
is demonstrated in Figure 1, which shows both the policy reaction function (1) and the asset
price function (2). Realizations of the interest rate and the asset price will be determined by
the intersection of these two schedules and therefore may not provide any information about
the slope of either schedule. Moreover, the two schedules are being frequently shifted by
realizations of the variable zt , and thus the observations will be in uenced by the coeÆcients
on those variables in the two equations (which determine the relative magnitude of the
shifts).
To see the econometric problems formally, consider running an OLS regression on equation (2). The estimated coeÆcient will be biased because the shock term t is correlated
with the regressor it as a result of the response of the interest rate to the stock market,
as determined by parameter in equation (1). Moreover, if some of the variables zt are not
observed, then the exclusion of those variables from the speci cation would also generate
some bias depending on the value of . Indeed, if one simply ran OLS on equation (2)
above, the estimated parameter would be given by:
b

= + (1

)  + 2 + (+ (+ +) )z2  ;
"

z

(3)

where x represents the variance of shock x. Again, according to equation (3), the estimate
would be biased away from its true value due to both simultaneity bias (if 6= 0 and
 > 0) and omitted variables bias (if 6= 0 and z > 0).
Researchers have typically addressed these problems by focusing on periods immediately
surrounding changes in the policy instrument|what has been often referred to as the eventstudy approach.2 This literature largely follows Cook and Hahn (1989), whose approach
was to regress daily changes in market interest rates on changes in the federal funds rate for
a sample of dates on which the federal funds rate changed. Their work has been followed by
a large number of papers applying a similar approach, including Bom m (2001), Bom m
and Reinhart (2000), Kuttner (2001), Roley and Sellon (1996, 1998), Thorbecke (1997),
and Thornton(1998). These more recent papers have modi ed the work of Cook and Hahn
in various directions, including focusing on more recent periods and isolating the surprise
Another approach that has been employed is to measure the response of stock prices and yields to policy
shocks identi ed from a VAR, as in Thorbecke (1997) and Evans and Marshall (1998).
2

4

component of funds rate changes. Nevertheless, the basis of the approach|estimating OLS
regressions on dates of FOMC meetings or policy moves|has remained the same.
The rationale underlying the event-study approach is that the bias in the OLS estimate
b will be limited if the sample contains periods in which the innovations to the system of
equations (1) and (2) are driven primarily by the policy shock. In fact, as is evident from
equation (3), the event-study approach requires the following assumptions to minimize the
bias of the estimator:
 z
"   ;
"

(4)
(5)

in which case b = . In the limit, if the variance of the monetary policy shock becomes
in nitely large relative to the variances of the other shocks, or "= ! 1 and "=z ! 1,
then the bias goes to zero, and the OLS estimate is consistent. This property of the OLS
estimate is what Fisher (1976) referred to as \near identi cation." However, it should
be clear that some bias remains if these ratios are nite. Unfortunately, the event-study
approach does not provide any evidence about whether these conditions hold, and thus
the magnitude of the bias that remains in those estimates is unclear from the event-study
literature.3
In the next section, we demonstrate that the parameter can be estimated under a
much weaker set of assumptions by relying on the heteroskedasticity in the data to identify
the parameter. This identi cation approach does not require the variance of one of the
shocks to become in nitely large, but instead relies on the change in the covariance of
interest rates and asset prices at times when the variance of the policy shocks increases.
In e ect, this approach can be thought of as estimating from the change in the bias in
equation (3) as the variance of policy shocks changes, rather than requiring that the level of
the bias goes to zero. The approach also allows one to measure the bias in the event-study
estimates, which can be used to test whether assumptions (4) and (5) are valid.
3
Note that the event-study assumptions are more likely to hold as the window around the policy event
shrinks. One could de ne a very narrow window by using intra-day data to measure announcement e ects,
although one would not want to use too narrow of a window if market participants need time to digest news.
In this paper, we explore biases that arise when daily data are used.

5

3 Identifying the Response of Asset Prices

To estimate the response of asset prices to monetary policy, we employ a technique called
identi cation through heteroskedasticity.4 This approach relies on looking at changes in the
co-movements of interest rates and asset prices when the variance of one of the shocks in
the system is known to shift. By doing so, the response of asset prices to monetary policy
can be identi ed under a fairly weak set of assumptions.
The intuition for this approach is shown in Figure 2. Suppose one could identify a
period of time in which the variance of the policy shocks was higher than at other times,
but the variances of the other shocks in the system remained unchanged. As is evident in
the gure, the pattern of realized observations would then shift to move more closely along
the asset price reaction schedule. That shift in the co-movement of interest rates and asset
prices towards the schedule of interest is the basis for the identi cation.
To implement this approach, we only need to identify two subsamples, denoted F and
~F (for reasons that become clear below), for which the parameters of equations (1) and (2)
are stable and the following assumptions on the second moments of the shocks hold:
"F > ~"F
F = ~F

zF

=


~zF :

(6)
(7)
(8)

In words, these assumptions imply that the \importance" of policy shocks increases in the
subsample F . Note, however, that innovations to the asset price equation and the common
shocks continue to take place even in subsample F , but those shocks are assumed to occur
with the same intensity as in the other subsample. These conditions are much weaker than
the near-identi cation assumptions (4) and (5) required under the event-study approach.
In particular, we do not required the variance of the policy shock to become in nitely large,
but only that it increases relative to the variances of the other shocks.5
The rst reference to identi cation using shifts in second moments was introduced by Sewall Wright in
the appendix to Wright (1928). More recently, this identi cation approach has been extended and further
developed. See Rigobon (1999) for a detailed description of the methods used here. Also see King, Sentana
and5 Wadhwani (1994), Sentana and Fiorentini (2000), and Klein and Vella (2000a,b).
Bom m (2001) explores patterns of volatility around FOMC meeting dates, nding that the variance of
4

6

We use institutional knowledge of the Federal Reserve to identify circumstances in which
assumptions (6) to (8) are plausible. In particular, days of FOMC meeting and of the
Chairman's semi-annual monetary policy testimony to Congress are likely to contain a
greater amount of news about monetary policy than other days.6 Note that other types of
shocks still take place on these days, but the relative importance of policy shocks is likely to
increase dramatically, as required under our identi cation approach. Thus, we take those
dates as the set of dates F , which will be referred to as the set of \policy dates" to indicate
that the variance of the policy shock is elevated.7 For the set of non-policy dates ~F , we
take the set of days immediately preceding those included in F , which keeps the samples
the same size and minimizes any e ects arising from changes in the variances of the shocks
over time.
The identi cation can be shown analytically by rst solving for the reduced form of
equations (1) and (2):8
it = 1 1 [( + ) zt + t + "t ]
st = 1 1 [(1 + ) zt + t + "t ] :
These variables can be divided up into the two subsamples, with the covariance matrix of
the variables in each subsample as follows:
2

F

= (1 1 )2 4
2

~F

= (1 1 )2 4

"F + 2 F + (

+ )2 zF

.
~"F + 2 ~F + ( + )2 ~zF
.

3

"F + F + ( + ) (1 + ) zF 5
2 "F + F + (1 + )2 zF
3
~
F
~
F
~
F
" +  + ( + )(1 + ) z 5
:
2 ~"F + ~F + (1 + )2 ~zF

the shock from the stock market equation increases on FOMC meeting dates. In the view of our model, this
nding
re ects that the simultaneity problem was not fully solved.
6
This testimony accompanies the release of the Federal Reserve's Monetary Policy Report to the Congress.
It used to be referred to as the \Humphrey Hawkins" testimony when it was mandated under the Full
Employment
and Balanced Growth Act of 1978.
7
One could imagine a broader set of dates to be included in the set of policy dates, such as dates of
policy-related
speeches by FOMC members.
8
This approach can also be implemented by rst estimating a VAR that includes interest rates and asset
prices, and then focusing on the reduced form residuals in place of i and s . The results obtained under
this approach are very similar to those reported below.
t

7

t

Note that we have assumed, in addition to (6) to (8), that the parameters , , and are
stable across the two set of dates, which is a necessary condition for identi cation.
The di erence in these covariance matrices is
 =

F

~F

"F

= (1

2


~"F 4
)2

1

3

2

5:

(9)

As is evident from equation (9), is easily identi ed from the change in the covariance
matrix. In fact, can be estimated in two di erent ways:
het
het

= 
= 


12
11
22 ;
12

(10)
(11)

where  ij represents the (i; j ) element of the change in the matrix.9 Moreover, as shown
in Appendix B, these estimators are consistent even if the shocks have heteroskedasticity
over time, as long as the volatility of the policy shock accounts for the shift in the covariance
matrix on policy dates (and some additional regularity conditions are met).
The estimates in equations (10) and (11) have, in spirit, the same interpretation as the
event-study estimator. In our case, the event (a policy day) is an increase in the variance of
the policy shock, which changes the covariance structure of the observed variables. Under
our assumptions, this is enough to estimate some of the underlying coeÆcients. If the shift
in the variance of the policy shocks were in nitely large, then the estimators (10) and (11)
would in fact converge to the standard event-study estimates. However, as described above,
the heteroskedasticity-based estimators het do not require such a strong assumption to be
consistent. As a result, the heteroskedasticity-based estimates can be used to assess the
bias in the event-study estimates, as described in the next section.
If all of the assumptions of the model hold, the two estimates of should be identical.
We can therefore use the two estimates of to construct a test of the overidentifying
restrictions of the model. Di erences in the estimates could indicate that the variance of
other shocks increased on policy dates or that the parameters of the equations are not
Equation (10) can also be found in Ellingsen and Soderstrom (2001), who independently developed this
estimator to correct for the bias arising from omitted variables. However, they do not discuss the estimator
(11), nor the IV implementation developed below.
9

8

stable across the two subsamples. The only assumption that is not testable in our setup is
the zero correlation across the structural shocks, which is a maintained assumption in the
overidenti cation tests. This test is described in more detail in the next section.
4 Implementation through Instrumental Variables

A nice feature about this identi cation method is that it can be implemented using an
instrumental variables technique, which makes it simple to apply using any standard econometrics software package.
4.1

Estimators for an individual asset

To arrive at the instrumental variables interpretation of the estimators, de ne the following
variables to include the interest rate and the asset price on all days in our sample, including
policy and non-policy dates:
[

i  fit ; t 2 F g fit ; t 2 ~F g
[
s  fst; t 2 F g fst; t 2 ~F g ;
which are both 2T  1 vectors (where T is the number of policy dates). Consider the
following two instruments:
[

 fit ; t 2 F g f it; t 2 ~F g
[
ws  fst ; t 2 F g f st ; t 2 ~F g :
wi

It turns out that the two estimates for from the analysis above can be obtained by
regressing the change in the asset price st on the change in the interest rate it over
the combined sample period using the standard instrumental variables approach with the
instruments wi and ws:
bihet
bshet

=
=



wi 0 i 1 wi 0 s


w 0 i 1 w 0 s :

s

s

9

(12)
(13)

To see that, note that the IV coeÆcients can be written as
bihet

= ffii ;;

bshet

= ffss ;;

F

F

F

F

i ~ g fs
i ~ g fi
s ~ g fs
s ~ g fi
F

F

F

F

0

0

0

0

F

F

F
F

;s ~F g
;i ~F g
;s ~F g
;i ~F g

F ; sF )
= Cov (Viar
(iF )
V ar (sF )
= Cov (iF ; sF )

Cov (i ~F ; s ~F )
V ar (i ~F )
V ar (s ~F )
;
Cov (i ~F ; s ~F )

which are the same estimators
bihet
bshet

= 
= 


12
11
22
12

from equations (10) and (11) above.10
A more complete derivation and analysis of the properties of these estimators is o ered
in Appendix A. The appendix demonstrates that wi and ws are valid instruments for estimating under the assumptions underlying the heteroskedasticity approach|that the
parameters are stable, that the asset price shocks are homoskedastic, and that the monetary policy shocks are heteroskedastic. One can intuitively see why this is the case: The
instrument wi, for example, is correlated with the regressor it because the F subsample
outweighs the ~F owing to the heteroskedasticity of "t . However, the instrument is not
correlated with the error terms t and zt because those shock are homoskedastic, leaving
the two subsamples to cancel each other out.
In addition to its simplicity, an advantage of implementing the identi cation technique
through instrumental variables is that all of the properties of IV estimators, including the
asymptotic distribution of the coeÆcient, apply.
4.2

Estimators for multiple assets

Of course, we are interested in the response of a number of asset prices to monetary policy.
The method described above can be generalized to allow for more than one asset price (as
will be the case in the empirical implementation below). Under the IV interpretation, if we
consider K di erent assets, we will have available K + 1 di erent instruments|one for the
More speci cally, this is the case if the sets F and ~F have the same number of observations. If the
number of observations in these sets di ers, the instruments and the variables have to be divided by the
square root of the number of dates in that set.
10

10

interest rate (wi ), and one (ws) for each asset price s 2 S , where S is the set of all asset
prices included. Denote the set of all possible instruments as
Wt = !i

[

s2S

!s ;

which is a 2T  (K + 1) matrix. We can then consider an estimator that uses all possible
instruments to estimate the coeÆcients:
ball
het



1 c 0 
i s ;

(14)


Wt 0 Wt 1 Wt 0 i:

(15)



= ci 0 i

for each s 2 S , where
ci = Wt

As discussed in Appendix A, this instrument set is again valid under the maintained assumptions.11
4.3

Hypothesis tests

If the assumptions of the model are correct, then all the IV estimators bihet, bshet, and
ball
het will asymptotically yield the true parameter value . This implies that the system is
overidenti ed and allows us to perform a test of the underlying assumptions of the model by
comparing any two estimates. To limit the scope of the analysis, we focus on the estimators
bihet and ball
het . We rst stack the estimates for each asset price s 2 S into vectors, so that
bihet and ball
het are now both K  1. The test of overidentifying restrictions then is as follows:
Æball;i = K1

ball
het

bihet

1
Mall;i

ball
het

bihet

where Mall;i is the variance of the di erence of the estimators. A rejection of the hypothesis that the two estimates are equal would indicate that at least one of the maintained
assumptions|that the parameters are stable, or that the stock market or the common
shock are homoskedastic|is not valid.
11

We implement three-stages least squares when all instruments are used.

11

We are also interested in testing whether the stronger assumptions required under the
event-study approach are valid. To do so, we compare the estimates under the heteroskedasticitybased approach to the event-study estimates obtained by running an OLS regression. Formally, the event-study estimator is
bes

= iF 0 iF  1 iF 0 sF  ;

(16)

where only those observations corresponding to policy dates (that is, t 2 F ) are included.
The event-study estimator is consistent and eÆcient under the assumption that endogeneity
is not a problem, which would be the case if equations (4) and (5) hold. Otherwise, the
event-study estimator is inconsistent, but the heteroskedasticity-based estimators are still
consistent. Thus, the validity of the event-study assumptions can be tested with a Hausman
(1978) speci cation test:
Æbes;all
Mse;all

=
=

1 all
K bhet
V ar



ball
het

bes


1
Mes;all

ball
het

bes

V ar ( bes )

where the event-study estimates have been stacked into a K  1 vector bes.12 This test
statistic has an F distribution with K; K (T 1) degrees of freedom. Note that for this test
statistic the variance of the di erence in the estimators is the di erence in the variances,
given the eÆciency of the OLS estimator under the null hypothesis that the event-study assumptions hold. A signi cant test statistic would indicate a rejection of the assumption that
the variance of the policy shock on policy dates is suÆciently large for near-identi cation
to hold.
5 Results

In the following results we focus on the e ect of monetary policy on stock market indexes
and longer-term interest rates. The data on stock indexes include the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA), the S&P 500, the Nasdaq, and the Wilshire 5000. The longer-term
A similar test statistic can be computed for the other heteroskedasticity-based estimator b . To narrow
the discussion, we will focus only on the test statistic Æb in the results below.
12

i
het

es;all

12

interest rates considered include Treasury yields with maturities of six months, one, two,
ve, ten, and thirty years. To provide a more complete picture of the response of shortand intermediate-term rates, we also investigate the response of eurodollar futures rates
expiring every three months from six months to ve years ahead.13
The sample runs from January 3, 1994 to November 26, 2001|a period over which the
majority of monetary policy actions took place at FOMC meetings. In contrast, over the ve
years preceding our sample, only about one quarter of policy moves took place on FOMC
dates, with other policy actions often taking place on the days of various macroeconomic
data releases. Thus, there was greater uncertainty about the timing of policy moves over the
earlier period, which makes it more diÆcult to split it according to the heteroskedasticity
of policy shocks. Our sample includes 78 policy dates, of which ve are discarded due to
holidays in nancial markets.14
The short-term interest rate used in the analysis is the rate on the nearest eurodollar
futures contract to expire, which is based on the three-month eurodollar deposit rate at the
time the contract expires.15 An advantage of using this interest rate as our \policy rate" is
that it moves only to the extent that there is a policy surprise. The importance of focusing
on the surprise component of policy moves has been emphasized in recent research, including
many of the papers listed in section 2. Some of those papers, most notably Kuttner (2001),
use the current month's federal funds futures rate to derive a measure of the unexpected
component of policy moves. However, this measure will be strongly in uenced by surprises
in the timing of policy moves, as discussed in more detail in section 6. Using the threemonth eurodollar rate as the monetary policy variable reduces the in uence of these timing
shocks, instead picking up surprises to the level of the interest rate expected over the coming
three months.16
The Treasury series are the constant maturity Treasury yields reported on the Federal Reserve's H.15
data
release, and the eurodollar futures rates are obtained from the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
14
These holidays fall either one or two days before the policy dates. Those observations are needed because
the speci cation requires rst di erences of the data on policy dates and on the days preceding policy dates,
as 15described below.
We use the eurodollar futures rate rather than using the eurodollar deposit rate because the futures
contract is more liquid and trades in U.S. markets, thereby avoiding issues with the timing of its quote
relative to those on other asset prices. One drawback of using futures is that the horizon of the contract can
vary. Because the contracts expire quarterly, the nearest contract will have between zero and three months
to 16expiration, depending on the timing of the FOMC meeting.
For similar reasons, Ellingsen and Soderstrom (2001) use changes in the three-month interest rate as a
measure of policy innovations for estimating the response of the term structure.
13

13

Table 1 reports some descriptive statistics on daily changes in the policy rate and in
other asset prices on policy and non-policy dates. In all of the results that follow, the
non-policy dates are taken to be the day before each policy date.17 The variance of changes
in the short-term interest rate rises substantially on the days with higher variance of policy
shocks, as expected. More importantly, for the non-policy dates, there is no discernible
relationship between stock prices and the policy rate, as evidenced by the relatively small
covariances between them. In contrast, a negative relationship between these variables
becomes evident on the policy dates, as the higher variance of the policy shocks on those
days tends to move the observations along the asset price response function (as suggested
in Figure 2). Treasury rates instead have a positive covariance with the policy rule on
non-policy dates. But again the relationship between these variables shifts importantly on
policy dates, with the positive covariance jumping much higher in that subsample.
Table 1: Variances and Covariances on Policy and Non-Policy Dates

Policy Rate
S&P 500
Nasdaq
DJIA

|Std. Dev. of Asset Prices|
~F Dates
F Dates
2.62
5.26
0.88
0.99
1.63
1.71
0.89
0.92
4.79
5.80
3.64
6.54
3.83
7.25
3.90
7.75
3.95
7.10
3.89
6.00

|Covar. with Policy Rate|
~F Dates
F Dates
-0.20
-1.60
0.08
-2.02
-0.51
-1.35
6.13
25.89
7.47
29.57
7.58
31.43
7.29
31.73
7.22
26.38
6.36
18.01

i6mo
i1yr
i2yr
i5yr
i10yr
i30yr
The table uses daily percent changes for stock prices (in percentage points) and daily changes
in Treasury yields (in basis points).

As described in the previous two sections, the shift in the covariance between the policy
rate and the asset prices that takes place on policy dates can be used to estimate the parameter from equation (2). We will consider two of the heteroskedasticity-based estimators
17
There is likely to be little news about monetary policy on those dates, as FOMC members appear to
refrain from making public comments and the FOMC from taking intermeeting policy actions so close to
an FOMC meeting. Similar results are obtained if we de ne the set of non-policy dates to include the week
before each FOMC meeting.

14

corresponding to equations (12) and (14).
5.1

Stock market indexes

The results across the four stock market indexes considered are shown in Table 2, which
reports the estimates obtained under the heteroskedasticity-based approach using both sets
of instruments ( bihet and ball
het ) as well as the estimate obtained under the event-study
approach ( bes).
The stock indexes considered have a signi cant negative reaction to monetary policy.
The estimate ball
het for the S&P 500 is -7.702, implying that an unanticipated 25-basis point
increase in short-term interest rates results in a 1.9% decline in the S&P index. A similar
response is found for the broader market index, the Wilshire 5000. The Nasdaq index
shows a considerably larger reaction, perhaps because of the greater duration of those
shares (their cash ows are farther in the future, making the share price more sensitive to
the discount factor), while the DJIA has the smallest reaction, maybe because it includes
companies that have current rather than back-loaded cash streams. In all four cases, the two
b
heteroskedasticity-based estimates bihet and ball
het are similar. Indeed, the test statistic Æall;i
indicates that the over-identifying restrictions of the heteroskedasticity-based estimators are
easily accepted.
The estimated responses of the stock indexes under the heteroskedasticity-based method
are almost always larger (in absolute value) than the corresponding estimates under the
event-study approach, and by a considerable amount in some cases. This di erence likely
re ects the bias in the event-study estimates. Shocks to the stock market generally cause
short-term interest rates to respond in the same direction (Rigobon and Sack (2001)), while
many other variables, such as news about future economic activity, also tend to induce a
positive correlation between the two variables. These shocks therefore generate an upward
bias (towards zero) in the estimated coeÆcient bes under the event-study approach. The
hypothesis that the heteroskedasticity-based and event-study estimates are equal across the
four stock price indexes, which is tested using the statistic Æbes;all, can be rejected at the
0.10 signi cance level, although not at the 0.05 level. Thus, the results suggest that the
assumptions underlying the event-study approach are violated enough to generate a bias in
the event-study estimates that is marginally signi cant.
15

Table 2: The Response of Stock Prices to Monetary Policy

S&P 500
Wilshire
Nasdaq
DJIA

Estimator: bihet
Coef Std Dev
-7.101 2.883
-7.004 2.834
-11.045 5.108
-4.729 2.823

Test of O.I. Restrictions: Æball;i
Test of E.S. Assumptions: Æbes;all

Estimator: ball
het
Coef Std Dev
-7.702 2.748
-7.271 2.698
-10.023 4.841
-5.883 2.681
F-test
P-value
0.750
0.559
2.283
0.063

Estimator: bes
Coef Std Dev
-6.171 2.087
-5.961 2.039
-7.356 3.689
-5.409 1.985

Both test statistics are distributed F(4,145). The value of the 95th percentile is 2.43.

The nding of a signi cant response of stock prices to monetary policy actions stands
out against the fairly inconclusive ndings of the previous literature. Thorbecke (1997)
and Bom m (2001) also nd a signi cant response for stock prices, although smaller in
magnitude than the response that we identify, while other papers, including Bom m and
Reinhart (2000) and Roley and Sellon (1998), nd no statistically signi cant response. Of
course, these papers rely on the event-study approach.
5.2

Treasury yields

Treasury yields also respond strongly to monetary policy, as shown in Table 3. The
heteroskedasticity-based coeÆcients ball
het are signi cant across all maturities except the
thirty-year bond. The pattern of the coeÆcients, which is shown in Figure 3, indicates that
monetary policy has the strongest impact on short-term and intermediate-term Treasury
yields. The impact falls o fairly sharply for maturities beyond ve years. The other set of
heteroskedasticity-based estimates, bihet are largely similar, and the test of overidentifying
restrictions Æ^all;i indicates that the model's assumptions are not rejected.
Both sets of heteroskedasticity-based estimates fall below the corresponding event-study
estimates, likely re ecting an upward bias in the event-study coeÆcients. Many types
of shocks push short-term and long-term interest rates in the same direction, including
macroeconomic developments that shift in ation expectations or changes in the value that
16

investors place on the safety and liquidity of their portfolios. These shocks are likely to
still be present on policy dates, inducing an upward bias to the event-study estimates. The
test statistic Æbes;all indicates that the equality of the event-study and the heteroskedasticitybased estimates can just be rejected at the 0.05 signi cance level.
Table 3: The Response of the Term Structure to Monetary Policy

i6mo
i1yr
i2yr
i5yr
i10yr
i30yr

Estimator: bihet
Coef Std Dev
0.883 0.114
0.802 0.089
0.826 0.107
0.961 0.122
0.639 0.135
0.377 0.135

Test of O.I. Restrictions: Æball;i
Test of E.S. Assumptions: Æbes;all

Estimator: ball
het
Coef Std Dev
0.843 0.107
0.716 0.087
0.732 0.103
0.872 0.116
0.474 0.132
0.225 0.132
F-test P-value
1.558
0.164
2.171
0.049

Estimator: bes
Coef Std Dev
0.903 0.066
0.913 0.072
0.930 0.092
1.035 0.110
0.770 0.119
0.527 0.113

Both test statistics are distributed F(7,145). The value of the 95th percentile is 2.16.

Based on the point estimates in Table 3, the bias in the event-study coeÆcients is largest
at long maturities. One possible explanation is that the policy shock is less in uential
on the Treasury yield as the maturity lengthens, thus leaving a larger role for the biases
induced by other shocks. Note that one puzzling aspect of the event-study results is the
magnitude of the response of long-term interest rates to policy changes, which is surprisingly
large if movements in the short-term rate are expected to be transitory. According to the
results, this puzzle partly re ects the bias in the event-study estimates, as both sets of
heteroskedasticity-based estimates decline more rapidly than the event-study estimates as
the maturity lengthens.
The response of the term structure to policy surprises has also been studied by Kuttner
(2001), among others. Our results are qualitatively similar to his, in that he nds that
Treasury yields respond signi cantly across most maturities, and that the response dimin17

ishes at longer maturities. His estimates di er in magnitude from ours in part because of
di erences in the the de nition of policy shocks, as discussed in more detail in section 6,
and because he uses only the event-study methodology.
5.3

Eurodollar futures rates

Our nal set of results is based on eurodollar futures rates expiring every three months out
to horizons of ve years. Focusing on the responsiveness of futures rates rather than yields
provides a more complete reading of the term structure response for short- and intermediateterm maturities. Table 4 reports the estimated coeÆcients and their standard deviations,
and the pattern of coeÆcients across all maturities is shown in Figure 4.
The responses of the futures rates under the heteroskedasticity-based estimator ball
het are
sizable and strongly signi cant across all the horizons considered. The responses build over
the rst several quarters, suggesting that the policy surprise leads to some expectations
of a continuation of the short-term interest rate in the same direction, and then gradually
decline at longer horizons. A similar pattern is found under the bihet estimator, and the test
statistic Æball;i indicates that the over-identifying restrictions of the heteroskedasticity-based
estimators are easily accepted.
As found above for Treasury yields, the heteroskedasticity-based estimates are below
the event-study estimates by a considerable amount, likely re ecting the bias in the eventstudy estimates that arises for the reasons discussed above. The largest di erences occur
at longer maturities, suggesting that the event-study assumptions are increasingly violated
as the horizon lengthens. In contrast, the event-study estimates are fairly close to the
heteroskedasticity-based estimates for eurodollar contracts with very short maturities. At
those maturities, the policy news may be the primary in uence over the eurodollar rate,
in which case the event-study assumtions nearly hold. Looking across all maturities, the
test of the equality of the heteroskedasticity-based and event-study estimates Æbes;all is not
rejected, although the test does reject the hypothesis if it is restricted to contracts expiring
farther out.18
In particular, the equality of the estimates for contracts expiring beyond four years can be rejected at
the 0.02 signi cance level.
18

18

Table 4: The Response of Eurodollar Futures Rates
to Monetary Policy

ED2
ED3
ED4
ED5
ED6
ED7
ED8
ED9
ED10
ED11
ED12
ED13
ED14
ED15
ED16
ED17
ED18
ED19

Estimator: bihet
Coef Std Dev
1.223 0.065
1.308 0.104
1.325 0.126
1.230 0.139
1.154 0.142
1.056 0.144
0.985 0.146
0.911 0.148
0.856 0.149
0.823 0.149
0.797 0.149
0.741 0.151
0.727 0.151
0.717 0.151
0.687 0.152
0.666 0.154
0.641 0.156
0.641 0.156

Test of O.I. Restrictions: Æball;i
Test of E.S. Assumptions: Æbes;all

Estimator: ball
het
Coef Std Dev
1.186 0.058
1.259 0.092
1.239 0.113
1.123 0.125
1.047 0.127
0.944 0.129
0.879 0.131
0.808 0.133
0.755 0.134
0.728 0.134
0.698 0.134
0.649 0.135
0.633 0.136
0.618 0.136
0.592 0.136
0.569 0.138
0.552 0.140
0.553 0.140
F-test P-value
0.626 0.875
0.615 0.884

Estimator: bes
Coef Std Dev
1.234 0.057
1.344 0.096
1.377 0.118
1.298 0.130
1.225 0.132
1.142 0.133
1.088 0.134
1.033 0.134
0.985 0.134
0.956 0.133
0.931 0.133
0.888 0.132
0.875 0.132
0.861 0.131
0.836 0.132
0.814 0.132
0.799 0.134
0.797 0.133

Both test statistics are distributed F(19,145). The value of the 95th percentile is 1.68. The
contracts expire quarterly, with ED2 representing the change in the three-month interest rate
one quarter ahead, ED5 the change one year ahead, and so on.

5.4

Robustness

The results above suggest that some bias exists in the event-study estimates for all of the
assets considered, with the heteroskedasticity-based estimators indicating a larger impact of
monetary policy on stock prices and a smaller impact on longer-term interest rates. These
ndings are robust to changes in the speci cation. For example, we obtain qualitatively
similar results if we allow for lags in equations (1) and (2) and perform the same analysis
on the reduced-form residuals. In that case the point estimates change very little and the
rejections of overidenti cation tests occurred in the same circumstances as found above. In
addition, we have repeated the analysis de ning the ~F subsample as the two days or ve
19

days prior to the policy dates. Again, the results are very similar.
As discussed earlier, our approach requires the coeÆcients in the model, as well as the
variances of the non-policy variables, to be stable across the two subsamples. The results
suggest that if non-linearities or parameter instability are present in the data, those characteristics are not strong enough to result in a rejection of the overidentifying restrictions of
the estimator. In contrast, the biases introduced in the event-study methodology are large
enough to be detected as statictically signi cant under our hypothesis tests.
6 Alternative De nitions of the Policy Variable

The results presented above measure the response of asset prices to changes in the threemonth eurodollar futures rate. Of course, other measures of monetary policy shocks are
also available. This section considers the results under an alternative measure based on the
current month federal funds futures contract.
The value of the federal funds futures contract is determined by the average e ective
federal funds rate over the contract month. As a result, changes in the the current month
federal funds futures contract can be used to calculate revisions to the e ective federal funds
rate expected to prevail over the remainder of the current month, as described thoroughly
in Kuttner (2001). The primary di erence between the policy surprises derived from the
federal funds futures contract and the changes in the three-month eurodollar rate used in
the results above is the horizon of policy expectations captured: Changes in the three-month
rate capture revisions to the expected near-term path of monetary policy, while changes in
the federal funds futures rate capture revisions to the immediate policy setting.
Table C.1 in Appendix C lists the two measures of policy shocks for the 78 policy
dates in our sample, as well as the reaction of some asset prices on those dates. The two
measures of policy shocks often move together, perhaps because the current policy action
provides the most useful information about the near-term course of policy. However, there
are a number of occasions on which the two measures di er substantially. For example,
on May 17, 1994, the federal funds futures rate measured a surprise tightening of 13 basis
points, while the eurodollar rate indicated a surprise easing of 15 basis points|the largest
discrepency in our sample. The two measures simply capture di erent aspects of the policy
20

action: Although the FOMC tightened by more than expected at its meeting that month,
the statement released that day indicated that policy going forward would be looser than
market participants had expected (the FOMC would not tighten to the extent that had
been expected). Other large discrepencies are indicated in Table C.1.
These observations indicate that federal funds futures shocks are a noisy measure of
policy expectations over the near term (beyond the immediate policy setting). One reason
is that the federal funds rate surprises are in uenced by surprises about the timing of
policy actions. For example, if the FOMC is expected to cut interest rates at next month's
policy meeting but instead does so at this month's meeting, this shift could be re ected
in a sizable federal funds futures shock, even if the timing shift had little implication for
the overall extent of near-term policy easing. Moreover, FOMC policy actions are often
accompanied by statements that might independently in uence the expected path of policy
over the near term.
The relevant issue for this paper is the extent to which the information captured under
the two measures has an impact on asset prices. In our opinion, surprises about the expected
path of policy over the coming several months are likely to exert a stronger in uence on asset
prices than surprises about the federal funds rate in the current month. Indeed, on May 17,
1994, Treasury yields fell 12 to 21 basis points and the stock market rallied|the type of
reaction that one would expect to an easing of policy expectations rather than a tightening.
Similarly, on the dates of nearly all of the large discrepencies in the two measures, asset
prices generally moved in a manner consistent with the shock to the three-month outlook
rather than the shock to the current-month funds rate.
If asset prices are in fact responding to revisions in the near-term path of policy, estimates of those responses will be damped by an errors-in-variables problem when the federal
funds futures shocks are used in the analysis. This appears to be the case in the empirical
results, which are reported in Appendix C and summarized brie y here. Consistent with
the errors-in-variables intuition, the estimated responses of asset prices to federal funds futures shocks are generally much smaller than the estimated responses to the eurodollar rate.
The equity indexes considered do not even respond signi cantly to federal funds shocks (at
the 0.05 signi cance level) under either the event-study or the heteroskedasticity-based ap21

proach.19 For the Treasury yield curve, the estimated responses to the federal funds shocks
are much smaller than those to the eurodollar shocks and are signi cant only for short
maturities. Still, as found in the results above, the event-study estimates are larger than
the heteroskedasticity-based estimates, and the hypothesis that the two sets of estimates
are equal can be marginally rejected. Similar patterns emerge for the response of eurodollar rates to federal funds rate shocks, although the di erence between the event-study and
heteroskedasticity-based estimates is not signi cant.
Overall, it is plausible that the event-study assumptions hold to a greater extent when
policy shocks are de ned using the current month federal funds futures rate. This would be
the case if the FOMC did not react to stock price movements or to any other developments
on the policy date itself, so that the policy shock is truly exogenous to any other factors
in uencing asset prices on those dates. This is a weaker assumption than that needed for
the three-month policy shocks to be exogenous, which would require the policy outlook to
be una ected by all of the shocks in uencing asset prices on those dates. Nevertheless, the
results for the Treasury yield curve indicate that some bias remains. Indeed, the conclusions
reached before generally survive the change in the de nition of the policy variable.
Moreover, the results suggest that asset prices respond more strongly to near-term
monetary policy expectations, as captured by using a three-month interest rate as the policy
variable. In that case, the results from the previous section provide some important guidance
on the amount of bias in the event-study estimates and o er an alternative estimator that
avoids this bias.
7 Conclusions

This paper has demonstrated that the response of asset prices and market interest rates to
changes in monetary policy can be estimated from the heteroskedasticity of policy shocks
that takes place on particular dates, including days of FOMC meetings and of the Chairman's semi-annual monetary policy testimony to Congress. We show that the correlation
between the policy rate and these other asset prices shifts importantly on those dates, as
one would expect given the greater importance of policy shocks. Using this time series
This is consistent with the event-study results of Bom m and Reinhart (2000), although they use a
slightly di erent measure of the current month's federal funds rate surprise.
19

22

property, we de ne a heteroskedasticity-based estimator of the response of asset prices to
monetary policy. We implement this method with a simple instrumental variable approach.
The results indicate that increases in the short-term interest rate have a negative impact
on stock prices, with the largest e ect on the Nasdaq index. According to the estimates,
a 25 basis point increase in the three-month interest rate results in a 1.9% decline in the
S&P 500 index and a 2.5% decline in the Nasdaq index. The results also indicate that the
short-term rate has a signi cant positive impact on market interest rates, with the largest
e ect on rates with shorter maturities. Indeed, in response to a 25 basis point increase
in the three-month rate, the Treasury yield curve shifts up by 18 to 22 basis points for
maturities out to ve years and by a smaller amount for maturities beyond that. Near-term
eurodollar futures rates increase by more than 25 basis points, but the response begins to
steadily diminish at horizons beyond one year, falling to 14 basis points for the contract
expiring in ve years.
The heteroskedasticty-based estimators are of the same spirit as the event-study estimators that have been used in previous studies, only where the \event" is a change in the
volatility of policy news. Indeed, the event-study method can be seen as an extreme case
of our heteroskedasticity-based estimator, in which the shift in the variance of the policy
shock is so large that it dominates all other shocks. However, such a strong assumption is
not needed, as our heteroskedasticity-based estimator requires only a shift in the relative
importance of the shocks.
The di erences across the coeÆcients found under the two approaches are used to statistically test whether the assumptions underlying the event-study approach are satis ed|
something that has been absent in that literature. The results suggest that there is some
bias in the event-study estimates. In particular, the heteroskedasticity-based results nd a
larger negative impact of monetary policy on the stock market and a smaller positive impact
on market interest rates. Moreover, the bias in the event-study estimates is found to be
statistically signi cant in some cases, implying that the heteroskedasticity-based estimator
provides a more appropriate measure of the responsiveness of asset prices.

23

8 References

Bom m, Antulio N. (2001), Pre-Announcement E ects, News E ects, and Volatility: Monetary Policy and the Stock Market, forthcoming, Journal of Banking and Finance.
Bom m, Antulio N. and Vincent R. Reinhart (2000), Making News: Financial Market
E ects of Federal Reserve Disclosure Practices, Finance and Economics Discussion Series
working paper #2000-14, Federal Reserve Board of Governors.
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller (1987), Cointegration and Tests of Present Value
Models, Journal of Political Economy 95, 1062-1088.
Cook Timothy and Thomas Hahn (1989), The E ect of Changes in the Federal Funds Rate
Target on Market Interest Rates in the 1970s, Journal of Monetary Economics 24, 331-351.
Ellingsen, Tore and Ulf Soderstrom (2001), Classifying Monetary Policy, mimeo, Stockholm
School of Economics.
Evans, Charles L. and David Marshall (1998), Monetary Policy and the Term Structure of
Nominal Interest Rates: Evidence and Theory, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy 49, 53-111.
Fisher, Franklin (1976),
Krieger.

The Identi cation Problem in Econometrics,

New York: R. E.

King, Mervyn, Enrique Sentana, and Sushil Wadhwani (1994), Volatility and Links between
National Stock Markets, Econometrica 62, 901-933.
Klein, Roger W. and Francis Vella (2000a), Employing Heteroskedasticity to Identify and
Estimate Triangular Semiparametric Models, mimeo, Rutgers Univerity.
Klein, Roger W. and Francis Vella (2000b), Identi caton and Estimation of the Binary
Treatment Model under Heteroskedasticity, mimeo, Rutgers Univerity.
24

Kuttner, Kenneth N. (2001), Monetary Policy Surprises and Interest Rates: Evidence from
the Fed Funds Futures Market, forthcoming, Journal of Monetary Economics.
Rigobon, Roberto (1999). Identi cation Through Heteroskedasticity, mimeo, Sloan School
of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Rigobon, Roberto and Brian Sack (2001), Measuring the Response of Monetary Policy to
the Stock Market, NBER Working Paper #8350.
Roley, V. Vance and Gordon H. Sellon (1996), The Response of the Term Structure of
Interest Rates to Federal Funds Rate Target Changes, mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City.
Roley, V. Vance and Gordon H. Sellon (1998), Market Reaction to Monetary Policy Nonannouncements, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Working Paper #98-06.
Sentana, Enrique and Gabriele Fiorentini (1999), Identi cation, Estimation, and Testing of
Conditional Heteroskedastic Factor Models, mimeo, CEMFI.
Thorbecke, Willem (1997), On Stock Market Returns and Monetary Policy,
Finance 52, 635-654.

Journal of

Thornton, D. (1998), Tests of the Market's Reaction to Federal Funds Rate Target Changes,
Review, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, 25-36.
Wright, Philip G. (1928), The Tari

on Animal and Vegetable Oils, New York:

25

Macmillan.

A Properties of the Instrumental Variables Implementation
In this appendix we study the validity of the instruments introduced in the text, as well as
their asymptotic properties. For convenience, we replicate the model used. Assume that the
change in the interest rate and in the asset price are determined by the following equations:
it = st + zt + "t
st = it + zt + t ;
where it and st are T  1 vectors and "t , t , and zt are the structural shocks described
in the text. As in the text, denote policy and non-policy dates as F and ~F , respectively,
and de ne the following variables across all dates in the two subsample:
[
i = fitjt 2 F g fit jt + 1 2 F g
[
s = fstjt 2 F g fstjt + 1 2 F g ;
where we are assuming that~F is the set of days that precede those days in F .
A.1

Validity of the instruments:

First we investigate the validity of the instruments.
Proposition 1 If the variance of t and zt are constant between the policy days (F ) and
the non-policy days (~F ), then the stochastic variables de ned as
!i
!s

[

= fit jt 2 F g f itjt + 1 2 F g
[
= fstjt 2 F g f stjt + 1 2 F g for all st 2 St

are all valid instruments to estimate .

Proof. A valid instrument needs to be correlated with the explanatory variables from
the regression but uncorrelated with the residuals. The reduced form of the above equations
is given by
it = 1 1 [ t + "t + ( + ) zt ]
st = 1 1 [t + "t + (1 + ) zt ] ;

and the equation that we estimate is the following:
s = i + z + ;

26

where z and  are stacked across all dates in the same manner as i and s. Under the
assumptions that
"F = "~F + "
F = ~F
zF = z~F ;
each instrument is correlated with the explanatory variable i:
X
X
plim 1 !0 i = 1 i2 1
i2
T

i

!

T t2F t T t+12F t
V ar (it jF ) V ar (it j ~F )

= (1 1 )2 " 6= 0
X
X
stit
plim T1 !s0 i = T1 stit T1
t2F
t+12F
! Cov (st; it jF ) Cov (st; it j ~F )
= (1 )2 " 6= 0:

The second step is to show that the instruments are uncorrelated with the residuals. To do
so, we show that the instrument is uncorrelated with each of the structural shocks in the
estimated equation, z and :
X
X
plim T1 !i0 z = T1 itzt T1
itzt ! 1 + zF 1 + z~F = 0
t2F
t+12F
X
X
plim T1 !i0  = T1 itt T1
it t ! 1 1 F 1 1 ~F = 0:
t2F

t+12F

Similar equations are obtained for the other instrument:
X
X
stzt ! 11 +
plim T1 !s0 z = T1 stzt T1
t2F
t+12F
X
X
1
1
1
plim T !s0  = T stt T
stt ! 1
t2F

t+12F

zF

1+
1

F

1

z~F

=0

~F

= 0:

Note that the above proof demonstrates that the instrument !s de ned using any s 2 S
is valid for estimating the response of any asset price to the interest rate. As a result, the
instrument set de ned by equation (15), which is a linear combination of all the asset prices
included, is also valid. Moreover, that instrument will be valid as long as any of the included
asset prices are correlated with the interest rate, which makes it a more robust instrument.
Of course, the assumptions of the model were maintained in the above proof. If those
assumptions are not met, then the validity of the instruments breaks down, as summarized
in the following remarks:
27

Remark 2 If the parameters are unstable (f ; ;
are not valid.

gF 6= f ; ; g ~F ), then the instruments

There are two possible cases in which the stability of the parameters is violated. First,
the underlying parameters may simply shift on policy dates. Second, the true model may
be non-linear. One advantage of our method is that if the model is non-linear or if the
parameters shift, then the overidentifying assumptions should be rejected.
Remark 3 Note that if the assumptions on the heteroskedasticity of the policy
shocks
F =  ~F  and of the
"F > "~F and the homoskedasticity
of
the
stock
market
shocks




common shocks zF = z~F are not satis ed, then the instruments are not valid.

These two remarks are immediately apparent from the proof of Proposition 1.
A.2

Asymptotic properties.

Next we study the asymptotic properties of the instrumental variables estimates. The
estimates are
 1

bihet = !i 0 i
!i 0 s
 1

bshet = !s 0 i
!s 0 s :
Substituting, the estimates are
bihet =
+ !i 0 i 1 !i 0 (zt + t )
bshet =
+ !s 0 i 1 !s 0 (zt + t ) :
As we showed above,
plim T1 !i 0 (zt + t ) ! 0
plim 1 !s 0 (zt + t ) ! 0
and

where
Therefore,

T

plim T1 !i 0 i ! (1 1 )2 M"
plim T1 !s 0 i ! (1 )2 M";
plim T1 "t 0 "t jt 2 F plim T1 "t 0 "t jt + 1 2 F ! M" = ":
plim bihet !
plim bshet !
28

:

This shows that consistency is obtained as the result of the validity of the instruments.
We now demonstrate that the estimates are asymptotically distributed as follows:
p i

T bhet
!
N (0; i )
d
p s
T ( bhet ) ! N (0; s ) :
d

Without loss of generality, the arguments about asymptotic normality are only developed
for the rst estimate. Substituting the de nitions of the instrument as above, we obtain
 1


p i

1
1
0
0
p !i (z + ) :
T b
= !i i
het

T

T

As was argued before, plim T1 !i 0 i ! (1 1 ) M". By the central limit theorem, the variable p1T !i 0 (z + ) is asymptotically normal with asymptotic variance M  T1 !i 0 (z +  ) !i,
where z and  are the variance of the structural shocks across both the F and ~F dates,
which under the null hypothesis are equal.
Thus, the estimator has the asymptotic covariance matrix (1 )4 M" 1 MM" 1 0 . The
estimator is not asymptotically eÆcient, as suggested by the fact that the asymptotic covariance matrix does not collapse into a single matrix.
Lastly, note that the previous proofs are based on the assumption that the number of
policy days and non-policy days go to in nity. In small samples the following adjustment
to the instruments is needed to ensure that the estimators are unbiased:




[

it

it
!i =
jt 2 F
jt + 1 2 F
2

!s

=



TF

L

st jt 2 F
TF L

[

where L is the number of parameters estimated.

29

T ~F

L

st jt + 1 2 F  ;
T ~F L

B Identi cation under More General Conditions
In the main text, we assumed that the shocks across di erent FOMC days have the same
variance, but this is unlikely to be the case. In this section we show that our estimator is
still consistent even if we allow the variables to be heteroskedastic over time.
For convenience, we replicate the model used. Assume that the change in the interest
rate and in the asset price are determined by the following equations:
it = st + zt + "t
st = it + zt + t :
The structural shocks are assumed to be uncorrelated and to have conditional moments
given by


E ["t jIt 1 ] = 0; E "2t jIt 1 = ";t


E [t jIt 1 ] = 0; E t2 jIt 1 = ;t


E [zt jIt 1 ] = 0; E zt2 jIt 1 = z;t ;
where It is the information set at time t. The reduced form of the above equations is as
follows:
i = 1 1 [ t + "t + ( + ) zt ]
s = 1 1 [t + "t + ( + ) zt ] :
The same procedure that produced consistent estimates of the responsiveness of asset
prices under assumptions (6) to (8) also identi es the parameter under more general
conditions for the variances of the shocks. In particular, we now allow the variances of
2 , ;i
2 6= ;j
2 , and z;i
2 6= z;j
2 for
the structural shocks to change over time, or ";i2 6= ";j
i 6= j and both i; j 2 F . This allows the variances of the shocks can change across di erent
policy dates. However, we still assume that the variances around each policy date satisfy
the following conditions:
2 + 2 = 2
";t
(17)
1
";t
";t
2
2
;t
(18)
1 = ;t
2
2
z;t 1 = z;t;
(19)
where we have taken the set of non-policy dates to be the days preceeding each policy
date. In other words, each shock can exhibit heteroskedasticity through the sample, but
the change in the variances around each policy day must be explained entirely by the shift
in the volatility of the policy shocks.
Under conditions (17) to (19), the procedure described in the text provides a consistent
estimate for under the following assumption:
Assumption 4 Assume "t , t , and zt have nite fourth moments, and that there exists an

30

M < 1 such that






E "4t jIt 1 < M; E t4 jIt 1 < M; E zt4 jIt 1 < M:

Under that assumption, the following proposition holds:
Proposition 5 The reduced form residuals are uniformly integrable.
Proof. The reduced form residuals are a linear combination of three uncorrelated
nite fourth moment shocks. Hamilton [1994] (proposition 7.7, page 191) shows that a
linear combination of stochastic variables with at least nite second moments is uniformly
integrable.
De ne, as in the main text, the sequence of changes in the interest rate and asset price
during policy days and prior days as follows:
XF  f(it ; st ) jt 2 F g
X~F  f(it ; st ) jt + 1 2 F g :
The following proposition then holds:
Proposition 6 De ne the martingale di erence sequence for the policy dates and the dates
immediately preceding the policy dates as follows:
X~ F

 T1

X

F

XF ; X~ ~F

 T1

X

~F

X ~F ;

p

wherepTF and T ~F are the number of observations in F and ~F , respectively. Then, TF X~ F
and T ~F X~ ~F are normally distributed with mean zero and variances

1

X

TF

1

T ~F

X

F;t

 ~F;t

! ~F
! ~ ~F :

The reduced form variables have mean zero, given that the structural shocks are
assumed to have mean zero. Therefore, X~F and X~ ~F are martingale di erence sequences.
White [1984] (corollary 5.25, page 130) shows
that if X~i is a scalar martingale di erence
p
sequence, with nite fourth moments, then TiX~i is asymptotically normal with limiting
variance ~i.
These assumptions and propositions indicate that the interest rates and the vector of
asset prices are asymptotically joint normal for any subset of dates in the sample. In
particular,
1 X (it ; st )0 (it; st ) ! F
Proof.

1

TF t2F
X

T ~F t+12F

(it ; st )0 (it; st ) !
31

~F

where

2 F + 2 F + F ( + ) (1 + ) F + F + F 
(
+
)
z

"
z

"
F =
(1 + )2 Fz + F + 2 F"
(1 )2 
1
( + )2 z~F + 2 ~F + "~F ( + ) (1 + ) z~F + ~F + "~F
~F =
(1 + )2 z~F + ~F + 2 "~F
(1 )2
and the variances of the shocks in the elements of the matrix are given by
1 X "2 ! F ;

1



TF t2F

1

X

1

X

TF t2F

TF t2F

and

1

X

1

X

1

X

t

"

t2

! F ;

zt2

! Fz ;

T ~F t+12F
T ~F t+12F
T ~F t+12F

"2t

! "~F ;

t2

! ~F ;

zt2

! z~F :

The result then follows under the same assumption about the homoskedasticity of the
asset price shocks and the common shock:
Assumption 7 As before, assume that the asset prices shocks and the common shock have
the same variance before and during the policy day. More speci cally,
 ~F = F ; and  ~F = F :




z

z

Under assumptions 4 and 7, the change in the covariance matrix between non-policy
and policy dates is as follows:

F  ~F 

1


  F ~F = (1 )2
2 ;
which implies that the coeÆcient is identi ed in the same manner as in the text.

32



C Results for Federal Funds Futures Shocks
The policy measure used in this paper is based on the three-month eurodollar futures rate.
As discussed in section 6, an alternative de nition of policy shocks can be obtained from
federal funds futures rates. Table C.1 compares these two measures of policy shocks for the
78 policy dates included in our sample.
Table C.1: Alternative Shock De nitions and Asset Price Responses

Date

4-Feb-94
22-Feb-94
22-Mar-94
17-May-94***
6-Jul-94
20-Jul-94***
16-Aug-94***
27-Sep-94
15-Nov-94
20-Dec-94

Shock De nition:
3-mo ED 1-mo FF
Shock Shock
0.09
0.00
-0.07
-0.15
-0.03
0.09
0.00
-0.03
0.07
-0.06

0.12
-0.01
-0.03
0.13
-0.05
0.00
0.14
-0.08
0.14
-0.17

1-Feb-95
22-Feb-95
28-Mar-95***
23-May-95
6-Jul-95***
19-Jul-95
22-Aug-95
26-Sep-95
15-Nov-95
19-Dec-95

0.07
-0.08
0.07
-0.02
-0.16
0.05
0.03
0.05
0.03
-0.10

31-Jan-96
20-Feb-96***
26-Mar-96
21-May-96

-0.06
0.14
0.00
0.00
-0.05
-0.04
-0.02
-0.12
0.00
0.02

3-Jul-96

18-Jul-96
20-Aug-96
24-Sep-96
13-Nov-96
17-Dec-96

Change in Asset Prices:
1-yr 2-yr 5-yr 10-yr S&P 500
Treas. Treas. Treas. Treas. Index
0.11
0.00
-0.08
-0.12
-0.02
0.10
-0.02
-0.02
0.06
-0.07

0.14
0.00
-0.06
-0.15
-0.03
0.12
-0.05
-0.02
0.04
-0.03

0.15
-0.02
-0.11
-0.19
-0.01
0.11
-0.10
0.03
0.03
-0.01

0.13
-0.04
-0.11
-0.21
0.01
0.10
-0.11
0.04
-0.02
0.00

-2.27
0.81
0.06
1.10
-0.05
-0.50
0.82
0.27
-0.22
-0.18

0.05
-0.01
0.00
0.00
-0.01
0.00
0.00
0.04
0.06
-0.10

0.13
-0.17
0.11
-0.06
-0.19
0.03
0.04
0.06
0.04
-0.10

0.07
-0.17
0.11
-0.04
-0.22
0.12
0.02
-0.01
0.06
-0.07

0.02
-0.15
0.12
-0.09
-0.20
0.14
0.04
0.03
0.06
-0.08

0.06
-0.10
0.11
-0.06
-0.14
0.18
0.03
0.02
0.03
-0.04

0.00
0.48
0.14
0.94
1.23
-1.34
0.25
-0.07
0.79
0.84

-0.07
-0.03
0.01
0.00
-0.05
-0.02
-0.04
-0.13
0.00
0.01

-0.08
0.25
0.00
0.01
-0.05
0.00
-0.02
-0.12
-0.01
0.02

-0.09
0.28
0.03
0.01
-0.02
-0.07
0.00
-0.08
-0.02
0.05

-0.05
0.24
0.00
0.03

-0.03
0.25
-0.01
0.03
-0.02
-0.11
0.00
-0.06
0.01
0.03

0.93
-1.13
0.45
-0.06
-0.18
1.50
-0.13
-0.13
0.22
0.70

33

-0.03
-0.11
0.00
-0.08
0.01
0.04

Table C.1 (continued)

Date

5-Feb-97
26-Feb-97
25-Mar-97
20-May-97
2-Jul-97
22-Jul-97
19-Aug-97
30-Sep-97
12-Nov-97
16-Dec-97

3-mo ED 1-mo FF
Shock Shock
0.00
0.06
0.04
-0.08
-0.02
-0.03
0.01
0.00
-0.01
0.01

-0.03
0.01
0.04
-0.11
-0.02
0.00
-0.01
0.00
-0.04
-0.01

4-Feb-98
24-Feb-98
31-Mar-98
19-May-98
1-Jul-98
21-Jul-98
18-Aug-98
29-Sep-98
17-Nov-98
22-Dec-98

0.00
0.02
-0.02
-0.03
-0.01
0.00
0.00
0.06
-0.07
0.02

3-Feb-99
23-Feb-99
30-Mar-99
18-May-99
30-Jun-99
22-Jul-99***
24-Aug-99
5-Oct-99
16-Nov-99
21-Dec-99
2-Feb-00
17-Feb-00
21-Mar-00
16-May-00
28-Jun-00
20-Jul-00***
22-Aug-00

1-yr 2-yr 5-yr 10-yr S&P 500
Treas. Treas. Treas. Treas. Index
-0.01
0.12
0.04
-0.06
0.00
-0.09
0.01
0.00
-0.03
0.00

0.03
0.16
0.04
-0.03
0.00
-0.04
0.03
0.00
-0.03
0.00

0.02
0.17
0.05
-0.03
-0.03
-0.11
0.01
0.01
-0.01
0.00

0.02
0.16
0.03
-0.01
-0.03
-0.12
0.00
0.02
-0.02
-0.01

-1.39
-0.79
-0.23
1.01
1.46
2.30
1.48
-0.64
-1.65
0.48

0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.03
-0.01
0.03
0.01
0.06
-0.06
-0.02

-0.01
0.12
-0.03
0.00
-0.01
0.00
0.02
0.00
-0.03
0.03

-0.02
0.11
-0.05
0.00
-0.03
0.00
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.03

0.00
0.13
-0.06
0.00
-0.04
-0.01
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.05

0.01
0.11
-0.05
0.01
0.00
-0.03
0.01
-0.02
0.02
0.06

0.09
-0.73
0.75
0.33
1.30
-1.61
1.62
0.03
0.30
0.06

0.02
0.00
-0.01
0.02
-0.09
0.07
0.01
0.00
0.05
0.00

0.00
-0.01
0.00
-0.04
-0.04
0.00
0.02
-0.04
0.09
0.02

0.00
0.05
-0.03
0.02
-0.10
0.07
-0.03
0.06
0.03
-0.02

0.02
0.09
-0.05
0.07
-0.15
0.07
-0.01
0.08
0.06
0.00

0.04
0.09
-0.06
0.05
-0.17
0.11
-0.06
0.09
0.04
0.01

0.04

-0.07
0.02
-0.12
0.12
-0.04
0.07
0.03
0.02

0.80
-0.08
-0.72
-0.46
1.57
-1.33
0.24
-0.25
1.82
1.08

0.00
0.03
0.00
0.06
-0.02
-0.09
-0.01

-0.05
0.00
-0.03
0.05
-0.02
0.00
-0.02

-0.06
0.06
-0.01
-0.01
-0.02
-0.11
0.00

0.03
0.06
-0.02
0.01
-0.07
-0.14
-0.01

0.01
0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.16
-0.03

-0.02
0.02
-0.05
-0.04
0.01
-0.15
-0.01

-0.01
0.04
2.56
0.94
0.29
0.92
-0.09

34

0.07

Table C.1 (continued)

Date

3-Oct-00
15-Nov-00
19-Dec-00
31-Jan-01
13-Feb-01
20-Mar-01***
15-May-01
27-Jun-01
21-Aug-01
2-Oct-01
6-Nov-01

3-mo ED 1-mo FF
Shock Shock
0.01
0.00
0.02

0.00
0.00
0.05

-0.02
0.04
-0.06
-0.11
0.09
-0.02
-0.11
-0.15

0.01
0.01
0.06
-0.08
0.09
0.02
-0.07
-0.10

1-yr 2-yr 5-yr 10-yr S&P 500
Treas. Treas. Treas. Treas. Index
0.01
-0.01
0.00

0.02
-0.02
0.02

0.02
-0.03
0.02

0.04
-0.04
0.02

-0.68
0.50
-1.30

-0.08
0.07
-0.07
-0.04
0.06
-0.03
-0.04
-0.08

-0.08
0.08
-0.08
-0.01
0.03
-0.05
-0.05
-0.09

-0.06
0.04
-0.06
0.01
0.08
-0.05
-0.03
-0.17

-0.05
0.02
-0.04
0.04
0.02
-0.04
-0.02
-0.01

-0.56
-0.87
-2.41
0.04
-0.47
-1.21
1.23
1.45

The table shows daily changes in asset prices in percentage points for Treasury yields and percent for stock prices.
Two day changes are used when necessary due to holidays. Dates indicated with stars have discrepencies of
at least 7 basis points between the shock measures.

The empirical results using the federal funds futures shocks are reported in Tables C.2
to C.4, which are analogous to Tables 2 to 4 from section 5 of the text.
Table C.2: The Response of Stock Prices
to Federal Funds Futures Shocks

S&P 500
Wilshire
Nasdaq
DJIA

Estimator: bihet
Coef Std Dev
-3.772 2.708
-4.219 2.649
-8.398 4.670
-2.582 2.668

Test of O.I. Restrictions: Æball;i
Test of E.S. Assumptions: Æbes;all
See footnote from Table 2.

Estimator: ball
het
Coef Std Dev
-3.999 2.702
-4.395 2.643
-8.514 4.658
-2.880 2.662
F-test P-value
0.054
0.995
0.204
0.936

35

Estimator: bes
Coef Std Dev
-3.238 2.142
-3.658 2.074
-7.046 3.672
-2.341 2.018

Table C.3: The Response of the Term Structure
to Federal Funds Futures Shocks

Estimator: bihet
Coef Std Dev
0.509 0.134
0.292 0.129
0.152 0.147
0.101 0.166
-0.146 0.158
-0.258 0.143

i6mo
i1yr
i2yr
i5yr
i10yr
i30yr

Test of O.I. Restrictions: Æball;i
Test of E.S. Assumptions: Æbes;all
See footnote from Table 3.

Estimator: ball
het
Coef Std Dev
0.415 0.129
0.210 0.125
0.083 0.142
0.032 0.160
-0.259 0.155
-0.354 0.139
F-test P-value
1.593
0.154
2.158
0.051

Estimator: bes
Coef Std Dev
0.540 0.106
0.413 0.118
0.256 0.138
0.202 0.160
-0.014 0.147
-0.123 0.126

Table C.4: The Response of Eurodollar Futures Rates
to Federal Funds Futures Shocks

ED2
ED3
ED4
ED5
ED6
ED7
ED8

Estimator: bihet
Coef Std Dev
0.335 0.148
0.232 0.182
0.177 0.200
0.103 0.202
0.092 0.197
0.070 0.192
0.041 0.190

Test of O.I. Restrictions: Æball;i
Test of E.S. Assumptions: Æbes;all

Estimator: ball
het
Coef Std Dev
0.340 0.134
0.222 0.165
0.154 0.182
0.069 0.184
0.053 0.180
0.035 0.175
0.011 0.173
F-test P-value
0.672 0.834
0.617 0.882

Estimator: bes
Coef Std Dev
0.416 0.148
0.358 0.180
0.307 0.198
0.233 0.200
0.215 0.195
0.193 0.188
0.168 0.185

See footnote from Table 4. Contracts expiring beyond two years have insigni cant responses
and are therefore omitted from the table (but are still included in the F-tests).

36

Figure 1
Joint Determination of Interest Rates and Asset Prices

Asset Price

Monetary Policy
Response

Asset Price
Response

Interest Rate

Figure 2
Policy Dates

Asset Price

Monetary Policy
Response

Asset Price
Response

Interest Rate

Figure 3
Responsiveness of Treasury Rates
1.2

1

0.8

0.6

Event-study
0.4

Hetero-based (i instruments)
Hetero-based (all instruments)

0.2

0
6 mo

1 yr

2 yr

5 yr

10 yr

30 yr

Maturity

Figure 4
Responsiveness of Eurodollar Futures Rates
1.5

1.3

1.1

0.9

0.7

Event-study
Hetero-based (i instruments)

0.5

Hetero-based (all instruments)
0.3
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Horizon (quarters)

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

