                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         UNCOVERED INTEREST RATE PARITY AND THE TERM STRUCTURE


                                            Geert Bekaert
                                              Min Wei
                                            Yuhang Xing


                                        Working Paper 8795
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w8795


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2002




Geert Bekaert acknowledges financial support from an NSF grant. We thank Bob Hodrick and seminar
participants at Columbia University for useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Geert Bekaert, Min Wei and Yuhang Xing. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Uncovered Interest Rate Parity and the Term Structure
Geert Bekaert, Min Wei and Yuhang Xing
NBER Working Paper No. 8795
February 2002
JEL No. F3



                                             ABSTRACT

         This paper examines uncovered interest rate parity (UIRP) and the expectations hypotheses of the
term structure (EHTS) at both short and long horizons. The statistical evidence against UIRP is mixed
and is currency- not horizon-dependent. Economically, the deviations from UIRP are less pronounced
than previously documented. The evidence against the EHTS is statistically more uniform, but,
economically, actual spreads and theoretical spreads (spreads constructed under the null of the EHTS)
do not behave very differently, especially at long horizons. Partly because of this, the deviations from
the EHTS only play a minor role in explaining deviations from UIRP at long horizons. A random walk
model for both exchange rates and interest rates fits the data marginally better than the UIRP-EHTS
model.




Geert Bekaert                        Min Wei                             Yuhang Xing
Columbia Business School             Columbia Business School            Columbia Business School
808 Uris Hall                        3022 Broadway                       3022 Broadway
3022 Broadway                        New York, NY 10027                  New York, NY 10027
New York, NY 10027                   mw427@columbia.edu                  yx35@columbia.edu
and NBER
gb241@columbia.edu
1     Introduction

Uncovered Interest Rate Parity (UIRP) predicts that high yield currencies should be
expected to depreciate. It also predicts that, ceteris paribus, a real interest rate increase
should appreciate the currency. UIRP is one of the cornerstones of international nance,
constituting an important building block of most important exchange rate determination
theories such as the monetary exchange rate model, Dornbusch (1976)'s overshooting
model or Krugman (1991)'s target zone model and dominating the discussion on exchange
rate determination in most international textbooks. Nevertheless, there appears to be
overwhelming empirical evidence against UIRP, at least at frequencies less than one year
(see Hodrick (1987), Engel (1996) and Froot and Thaler (1990)). Given that this empirical
evidence has not stopped theorists from relying on UIRP, it is fortunate that recent
evidence is more favorable: Bekaert and Hodrick (2001) and Baillie and Bollerslev (2000)
argue that doubtful statistical inference may have contributed to the strong rejections of
UIRP at higher frequencies whereas Chinn and Meredith (2001) marshal evidence that
UIRP holds much better at long horizons.
    The long-horizon evidence regarding UIRP is somewhat puzzling at rst sight. By
construction, if UIRP holds in the short run, it should hold in the long run as long as the
expectations hypothesis of the term structure of interest rates (EHTS) holds; that is, as
long as the long rate equals the average expected future short rate over the life of the bond.
It seems unlikely that the short-term deviations from UIRP would exactly o set the long-
term deviations from the EHTS to make UIRP hold in the long run. In alternative models
based on risk, a time-varying risk premium separates expected exchange rate changes from
the interest di erential and a time-varying term premium separates the long-term interest
rate from expected future short rates. Consequently, these risk premiums would be driven
by the same fundamentals and deviations from UIRP and the EHTS should be visible at
both long and short horizons.
    However, if ineÆcient markets or short-term market frictions prevent an immediate
complete response of the exchange rate to an interest rate change, short-term deviations of
                                              1
UIRP may occur while long-horizon UIRP holds (see Froot and Thaler (1990)). Similarly,
term spreads may be poor predictors of short-run changes in interest rates, but good
predictors of short rate changes over the long run, for which there is some empirical
evidence (see Campbell and Shiller (1991)).
    It is therefore worthwhile to re-examine UIRP and the EHTS simultaneously at long
and short horizons. To do so, our main tool of analysis will be a vector autoregression
(VAR) on exchange rate changes, interest rates and term spreads, drawing data from
three countries: the US, the UK and Germany. The VAR not only allows us to disen-
tangle the various hypotheses in a uni ed framework, it also makes it easy to conduct
more powerful joint tests across both short and long horizons. Apart from the statistical
signi cance, we also examine the economic signi cance of potential deviations from UIRP
and the EHTS. Many policymakers conduct policy experiments imposing the EHTS for
example (see Evans (1998) and Bernanke, Gertler, and Watson (1997)). If the EHTS does
not hold statistically, but the spread as predicted by the EHTS and the actual spread
are very highly correlated, assuming the EHTS in a policy analysis may be acceptable.
Our framework allows us to investigate the economic signi cance of imposing di erent
hypotheses.
    Our main ndings can be summarized as follows. The statistical evidence regarding
UIRP is mixed, depending on the currency pair but not on the horizon. Economically,
although our statistics show that UIRP deviations are important, it is crucial to adjust
them for small sample biases. Our results here are of immediate relevance for a growing
literature in international economics that makes use of an empirically calibrated \deviation
from UIRP", see for example McCallum (1994). In comparison, the statistical evidence
against the EHTS is more uniform across countries and horizons. Finally, the deviations
from the EHTS are not economically important, indicating that analyzing the e ects of
policy experiments under the null of the EHTS may be useful.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the main hy-
potheses, UIRP and the EHTS, and how they are related. Section 3 outlines our econo-

                                             2
metric procedure. Section 4 and section 5 present empirical results from the statistical
and the economic perspective. We also consider one popular alternative hypothesis, that
exchange rates and interest rates are random walks (see Meese and Rogo (1983) and
Mark (1995) for the rst and Campbell and Shiller (1987) or Mankiw, Miron, and Weil
(1987) for the latter). Section 7 concludes.

2       Expectations Hypotheses

Uncovered Interest Rate Parity (UIRP)
UIRP holds at the n-period horizon if
                           1 (E s                                  s)=i                        i    +                          (1)
                                     n        t    t+  n            t               t;n        t;n         n




where s is the logarithm of the spot exchange rate (local per foreign currency), i and
          t                                                                                                               t;n



i are the time-t continuously compounded domestic and foreign n-period interest rate
t;n



respectively, and is a constant risk premium. All interest rates are expressed in monthly
                    n



rates.
   Denote s = s s 1 . UIRP can be tested with the following regression:
                t    t   t




                       1 Xs = + n


                                               i
                                                        
                                                     i + "                           (2)
                                          +                                                                           +
                                                                        uirp

                         n =1i
                                         t    i            n            n               t;n         t;n         t;t   n




      Under the null the slope coeÆcient equals one.
Expectations Hypothesis of the Term Structure (EHTS)
The EHTS holds if the long-term n-period interest rate i is an unbiased estimator of                      t;n



the average expected short-term interest rate i + 1 during the bond's life plus a constant
                                                                                t       h;



term premium:
                                     1 X1                      n


                              i =          E (i + 1 ) + c                              (3)
                                     n       t;n

                                                               h   =0
                                                                            t       t     h;          n




   A direct test of this hypothesis (see for example Campbell and Shiller (1991)) is the
regression:
                                                                        3
                    1 X1 i
                       k


                                                i           =a +                            (i                i       )+u+                   (4)
                k =0 +
                                                                                    ehts
                             t   im;m            t;m                    n           n;m          t;n           t;m               t   n   m

                       i


where k = n=m and m < n.
   Under the EHTS, the slope coeÆcient in this regression should equal one.1
UIRP and EHTS
UIRP at horizon n is implied by UIRP at the short horizon (m periods, say) and the
EHTS at horizon n. To see this, assume that the UIRP holds at the shorter-term m-
period horizon:
                          1 X E s = + i i m



                          m          +                  t       t       j           m               t;m           t;m

                                        j   =1
and that the EHTS holds at the longer-term n-period horizon for both domestic and
foreign interest rates:
                                     1 X1                                   k


                          i =a +          E (i      )                                            +
                                        t;n                 n
                                                                        k =0j
                                                                                        t       t    j m;m




                                                                  1 X1      k
                                                                                                                  
                                    i  t;n
                                                = a        n
                                                                +      E
                                                                        k =0            t    i+t    j m;m

                                                                            j



where k = n=m. Then UIRP also holds at the n-period horizon
                                       1 X1                                     k
                                                                                                                                         
                i   i = a a +
                                           E i          i                                           +                     +
                     t;n     t;n                n               n
                                                                            k =0j
                                                                                            t        t    j m;m             t   j m;m




                                   = n1 E s + + a
                                       X                n


                                                                    t       t   j           n            an            m                    (5)
                                                    j   =1
   As a consequence, although UIRP in the short run, UIRP in the long run and the
EHTS at long horizons are three distinct hypotheses, a joint test requires testing only
two out of these three hypotheses. Surprisingly, this close relationship between UIRP
and the EHTS has been largely ignored in the literature. Campbell and Clarida (1987)
  1 Campbell and Shiller (1991) also investigate changes in the long-maturity bond yield over a shorter
m-period time span. We do not focus on these EHTS-restrictions because they are not directly relevant
for the link with UIRP and the empirical implementation su ers from a bias induced by lacking data on
the n m-period bond.
                                                                            4
and Lewis (1990) jointly study foreign exchange and term structure returns but they test
latent variable models not the Expectations Hypotheses. Bekaert and Hodrick (2001) do
test both UIRP and the EHTS, but as Campbell and Clarida and Lewis, they only focus
on short-horizon Eurocurrency data.

3     Econometric Methodology


3.1     Regression Tests


The error terms in regressions (2) and (4) are serially correlated when n; m > 1, and
OLS standard errors are hence no longer consistent. By standard Generalized Methods of
Moments (Hansen (1982)), the asymptotic distribution of the OLS estimator  = ( ; )
                    p 
                                                                                                       n           n   n
                               
in regression (2) is T b  s N (0; ), where = Z0 1S0Z0 1 , Z0 = E (x x0 ) with
                         n    n                                                                            t   t

                            P                       
x 0 = 1; i
 t       t;n   i and S0 = = 1 +1 E w + w0+
               t;n
                               n
                               j   n              t    with w + =  + x . A consistent
                                                       n   t   n   j               t   n   t   n   t



estimator of S0 is
                                         X1   n


                            S0 = C (0) + [C (j ) + C (j )0 ]
                            b
                                              j   =1
where
                             C (j ) =
                                      1       X
                                              T


                                                       w + w0+
                                                                               
                                      T   t= +1
                                              j
                                                           t   n   t   n   j




This is the Hansen and Hodrick (1980) estimator. However, Sb0 may fail to be positive
semi-de nite. If it is not, we replace it with a Newey and West (1987) estimator with n
lags. The estimator b = Zb0 1Sb0 1Zb0 thus obtained gives rise to our robust Hansen and
Hodrick (1980) standard errors.
    Regression tests have several disadvantages. First, the Hansen and Hodrick (1980)
standard errors have very poor small-sample properties leading to over-rejection (See
Hodrick (1992)). We examine below whether the regressions remain useful for our long-
horizon tests. Second, the long-horizon regressions have fewer observations than short-
horizon regressions, which complicates conducting eÆcient joint tests across horizons.


                                                  5
3.2       VAR Tests


An alternative to the simple regression tests that circumvents their disadvantages is to ex-
amine UIRP and the EHTS in the context of a VAR on exchange rate changes and interest
rates. With a VAR, we can recover (implied) regression slopes from the VAR dynamics
and conduct joint Wald tests of UIRP at short and long horizons and the EHTS. More-
over, if we impose the null hypothesis on the VAR dynamics, we can conduct Lagrange
Multiplier (LM) and Distance Metric (DM) tests, which have superior size properties
compared to the simple Wald test statistic (See Bekaert and Hodrick (2001)). Finally, the
dynamics of exchange rates and interest rates under the null and the alternative reveal
the economic signi cance of potential deviations from the null hypotheses.
   The variables included in our 5-variable VAR are
                               yt   = s ; i 3 ; i 3; sp 60 ; sp 600
                                              t   t;   t;           t;   t;




where * again indicates the foreign country, and we take the US as the domestic country.
Here sp 60 (sp 60 ) is the term spread between the 60-month long rate and the 3-month
          t;   t;



short rate. We also estimate a cross-country system for Deutsche Mark/Pound rates
with Germany functioning as the home country. Furthermore, we estimate two 7-variable
VARs where the 12-month or the 36-month term spreads are included for all currency
pairs. With these VARs, we can test both long- and shorter-horizon EHTS.
   We select the optimal order of the VAR using the BIC criterion, and represent the
companion form of the VAR (of order K say) in the usual way as
                                         x +1 = Ax
                                          t                 t   +  +1
                                                                     t




with x +1 = y0+1; y0 ; : : : ; y0+2 0, where we suppress the constant term.
      t        t    t      t       K



   Collect the parameters of the VAR (A, the constants and the innovation covariance
matrix) in the vector . We obtain unconstrained estimates using the GMM by minimizing
the objective function
                                         g ()0 W g () ;
                                              T                 T




                                                       6
where W is a weighting matrix, and g ()  1 P =1 g (x ; ) is the standard set of
                                                          T
                                                                           T
                                                                                       T
                                                                                       t               t



orthogonality conditions for a VAR system. Hansen (1982) demonstrates that the optimal
weighting matrix is the inverse of
                                                  1
                                                  X                                               
                                          =             E g (x ; ) g (x ; )0
                                                                   t               t       k

                                              k   = 1
    Let be a consistent estimator of and let the weighting matrix W be optimally
         T



chosen as 1 . Denote G  5g (). The parameter estimates are asymptotically
             T                       T             T



distributed as
                           p b                          
                             T  0 ! N 0; (G0 G ) 1 :                      T      T           T




    The hypotheses of UIRP and the EHTS impose di erent constraints on the parameters
of the VAR. Let e be an indicator column vector that selects the j -th variable in the
                         j



VAR. Using E x + = A x and straightforward algebra, we can show that UIRP at the
                 t   t   k
                               k
                                     t



3-month horizon implies
                             1 e0 A(I A3 ) (I A) 1 = e0 e0                         (6)
                             31                        2  3

while in the 5-variable VAR, UIRP at the 60-month horizon implies
                       1 e0 A(I A60 ) (I A) 1 = e0 e0 + e0 e0 :
                      60 1                        4     5  2  3

Similarly the domestic 60-month EHTS imposes the restriction
                                                           
                          e4 = e2
                           0      0   1      60    3  1
                                                                                   (7)
                                      20 I A I A          I :

    Let these constraints be summarized as
                                                       H0 : q (0 ) = 0

Further denote the sample counterpart of q () by q () and its gradient by Q  5q ().
                                                                           T                                T   T



   The constrained GMM objective function can be written as
                             L (;       ) = (1=2) g ()0  T           T
                                                                           1 g ()
                                                                               T                   q ()0
                                                                                                   T                (8)
where is the vector of Lagrange multipliers.
                                                               7
    Direct maximization of the objective function is diÆcult as these constraints are highly
nonlinear. Instead, we employ the recursive algorithm described in Bekaert and Hodrick
(2001). In brief, starting from a consistent estimator e, which is usually the unconstrained
estimator, we iterate on the following two equations derived from Taylor expansions of
the rst-order conditions to (8):
                                                                                                                                             
           = e B 1 2 M B 1 2 G0
                    T
                        =
                                T     T
                                          =
                                                      T       T
                                                                  1g
                                                                          T    e                 B 1 Q0 Q B 1 Q0 1 q
                                                                                                   T       T       T       T       T       T    e
                                                                                                                                        
            =     Q B 1 Q0 1 Q B 1 G0
                    T   T        T            T           T           T       T
                                                                                   1g
                                                                                          T    e      +   Q B 1 Q0 1 q
                                                                                                               T       T       T       T    e

where
                        B   T    = G0     T       T
                                                      1G
                                                              T


                                                               
                        M   T    =I           B 1 2 Q0 Q B 1 Q0 1 Q B 1 2
                                                      T
                                                          =
                                                                      T               T       T        T           T       T
                                                                                                                               =




   We consider three di erent test statistics of the null hypothesis, the Wald statistic
                                      0                  1  
                            Tq  T     b              1
                                                  Q B Q
                                                      T
                                                        0    q b ! 2 (k) ;
                                                                  T           T               T




the distance metric (DM) statistic
                                                          0                              
                                      Tg     T                       T
                                                                          1g
                                                                               T             ! 2 (k) ;
and the Lagrange multiplier (LM) statistic
                                                   
                                      T 0 Q B 1 Q0        T           T           T
                                                                                              ! 2 (k) :
   The DM and LM statistics require estimation under the null. The degrees of freedom
k of the 2 -distribution depends on the VAR order.


3.3     Implied VAR Statistics


Let be the unconditional variance of y . Together with A, fully describes the dynamics
                                                                  t



of exchange rate changes, interest rates and spreads in the VAR. First, we compute implied

                                                                               8
slope coeÆcients that correspond to the regression slope coeÆcients of section 2. For
example, in our 5-variable VAR, the implied 3-month UIRP regression slope is
                               1 e01 A (I A3 ) (I A) 1 (e2 e3 )
                        3 =3                                        ;
                        uirp

                                          (e02 e03) (e2 e3)
and the implied TS slope coeÆcient in equation (4) for the domestic 60-month interest
rate is                          h
                                                      1
                                                               i
                              e2 (I A )(I A ) =20 I e4
                               0           60       3
                       60 3 =                                         :
                       ehts
                         ;
                                               e04 e4
    Second, to further characterize the economic signi cance of deviations from the null
hypotheses, we compute three alternative statistics. When UIRP holds, the expected
exchange rate change should be perfectly correlated with the interest rate di erential; its
variability should equal the variability of the interest di erential, and the variability of
the foreign risk premium should be zero. Hence we compute
                                                               !
                  CORR = corr E
                                         1    X
                                                 s ; i i
                                                                 n


                                                                                         (9)
                                                                              +
                          uirp

                                           n         t

                                                              =1
                                                                             t       i       t;n         t;n


                                                                                     !
                                                             i




                     VR          = var     1 E X s          n


                                                                                             =var i                      i
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                      (10)
                                                                          +
                          uirp

                                           n     t

                                                         i=1
                                                                         t       i                        t;n            t;n


                                     "                                                                                       !#0:5
                     SD          =   var
                                            1 E X s +               n


                                                                                                   i          i
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                      (11)
                                                    +
                          uirp

                                            n        t

                                                                 i=1
                                                                             t           i         t;n             t;n




where the expression between parentheses in equation (11) is the foreign exchange risk
premium, which we will refer to as rp .    uirp
                                           t;n



    Analogously, we compute the correlation CORR between the actual spread and the   ehts




\theoretical" spread as computed from expected future short rates, 1 E P =01 i +                                                   k   t
                                                                                                                                           k
                                                                                                                                           j   t   j m;m



i , the corresponding variance ratio V R and the standard deviation of their di erence
t;m
                                                 ehts




SD . The di erence between the theoretical spread and the actual spread can be
      ehts




thought of as the expected excess return to rolling over short-term interest contracts over
a period of n months instead of holding the long bond till maturity.
    Under the alternative of a time-varying risk premium, it is also interesting to exam-
ine Fama's (1984) \excess volatility puzzle". For many economists, a volatility of the
risk premium larger than the volatility of expected exchange rate changes would appear
                                                                     9
excessive. Fama shows that the volatility of the \risk premium" is larger than that of ex-
pected changes in the exchange rate as long as the standard UIRP regression coeÆcient is
less than 1=2. Assuming that the investors form their expectation about future exchange
rates and interest rates based on current and historical values of our VAR variables only,
we can compute the Fama (1984) volatility ratio,
                                                   "               #
                      EV R = var rp
                                           
                                              =var E
                                                     1   X
                                                             s ;
                                                                                                   n


                                                                                                           +
                                         uirp               uirp
                                                            t;n
                                                                                n      t

                                                                                               i   =1
                                                                                                          t   i




at di erent horizons from our VAR estimates.2 The concept nicely generalizes to devi-
ations from the EHTS. When the ratio of SD to the variance of expected spot rate
                                                                         ehts




changes is larger than one, this would indicate excess volatility of term structure premi-
ums.
    Whereas the excess volatility statistics would be zero under the null of UIRP and the
EHTS, they would converge to zero as the horizon increases under the short-term market
ineÆciency story.

3.4        Monte Carlo Analysis


Given recent evidence on the poor nite sample behavior of many test estimators, we
conduct a bootstrap analysis of the nite sample properties of the Wald, LM and DM
test statistics, the actual and implied regression slopes and the four economic signi cance
test statistics. Our null model is a biased-corrected version of the constrained VAR with
UIRP and the EHTS imposed. Appendix B describes the data generating process and
the results in detail. Here, we only summarize our main ndings.
    First, the actual UIRP regression coeÆcients are downward biased at the 60-month
horizon. Together with a dispersion that is typically larger at long horizons, this results
in a wider con dence interval for long-horizon slopes. These biases are partly the reason
  2 It         can          be     rewritten as 1 + var i i  =var  1 E P =1 s +          t;n      t;n       n   t
                                                                                                                          n
                                                                                                                          i   t   i

                           P                     P
2cov i   t;n      i ; 1 E =1 s + =var[ 1 E =1 s + ]. The second term on the right hand side
                  t;n   n   t
                                 n
                                 i   t   i      n   t
                                                        n
                                                        i           t    i


is 1=V R   uirp
                  , and the third term equals 2  CORR =(V R )0 5.uirp          uirp       :




                                                                  10
for the very poor small-sample behavior of the t-statistics, especially at long horizons.
Whereas the small sample distribution of the implied slope coeÆcients is similar to that
of the OLS counterparts, its small sample properties are superior: the biases are generally
lower and the implied t-statistics are much closer to normal.
    The TS-slope coeÆcients are upward biased, con rming the Monte Carlo results in
Bekaert, Hodrick, and Marshall (1997). The t-statistic distribution of the EHTS regression
slope is somewhat closer to normal than its UIRP counterpart but it is still severely
distorted. Again the VAR implied t-stats are much better behaved. Consequently, we do
not report direct regression coeÆcients but focus entirely on the VAR results.3
    Second, generalizing the ndings in Bekaert and Hodrick (2001), the LM test statistic
has little size distortion and its nite-sample distribution is well-approximated by the
asymptotic 2 distribution. Hence, we only use the LM test for our VAR-based tests. The
Wald statistic has the worst size distortion and its use invariably leads to over-rejection.
    Third, the examination of the four economic signi cance statistics reveals important
biases and wide nite-sample distributions. For example, the correlation and variance
ratio statistics, also used by Campbell and Shiller (1991) in a study on the EHTS in the
US, show downward (upward) bias. The bias is least severe for statistics involving the
theoretical spread, exactly the hypotheses Campbell and Shiller (1991) focused on. Not
surprisingly, the standard deviation of the risk premium is an upwardly biased statistic
but the bias is economically large and is most severe for short-horizon UIRP premiums.
This foreign exchange risk premium is exactly the variable that is a critical input in a
number of recent analyses, such as McCallum (1994). The Fama excess volatility ratio
statistic is also upwardly biased, with the bias less severe at shorter horizons and for the
term structure tests.
    In reporting these statistics below, we always add the Monte Carlo mean and a [2.5%,
97.5%] con dence interval based on the Monte Carlo analysis.
  3 Direct regression results are available upon request.We nd that one reason for Chinn and Meredith
(2001)'s claim that UIRP holds better at longer horizons is simply sample choice. When we restrict our
sample to start only in 1980, the slope coeÆcients are closer to the ones Chinn and Meredith nd.
                                                    11
4    Statistical Evidence on the Expectations Hypothe-

     ses

Table 1 reports the LM-test results for our base 5-variable VAR system with 3-month
and 60-month interest rate data and the two 7-variable systems. The latter systems add
the intermediate maturity to both \short" and \long" horizon tests in UIRP. Therefore,
Table 1 contains joint tests across all possible combinations of maturities except those
involving both 12-month and 36-month data.
    We nd no evidence against UIRP at either the 3-month or the 60-month horizon
in the USD-DEM system at the 5% signi cance level (See Panel A). For the USD-GBP
system, the results are more mixed. The LM test marginally fails to reject the null at the
3-month and the 60-month horizon separately in the 5-variable VAR. However, in the 7-
variable systems we reject UIRP at the 5% level for short horizons but fail to reject at long
horizons. Generally, the p-values are rather low. Hence, there is only weak evidence that
the UIRP holds up better at long than at short horizons, and the intermediate maturities
are key to help reject the hypotheses. The two joint tests across horizons that we could
compute both reject at the 5% level. For the cross-country system of DEM-GBP, the LM
test rejects UIRP at all horizons. We conclude that for UIRP, the horizon story seems to
be a myth. In some cases, the statistical evidence against UIRP is even stronger at long
horizons. Whether one rejects or not depends on the currency pair under investigation.
These ndings are potentially consistent with a time-varying risk premium explanation,
where the variability of the risk premium varies across currencies.
    Turning now to Panel B and the EHTS hypothesis, we nd that the LM test yields
rather uniform evidence against the EH. For the U.S., we reject the EHTS at all horizons
apart from the joint test in the 3/36/60-month USD-GBP system. We always reject the
EHTS in Germany at the 5% level independent of the VAR system. The evidence against
the EHTS is the weakest for the GBP, at least in the DEM-GBP system, where we fail to
reject the null at long horizons. However, it is likely that the presence of DEM instruments

                                             12
simply reduces the power of the test because in the USD-GBP system, the EHTS in the
UK is rejected at both short and long horizons and jointly. The highest p-value is 5.25%.
When we pool across countries, the EHTS is strongly rejected at short horizons in all
systems. At longer horizons, we reject the EHTS at the 1% level in the USD-DEM
system, at the 5% level in the USD-GBP system, but fail to reject the hypothesis at the
5% level in the 7-variable DEM-GBP systems. Nevertheless, the p-values are rather low.
    Panel C contains joint tests of UIRP and the EHTS. Most of interest is the \UIPs
TSl" hypothesis which not only imposes short-term UIRP and the long-term EHTS but
also automatically long-term UIRP (see Section 2). This hypothesis is not equivalent to
the joint UIRP hypothesis of Panel A, because that hypothesis did not require the EHTS
to hold in both countries. For UIRP to hold both at the short and the long horizon,
it must be true that the di erence between the term premiums in the two countries is
time-invariant. This might be the case in the USD-DEM system, where the weaker Panel
A test does not reject but the Panel C test rejects. For the USD-GBP system, the two
tests yield similar p-values, constituting only marginal evidence against the hypothesis.
For the DEM-GBP system, testing the additional restrictions mostly weakens the test,
although we still reject the null at the 5% level in the 3/36/60-month VAR and at close to
the 5% level in the 5-variable VAR. As to the combination of short or long horizon UIRP
with the EHTS at short horizons, we reject these null hypotheses in the USD-DEM and
USD-GBP systems, but the evidence against the hypotheses is weaker in the USD-GBP
system.

5    Economic Evidence on the Expectations Hypothe-

     ses

We now study the ve economic signi cance test statistics: IMP LIED, the implied slope
coeÆcient; CORR, the correlation between the interest rate di erential (term spread) and
the expected exchange rate change (expected interest rate changes); V R, the ratio of the
                                           13
variance of expected exchange rate changes (expected interest rate changes) and that of
the interest rate di erential (term spread); SD, the standard deviation of the foreign
exchange market \risk premium" (term premium); and EV R, the excess volatility ratio.
After analyzing the deviations from UIRP and EHTS in sections 5.1 and 5.2, we consider
how imposition of various EH a ects certain key impulse responses implied by the VAR.

5.1    Uncovered Interest Rate Parity


5.1.1 Patterns
Table 2 contains the results for the three di erent 5-variable systems. (USD-DEM, USD-
GBP and DEM-GBP) in three panels. First consider the unconstrained estimation. The
correlation statistics inherit the negative sign from the implied slope coeÆcients and hence
expected exchange rate changes and current interest di erentials are negatively correlated
at both short and long horizons for all three currency pairs. In fact, the correlation is
more negative at the 60-month horizon for two of the three currency pairs. The Monte
Carlo analysis reveals that correlations are downward biased under the null (see Appendix
B). Nevertheless, even the bias-corrected statistics, with the exception of CORR in the
USD-DEM system at the three-month horizon, remain negative.
    In both the USD-DEM and the USD-GBP systems, V R is above one at the 3-month
horizon and below one at the 60-month horizon. In the DEM-GBP system, V R is also
above one at the 60-month horizon. However, the statistic displays an upward bias of
about 0:61 so that on a bias-corrected basis, V R is below one even in this system. This
indicates that expected exchange rate changes are more variable than the corresponding
interest rate di erential in the shorter run, but not necessarily in the long run, even though
interest rate di erentials become less variable at longer horizons. Whereas it is tempting
to ascribe this large variability in short-term expected exchange rate changes to irra-
tional factors, these results are potentially consistent with a time-varying risk premium,
characterized by a highly persistent component in expected exchange rate changes.
    This is con rmed by investigating the standard deviation of the risk premium directly.
                                             14
In all three systems, SD is substantially higher in the short run. Given the decomposi-
tion of long-horizon foreign exchange premiums, this must indicate persistent but mean-
reverting short-run foreign exchange risk premiums and/or strongly negative correlation
between short-run foreign exchange risk premiums and the term premium di erential. To
see this more clearly, note that the counterpart to equation (5) under the alternative of a
time-varying risk premium is:
                                  1   X1    k


                         rp = E
                          uirp
                               60         rp      + rp  rp
                                                     uirp
                                                      +3 3       60
                                                               ehts   ehts
                                                                           60         (12)
                          t;
                                    k   t

                                            j   =0
                                                     t    j;   t;     t;




where rp 60  indicates the \foreign" term premium.
         ehts
         t;



    Alternatively, because the risk premium is the sum of expected exchange rate changes
and the interest rate di erential, the reduced variability at longer horizons is due to
reduced variability in both components. Of course, the V R statistic shows that it is
expected exchange rate changes that became relatively less variable.
    Given these results, the EV R (excess volatility) patterns are not entirely surprising.
Excess volatility comes about because the risk premium embeds the variability of its two
components, expected exchange rate changes and interest-rate di erentials, which are
only weakly or even negatively correlated instead of perfectly correlated.
    At the 3-month and the 60-month horizon respectively, the excess volatility ratio is
1.8931 and 3.5034 for the USD-DEM system, 1.9223 and 3.7533 for the USD-GBP system,
and 1.7414 and 2.7939 for the DEM-GBP system. Our results are stronger than the U
shape in volatility ratios documented in Bauer (2001), but they also support the conclusion
that the \excess volatility" phenomenon does not go away in the long run. On the contrary,
there is more excess volatility at long horizons, basically because the correlation between
expected exchange rate change and interest rate di erences does not become more positive
and because the relative variability of expected exchange rate changes decreases. These
results are hard to reconcile with a short-term market frictions or market ineÆciency
story. We conclude that most of the patterns we see are consistent with a time-varying
risk premium model with mean-reverting factors.
                                                     15
5.1.2 Statistical Signi cance
To judge statistical signi cance, we rely on the critical values derived from the Monte
Carlo analysis described in Appendix B and reported at the bottom of each panel in
Table 2.
    For the USD-DEM system all statistics could have been generated by a dynamic
system which satis es the EHs. However, for the USD-GBP and DEM-GBP systems, only
the V R, SD and EV R at the long horizons fall comfortably within the 95% con dence
interval.
    The loss of power for the V R, EV R, and especially the SD statistic is interesting
in its own right. Empirical estimates of the variability of the risk premium are often
chosen as population moments to be matched in general equilibrium models attempting
to explain the forward premium anomaly (See for example Bekaert (1996) and Duarte
and Stockman (2001)). However, our analysis here shows that this statistic is severely
upwardly biased, with the 2.5% quintile being at least 1.3946. Similarly, the classic excess
volatility results relied on asymptotic statistics without an attempt to correct for small
sample biases. Even under the null, we should expect to see ratio of at least 0:60 at short
and 1:5 at long horizons.
    Whereas the coeÆcient patterns described in 5.1.1 remain valid when we correct for
small sample bias, small sample biases appear very important in judging the economic
importance of the deviations from UIRP. The implied slope coeÆcients and correlation
statistics reveal that the data remain grossly inconsistent with UIRP, but at the same time,
standard statistics considerably exaggerate the deviation from UIRP. Bias-correcting the
variability of the risk premium for example, typically leads to standard deviations less
than 50% of the original estimate.4
  4 This being said, the VAR uses a particular limited information set to generate expected values,
whereas the true information set is usually larger, potentially inducing more variable UIRP premiums.
In Section 5.1.4, we expand the information set and show the estimate for the variability of the risk
premium to be very robust.


                                                 16
5.1.3 Dynamics under Alternative Null Hypotheses
Next we examine how imposing di erent null hypotheses changes the dynamics of the
system. Table 2 shows that imposing UIRP at one horizon almost invariably moves
the economic signi cance statistics closer to their hypothesized values under the null of
UIRP at the other horizon. Most strikingly, imposing the UIRP hypothesis in the short
run moves the implied slope for the long-run UIRP regression much closer to one, and
vice versa. For example, with the USD-DEM data, imposing the UIRP at the 3-month
horizon brings the implied slope for the 60-month UIRP regression from -0.3741 under
the unconstrained VAR up to 0.5183, while imposing the UIRP at the 60-month horizon
brings the implied slope for the 3-month UIRP regression from -0.6007 to 0.6467. The
deviations from UIRP at short and long horizons are clearly highly correlated making it
again unlikely that the UIRP is satis ed at the long horizon but not at the short horizon.
    The same is not true for the relation between UIRP and the EHTS. Imposing the
EHTS has very di erent e ects depending on the currency pair and the statistic. Of main
interest here is the behavior of SD. The variance of the longer-horizon UIRP premium
can be decomposed into the variance of the short-horizon UIRP premiums, the variance of
the di erence in domestic and foreign EHTS term premiums, and the covariance of these
two terms. We can examine their relative importance by imposing either short-horizon
UIRP or the EHTS. Comparing SD (rp) computed under the unconstrained VAR, the
constrained VAR under 3-month UIRP, and the constrained VAR under the 60-month
EHTS across countries we nd that imposing 3-month UIRP decreases the volatility of the
long-horizon foreign exchange risk premium much more than does imposing the 60-month
EHTS hypothesis. In fact, only between 12.24% (USD-DEM) and 19.51% (USD-GBP
system) of the total variance is accounted for by variation in term premiums (what is
left when UIRP short is imposed). Thus longer-term UIRP deviations appears to result
primarily from short-term UIRP deviations.
    If we assume a persistent risk premium with autocorrelation coeÆcient , then under
the null of the EHTS, the relative variability of long and short-horizon risk premiums is
                                           17
completely governed by . In particular:
                                                       
                                            1    1   60 2
                             V AR[rp 60 ] = 2
                                           20 1 3 V AR[rp 3 ]
                                      uirp                                                uirp
                                      t;                                                  t;




    From the 3 and 60 month statistics for SD(rp), we infer that  would be 0.9380 for the
USD-DEM risk premium, 0.9715 for the USD-GBP system and 0.9209 for the DEM-GBP
system.
    Imposing the EHTS also has the uniform e ect of increasing the variability of expected
exchange rate changes relative to interest rate di erentials, especially at long horizons (see
the V R statistics). The main mechanism here is the increased persistence of the VAR
induced by imposing the EHTS which feeds into expected exchange rate changes.
    To further summarize the information in the VARs, Figure 1 plots impulse responses
(IR) from the interest rate to foreign exchange risk premiums. We adopt the Wold ordering
of fsp 60 , i , sp1 60 , i1, s g in orthogonalizing the shocks, assuming that a shock to the
         j
         t;
              j
              t   t;   t   t



U.S. short rate does not a ect foreign interest rates or the term spread contemporaneously.
The shock is a 1% positive shock to the USD short rate.
    We consider the 3-month excess return, rp 3 = 31 E P3=1 s + i 3 i 3 , the
                                                          uirp
                                                          t;                      t   i          t   i   t;   t;



60-month risk premium, rp 60 = 201 E P60=1 s + i 60 i 60 , and the 60-month cu-
                               uirp
                               t;            t   i        t    i             t;       t;



mulative short term foreign exchange premium rp 60 , which is obtained by rolling over
                                                                   uirp
                                                                   t;   ;c



rp 3 every three months. The top (bottom) panel contains results for the USD-DEM
  uirp
  t;



(USD-GBP) system.
    The solid lines which represent the data show that all expected excess returns respond
negatively to a positive USD short rate shock, and the magnitude of the response is large
(about 3% in the short and 2% in the long rate). Hence U.S. interest rate increases lower
the expected return to foreign money market investments. When long-horizon UIRP is
imposed the interest rate response of the short-horizon (long-horizon) premium dwindles
to substantially less than 1%.
    The right panel shows that the responses of the cumulative short-term premiums are
very similar to the responses of the long-term premium; con rming that the behavior
of short-term foreign exchange premiums dominates the behavior of long-term foreign
                                                     18
exchange premiums.
   Imposing the EHTS has di erent e ects on the two systems, as should not be a surprise
from the results reported in Table 2. Moreover, the implied foreign exchange risk premium
dynamics are quite di erent from what we see in the data and what is implied by UIRP.

5.1.4 Robustness
It is conceivable that our conclusions are very sensitive to the exact information set used
in the VAR, severely reducing their relevance. As indicated before, we also estimate
two 7 variable VAR systems, for which we also generate all the statistics as in Table 2.
Fortunately, the results are remarkably robust. In fact, it is not only the case that the
patterns in the statistics are similar across VARs, but the point estimates of the various
statistics are very close. To give one example, the volatility of the risk premium, which we
would expect to be especially sensitive to the information set, is estimated to be 8.10%
(2.89%) at the 3-month (60 month) horizon in the original 5 variable USD-GBP VAR
system. In the corresponding 3/12/60 month system, our estimate is 8.07% (3.15%) and
in the 3/36/60 month system, it is 8.45% (2.84%).
    We are of course also interested whether the horizon patterns hold up and are uniform
across the intermediate maturities. To examine this, Table 3 collects information from
the 3 and 60-month horizons using the 5 variable VAR but also reports information for
the intermediate maturities using the 7 variable VARs. We draw four conclusions:
  1. UIRP deviations are economically important in that exchange rate changes are weak
     to negatively correlated with interest rate di erentials. Importantly, there is not a
     clear horizon pattern in these correlations.
  2. The VR statistic (variability of expected exchange rate changes to interest rate
     di erentials) and the variability of the risk premium decrease monotonically with
     the horizon whereas the excess volatility ratio EVR increases monotonically with
     the horizon. Excess volatility is not a short-run phenomenon!

                                            19
  3. When we bias-correct the statistics, the results are mostly (but not always) pre-
     served, but generally become much less pronounced. The economic deviations of
     UIRP are less strong than previously thought.
  4. Imposing UIRP at di erent horizons than the horizon under examination on the
     VAR dynamics with one exception moves all statistics closer to their hypothesized
     values under the null, sometimes dramatically so. For example, the implied slopes
     and correlation statistics in the DEM-GBP system all become very close to one.

5.2    Expectations Hypotheses of the Term Structure


5.2.1 Patterns and Statistical Signi cance
Table 4 reports the economic statistics for the EHTS in the 5-variable system. We look
separately at the USD and the DEM term structure based on the USD-DEM system, and
the GBP term structure based on the USD-GBP system. Alternative estimates based on
a di erent VAR system yield qualitatively similar results.
    Moving to the statistics in Table 4, both the implied slopes and the correlation coeÆ-
cients are positive and below one. Except for the US, the correlation coeÆcient does not
appear signi cantly di erent from 1 based on the small sample critical values. Imposing
UIRP has little e ect on its value.
    Expected future interest rates are more variable than the term spread for the USD
and the GBP, but the variance ratio statistic is below one for the DEM. Only the DEM
variance ratio statistic is signi cantly di erent from one. Imposing UIRP does not lead
to a clear pattern in variance ratio changes, with the exception that imposing joint UIRP
invariably increases the variance ratio. This is primarily caused by the higher persistence
of the interest rate in the constrained systems.
    The risk premium of rolling over short-term deposits versus holding long-term bonds
has a volatility of about 1% for the DEM and the GBP, and about 1.65% for the US.
These values could have been produced by a system that imposes the EH. Imposing UIRP

                                            20
has little e ect on these values, except for increasing them when UIRP is imposed jointly
for the DEM and GBP. This is at rst somewhat surprising because when UIRP holds
at both horizons, the term premium di erential across countries must be time invariant.
Clearly, this is not accomplished by clamping down the variability of both term premiums.
The high variability of the term premiums is the result of the variability of the constrained
term premium inheriting some of the variability of the US term premium and the increased
persistence of the constrained systems.
    We conclude that while the data statistically reject the EHTS, the dynamics of in-
terest rates do not yield patterns that are very di erent from what we would observe
under the EHTS. Figure 2 con rms these conclusions using impulse responses from a
1% interest rate shock to the 5-year term premiums. The term premium is de ned as
               P
rp 60 = 201 E 19=0 i +3 3 i 60 . An increase in the interest rate contemporaneously de-
  esth
  t;         t   j   t   j;   t;



creases the term premium but the e ect is never larger than 80 basis points and dissipates
fast. Whereas this may be comforting for policy models imposing the EHTS while con-
ducting policy analysis, we know from Section 5.1 that imposing EHTS does substantially
change exchange rate dynamics. Similarly, it appears from Figure 2 that imposing UIRP
on a VAR does change the dynamic responses of interest rates on term premiums in some
cases. In particular, the e ect on the DEM term premium is large when UIRP is imposed.
Moreover, imposing UIRP at both horizons in the USD-GBP system leads to a strong
persistent response of the term premium to the interest rate, which is, by construction
similar in both currencies (see above).

5.2.2 Robustness and Horizon E ects
The 7 variable systems can again serve as robustness checks. Moreover, they allow us to
analyze the EHTS at both short and long horizons. Our results are very robust across
VAR systems. As an example, consider the correlation between the actual spread and the
theoretical spread (average expected interest rate changes) for the USD at the 60-month
horizon. Table 4 reports a correlation of 0:52. With the 7 variable systems, we estimate

                                             21
this correlation with four di erent information sets: it is 0:51 in the USD-DEM 3/12/60
month system; 0:50 in the USD-DEM 3/36/60 month system; 0:50 in the USD-GBP
3/12/60 month system and 0:49 in the USD-GBP 3/36/60 month system.
    Table 5 reports the EHTS results over various horizons. The horizon e ects are in
many ways opposite to what we found with the UIRP statistics. The correlation between
theoretical and actual spread increases with horizon, and is actually negative in the case
of the USD at the 12-month horizon (but the negative coeÆcient would disappear when
the downward bias is corrected for). The variance ratio increases with horizon,5 as does
the variability of the risk premium. The excess volatility ratio decreases with horizon.
The strength of the horizon dependence depends on the currency examined, but the
results are qualitatively robust across currencies. In other words, the forecasting power of
spreads appears rather weak for short-term interest rates at short horizons but is better
for interest rates over longer horizons. The market ineÆciency story often told for UIRP
seems to t better for the EHTS. One possible reason for these ndings is that monetary
policy succeeds in keeping short term interest rates close to random walks and nearly
unforecastable in the short run, but at longer horizons larger economic shocks do drive
interest rates, and these are more importantly re ected in long-term interest rates.
    When we impose the EHTS at one horizon, the statistics on the other EHTS virtually
invariably move closer to their values predicted under the null. This again demonstrates
the strong correlation of the EHTS at di erent horizons, suggesting that a uni ed expla-
nation based on time-varying risk for example may be possible.

6      The random walk as an alternative model

Since the seminal article by Meese and Rogo (1983), the random walk has often been
described as the exchange rate model to beat, and some authors have even used it as
a benchmark model in applied work (see for example West, Edison, and Cho (1993)).
    5 Given
          that the theoretical spread depends on future expected interest rates, this is to be expected
when short rates follow a persistent AR(1) process. A derivation of this result is available upon request.
                                                   22
Of course, if the exchange rate is a random walk, UIRP does not hold. The lack of
predictability for exchange rate changes translates into predictable excess returns in the
foreign exchange market. So under a time-varying risk premium explanation, the random
walk model implies a particular risk premium that is a negative function of the current
interest rate di erential. Similarly, Mankiw and Miron (1986) and Rudebusch (1995) have
argued that the interest smoothing e orts of monetary policymakers make interest rates
near random walks and the assumption of a unit root in interest rates has often been
made in empirical work (see for example Mark and Wu (1998)). Mankiw and Miron even
ascribe deviations from the EHTS to this near-random walk behavior of interest rates.
In fact, similar to the foreign exchange case, a random walk interest rate implies that
the rollover term premium would vary through time as a negative function of the current
term spread.
    We will call the joint assumption of a random walk for the log exchange rate and
the two interest rates, the random walk model. In terms of our economic statistics, the
random walk model has strong predictions. The Implied and CORR statistics should be
exactly zero under the null of a random walk model, the variance ratio should be zero,
the SD statistic should re ect the variance of interest rate di erentials and the EVR ratio
ought to be in nity.
    Whereas, from a theoretical perspective, we do not nd this model particularly ap-
pealing, its simplicity and prevalence in the literature make it worthwhile to examine
whether the economic statistics we observe in the data are consistent with it. To this end,
we simulate data from the model:
                     s +1 = 1 + "1
                        t                t




                       i 3 = 2 + i 1 3 + "2
                            t;       t       ;                t




                       i 3 = 3 + i 1 3 + "3
                            t;       t       ;                t




                     sp 60 = 4 + sp 1 60 +  (i
                        t;                   t       ;            t    1       i 2 ) + "4
                                                                               t               t


                                                                                          
                     sp 60 = 5 +  sp 1 60 +  
                        t;                       t       ;
                                                                      i
                                                                      t    1       i 2
                                                                                   t
                                                                                              + "5 t   (13)

                                                             23
where all coeÆcients are obtained from an equation-by-equation OLS estimation .
    Note that short rate changes are unpredictable but help predict term spreads. Because
the model is non-stationary, we change our typical Monte Carlo procedure by starting from
the initial observations without discarding start up draws. We use an i.i.d bootstrap as in
the other experiments, drawing from the residuals in Equation (13). Of course, a number
of samples will yield non-stationary VARs, in which case we cannot compute our economic
statistics. The distributions that we show in Tables 6 and 7 condition on stationarity.
For the three systems, there were about 2,000 out of 25,000 experiments that yielded an
explosive A - matrix. For these samples, it is literally true that EVR is in nity, VR is 0
etc., but we ignore this fact in the table.
    Table 6 reports some characteristics of the empirical distributions for the various
statistics summarizing UIRP deviations. For the USD/DEM system, we never reject the
random walk model at the 5% level using the empirical critical values for the statistics.
The evidence against UIRP, reported in Table 3, was also marginal in this system. For
the USD-GBP system, the random walk model cannot generate the negative correlation
and high variance ratios we observe in the data at short horizons, but it is not inconsistent
with the statistics at the 60 month horizon. For the cross-rate system, the random walk
model fails to match the negative correlation and high variance ratio for both short and
long horizons. We count a few more rejections in Table 3 under the null of the UIRP, but
overall the random walk model does not provide a dramatically better t with the data.
    In Table 7, we repeat this information for the EHTS statistics. Here an interesting
paradox occurs. For the USD and DEM, the random walk model never rejects. It under-
predicts the correlation between theoretical and actual spreads (in population they would
be zero, but there is an upward bias of 0.2 to 0.3), and generates too high excess volatility
statistics and too variable term premiums on average, but the observed statistics are
well within a 95% empirical con dence interval around the mean. Here the random walk
model ts the data better than the EHTS. For the GBP however, almost all data statistics
are outside the empirical con dence intervals. The random walk model here is easily

                                             24
dominated by the EHTS. Overall, we conclude that the random walk model provides a
marginally better t with the data than UIRP and the EHTS, with the exception of term
structure data for the GBP.

7       Conclusions

Theorists and policymakers have often ignored the deviations from UIRP and the EHTS
demonstrated by empirical researchers. The consensus among empirical researchers so
far is that the deviations from UIRP are too strong to be matched by theory,6 whereas
the evidence on the EHTS is decidedly mixed and di ers across countries. One reason to
motivate a continued use of the hypotheses in certain international theories or policy work
may be that irrational behavior or short-term market frictions cause short-run deviations
of the theory but that at longer horizons the theories hold up better. Scattered recent
empirical evidence seems to support these contentions. In this paper, we overturn the
conventional wisdom along various dimensions.
    First, statistically, the evidence against UIRP is quite mixed, as Baillie and Boller-
slev (2000) and Bekaert and Hodrick (2001) have pointed out before, and it is currency
dependent. We also show that it is not horizon dependent. Deviations from UIRP seem
to be not less severe at long horizons. In fact, Fama's excess volatility ratio is larger at
long horizons. Perhaps this is not surprising. Our results are potentially consistent with a
time-varying risk premium story for example, where the variability and persistence of risk
premiums is di erent across countries. The presence of speculative capital of various pro-
prietary desks in foreign exchange markets attempting to exploit deviations from UIRP
(see Green (1992) for an illustration) suggests that it might be the long-term relation
rather than the short-term relation that is a ected by market frictions, since it is unlikely
that these trading desks will keep capital tied up in such long-term contracts.
    6 There appears to be some evidence that UIRP holds up better in developing countries (Bansal and
Dahlquist (2000) and in the 90's (Flood and Rose (2001)). However, interest rates in developing countries
may be contaminated by country risk premiums.

                                                   25
     Second, although our statistics show that UIRP deviations are economically important,
it is critical to adjust them for small sample biases. Recent theoretical attempts to match
the evidence (See Engel (1996) for a survey and Backus, Foresi, and Telmer (2001) for a
recent example) have invariably focused on population moments estimated from the data.
This has led to the recognition that foreign exchange premiums are extremely variable
and not a single model of risk has come close to generating such excessive volatility.
Our results demonstrate that the small sample upward bias in this statistic is extreme,
a fact that should be taken into account both in theoretical work and in applied work
that uses an empirically calibrated foreign exchange risk premium. It may also lead to
a re-evaluation of the VAR results on monetary policy's role in exchange rate behavior,
where UIRP deviations play an important role (see Eichenbaum and Evans (1995) and
Faust and Rogers (1999)).
     Third, the statistical evidence against the EHTS is more uniform across countries and
horizons than the evidence against UIRP. For the EHTS at short horizons, the presence
of long-term interest rates leads to more powerful tests than the tests usually constructed
in the literature.
     Fourth, economically the deviations from the EHTS are not very important, indicating
that analyzing the e ects of policy experiments under the null of the EHTS may be useful.
Nevertheless, imposing the EHTS does change the VAR dynamics and a ects the behavior
of foreign exchange premiums.
     Finally, a popular alternative model, the random walk model, ts the data marginally
better than the UIRP-EHTS model but fails to match the term structure dynamics in the
UK, which appear very consistent with the EHTS.




                                            26
References

Backus, D. K., S. Foresi,       and C. I. Telmer (2001):
                                                    \AÆne Term Structure Models
  and the Forward Premium Anomaly," Journal of Finance, 56(1), 279{304.
Baillie, R. T.,   and   T. Bollerslev (2000): \The Forward Premium Anomaly Is Not
  as Bad as You Think," Journal of International Money and Finance, 19(4), 471{488.
Bansal, R.,   and   M. Dahlquist  (2000): \The Forward Premium Puzzle: Di erent
  Tales from Developed and Emerging Economies," Journal of International Economics,
  51(1), 115{144.
Bauer, G.   (2001): \The Foreign Exchange Risk Premium Over the Long Run," Working
  Paper.
Bekaert, G.  (1996): \The Time-variation of Risk and Return in Foreign Exchange
  Markets: A General Equilibrium Perspective," Review of Financial Studies, 9, 427{
  470.
Bekaert, G.,   and   R. J. Hodrick     (2001): \Expectations Hypotheses Tests," Journal
  of Finance, 56(4), 115{138.
Bekaert, G., R. J. Hodrick,         and   D. A. Marshall(1997): \On Biases in Tests
  of the Expectations Hypothesis of the Term Structure of Interest Rates," Journal of
  Financial Economics, 44, 309{348.
Bernanke, B. S., M. Gertler,           and   M. Watson  (1997): \Systematic Monetary
  Policy and the E ects of Oil Price Shocks," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1,
  91{142.
Campbell, J. Y.,     and   R. H. Clarida  (1987): \The Term Structure of Euromarket
  Interest Rates: An Empirical Investigation," Journal of Monetary Economics, 19(1),
  25{44.

                                             27
Campbell, J. Y.,     and    R. J. Shiller(1987): \Cointegration and Tests of Present
 Value Models," Journal of Political Economy, 95(5), 1062{1088.
Campbell, J. Y.,     and              (1991): \Yield Spread and Interest Rate Move-
                           R. J. Shiller


 ments: A Bird's Eye View," Review of Economic Studies, 58(3), 495{514.
Chinn, M.,   and G. Meredith (2001):       \Testing Uncovered Interest Parity at Short and
 Long Horizons," Working Paper.
Dornbusch, R.    (1976): \Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of Po-
 litical Economy, 84(6), 1161{1176.
Duarte, M.,    and   A. C. Stockman (2001): \Rational Speculation and Exchange
 Rates," NBER Working Paper No. 8362.
Eichenbaum, M.,      and           (1995): \Some Empirical Evidence on the E ects
                           C. L. Evans


 of Shocks to Monetary Policy on Exchange Rates," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 110(4), 975{1009.
Engel, C.  (1996): \The Forward Discount Anomaly and the Risk Premium: A Survey
 of Recent Evidence," Journal of Empirical Finance, 3, 123{192.
Evans, M. D.   (1998): \Real Rates, Expected In ation, and In ation Risk Premia,"
 Journal of Finance, 53(1), 187{218.
Fama, E. F.  (1984): \Forward and Spot Exchange Rates," Journal of Monetary Eco-
 nomics, 14(3), 319{338.
Faust, J.,   and   J. H. Rogers(1999): \Monetary Policy's Role in Exchange Rate
 Behavior," Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance
 Discussion Paper 652.
Flood, R. P.,      and   A. K. Rose(2001): \Uncovered Interest Parity in Crisis: The
 Interest Rate Defense in the 1990s," Working Paper.
                                             28
Froot, K. A.,    and   R. H. Thaler   (1990): \Foreign Exchange," Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 4(3), 179{192.
Green, P.   (1992): \Is Currency Trading Pro table? Exploiting Deviaitons from Uncov-
  ered Interest Rate Parity," Financial Analysts Journal, 48(4), 82{86.
Hansen, L. P.   (1982): \Large Sample Properties of Generalized Methods of Moments
  Estimators," Econometrica, 50, 1029{1054.
Hansen, L. P.,   and R. J. Hodrick (1980):   \Forward Exchange Rates as Optimal Pre-
  dictors of Future Spot Rates: an Econometric Analysis," Journal of Political Economy,
  88(5), 829{853.
Hodrick, R. J.   (1987): The Empirical Evidence on the EÆciency of Forward and Fu-
  tures Foreign Exchange Markets. Harwood Academic Publishers, Chur, Switzerland.
          (1992): \Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns: Alternative Procedures
  for Inference and Measurement," Review of Financial Studies, 5(3), 357{386.
Jorion, P.,   and   F. Mishkin (1991): \A Multicountry Comparison of Term-Structure
  Forecasts at Long Horizons," Journal of Financial Economics, 29(1), 59{80.
Krugman, P. R.     (1991): \Target Zones and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 106(3), 669{682.
Lewis, K. K.  (1990): \The Behavior of Eurocurrency Returns Across Di erent Holding
  Periods and Monetary Regimes," Journal of Finance, 45(4), 1211{1236.
Li, H.,   and G. S. Maddala (1996):   \Bootstrapping Time Series Models," Econometric
  Reviews, 15(2), 115{158.
Mankiw, N. G.,       and   J. A. Miron   (1986): \The Changing Behavior of the Term
  Structure of Interest Rates," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101(2), 211{228.


                                          29
Mankiw, N. G., J. A. Miron,      and   D. N. Weil  (1987): \The Adjustment of Ex-
 pectations to a Change in Regime: A Study of the Founding of the Federal Reserve,"
 American Economic Review, 77(3), 358{374.
Mark, N. C.    (1995): \Exchange Rates and Fundamentals: Evidence on Long-Horizon
 Predictability," American Economic Review, 85(1), 201{218.
Mark, N. C.,    and   Y. Wu (1998): \Rethinking Deviations From Uncovered Interest
 Parity: the Role of Covariance Risk and Noise," The Economic Journal, 108, 1686{
 1706.
McCallum, B. T.     (1994): \A Reconsideration of the Uncovered Interest Parity Rela-
 tionship," Journal of Monetary Economics, 33(1), 105{132.
Meese, R. A.,    and   K. Rogoff  (1983): \Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the
 Seventies: Do They Fit Out of Sample?," Journal of International Economics, 14(1-2),
 3{24.
Melino, A.  (2001): \An Estimation of a rational expectations model of the term struc-
 ture," Journal of Empirical Finance, 8(5), 639{668.
Newey, W. K.,    and   K. D. West     (1987): \A Simple Positive Semi-De nite, Het-
 eroskedasticity and Aurocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix," Econometrica, 51,
 1233{1242.
Rudebusch, G. D.    (1995): \Federal Reserve Interest Rate Targeting, Rational Expec-
 tations, and the Term Structure," Journal of Monetary Economics, 35(2), 245{274.
Tauchen, G.   (2001): \The Bias of Tests for a Risk Premium in Forward Exchange
 Rates," Journal of Empirical Finance, 8(5), 695{704.
West, K. D., H. J. Edison,     and   D. Cho (1993): \A Utility Based Comparison of
 Some Models of Exchange Rate Volatility," Journal of International Economics, 35(1-
 2), 23{46.
                                         30
                                         Table 1: VAR-based Expectations Hypotheses Tests

                                     USD-DEM                               USD-GBP                              DEM-GBP
                           3/36/60m 3/12/60m 3/60m              3/36/60m 3/12/60m 3/60m               3/36/60m 3/12/60m 3/60m
                                                           Panel A: UIRP Tests
      UIP Short               15.9242 18.2930         4.6712       33.3951 26.9761            9.4966     31.7254 36.3987 14.5589
                              (0.3180) (0.1938) (0.4573) (0.0025) (0.0194) (0.0908)                      (0.0044) (0.0009) (0.0124)
      UIP Long                17.5211 15.6082         9.7159       23.6114 20.2938 10.6313               39.4183 24.6214 17.0804
                              (0.2295) (0.3379) (0.0837) (0.0510) (0.1211) (0.0592)                      (0.0003) (0.0385) (0.0043)
                                                                     b
      UIP Joint               23.3671 22.9263 15.2244                  {       32.9450 18.8895           47.8830 45.9573 19.5211
                                                                     b
                              (0.3247) (0.3479) (0.1241)              ({ )     (0.0468) (0.0417)         (0.0007) (0.0013) (0.0341)
                                                             Panel B: EHTS Tests
                                                       a                                    a                                     a
       Domestic TS Short 17.6799 18.8900                {          13.2852 12.9869              {        19.9735 25.6445          {
                                                       a                                    a                                     a
                              (0.0135) (0.0085)        ({ )        (0.0347) (0.0724)           ({ )      (0.0056) (0.0006)       ({ )
       Domestic TS Long 15.3414 16.7159 15.3927                    15.1061 16.2890 12.6005               14.9291 16.1294 14.7388
                              (0.0319) (0.0193) (0.0088) (0.0347) (0.0226) (0.0274)                      (0.0369) (0.0240) (0.0115)
                                                       a                         b          a                                     a
       Domestic TS            31.5128 24.8316           {          17.3907         {            {        32.3243 32.7016          {
                                                       a                         b          a                                     a
                              (0.0047) (0.0363)        ({ )        (0.2360)       ({ )         ({ )      (0.0036) (0.0032)       ({ )
                                                       a                                    a                                     a
       Foreign TS Short 26.1020 22.6457                 {          15.8615 22.2607              {        13.4151 24.8534          {
                                                       a                                    a                                     a
                              (0.0005) (0.0020)        ({ )        (0.0199) (0.0023)           ({ )      (0.0626) (0.0008)       ({ )
       Foreign TS Long 23.4606 20.7820 20.4466                     16.6421 13.9282 11.7181                8.3693     6.9398     6.3026




T-1
                              (0.0014) (0.0041) (0.0010) (0.0199) (0.0525) (0.0389)                      (0.3012) (0.4352) (0.2779)
                                                       a                                    a                          b          a
       Foreign TS             34.2008 25.2319           {          30.1744 37.4081              {        35.6990        {         {
                                                       a                                    a                          b          a
                              (0.0019) (0.0323)        ({ )        (0.0072) (0.0006)           ({ )      (0.0012)      ({ )      ({ )
                                                       a                                    a                                     a
       TS Short               38.8674 69.3878           {          24.4973 28.7627              {        28.1128 37.4158          {
                                                       a                                    a                                     a
                              (0.0004) (0.0000)        ({ )        (0.0399) (0.0113)           ({ )      (0.0137) (0.0006)       ({ )
       TS Long                36.4519 29.5714 24.5659              26.3432 26.2835 19.1869               22.2286 20.6630 18.6356
                              (0.0009) (0.0087) (0.0062) (0.0234) (0.0238) (0.0380)                      (0.0740) (0.1106) (0.0451)
                                                             Panel C: Joint Tests
                                                       a                                    a                                     a
       UIPs TSs               40.7372 34.4780           {          28.6456 33.1392              {        38.4449 45.2382          {
                                                       a                                    a                                     a
                              (0.0060) (0.0322)        ({ )        (0.1228) (0.0447)           ({ )      (0.0114) (0.0016)       ({ )
       UIPl TSl               38.0505 32.5468 26.2010              30.2034 31.5195 23.9954               35.5748 28.2698 24.7116
                              (0.0127) (0.0515) (0.0360) (0.0880) (0.0654) (0.0652)                      (0.0244) (0.1327) (0.0540)
                                                       a                         b          a                                     a
       UIPl TSs               40.9555 51.8688           {          29.4433         {            {        43.2352 49.9648          {
                                                       a                         b          a                                     a
                              (0.0057) (0.0002)        ({ )        (0.1038)       ({ )         ({ )      (0.0029) (0.0004)       ({ )
         This Table reports the LM test statistics and their asymptotic p-values (in parentheses). \UIP Short" imposes UIRP at the 3-m
      horizon for the 3/60m system, 3-m and 12-m horizons for the 3/12/60 system, and 3-m and 36-m horizons for the 3/36/60 sytem. \UIP
      Long" imposes UIRP at the 60-m horizon for the 3/60m system, 12-m and 60-m horizons for the 3/12/60 system, and 36-m and 60-m
      horizons for the 3/36/60 system. \TS Short" imposes the EHTS at the 12-m horizon for the 3/12/60 system and 36-m horizon for the
      3/36/60 system. \TS Long" imposes the EHTS at the 60-m horizon for all systems. \UIP joint" and \TS" impose the corresponding
      constraint at all horizons. \Short" and \Long" are abbreviated as \s" and \l" in joint hypotheses.
          a
         { : Hypothesis unde ned
          b
         { : Hypothesis not tested because of a singularity problem in the constrained VAR estimation
           Table 2: Uncovered Interest Rate Parity at Short and Long Horizons

                                              Panel A: USD-DEM, 3/60 System
                                          UIP 3m                                                    UIP 60m
                       Implied      Corr.    VR           SD       EVR         Implied     Corr.       VR          SD       EVR
 Unconst.              -0.3741 -0.2674 1.9574 5.8598 1.8931                   -0.6007 -0.6406       0.8794    3.7002     3.5034
 UIP Long/Short         0.5183 0.1289 2.8372 5.6153 1.1994                      0.6467 0.7914          0.7203    1.2944     0.5234
 TS Long                1.2761 0.7550 5.3653 5.1549 0.5345                      1.2450 0.8038          4.8294    3.1948     0.4755
 Mean                   1.0173 0.6268 2.8619 4.5864 0.8111                      0.8060 0.6639          1.6622    2.5465     1.5791
 2:5%                  -0.3124 -0.2769 0.3517 1.7117 0.1193                    -0.4410 -0.5624         0.1008    0.6771     0.0449
 97:5%                  2.4333 0.9767 9.0111 8.6137 3.0964                      2.0330 0.9943          6.0438    6.4712     9.9018
                                              Panel B: USD-GBP, 3/60 System
                                           UIP 3m                                                   UIP 60m
                       Implied       Corr.     VR           SD     EVR         Implied      Corr.        VR          SD      EVR
 Unconst.              -2.2587 -0.9235 5.9819 8.1009 1.9223               -0.5729 -0.6490 0.7794 2.8923 3.7532
 UIP Long/Short         0.8780 -0.2554 2.3351 4.8464 1.7625                     0.3981 0.6752 0.2623 1.2774 2.1755
 TS Long               -2.5040 -0.8274 9.3663 9.3841 1.6475                -2.8220 -0.8657 12.2900 7.4407 1.5753
 Mean                   0.9615 0.7512 1.7469 4.1376 0.6431                      0.7751 0.7547 1.1766 2.3684 1.7937
 2:5%                   0.0111 0.0132 0.3010 1.5763 0.0656                     -0.1146 -0.2282 0.0775 0.6995 0.0354
 97:5%                  1.8823 0.9856 4.7697 7.6287 2.9026                      1.7779 0.9943 4.0568 5.5961 11.5802
                                              Panel C: DEM-GBP, 3/60 System
                                           UIP 3m                                                   UIP 60m
                       Implied       Corr.     VR           SD     EVR         Implied      Corr.        VR          SD      EVR
 Unconst.                -1.1982 -0.5598 4.5812 8.1587 1.7414 -0.7746 -0.6498 1.4210 3.0029 2.7940
 UIP Long/Short           1.0211 0.9157 1.1359 1.2391 0.1620                     0.6229 0.6667 0.6801 1.1482 0.8535
 TS Long                 -1.0087 -0.3738 3.3494 6.9070 1.7070 -1.3556 -0.5600 3.3923 3.8289 1.9029
 Mean                     0.9114 0.7030 1.7720 3.6663 0.7310                     0.6494 0.5501 1.6070 2.4459 1.7316
 2:5%                    -0.0955 -0.1135 0.3087 1.3946 0.0767 -0.3406 -0.4308 0.1053 0.7351 0.0828
 97:5%                    1.8388 0.9821 4.7012 6.7868 3.2267                     1.8880 0.9827 5.9695 6.1345 9.0057
    This Table lists various test statistics for the 3m and 60m UIRP regressions (2) under di erent null hypotheses. IMPLIED refers
to the implied regression slope coeÆcients. CORR refers to the correlation statistic. VR refers to the variance ratio statistic. SD
refers to the standard deviation of the risk premium. EVR refers to the Fama excess variance ratio statistic. \UIP Long/Short"
imposes \UIP Long" for \UIP 3m" regressions and \UIP Short" for \UIP 60m" regressions. The mean, 2.5% and 97.5% critical
values are provided at the bottom of each panel. An asterisk indicates signi cance at 5% level using these empirical critical values.
For explanations of other null hypotheses please refer to Table 1. The 2.5% and 97.5% critical values are based on the bootstrap
analysis reported in Appendix B.




                                                                 T-2
      Table 3: Uncovered Interest Rate Parity over Various Horizons
                                 Panel A: USD-DEM
                                     Implied     Corr.       VR        SD       EVR
    UIP 3m        Unconst.           -0.3741     -0.2674    1.9574    5.8598   1.8931
                  Bias Corrected     -0.3914      0.1058    0.0955    1.2734   1.0820
                  UIP Long            0.5183      0.1289    2.8372    5.6153   1.1994
    UIP 12m       Unconst.           -0.5643     -0.3802    2.2026    5.3879   1.9664
                  Bias Corrected     -0.4580     -0.0358    1.2291    1.5427   1.1242
                  UIP 3&60            1.3763      0.8826    1.3029    1.3895   0.2211
    UIP 36m       Unconst.           -0.5307     -0.4485    1.4000    4.3022   2.4724
                  Bias Corrected     -0.3328      0.0272   -0.1814    1.5329   1.2841
                  UIP 3&60            1.2834      0.9624    1.2430    0.7205   0.0781
    UIP 60m       Unconst.           -0.6007     -0.6406    0.8794    3.7002   3.5034
                  Bias Corrected     -0.4067     -0.3045    0.2172    1.1537   1.9243
                  UIP Short           0.6467      0.7914    0.7203    1.2944   0.5234
                                 Panel B: USD-GBP
                                     Implied     Corr.       VR        SD       EVR
    UIP 3m        Unconst.           -2.2587     -0.9235    5.9819    8.1009   1.9223
                  Bias Corrected     -2.2202     -0.6747    5.2350    3.9633   1.2792
                  UIP Long            0.8780     -0.2554    2.3351    4.8464   1.7625
    UIP 12m       Unconst.           -1.4708     -0.7084    4.3107    6.0373   1.9144
                  Bias Corrected     -1.4473     -0.5788    3.9610    2.0301   1.5296
                  UIP 3&60            1.2694      0.8737    0.7786    1.0225   0.3040
    UIP 36m       Unconst.           -0.9523     -0.7859    1.4683    3.7369   2.9782
                  Bias Corrected     -0.6997     -0.4654    1.2655    1.3390   1.2215
                  UIP 3&60            0.8942      0.8953    1.0249    0.8231   0.2070
    UIP 60m       Unconst.           -0.5729     -0.6490    0.7794    2.8923   3.7532
                  Bias Corrected     -0.3480     -0.4037    0.6028    0.5239   1.9595
                  UIP Short           0.3981      0.6752    0.2623    1.2774   2.1755
                                Panel C: DEM-GBP
                                     Implied     Corr.       VR        SD       EVR
    UIP 3m         Unconst.          -1.1982 -0.5598 4.5812 8.1587 1.7414
                   Bias Corrected -1.1096 -0.2628 3.8092 4.4924 1.0104
                   UIP Long            1.0211 0.9157 1.1359 1.2391 0.1620
    UIP 12m Unconst.                  -1.4808 -0.7060 4.3993 6.2497 1.9005
                   Bias Corrected -1.3882 -0.2907 2.9470 3.2969 1.0492
                   UIP 3&60            1.0901 0.9624 1.4595 0.7916 0.0919
    UIP 36m Unconst.                  -1.0219 -0.7104 2.0690 3.8043 2.4711
                   Bias Corrected -0.7829 -0.2507 0.9240 1.2713 1.3154
                   UIP 3&60            1.1717 0.9749 1.4797 0.5528 0.0730
    UIP 60m Unconst.                  -0.7746 -0.6498 1.4210 3.0029 2.7940
                   Bias Corrected -0.4240 -0.1999 0.8140 1.5570 2.0624
                   UIP Short           0.6229 0.6667 0.6801 1.1482 0.8535
   This Table lists various test statistics for the UIRP regressions over various hori-
zons. IMPLIED refers to the implied regression slope coeÆcients. CORR refers to the
correlation statistic. VR refers to the variance ratio statistic. SD refers to the standard
deviation of the risk premium. EVR refers to the Fama excess volatility ratio. \UIP
Short" imposes the 3-month UIRP hypothesis while \UIP Long" imposes the 60-month
UIRP hypothesis. The bias correction is done by adding back the small-sample biases,
which are computed by subtracting the empirical mean values from the hypothesized
values. The results for the \UIP 3m" and \UIP 60m" come from the 3/60 systems; the
results for the \UIP 12m" and \UIP 36m" come from the 3/36/60 and the 3/12/60
systems respectively.

                                           T-3
   Table 4: Expectations Hypotheses of the Term Structure
                         Panel A: USD TS 60m
                    Implied      Corr.       VR         SD       EVR
     Unconst.       0.7002      0.5201    1.8119     1.6259    0.7791
     UIP Short      0.6870      0.5531    2.3535     1.7613    0.7038
     UIP Long       0.5932      0.5682   1.8708     1.5701    0.7037
     UIP Joint      0.8655      0.6140     2.1453     1.5880    0.6277
     Mean           0.9177      0.8727     1.1319     0.9749    0.5235
     2:5%           0.5226      0.6180     0.5208     0.3732    0.0320
     97:5%          1.3073      0.9899     2.0934     1.8106    0.9251
                        Panel B: DEM TS 60m
                    Implied      Corr.       VR         SD       EVR
     Unconst.       0.5154     0.7911     0.4245    1.1063    0.9274
     UIP Short      0.5425     0.8316     0.6745     0.9794    0.4574
     UIP Long       0.5049     0.7904     0.7857     1.0933    0.4894
     UIP Joint      1.3507      0.8002     2.1667    1.5880   0.3743
     Mean           0.9297      0.9281     1.0176     0.5729    0.4235
     2:5%           0.5542      0.7168     0.4842     0.1913    0.0126
     97:5%          1.2330      0.9967     1.6512     1.2079    0.8048
                         Panel C: GBP TS 60m
                    Implied      Corr.       VR         SD       EVR
     Unconst.        0.9486 0.8368 1.2852 1.0278 0.3019
     UIP Short       0.7983 0.8046 0.9315 1.0149 0.4061
     UIP Long        0.2623 0.5872 1.0343 1.5123 0.8121
     UIP Joint       0.3014 0.6308 2.1078 1.8640 0.6054
      Mean           1.0256 0.9095 1.3049 1.0924 0.3116
      2:5%           0.5487 0.6894 0.4833 0.3923 0.0235
      97:5%          1.4087 0.9944 2.2812 2.2833 0.8254
    This Table lists various test statistics for the 60m TS2 regressions (4)
under di erent null hypotheses. USD and DEM (GBP) statistics are from
the 3/60-m USD-DEM (USD-GBP) system. IMPLIED refers to the implied
regression slope coeÆcients. CORR refers to the correlation statistic. VR
refers to the variance ratio statistic. SD refers to the standard deviation of
the risk premium. EVR refers to the Fama excess variance ratio statistic.
The 2.5% and 97.5% critical values are based on the bootstrap analysis
reported in Appendix B.




                                    T-4
Table 5: Expectations Hypotheses of the Term Structure over Various Horizons
                                      Panel A: USD
                                       Implied     Corr.      VR       SD      EVR
       TS2 12m       Unconst.          -0.0171    -0.0243   0.4937    1.0214   3.0948
                     Bias Corrected    -0.0072     0.0010   0.4586    0.7973   3.0406
                     TS Long            0.2777     0.8771   0.4985    0.4213   0.5214
       TS2 36m       Unconst.           0.3994     0.3341   1.4286    1.5373   1.1409
                     Bias Corrected     0.4056     0.4386   1.1749    0.8965   0.9148
                     TS Long            2.7551     0.9522   1.1209    0.3895   0.0934
       TS2 60m       Unconst.           0.6757     0.5001   1.8256    1.6645   0.8075
                     Bias Corrected     0.6574     0.5817   1.5738    0.7905   0.5920
                     TS Short           0.9820     0.9881   0.8465    0.2306   0.0334
                                      Panel B: DEM
                                       Implied     Corr.      VR       SD      EVR
       TS2 12m       Unconst.          0.1792      0.4067   0.1941    0.8961   4.3059
                     Bias Corrected    0.1893      0.4345   0.1513    0.7183   4.2431
                     TS Long           0.2554      0.7146   0.3663    0.6939   1.3683
       TS2 36m       Unconst.          0.3716      0.6726   0.3053    1.1576   1.8408
                     Bias Corrected    0.4136      0.7217   0.2829    0.7400   1.7218
                     TS Long           1.0106      0.9569   0.8119    0.4567   0.1078
       TS2 60m       Unconst.          0.5081      0.7849   0.4190    1.1578   0.9615
                     Bias Corrected    0.5519      0.8172   0.4351    0.5487   0.8689
                     TS Short          0.9863      0.9703   1.1270    0.4718   0.0594
                                      Panel C: GBP
                                       Implied     Corr.      VR       SD      EVR
       TS2 12m        Unconst.           0.5587 0.6354 0.7730 0.6728 0.8482
                      Bias Corrected 0.5331 0.6718 0.6248 0.2789 0.7600
                      TS Long            0.2358 0.6039 1.1480 0.7678 0.7438
        TS2 36m Unconst.                 0.9098 0.8360 1.1845 0.8541 0.3080
                      Bias Corrected 0.9029 0.9152 0.9653 0.1082 0.1244
                      TS Long            0.8193 0.9418 0.9821 0.4803 0.1175
        TS2 60m Unconst.                 0.9773 0.8300 1.3863 1.0831 0.3115
                      Bias Corrected 0.9267 0.9253 1.0062 0.0060 0.0729
                      TS Short           1.1187 0.9532 1.1348 0.5314 0.0916
       This Table lists various test statistics for the EHTS regressions over various hori-
   zons. IMPLIED refers to the implied regression slope coeÆcients. CORR refers to the
   correlation statistic. VR refers to the variance ratio statistic. SD refers to the stan-
   dard deviation of the risk premium. EVR refers to the Fama excess volatility ratio.
   \TS Short" imposes the 36-month ESTH hypothesis while \TS Long" imposes the 60-
   month EHTS hypothesis. The bias correction is done by adding back the small-sample
   biases, which are computed by subtracting the empirical mean values from the hypoth-
   esized values. USD and DEM (GBP) statistics come from the USD-DEM (USD-GBP)
   systems. \TS2 36m" and \TS2 60m" (\TS2 12m") results come from the 3/36/60
   (3/12/60 systems) systems.



                                            T-5
          Table 6: Uncovered Interest Rate Parity under the Random Walk Null

                                        Panel A: USD-DEM, 3/60 System
                                   UIP 3m                                                 UIP 60m
            Implied      Corr.       VR        SD       EVR         Implied      Corr.      VR        SD        EVR
 Data       -0.3741     -0.2674     1.9574 5.8598 1.8931            -0.6007     -0.6406   0.8794 3.7002          3.5034
 2:5%       -0.8924     -0.8561     0.0701 2.1582 0.2389            -0.7421     -0.9662   0.0112 1.4949          0.2046
 97:5%       1.5514      0.9290     5.8102 16.6823 15.6230           0.9854      0.9761   2.2220 15.5018        90.0993
 Mean        0.2215      0.1735     1.3582 6.7886 3.4814             0.1130      0.1737   0.4750 5.3665         15.5018
 Median      0.1814      0.2384     0.8221 5.7940 1.8340             0.1103      0.3351   0.2163 4.1668          4.8003
                                         Panel B: USD-GBP, 3/60 System
                                   UIP 3m                                                 UIP 60m
            Implied      Corr.       VR        SD       EVR         Implied      Corr.      VR        SD        EVR
 Data       -2.2587     -0.9235    5.9819 8.1009 1.9223           -0.5729     -0.6490   0.7794 2.8923 3.7532
 2:5%       -0.9449     -0.8923     0.0446 2.6902 0.3656            -0.6615     -0.9782   0.0061 2.0653 0.4859
 97:5%       0.9965      0.9057     3.4753 19.3450 23.7088           0.6750      0.9766   1.3420 18.5891 164.2669
 Mean        0.0190      0.0193     0.8861 7.9680 5.4300             0.0085      0.0130   0.2802 6.7252 28.8370
 Median      0.0160      0.0282     0.5049 6.8936 2.9678             0.0076      0.0342   0.1162 5.4439 9.7430
                                        Panel C: DEM-GBP, 3/60 System
                                   UIP 3m                                                 UIP 60m
            Implied      Corr.       VR        SD       EVR         Implied      Corr.      VR        SD        EVR
 Data         -1.1982 -0.5598 4.5812 8.1587 1.7414 -0.7746 -0.6498 1.4210 3.0029 2.7940
  2:5%        -1.0428 -0.9085 0.0410 2.6257 0.4890 -0.7440 -0.9787 0.0077 1.9805 0.6541
  97:5%        0.8017 0.8757 3.3623 16.8225 26.0573                    0.5996 0.9685 1.3527 15.9394 129.5001
  Mean        -0.0765 -0.0757 0.7976 7.2886 6.2175 -0.0627 -0.1214 0.2738 6.1258 25.5175
  Median -0.0602          -0.1005 0.4856 6.3538 3.3000 -0.0605 -0.2332 0.1320 5.0391 9.5089
    This Table provides the empirical distributions of various economic statistics for the UIRP regressions under the null
that the exchange rate process and the short rate processes are random walks with a drift. IMPLIED refers to the implied
regression slope coeÆcients. CORR refers to the correlation statistic. VR refers to the variance ratio statistic. SD refers
to the standard deviation of the risk premium. EVR refers to the Fama excess variance ratio statistic. \Data" refers to
statistics calculated from the actual data. The summary statistics are the Mean, the Median and the 2.5% and 97.5%
critical values. An asterisk indicates signi cance at 5% level using the empirical critical values.




                                                        T-6
Table 7: Expectations Hypotheses of the Term Structure under the Random Walk Null
                                         Panel A: USD
                             Implied      Corr.       VR        SD        EVR
                 Data         0.7002      0.5201     1.8119   1.6259      0.7791
                 2:5 %       -0.3678     -0.2956     0.3714   1.0598      0.7470
                 97:5 %       0.7005      0.5985     3.2017   3.1020      3.3173
                 Mean         0.2358      0.2148     1.4313   1.8175      1.6631
                 Median       0.2600      0.2380     1.3119   1.7181      1.3695
                                         Panel B: DEM
                             Implied      Corr.       VR        SD        EVR
                 Data         0.5154      0.7911     0.4245   1.1063 0.9274
                 2:5 %       -0.2191     -0.3568     0.0906   0.8186 0.8034
                 97:5 %       0.5585      0.8245     0.8728   3.4062 10.4254
                 Mean         0.2065      0.3347     0.4083   1.7189 4.6834
                 Median       0.2188      0.3720     0.3828   1.5636 2.4902
                                         Panel C: GBP
                             Implied      Corr.       VR        SD        EVR
                 Data          0.9486 0.8368 1.2852 1.0278 0.3019
                  2:5%        -0.4098 -0.3612 0.3100 1.1151 0.6020
                  97:5%        0.7763 0.7135 2.8437 3.9092 3.7916
                  Mean         0.2657 0.2517 1.2834 2.1561 1.6300
                  Median       0.2941 0.2795 1.1887 2.0100 1.3499
           This Table provides the empirical distributions of various economic statistics
       for the EHTS regressions under the null that the exchange rate process and the
       short rate processes are random walks with a drift. IMPLIED refers to the implied
       regression slope coeÆcients. CORR refers to the correlation statistic. VR refers to
       the variance ratio statistic. SD refers to the standard deviation of the risk premium.
       EVR refers to the Fama excess variance ratio statistic. \Data" refers to statistics
       calculated from the actual data. The summary statistics are the Mean, the Median
       and the 2.5% and 97.5% critical values. An asterisk indicates signi cance at 5%
       level using the empirical critical values. USD and DEM (GBP) statistics come from
       the USD-DEM (USD-GBP) system.




                                               T-7
This gure plots the impulse responses of the foreign exchange risk premiums to a 1% positive shock to
the U.S. interest rate. The upper (lower) panel is based on the USD-DEM (USD-GBP) system. rp 3   uirp
                                                                                                 t;

(rp 60 ) refers to the 3-month (5-year) foreign exchange risk premiums. rp 60 refers to the 5-year
   uirp
   t;
                                                                            uirp
                                                                            t;   ;c

cumulative short term premium, which is obtained by rolling over rp 3 every three months. The solid
                                                                   uirp
                                                                   t;

line is computed from the data. The null hypotheses imposed are 3-month UIRP (the long dashed line),
60-month UIRP (the thin dotted line), joint UIRP (the short dashed line), the 60-month TSEH (the
thick dotted line) and all hypotheses (the dash dotted line).
             Figure 1: Impulse Responses of Foreign Exchange Risk Premiums

                                             T-8
This gure plots the impulse responses of the 5-year term premium (rp 60 ) to a 1% positive shock to
                                                                     ehts
                                                                     t;

the U.S. interest rate. The upper (lower) panel is based on the USD-DEM (USD-GBP) system. The
solid line is computed from the data. The null hypotheses imposed are 3-month UIRP (the long dashed
line), 60-month UIRP (the thin dotted line), joint UIRP (the short dashed line), the 60-month TSEH
(the thick dotted line) and all hypotheses (the dash dotted line).
                      Figure 2: Impulse Responses of Term Premiums

                                             T-9
Appendix
A     Data

Our data for the US, UK and Germany zero-coupon bond yields is an updated version
of the data originally used by Jorion and Mishkin (1991). We thank Philippe Jorion for
generously providing us with the data. The Jorion-Mishkin data set consists of monthly
observations from 1972:0l through 1991:12 on implied zero-coupon yields with maturities
of 3, 12, 24, 36, 48, and 60 months. These yields are constructed from observations on
outstanding government bonds. Data from 1990:l to 1996:9 on zero-coupon bond yields
with maturities of 3, 12, 36, and 60 months for the three currencies were obtained from
a New York investment bank that wishes to remain anonymous. The exchange rate data
are from Datastream.

B     Monte Carlo Analysis

We examine the nite sample properties of various test statistics using a bootstrap anal-
ysis.
The Data Generating Processes (DGP)
   We use various constrained VAR systems as the basis for a DGP. For the 5-variable
VAR system, the DGP uses the constrained estimates under the null of 3-month UIRP
and the 60-month EHTS, that is, all EHTS are imposed. For the 7-variable VAR system,
we investigate two di erent sets of constrained estimates. The rst set imposes 3-month
UIRP and the intermediate-horizon (12- or 36-month depending on the system) EHTS,
and the second set imposes 3-month UIRP and 60-month EHTS. In all of our experiments,
we bootstrap the unconstrained VAR residuals in an i.i.d. fashion. Bekaert and Hodrick
(2001) examine a subset of our statistics in an analogous VAR system and show that the
small sample results are robust to an alternative DGP that employs a GARCH model for
the residuals.

                                          A-1
    We correct the constrained estimates for small sample bias with a procedure also
used by Bekaert and Hodrick (2001). We start by bias-correcting the unconstrained VAR
parameter estimates. To this end, we use an i.i.d. bootstrap of the unconstrained residuals
to generate 50; 000 data sets, each of the same length as the actual data (after throwing
out the rst 1; 000 data points to diminish the e ect of starting values). For each of the
50; 000 samples, we recalculate the unconstrained parameters. We subtract the mean of
these estimates from the original unconstrained parameters  to obtain the small sample
                                                                   u



bias. We then add back this bias estimate to the unconstrained estimates  to obtain the
                                                                                  u



bias-corrected estimates e . To bias-correct the constrained VAR, we use e to simulate
                            u                                                         u



a very long series (51; 000 observations with the rst 1; 000 observations discarded). We
then subject this series to the iterative procedure as described in section 3.2 to obtain the
bias-corrected constrained estimates. Those estimates are what we use in generating the
simulation data.
    Due to the high persistence of the interest rates, we sometimes7 encounter the problem
that the bias-corrected constrained estimates have an eigenvalue that is larger than one
in absolute value. In such cases we correct the eigenvalues and restore stationarity using
a procedure described in Appendix C.
    For each DGP, we simulate 25; 000 data samples, each consisting of the same number
of observations as the actual data. For each data sample, we compute the actual and the
implied univariate regression slope coeÆcients, the economic signi cance test statistics,
and the Wald, LM and DM test statistics for each hypothesis of interest. The remaining
analysis in this section focuses on the 5-variable VAR system. The 7-VAR systems serve
as a robustness check.
Wald, LM and DM statistics
The empirical sizes of the Wald, LM and DM test statistics for a 5% test are shown
  7 This happens with the unconstrained bias-corrected estimates for all two 7-variable USD-DEM and
DEM-GBP systems; with the constrained estimates under the null of 3-month UIRP and 60-month
EHTS for the 3/12/60m USD-DEM systems, under the null of 3-month UIRP and 36-month EHTS
for the 3/12/60 USD-GBP system, and under both nulls for the 3/36/60m USD-DEM and USD-GBP
systems
                                               A-2
in Table A1, Panel A. The empirical size is de ned as the percentage of Monte Carlo
experiments where the test statistics generated under the null exceed the 5% critical
value of a 2 distribution. While all three test statistics show some size distortion, the
Wald statistic is by far the worst. For example, the empirical size of the Wald statistic
for the 60-month EHTS hypothesis is 72:3% for the USD-DEM system and 77:1% for
the USD-GBP system. The smallest distortion occurs for the \UIP short" hypothesis in
the USD-DEM system, where the empirical size is 11.09%. The DM test also produces
empirical sizes larger than 5% except for the joint test case in the USD-GBP system.
However, the upward size distortion is much smaller than for the Wald test. The LM test
produces empirical sizes closest to the asymptotic value of 5%. It is slightly conservative,
meaning it will lead to under-rejection in some cases.
    Panel B of Table A1 reports the empirical 95% critical value of the Wald, LM and
DM test statistics together with the critical value of the corresponding 2 distribution.
Consistent with Panel A, the LM statistic has empirical critical values that are closest to
that of a 2 distribution.
    Overall, our results con rm the ndings in Bekaert and Hodrick (2001) that the 2
distribution is a good approximation to the distribution of the LM test statistic in -
nite samples. The Wald test widely used in empirical research produces the worst size
distortion and invariably leads to serious over-rejection.
    Bekaert and Hodrick (2001) also show that all these tests have similar power properties
making the LM-statistic the obvious test statistic to use in empirical work.
Slope CoeÆcients
Tables A2 to A5 study the small sample properties of the slope coeÆcients in various
UIRP and EHTS regressions. We look at both direct OLS regression slopes and slope
coeÆcients implied by the VAR systems, and report the mean, standard deviation and
the 2:5% and 97:5% quantiles. The actual parameter estimates from the data are reported
in the last column in each table.
    Focusing rst on the slope coeÆcients in Tables A2 and A4. The bias for the 3-
                                          A-3
month UIRP regression slope is relatively small, and the di erence between the OLS
regression slope and the implied slope is also insigni cant. At a longer horizon, the 5-
year UIRP slope coeÆcient is signi cantly downward biased. Bekaert and Hodrick (2001)
document downward bias for UIRP regression slopes at the 12-month horizon. Together
our results indicate that the downward bias in the UIRP regression gets larger as the
horizon increases. This bias-pattern would make it less likely to nd coeÆcients close to
1 at longer horizons than at short horizons. Tauchen (2001) nds upward biases in UIRP
regressions but his results are based on a very short sample and a very di erent DGP
that assumes a stationary exchange rate.
    As in Bekaert, Hodrick, and Marshall (1997), the EHTS display upward bias. Overall,
the absolute values of the biases are somewhat lower with the implied slopes and so are
the dispersions. Nevertheless, the slope distributions are quite similar.
    Comparing the standard deviations of the slope coeÆcients, we can see that the dis-
persion of the UIRP slopes are more widely dispersed than the TS regression slopes in
(4). The dispersion of the UIRP slopes is large enough to imply negative 2.5% quantiles,
with the long-horizon critical values lower than the short-horizon ones. The 2.5% critical
values for the term structure regressions are never negative.
    As stressed by Li and Maddala (1996) and Bauer (2001), it is important to base in-
ference on \asymptotically pivotal" statistics, that is, statistics with a limit distribution
that does not depend on unknown parameters. Hence, we also examine the empirical
distributions of the t-statistics which satisfy this criterion. Table A3 shows the empir-
ical distributions of the t-statistics for direct OLS regression slope coeÆcients. These
t-statistics are computed using Hansen and Hodrick (1980) standard errors. Since the
UIRP regression slope is downward biased at longer horizons, it is no surprise that we ob-
serve on average negative t-statistics at longer horizons. At the 5-year horizon, the 2:5%
and 97:5% empirical critical values for the t-statistics of the UIRP slope coeÆcients are
-9.2093 and 5.2401 for the USD-DEM system, and -9.6211 and 4.2258 for the USD-GBP
system, which are remarkably di erent from their asymptotic critical values 1:96. These
                                            A-4
severe distortions makes it diÆcult to use this regression for empirical tests. Whereas the
EHTS t-stats are marginally better behaved, its distribution remains very far from the
N (0; 1) distribution we expect.
   Table A5 shows the empirical distributions of the t-statistics for the implied slope
coeÆcients. They are qualitatively similar to the corresponding entries in Table A3 while
the biases are smaller and the standard deviation is now close to one, its asymptotic value.
This indicates that the implied slope t-stat provides a better test in nite samples than
the standard regression t-statistic.
Economic Signi cance Statistics
The small sample properties of the three economic signi cance statistics de ned in section
3.2 are documented in Table A6 to Table A8.
    Table A6 presents the empirical distribution of the correlation statistics. While there
is a downward bias in all correlation statistics, the downward bias is more severe for the
UIRP than for the EHTS regressions. The degree of downward bias in the correlation
statistic for the UIRP at the short horizon is comparable to that at the longer horizon.
The 2:5% empirical critical values for the UIRP correlation statistics go into the negative
territory except in the case of 3-month UIRP for the USD-GBP system.
    Table A7 presents the empirical distribution of the variance ratio statistics. All vari-
ance ratio statistics are upwardly biased, indicating that on average the variability of
expected future asset prices is larger than the variability of current interest rate di eren-
tials. For the UIRP regressions, the upward bias in the variance ratio statistic is larger for
the short horizons and economically large. In the USD-DEM system, the average variance
ratio varies from 2.862 at the 3-month horizon to 1.662 at the 5-year horizon, while in the
USD-GBP system, it decreases from 1.747 at the 3-month horizon to 1.177 at the 5-year
horizon. The ratio of the standard deviation of the \theoretical spread" versus actual
spread only shows signi cant bias in the UK.
    Table A8 presents the empirical distribution of the standard deviation of foreign ex-
change and term premiums. The SD statistics are upwardly biased in all cases, which
                                            A-5
is anticipated as the statistic is bounded below by zero. The bias is more signi cant in
the UIRP regressions than in the EHTS regressions. For the UIRP regressions, the mean
of the SD statistic is larger at shorter horizons. It decreases from 4.586 at the 3-month
horizon to 2.547 at the 5-year horizon in the USD-DEM system, and decreases from 4.138
at the 3-month horizon to 2.368 at the 5-year horizon in the USD-GBP system.
    Table A9 presents the empirical distribution of the excess variance ratio statistic. The
EV R statistic, which should be zero under the null, is upwardly biased for all systems,
with the bias mostly worsening with horizon. Going from the 3-month to the 5-year hori-
zon, the bias increases from 0.8111 to 1.5791 in the USD-DEM system, from 0.6431 to
1.7937 in the USD-GBP system, and from 0.7310 to 1.7316 in the DEM-GBP system. The
con dence intervals are very wide for the UIRP statistics but lower than 1 for the EHTS
statistics. The standard deviations of the empirical distribution of this statistic are unrea-
sonably high because of one outlier observation. For example, for the USD/DEM system,
dropping the maximum EVR statistic leads to more reasonable standard deviations of
1:1295, 4:7629, 0:4671, 0:4488, 1:0702 and 1:3900.

C     Eigenvalue Correction

Melino (2001) and Bekaert and Hodrick (2001) show that the various null hypotheses
impose restrictions on the eigenvectors of A. Consider an eigenvalue decomposition
                                        A = P P 1                                       (14)
where  is the diagonal matrix of eigenvalues and P is the matrix with corresponding
eigenvectors. Without loss of generality, we can normalize P so that P1 = 1 8j where P
                                                                          j                 ij



denotes the (i,j)-th entry in the P-matrix . To derive the restrictions imposed by 3-month
UIRP, substitute (14) into (6) and multiply both sides by P from the right-hand side.
This gives                                  
                                1  1 3 = P P 8j
                                  j          j


                                3 1             3 j    2j
                                         j



Similarly by substituting (14) into (7) and simplifying, we obtain the restrictions of the
                                           A-6
domestic 36-month EHTS on the eigenvectors:
                                     
                       1  1 36 = P P + P P 8j
                         j          j


                       36 1             j5    j4   3j     2
                                                           j
                                j




    When there exist eigenvalues with absolute values larger than one in a constrained
system, we replace them with +/-0.99 and modify the eigenvector matrix P according
to the relevant restrictions as discussed above. We can think of the resulting system
as the constrained VAR estimates under the additional requirement that the system be
stationary.




                                         A-7
         Table A1: Empirical Size of Test Statistics under the Null (5% Test)

                                  Panel A: Empirical Size (in        %)
                       USD-DEM                               USD-GBP
Constraint        Wald    LM              DM            Wald    LM             DM
UIP Short         11.0905 4.3882 9.1277       14.2782 3.2421                  11.0198
UIP Long          12.0078 5.4047 10.3343      26.5590 5.1621                  15.0917
UIP Joint         29.0236 6.9832 16.0076      46.4427 2.7295                  14.9494
TS Long           72.2780 10.4335 16.2968     77.0817 5.2028                  23.3617
UIPs TSl          73.9060 5.8965 8.2476       81.2309 0.8176                   3.7384
                                Panel B: 95% Critical Value
                       USD-DEM                               USD-GBP                              2
                  Wald    LM              DM            Wald    LM             DM          df       95%
 UIP Short        13.9182 10.7516 12.8644              15.7789 10.2200 13.6723              5 11.0705
 UIP Long         14.6839 11.2429 13.4203              23.7108 11.1356 14.9992              5 11.0705
 UIP Joint        46.9183 19.2414 22.9091              84.8897 17.0766 22.0989 10 18.3070
 TS Long         137.3161 20.3749 22.5465 177.8543 18.3708 23.9268 10 18.3070
 UIPs TSl 152.7214 25.4593 26.6124 205.8911 22.1193 24.2639 15 24.9958
Panel A of this Table provides the empirical sizes of various test statistics under di erent constraints.
The empirical size is the percentage of the Monte Carlo replications where the test statistic exceeds
the 5% critical value of a 2 distribution. Panel B lists the 95% critical values of various test statistics
under di erent constraints. df refers to the degrees of freedom of the asymptotic 2 distribution.




                                                   A-8
        Table A2: Empirical Distribution of Actual Regression Slopes

                        Panel A : USD-DEM VAR System
                            Mean     S.D.      2:5%     97:5%    Data
                 UIP 3m     1.0254   0.6694   -0.2679   2.4044   -0.3707
                 UIP 5y     0.7314   0.7843   -0.8653   2.2410   -0.2007
                 TS D 5y    1.0249   0.2526    0.5304   1.5225    0.6731
                 TS F 5y    1.0493   0.2107    0.6259   1.4576    1.2836
                         Panel B : USD-GBP VAR System
                            Mean     S.D.      2:5%     97:5%    Data
                 UIP 3m     0.9598   0.4620    0.0205   1.8675   -1.9243
                 UIP 5y     0.6836   0.6288   -0.5689   1.9102    0.3325
                 TS D 5y    1.0468   0.2545    0.5507   1.5557    0.6731
                 TS F 5y    1.2032   0.3040    0.5888   1.7807    1.4183
                        Panel C : DEM-GBP VAR System
                             Mean      S.D.     2:5%    97:5%    Data
                   UIP 3m 0.9072 0.4775 -0.1060 1.8118 -1.1867
                   UIP 5y 0.5233 0.7358 -0.8714 1.9833 -1.7569
                   TS D 5y 1.0358 0.1969 0.6355 1.4179 1.2836
                   TS F 5y 1.2154 0.2962 0.6187 1.7853 1.4183
This Table provides summary statistics for the empirical distributions generated from a
constrained VAR with bootstrapped residuals. The summary statistics are the Mean, the
Standard Deviation (S.D.) and the 2.5% and 97.5% critical values. \Data" refers to the
statistics calculated from the actual data. \D" and \F" in the TS regressions refer to the
 rst and the second country respectively in the name of the VAR.




                                          A-9
  Table A3: Empirical Distribution of Actual Regression Slope T-Statistics

                        Panel A : USD-DEM VAR System
                            Mean      S.D.     2:5%     97:5%     Data
                UIP 3m      0.0284   1.0626   -2.0791   2.1285   -1.3596
                UIP 5y     -1.0715   3.7289   -9.2093   5.2401   -1.8628
                TS D 5y     0.0868   1.8418   -3.6872   3.6100   -1.0790
                TS F 5y     0.3960   1.8897   -3.3154   4.1289    1.4931
                         Panel B : USD-GBP VAR System
                            Mean      S.D.     2:5%     97:5%     Data
                UIP 3m     -0.0828   1.0589   -2.1659   1.9957   -2.5693
                UIP 5y     -1.5174   3.6524   -9.6211   4.2258   -1.4423
                TS D 5y     0.2143   1.8197   -3.4348   3.6586   -1.0790
                TS F 5y     1.0898   1.8018   -2.1183   4.9895    2.5477
                        Panel C : DEM-GBP VAR System
                             Mean      S.D.     2:5%    97:5%    Data
                  UIP 3m -0.1772 1.0582 -2.2598 1.9013 -2.8760
                  UIP 5y -1.8736 3.4463 -9.7387 3.4464 -6.3525
                  TS D 5y 0.3340 1.9041 -3.4348 4.2182 1.4931
                  TS F 5y 1.1998 1.8516 -2.1198 5.2529 2.5477
This Table provides summary statistics for the empirical distributions generated from a
constrained VAR with bootstrapped residuals. The summary statistics are the Mean, the
Standard Deviation (S.D.) and the 2.5% and 97.5% critical values. \Data" refers to the
statistics calculated from the actual data. \D" and \F" in the TS regressions refer to the
 rst and the second country respectively in the name of the VAR.




                                          A-10
        Table A4: Empirical Distribution of Implied Regression Slopes

                        Panel A : USD-DEM VAR System
                            Mean     S.D.      2:5%     97:5%    Data
                 UIP 3m     1.0173   0.6864   -0.3124   2.4333   -0.3741
                 UIP 5y     0.8060   0.6330   -0.4410   2.0330   -0.6007
                 TS D 5y    0.9177   0.1980    0.5226   1.3073    0.7002
                 TS F 5y    0.9297   0.1739    0.5542   1.2330    0.5154
                         Panel B : USD-GBP VAR System
                            Mean     S.D.      2:5%     97:5%    Data
                 UIP 3m     0.9615   0.4664    0.0111   1.8823   -2.2587
                 UIP 5y     0.7751   0.4864   -0.1146   1.7779   -0.5729
                 TS D 5y    0.9445   0.1760    0.6004   1.2915    0.6331
                 TS F 5y    1.0256   0.2158    0.5487   1.4087    0.9486
                        Panel C : DEM-GBP VAR System
                             Mean      S.D.     2:5%    97:5%    Data
                   UIP 3m 0.9114 0.4882 -0.0955 1.8388 -1.1982
                   UIP 5y 0.6494 0.5812 -0.3406 1.8880 -0.7746
                   TS D 5y 0.9440 0.1602 0.6033 1.2354 0.5049
                   TS F 5y 1.0720 0.2335 0.5493 1.4923 0.8501
This Table provides summary statistics for the empirical distributions generated from a
constrained VAR with bootstrapped residuals. The summary statistics are the Mean, the
Standard Deviation (S.D.) and the 2.5% and 97.5% critical values. \Data" refers to the
statistics calculated from the actual data. \D" and \F" in the TS regressions refer to the
 rst and the second country respectively in the name of the VAR.




                                          A-11
 Table A5: Empirical Distribution of Implied Regression Slope T-Statistics

                        Panel A : USD-DEM VAR System
                            Mean      S.D.     2:5%     97:5%     Data
                UIP 3m      0.0153   0.9441   -1.8349   1.8883   -1.2259
                UIP 5y     -0.3434   0.9078   -2.2205   1.3218   -1.5906
                TS D 5y    -0.5142   1.0530   -2.8194   1.2881   -1.6588
                TS F 5y    -0.3735   0.9806   -2.4712   1.4406   -1.6187
                         Panel B : USD-GBP VAR System
                            Mean      S.D.     2:5%     97:5%     Data
                UIP 3m     -0.0781   0.9914   -2.0535   1.8674   -3.0635
                UIP 5y     -0.6322   1.0701   -2.9892   1.1208   -4.5684
                TS D 5y    -0.4109   1.0754   -2.7658   1.4648   -2.3020
                TS F 5y     0.2700   0.9480   -1.4340   2.2624   -0.3383
                        Panel C : DEM-GBP VAR System
                             Mean      S.D.     2:5%    97:5%    Data
                  UIP 3m -0.1698 0.9656 -2.0980 1.7342 -3.1514
                  UIP 5y -0.8439 1.0933 -3.2680 0.9083 -3.3995
                  TS D 5y -0.3404 0.9882 -2.4090 1.4932 -1.4375
                  TS F 5y 0.4537 0.9692 -1.2780 2.4323 -0.7083
This Table provides summary statistics for the empirical distributions generated from a
constrained VAR with bootstrapped residuals. The summary statistics are the Mean, the
Standard Deviation (S.D.) and the 2.5% and 97.5% critical values. \Data" refers to the
statistics calculated from the actual data. \D" and \F" in the TS regressions refer to the
 rst and the second country respectively in the name of the VAR.




                                          A-12
         Table A6: Empirical Distribution of the Correlation Statistic

                        Panel A : USD-DEM VAR System
                            Mean     S.D.      2:5%     97:5%    Data
                 UIP 3m     0.6268   0.3316   -0.2769   0.9767   -0.2674
                 UIP 5y     0.6639   0.4074   -0.5624   0.9943   -0.6406
                 TS D 5y    0.8727   0.1008    0.6180   0.9899    0.5201
                 TS F 5y    0.9281   0.0799    0.7168   0.9967    0.7911
                         Panel B : USD-GBP VAR System
                            Mean     S.D.      2:5%     97:5%    Data
                 UIP 3m     0.7512   0.2559    0.0132   0.9856   -0.9235
                 UIP 5y     0.7547   0.3140   -0.2282   0.9943   -0.6490
                 TS D 5y    0.8927   0.0863    0.6752   0.9928    0.4880
                 TS F 5y    0.9095   0.0849    0.6894   0.9944    0.8368
                        Panel C : DEM-GBP VAR System
                             Mean      S.D.     2:5%    97:5%    Data
                   UIP 3m 0.7030 0.2867 -0.1135 0.9821 -0.5598
                   UIP 5y 0.5501 0.3843 -0.4308 0.9827 -0.6498
                   TS D 5y 0.9462 0.0657 0.7689 0.9981 0.9228
                   TS F 5y 0.9169 0.0812 0.7077 0.9936 0.8457
This Table provides summary statistics for the empirical distributions generated from a
constrained VAR with bootstrapped residuals. The summary statistics are the Mean, the
Standard Deviation (S.D.) and the 2.5% and 97.5% critical values. \Data" refers to the
statistics calculated from the actual data. \D" and \F" in the TS regressions refer to the
 rst and the second country respectively in the name of the VAR.




                                          A-13
       Table A7: Empirical Distribution of the Variance Ratio Statistic

                        Panel A : USD-DEM VAR System
                            Mean      S.D.      2:5%    97:5%    Data
                 UIP 3m     2.8619    2.5164   0.3517   9.0111   1.9574
                 UIP 5y     1.6622    2.2576   0.1008   6.0438   0.8794
                 TS D 5y    1.1319    0.4092   0.5208   2.0934   1.8119
                 TS F 5y    1.0176    0.3109   0.4842   1.6512   0.4245
                         Panel B : USD-GBP VAR System
                            Mean      S.D.      2:5%    97:5%    Data
                 UIP 3m     1.7469    1.2202   0.3010   4.7697   5.9819
                 UIP 5y     1.1766    1.2394   0.0775   4.0568   0.7794
                 TS D 5y    1.1410    0.3540   0.5862   1.9630   1.6826
                 TS F 5y    1.3049    0.4578   0.4833   2.2812   1.2852
                        Panel C : DEM-GBP VAR System
                              Mean      S.D.    2:5%    97:5%    Data
                    UIP 3m 1.7720 1.3176 0.3087 4.7012 4.5812
                    UIP 5y 1.6070 4.3613 0.1053 5.9695 1.4210
                    TS D 5y 1.0091 0.2862 0.5100 1.6274 0.2993
                    TS F 5y 1.4047 0.5130 0.4781 2.5022 1.0105
This Table provides summary statistics for the empirical distributions generated from a
constrained VAR with bootstrapped residuals. The summary statistics are the Mean, the
Standard Deviation (S.D.) and the 2.5% and 97.5% critical values. \Data" refers to the
statistics calculated from the actual data. \D" and \F" in the TS regressions refer to the
 rst and the second country respectively in the name of the VAR.




                                          A-14
                   Table A8: Empirical Distribution of SD(rp)

                        Panel A : USD-DEM VAR System
                            Mean      S.D.      2:5%    97:5%    Data
                 UIP 3m     4.5864    2.8221   1.7117   8.6137   5.8598
                 UIP 5y     2.5465    3.5902   0.6771   6.4712   3.7002
                 TS D 5y    0.9749    0.8492   0.3732   1.8106   1.6259
                 TS F 5y    0.5729    0.7044   0.1913   1.2079   1.1063
                         Panel B : USD-GBP VAR System
                            Mean      S.D.      2:5%    97:5%    Data
                 UIP 3m     4.1376    1.7571   1.5763   7.6287   8.1009
                 UIP 5y     2.3684    1.6939   0.6995   5.5961   2.8923
                 TS D 5y    0.8501    0.3693   0.3104   1.5100   1.6291
                 TS F 5y    1.0924    0.6782   0.3923   2.2833   1.0278
                        Panel C : DEM-GBP VAR System
                              Mean      S.D.    2:5%    97:5%    Data
                    UIP 3m 3.6663 1.6920 1.3946 6.7868 8.1587
                    UIP 5y 2.4459 2.1057 0.7351 6.1345 3.0029
                    TS D 5y 0.5832 0.3560 0.1816 1.2544 0.9991
                    TS F 5y 1.2626 1.1894 0.4468 2.8389 0.9203
This Table provides summary statistics for the empirical distributions generated from a
constrained VAR with bootstrapped residuals. The summary statistics are the Mean, the
Standard Deviation (S.D.) and the 2.5% and 97.5% critical values. \Data" refers to the
statistics calculated from the actual data. \D" and \F" in the TS regressions refer to the
 rst and the second country respectively in the name of the VAR.




                                          A-15
      Table A9: Empirical Distribution of Fama Excess Volatility Ratio

                             Panel A : USD-DEM VAR System
                             Mean      S.D.     2:5%     97:5%   Data
                  UIP 3m 0.8111 1.2254 0.1193 3.0964 1.8931
                  UIP 5y 1.5791 6.0428 0.0449 9.9018 3.5034
                  TS D 5y 0.5235 32.1486 0.0320 0.9251 0.7791
                  TS F 5y 0.4235 32.1635 0.0126 0.8048 0.9274
                             Panel B : USD-GBP VAR System
                             Mean      S.D.     2:5%     97:5%   Data
                  UIP 3m 0.6431 1.1424 0.0656 2.9026 1.9223
                  UIP 5y 1.7937 7.6655 0.0354 11.5802 3.7532
                  TS D 5y 0.2534 0.7754 0.0243 0.7195 0.8418
                  TS F 5y 0.3116 8.0481 0.0235 0.8254 0.3019
                             Panel C : DEM-GBP VAR System
                             Mean      S.D.     2:5%     97:5%   Data
                  UIP 3m 0.7310 1.2005 0.0767 3.2267 1.7414
                  UIP 5y 1.7316 4.0138 0.0828 9.0057 2.7940
                  TS D 5y 0.1518 0.4610 0.0083 0.6471 0.9675
                  TS F 5y 0.4137 15.2802 0.0259 0.8194 0.3070
This Table provides summary statistics for the empirical distributions generated from a
constrained VAR with bootstrapped residuals. The summary statistics are the Mean, the
Standard Deviation (S.D.) and the 2.5% and 97.5% critical values. \Data" refers to the
statistics calculated from the actual data. \D" and \F" in the TS regressions refer to the
 rst and the second country respectively in the name of the VAR.




                                          A-16
