NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT HAVE TWO DECADES OF BRITISH ECONOMIC REFORM DELIVERED?

David Card
Richard B. Freeman

Working Paper 8801
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8801

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2002

Prepared for the forthcoming volume Seeking a Premier League Economy, edited by Richard Blundell, David
Card, and Richard B. Freeman. We are grateful to Till von Wachter and Rishi Madlani for research
assistance, and to Mary O’Mahoney for generously sharing her data. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by David Card and Richard B. Freeman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

What Have Two Decades of British Economic Reform Delivered?
David Card and Richard B. Freeman
NBER Working Paper No. 8801
February 2002

ABSTRACT
Beginning in 1979 with the newly elected Thatcher Government and continuing under successive
Conservative and Labour Governments, the United Kingdom has embarked on a two-decade-long
experiment in economic reform. We present evidence that the reform process has succeeded in making
the UK more market-friendly than its European competitors. In fact, by the 1990s Britain ranked near the
top of the league tables for freedom of markets, in some cases even ahead of the United States. To
evaluate the effects of these reforms we compare trends in macroeconomic outcomes in the UK relative
to the US, Germany, and France. During the 1980s and 1990s Britain halted the relative declines in GDP
per capita and labour productivity that had characterized earlier decades, and partially closed the gap in
income per capita with France and Germany. These gains were mainly attributable to relative rises in
employment and hours. Unlike its EU competitors, Britain was able to achieve high
employment-population rates with rising real wages for workers. The case that the change in economic
performance can be credited to market-oriented reforms is harder to prove. Nevertheless, based on our
own macro-level analyses, and micro-level evidence from several companion studies, we conclude that
economic reforms contributed to halting the nearly century-long trend in relative economic decline of the
UK relative to its historic competitors, Germany and France.

David Card
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
card@econ.berkeley.edu

Richard B. Freeman
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
freeman@nber.org

What Have Two Decades of British Economic Reform Delivered?
For much of the 19 th and 20 th centuries Britain, which pioneered the Industrial Revolution, had a
disappointing growth record, falling markedly from the top ranks in the league economic tables. In 1979,
the U K w as 12th in per capita GDP among advanced OECD countries, well below Germany, France, and
other EU econom ies.1 In response to this weak economic performance, recent UK governments have
adopted po licies designed to move the eco nom y back to “prem iere league” status. Beginning with M rs.
Thatcher and continuing under John Major and Tony Blair, these reforms have sought to increase the
efficacy of labou r and prod uct m arkets and limit governm ent an d institutional involvement in econom ic
decision-making.
The mov e toward more markets and less government is not unique to the UK. Many other
advanced economies also responded to the economic challenges of the 1980s and 1990s by granting
markets more leeway in the allocation of resources and the setting of prices. All the major economies
eliminated restrictions on the flow of cap ital by the early 19 80s. Most privatized state-run industries in
the 1980s and 1990s. All lowered marginal tax rates for high-income earners. Most also made labour
contracts m ore flexible and moved from national w age setting to more localized collective agreements in
the 1990s. For its part, the EU Comm ission pushed comp etition policies and the reduction of subsidies
to declining industries while seeking a unifo rm social charter to regulate labo ur m arket outcom es.
Outside the EU, the other English-speaking economies – the US, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand –
moved toward less state and institutional intervention in the economy.
Have two decades of economic reform significantly shifted the market orientation of the UK
economy relative to other advanced OECD economies, or has the UK only kept pace with its peers?
What have the reforms done for aggregate economic output and the average income of citizens? Have the
reforms improved the position of the U K in the econo mic league tables?

1

This refers to GDP per capita in purchasing power parity units, as reported in our table 8, which
includes 13 OECD countries. The precise position of the UK varies with the number of countries included
in the analysis and particular purchasing parity adjustment used.

2
This paper examines these questions. Section 1 compares the market-orientation of the UK
relative to other advanced economies using a diverse set of market indicators. We find that the post-1980
reforms have made the UK more market-friendly than its EU competitors, and that in the 1990s the UK
ranked higher on som e measures of freedom of markets than the U S. Section 2 contrasts macro-econom ic
outcomes. We show that during the 1980s and 1990s the UK arrested the relative declines in GDP per
capita and labour productivity that had characterized earlier decades, and partially closed the gap in per
capita income with France and Germany through relative gains in employment and hours. While the UK
did not experience an American-style “New Economy” boom, it combined high employment-population
rates w ith rising real wages fo r workers: an achievement that the U S was unable to match until the late
1990s. Section 3 examines the link between the reforms and outcomes. Since there is no ready
counterfactual again st wh ich to com pare the observed UK performance, our analysis is m ore judgm ental.
Based on macro-level analyses and the micro-level evidence available from several compan ion studies,
how ever, we conclude that econom ic reforms contributed to halting the nearly cen tury-long trend in
relative econom ic decline of the U K relative to its historic comp etitors, G ermany and France.

1. The Market-Friendliness of the UK and other A dvanced Econom ies
“They used, when I first cam e in, to talk abou t us in terms of the British disease. Now they talk
abo ut us and say, ‘L ook, Britain has got the cure. Come to Britain to see how Britain has done it’ That is
an enormous turn-around.” Margaret Thatcher, Financial Times, 15 February, 1988
“Government should have a role that is enabling: supporting small businesses, encouraging
technological adva nce; investing in science; above all, promoting competition and removing the barriers
to business growth... I call it a Third Wa y ... Sup porting w ealth creation. Tackling vested interests.
Using market mechanisms.” Tony Blair, speech at World Economic Forum, Davos 18 January 2000
For the past two decades British econom ic reforms have been motivated by a desire to increase
the reliance on market forces and reduce the role of the state in the determination of prices and the
allocation of resources. Mrs. Thatcher’s Conservative governm ent privatized industries and council
hou sing, enacted law s to weaken trade union s, created financial incen tives fo r workers to choose private

3
pensions, and reduced the benefits available to unemployed workers, all the while preserving national
health and other features of the welfare state. The M ajor government pursued a similar agenda,
abolishing the Wages Cou ncils and privatizing many of the remaining state-owned enterprises. Even
after the defeat of the Conservatives, Tony Blair’s New Labo ur government continued to introduce
market-enhancing reforms. It created tax breaks for employee share ownership programs, opposed EU
directives that were interpreted by private employers as anti-business, and enhanced the work incentives
of the income support system. In the realm of monetary policy, Labour went beyond the Tories by
shifting interest-rate-setting authority from the Treasury to an independent M onetary Policy com mittee.
While there are some exceptions – the Thatcher campaign to centralize the public sector and limit the
authority of local government, and the Blair efforts to ease the formation of unions and introduce a
national minimum w age – the main thrust of UK policy reforms has been to reduce the economic role of
the state and enhance the role of markets.2
For purposes of analysing the potential effect of these reforms on the economic performance of
the UK relative to other advanced cou ntries, it is importan t to determ ine whether these reform s were
larger, smaller, or similar to those in other advanced countries. This in turn requires measures of the
institutional and policy stance of advanced countries. In the absence of a single GDP-style measure of
the free market stance of economies, we examine a variety of indicators that rate countries by the way
different m arkets determine outcomes. Som e of these indicators are b ased on objective data w hile others
are based on the assessments of expert analysts or surveys of m anagers. Som e of the m easures are
produced by think tanks with conservative ideological bents, such as the “economic freedom” indices of
the Fraser In stitute and the Heritage Found ation. These indices stress particular measures of econom ic
freedom , such as low taxes, which fit a more con servative agenda, while ignoring social inclusion factors

2

Since local governm ents must “com pete” for residents and businesses (in the Tiebout sense),
many economists believe that market forces exert greater discipline on the local public sector than on the
central government. We therefore classify reforms which decentralize political decision-making as promarket, an d those that centralize autho rity as anti-m arket.

4
such as spending on education. Another broad set of m easures are the indexes of “com petitiveness”
produced by the World Economic Forum, most recently in conjunction with the Harvard Center for
International Developm ent. These indices mix the stance of po licy, institutions, and specific outcomes,
and give higher scores to econom ically successful social dem ocratic regimes than the freedom indices.
Finally, the OECD and some independent scholars have produced indices of regulations and procedures
in particular markets, such as labor m arkets, product markets, and capital m arkets.
All of these measures of the market friendliness of institutions have shortcomings. Som e are
formed by weighting linear sums of sub-indices, with the weights determined subjectively, and with some
potential measures excluded. Some are scaled in ways that have little basis in theory or other empirical
work. Some treat all regulations and administrative decrees as if they were rigidly enforced, when in fact
the degree of enforcement of regulations that limit markets varies across countries. All the measures
igno re potential com plem entarities or substitutions among institutions.
Competitiveness indices have other problems. The groups who provide these measures have
changed their modes of calculating competitiveness over time, so that their indices do not reflect the same
underlying data over time. In 2001, for exam ple, the Fraser Institute revised its historical indices,
producing generally modest adjustments as they accumulated additional data (see www .fraserinstitute.ca)
The W orld Econo mic Forum-H arvard Center for International Developmen t 2000 Comp etitiveness
Report reported tw o different indices, one for “current comp etitiveness” and one for “growth
competitiveness”, reflecting the different weights placed on the same data for different purposes. Finally,
the measures for individual markets can be criticized for focusing on some features of markets and
regulatory mechanisms but not on others. For instance, measures of labour market performance
concentrate on the extent of centralization of bargaining and employment protection legislation, but not
on the potential for court suits over discrimination or insurance of pension moneys. Comparisons of the
market-friendliness of product markets ignore difference in bankruptcy laws, which can greatly affect
business formation and dissolution. While the sub-indices necessarily cover only parts of econom ies,

5
they prov ide ch ecks on the m ore aggregate measures. If an aggregate index rates an econ om y as m arketfriendly while it has highly restrictive labour contracts or a highly regulated p roduct m arket, then we will
know that something is amiss. These measures also allow analysts to relate policies or institutions to the
specific outcomes they are designed to affect, rather than to measures like GDP per capita, which depend
on a wider set of factors.

W here the UK Fits in Econom ic Freedom and C ompetitiveness
Differences and shortcomings among the indices notwithstanding, the principal indicators of the
market stance of economies show that the policy reforms of the 1980s and 1990s made the UK one of the
most market friendly economies in the wo rld. The high rank of the U K in m arket friendliness at the turn
of the 21 st Century reflects more rapid market-oriented reforms in the UK than in most other advanced
econom ies, rather than a general increase in regulation in other countries.
a. Measures of Economic Freedom
The indices of economic freedom produced by the Fraser Institute and the Heritage Foundation
value key features of capitalist economies: private property rights, freedom to operate a business, and
freedom of capital and labor markets. Both include measures of free trade, which reflect international
policies, while neither includes measures of imm igration policies. Each treats cursorily the labour market
institutions that have drawn continuing policy attention in the wake of the divergence of unemployment
and employment-population rates between the US and the EU in the 1980s and 1990s. Morever, the
indices differ in their emphasis on particular dimensions of “freedom” (Hanke and Walters, 1997). The
Fraser Institute Index rates countries with military conscription as having less economic freedom, and
gives countries with higher top m arginal tax rates and governm ent transfers and subsidies lower scores. 3

3

Com paring the higher ranking that the Heritage/WSJ gives to Israel, which has conscription, than
the Fraser Institute, Alvin Rabushka (2000) argued that the “Fraser Institute index is far superior to that of
the Heritage/W SJ. It is based on far more exten sive research , deliberation, and testing by far m ore
qualified and distinguished scholars”.

6
The Heritage Found ation/Wall Street Journal index penalizes higher corporate and value-added taxes.
Reflecting the view that even a democratically chosen state sector is inimical to economic freedom, the
Fraser and Heritage indices rate the size of governm ent as important negative in dicators of freedom . Both
measures penalize high inflation, although this is an outcome of economic policy and market function,
rather than an indicator of market orientation.
A third aggreg ate index of economic freedom was created by Freedom House. This index differs
somewhat from the other two – for example, it ignores the level of taxation but counts freedom of
association in the labour market. The index was produced only one, and so we leave it out of our
analysis. Nevertheless, it is sufficiently highly correlated with the other two indicators that we do no
harm to the analy sis by exclu ding it.
Wh ile the Fraser and Heritage measures lead to somewh at different rankings of the market stance
of particular countries, the high correlation between them shows that they are measuring essentially the
same phenomenon. For all of the countries covered, including the less developed countries, Hanke and
Walters (1997) report a rank-order correlation between the two indexes of 0.85 in 1995-96. For advanced
OE CD countries, w e obtain a rank correlation of 0.83 betw een the Fraser and H eritage/W SJ m easures.
Most importantly, both indices give a relatively high rank to the UK in the 1990s. The Heritage/WSJ
index ranks the UK third in 1996 among advanced OECD countries in market friendliness (after the US
and New Zealand, tied with the Netherlands) and 5th in 2001 (after Ireland, New Zealand, US, and
Luxemb urg). 4 According to the Fraser Institute index, the UK was tied for second with the US in 1995
among the advanced OE CD coun tries (after New Zealand), while in 1999 it ranked 2nd after New
Zealand and just ahead of the US.5

4

In the Freedom House ranking in 1996, the UK was tied with the US and 4 other countries for
the top rank.
5

We exclude Singapore, Hong K ong and Bahrein from the rankings since they are not advanced
OECD countries, but in some years they score higher than the UK

7
a.1 Fraser Institute Index
Because the Fraser Institute Index (FII) is available from 1970 to the present, while the Heritage
index covers a shorter period, we use the FII to measure the change in the UK’s position over time. The
FII measures the degree of econom ic freedom on a scale from 1 to 100, with higher values reflect m ore
freedom in m arket transactions.
Table 1 reports the FII for the UK and other major OECD countries every five years from 1970
to 1995 and fo r 199 9. Th e levels and trends in the value of the index for various countries accord well
with informal observations on the level and change in policy stances toward m arkets. For example, most
analysts place the US and other English-speaking countries at the market-friendly end of the spectrum,
and Nordic countries and other social democratic EU countries at the other end. The FII orders the
countries in the same manner. Still, the index has potential errors. It does not deal with the
imp lementation or enforcem ent of regulations that lim it markets, so countries like Italy w ith a sizeable
und ergro und econ om y are arguably given too low a score. It also ignores the use of the judicial system to
regulate m arket transactions, which m ay lead to an overstatement of the market freedom s in the US.
From 1970 to 1975 the index shows a decline in economic freedom in most countries (though not the US)
when governments struggled to control inflationary pressures. This is odd since the US introduced wage
and price controls in this period while many other countries relied o n collective bargaining agreem ents to
contain wage pressures.6 From 1980 to 1999 there was a general trend toward increased market
freedom s.
Focusing on the UK, the FII tells a clear story about trends in the market friendliness. In the
1970s, before the Thatcher reforms, the UK scored relatively low among advanced countries in the
economic freedom league table. In 1970 and 1975, when the UK had exchange controls, it ranked 17th
and 16 th. By 1980, after the elimination of controls, the UK had risen to 13th position. Over the

6

Canada also adopted wage and price controls in the period between 1975 and 1980, and yet the
FII shows a rise in econ om ic freed om .

8
following two decades it rose sharply in the rankings, so that by 1999 , the UK sto od second behind only
New Z ealand among the advanced OEC D countries. Measured by the change in FII points, the UK w as
the third most reformed economy between 1980 and 1999, after New Z ealand and Portugal. Thus, in an
epoch of increasing market-friendly economic reforms, the UK reformed more than most other advanced
countries.
The Fraser Institute index contains seven components, four of which – the total size of
government expenditures, monetary policy and price stability, regulation of international exchange and
freedom to trade with foreigners, and freedom to use alternative currencies – fall outside the purview of
the micro-domestic policies which are our primary focus. Accordingly, in Table 2 we show the three
components of the FII that more closely reflect domestic market freedoms: the structure of economy and
use of markets, legal structure and property rights, and freedom of exchange in capital and financial
markets. 7 As a crude summary, we also report the unweighted average of these components. They show
that the UK ranked in the middle of the pack in 1980 but near the top by 1999, considerably ahead of
most of its EU co mpetitors.
b. World Econ omic Forum /Harvard Institute Competitiveness Scores
Since 19 80 the International Institute for Managem ent D evelopm ent (IM D) and the W orld
Economic Forum (WEF) have developed jointly or separately a world competitiveness report of
countries. From 1998 to 2000 the W EF collaborated with Harvard University’s Center for International
Development to give the Global Competitiveness Report (GCR) In contrast to the economic freedom
indices, indices of competitiveness measure the “set of institutions and economic policies supportive of
high rates of econ omic grow th in the m edium run.” (GCR, 2000, p 14). Th e com petitiveness scores are
based on a mixture of quantitative economic measures and the responses of executives to questions about

7

Freedom of exchange in capital and financial markets includes a subcategory for freedom of
citizens to engage in capital tran sactions w ith foreigners, so this is not exclusively a m easure of dom estic
market activities. Note that the vast majority o f countries score 100 in the legal structure and pro perty
rights sub-index in 1997, while the rem ainder are in the 90+ range, except for Greece.

9
the situation in their country. Most of the questions in the 2000 Report ask executives to rate “the extent
to which” a country fits a particular statement on a scale from 1 to 4; earlier reports used a scale from 0
(not at all) to 100 (to a great exten t). The response rate to the survey has varied in the range of 15% to
20% , with non-respond ents having sim ilar characteristics to respo ndents.
Because the com petitiveness scores are heav ily weighted toward actual (or prospective) econom ic
perfo rmance, the rankin gs of countries d iffer from rankin gs based on the market friendliness of their
institutions. Som e highly regulated coun tries such as Germany, Switzerland, and the N ordic countries,
and others such as Japan that have performed better during various time periods than the m arket-friend ly
English-speaking countries receive higher competitiveness scores. For instance, in 1990 Japan,
Switzerland, Germany, and Sw eden scored higher on the world competitiveness index than less-regulated
UK, Ireland, and Australia. Across all countries, however, Hanke and W alters (1997) report that
competitiveness scores are highly correlated with the Fraser Institute and Heritage/WSJ indices of
econom ic freed om , with rank-order correlation coefficien ts in the area of 0.85 .
Table 3 shows the competitiveness index rankings for advanced OECD countries in the 2000
Global C om petitiveness Ranking and som e of the sub-indices that go into the agg regate measures.
Column 1 records ranks in the GCR’s “growth competitiveness” index, which is designed to measure a
country’s standing in the factors likely to produce economic growth. Column 2 gives its rank in “current
com petitiveness”, which is desig ned to measure facto rs that are likely to determ ine the level of eco nom ic
activity . While the two indices rank som e cou ntries d ifferently, most notably Germany (poo r in gro wth
competitiveness but good in current competitiveness), they give similar scores to the UK. By either
measure, the UK ranks in upper third or so of advanced OECD countries. This is considerably above the
position of the U K in GD P per capita tables, but falls well short of the top 3 rating that the UK received in
the indices of econo mic freedom .
Why does the UK rate lower in competitiveness than in market freedoms? The lower ranking
does not reflect differences in the ran king that the GCR and Fraser or H eritage foundations give to

10
indicators of market freedom s. For example, column (3) show s that the UK is 2 nd in one GCR indicator
that meshes well with the indexes of market freedom -- the time executives say that they spent dealing
with government bureaucracies. Column (4) shows that the UK ranks 6 th in protection of property rights,
which was one of the major factors in indices of economic freedom, ahead of the US, Germany, and
Fran ce. Th e area where the UK does relatively poorly is in the provision of pu blic services. This is
illustrated in columns 5 and 6 of Table 3. The UK scores 17th in terms of overall infrastructure and 20 th in
the quality of pu blic schoo ls. While econo mists are uncertain about the contribution of infrastructure to
national outpu t, and of the effect of scho ol quality on pro ductivity, both factors surely do affect econo mic
performance.8
c. Indices for Sp ecific M arkets: Prod uct M arkets
To assess the extent and intrusiveness of regulations on business in 1988 the OEC D sent a
detailed questionnaire to member states asking about 1,300 different regulations concerning economywide and industry specific laws, regulations, and administration of laws. 9 The responses to this
questionnaire form the basis of the OECD regulatory data base, which is the most comprehensive and
detailed body of information on product market regulations across countries. The data base measures
adm inistrativ e regulations but does not take account of differences in the use of the judicial system to
regulate product markets. Since legal challenges to business operations are a greater threat in the US than
in most other countries, indexes based on the IRDB arguably over-state the market-friendly orientation of
the US economy. Only in the US do liability suits have the potential to bankrupt firms (as they have done

8

The GCR gives the UK a mixed record in use of modern technology. The UK scores among the
top 10 countries in terms of innovation but much lower in its ability to copy technological advances of
other countries (World Economic Forum-HCID Econom ic Com petitiveness 2000 Report). The Fraser
Institute measures of protection of patent rights gives the UK a rank of 14 among 15 advanced countries
(Fraser Institute, 2001, exhibit 4-3A).
9

The OECD supplemented the questionnaire with information from other sources, so that about
10 percent of the data comes from other sources. See Nicoletti, Scarpetta, and Boylaud (1999), and the
overview in O ECD (1999, chapter V II).

11
in the cases of asbestos and breast implants, for example) and only in the US are class action and
individual employmen t discrimination suits a major concern for business. 10 In addition, the OECD
regulatory data base does not really address the extent to which state regulators actually enforce
regulations, which depends on the level of state fund ing fo r gov ernm ent ag encies, the salaries paid to civil
servants, and modes of comp liance.
There are various w ays to sum marize the information on the 1,300 regulations in the OE CD data
base. In a companion report on the OECD report on the product market regulations, Nicoletti, Scarpetta,
and Boylaud (2000) use a factor analysis procedure to derive aggregate measures of the burden of
regulation in two key domains: inward oriented regulations, covering state control of industry, barriers to
entrepreneurship, and regulations of domestic markets; and outward-oriented regulations, covering
barriers to trade and investment. The scaling is such that higher scores mean a thicker and more intrusive
set of regulations – and thus one nominally less friendly to market mechanisms. Different aggregations of
the information in the database would give different measures to each country than Nicoletti, et al
produce, but would presumab ly give a sim ilar ordering of countries by the scope and depth of regulatory
practices. W e use the N icoletti et al measures in this paper.
Table 4 records the product market regulatory scores for the OECD countries. In all of the
inward oriented regulatory domains and in the overall score the UK is the least regulated economy. The
US, Ireland, and Australia also show limited regulatory activity. At the other end of the spectrum, Italy,
Norway and Greece have the most highly regulated product markets. In the outward-oriented domain the

10

There are factors that work in the other direction as well. The regulatory scale gives the UK a
lower score in barriers to entrepreneurship than the US, which is often cited as the ideal environment for
aspiring entrepreneurs. The gap between the US and UK comes from two sub-indices: one that measures
the “regulatory and administrative opacity” (attributed to the high number of administrative procedures
and services involved in business startups) an d another than measures barriers to com petition. However,
the IRDB may be misleading in this respect, because it fails to account for lenient US bankruptcy law s,
which enable entrepreneurs who fail to start up again with less cost than in most other countries. And the
OECD also failed to collect data on land-use regulations (OECD , 1999, footnote 8) which may be less
restrictive in most parts of the US than the UK or other European countries.

12
UK is tied with Ireland and Australia for the least regulated economy. Over all domains the UK is ranked
as the least reg ulated of the OE CD econ om ies, with Ireland in second place and the US in third.
Nicoletti et al (2001) have used information from the OECD regulatory data base to create a
measure of the coverage of regulations for each country from 1990 to 1996 that allows us to measure the
changes in regulatory practices across countries. They find that all of the covered countries reduced
regulations in the 1990s, but that the UK deregulated its markets to a greater extent than did the US,
France, and G ermany. In 1990 the UK w as 7 th in freedom from regulation whereas in 1996 it was at the
top of the table. This illustrates one of our major points: that the market reform stance of the UK
continued post-M rs. Thatcher.
That the UK developed a more m arket friendly regulatory regime in product markets than
Germany and France fits well with general views of government involvement in these economies. But
this does not necessarily mean that consumers are uniformly better off in Britain. The prices of some
goods such as autom obiles have long been higher in the UK than on the continent, reflecting the structure
of private product markets.11 Still, the OECD has a clear message: the UK has gone from a regime of
relatively m edium regulation of business to a relatively deregulated regim e in the period of econom ic
reforms.
d. Indices for Specific M arkets: Lab our M arkets
The labour market is arguably the most idiosyncratic market in modern capitalist economies. The
extent and nature of unionization, employer associations, and regulations vary w idely across countries,
leading many analysts to try to explain differences in economic performance across countries in terms of
differences in labour market institutions (for example Bruno and Sachs, 1985; Calmfors and Driffil, 1988;
Freeman, 1998; OECD, 1999). To do this, these analysts have developed ratings of country wage-setting
institutions and employment protection legislation, and have estimated union density and collective

11

In April 2000, the UK C ompetition Commission issued a report finding that new car prices were
about 10 percent higher in the U K than elsewhere in the EU – see D etroit New s (2000).

13
bargaining coverage.
Table 5 shows how different analysts ranked countries by their degree of centralization of wagesetting from the early 1980s to the mid 1990s. In this table a high number means that the analyst regards
the wage setting system as highly centralized while a low number means that the analyst regards the
system as decentralized. Most analysts built their rankings from a limited number of “facts”(such as
whether there is a central union negotiating body, whether there is one bargaining federation or many,
etc.) analogous to the way the freedom or competitiveness indices are constructed. Several of the
rankings give rise to ties betw een countries b ecause the underlying facts are sim ilar. Still, there is
subjectivity in the building blocks chosen and, perhaps m ore im portantly, in the weights that analysts
accord them in aggregating to a single statistic. While analysts generally place the same countries at the
top or bottom of the table in terms of market-based wage setting, there are some notable differences (for
instance, in rating Japan or France). The UK is invariably among the countries that have more market
based wage-setting. Over the period of reforms, the UK moved up the rankings as it shifted from a
collectively bargained system of wage-setting to a largely market determined system. New Zealand
followed a sim ilar pattern.
But rankings can only tell us about changes in relative position. The final co lum n in the table
gives absolute changes in centralization of wage-setting as summarized by Elmeskov, Martin, and
Scarpetta (1998). They code countries from 1 (decentralized wage setting) to 3 (coordinated or
centralized) and specify periods of change. Eight countries change their wage-setting stance in the period
they covered, with five moving towards less centralized institutions while the Netherlands, Ireland, and
Italy moved in the opposite direction.
Quantitative data on the extent of unionism and collective bargaining coverag e in the U K confirm
this picture of movement toward more market-oriented wage-setting. In 1980 approximately 50% of UK
workers were unionized and 70% were covered by collective bargaining (see Appendix Table 5). By
contrast, twenty-odd years later, in 1997, 30% of UK w orkers were unionized and only 44% w ere covered

14
by collective bargaining. Relative to its major European competitors, the UK has a smaller fraction of
nonunion workers who are covered by collective bargaining. France, w hich has a very low rate o f
unionization, has a very high rate of collective bargaining coverage because of laws that extend union
contracts to nonunion workplaces. Germany lies somewhere between the UK and France. Over the
1980s and 1990s unionization and collective bargaining coverage remained roughly stable in Germany,
compared to the declines in the UK. This reflects a more general pattern of divergence among OECD
countries in the im portance of union ism in the labour m arket.
In addition to having different institutions for wage-setting, advanced countries have different
rules th at regulate emp loym ent ad justm ents. E U coun tries like Spain, Portugal and Italy m ake it difficult
to lay off w orkers w ith perm anent contracts, while German y and Belgium m ake it difficult to hire
temporary labor. All continental EU coun tries have w orks councils and require managem ent to consult
with those cou ncils abou t plant closings, which invariably delay s closures and increases their cost.
Employment protection policies effectively shift the property rights of a job from management to the
incumb ent w orker. Sev eral analysts have stressed the role of em ploy ment pro tection legislation (E PL) in
constraining em ployer’s flexibility and ultimately holding down the rate of em ploym ent growth (L azear,
1990; Bertola, 1990; Grubb and Wells, 1993).
Com parisons of EPL across countries show that throughout the past two decades the UK w as
among the least restrictive countries on the rights of employers to alter employment at will. In the 1994
Jobs Study the O EC D ranked the UK in fourth place in terms of reliance on m arket forces as op posed to
EPL intervention in the labour m arket. Table 6 records rating s of the strictness of the EPL regulations in
the late 1980s and late 1990s by the OECD. The scores given to the regulations are scaled so that low
values (m inimum of 0) imply little em ploy ment pro tection while high values (m axim um of 6) imply
considerable employment protection. The A measures in columns 1, 2, and 4 are based on data for
regular contracts and temporary contracts. The B measures (in column 4, for the late 1990s only) add
additional information on regulations covering collective dismissals. All the EPL measures show that the

15
UK , US, and other English-speaking countries have the least restriction s on the rights of employ ers to
alter em ploy ment at w ill. Over time, however, the difference betw een the U K and E U coun tries with
more restrictive legislation declined over this period, as other EU countries weakened their regulation of
regular contracts and eased the rules on temporary contracts. Because the UK had relatively weak
regulations to begin with, employment protection legislation is an area where most other EU countries
have moved their policies closer to those of the UK, though substantial differences in employment
protection remain.
e. Indices of Specific M arket: Business Form ation a nd C apital M arkets
To assess the ease of starting a new business, researchers in corporate finance hav e gath ered data
on regulations covering start-ups (Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, 2000). Columns 1-3 of
Table 7 summarize their analysis in terms of three broad measures of the ease of business formation: the
estimated num ber of procedures needed to start a business, the estimated time to m eet those requirements;
and the estimated direct and indirect cost of m eeting the req uirem ents relative to GD P per capita.
Djankav et al not the wide variation in these measures: “T o meet go vernment requirem ents fo r starting to
operate a business in Austria, an entrepreneur must complete 12 procedures taking at least 154 days and
pay US$1 1,612 in government fees” (Djankov, et al, p. 1). This compares with 4 procedures that take 7
days at a cost of $2806 in the US and even less in Canada (D jankov, et al, Table III). The UK is number 2
in terms of the estimated costs of forming a business relative to GDP, right behind New Zealand and
ahead of the US.
To assess the protection given to investors to invest or loan money to firms, La Porta, Lopez-deSilanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1999) have developed indices of the rights of investors and creditors in the
various countries. Columns 4-7 of Table 7 present their summary measures of the assessment of law and
order in the cou ntry (on a scale from 0 to 10), based on the International Co untry Risk G uide, and their
indices of shareholder rights (scale of 0 to 4) and creditor rights (scale of 0 to 5). The majority of the
advanced countries obtain the highest value in the rule of law measure, while some of the lower income

16
countries scoring substantially lower than the maximum 10 score. There is greater variation in the
protections given to shareholders and creditors, at least by these measures. The US, for instance, provides
considerable anti-director protection while Italy does not; whereas the UK provides considerable creditor
rights while France does not. La Porta et al (1999) show that the different legal codes produce different
corporate valuations, but do not attem pt to link these institutional differences to differences in aggregate
national econom ic outcomes.
f. Summa ry
The evid ence in this section shows that U K governm ents have made co nsiderable progress in
reforming the economy in a pro-market direction over the past two decades. In the late 1970s the UK was
ranked near the middle of all advanced countries in terms of the market friendliness of its institutions.
Some indices put the UK even further down, reflecting such factors as the relatively high rate of
government own ership, exchange rate controls, and high marginal tax rates. By the late 1990s, the UK
stood at or near the top of the rankings – close to and in some cases even ahead of the US. To the extent
that orthodox economic thinking is correct and a greater market orientation of policy and institutions
means better functioning markets and superior economic outcomes, the UK should have benefitted from
these reforms by an improvement in its relative economic performance. What in fact happened?

2. Trends in UK E conomic Performance, 1960-1999
In this section we analyze the economic performance of the UK relative to the US and its major
EU peers, France and Germany, from 1960 to 2000. We focus on the relative trends in aggregate output
per capita, and on the associated trends in output per un it of labor input and labor input per capita. There
are several reasons for this narrow focus. First, output per capita is the subject of many international
comparisons, and policy-makers regularly monitor league tables comparing gross domestic product
(GD P) per capita. Second, internationally co mparable data on GDP and labor inputs are available for a
long period, facilitating an analysis of changes in UK relative performance in these dimensions. Third,

17
other macroeconomic indicators, such as the unemployment rate, are highly correlated with labor input
per capita . Finally, and most importantly, although conventional econ om ic reasonin g says that m arketoriented reform s will raise total income, there is no claim that such reform s will im prove other potentially
imp ortant outcom es, such as the poverty rate or the distribution of income. Advocates for marketoriented reform s usually em phasize the goal of increasing incom e. Taken on their ow n term s, then, it is
important to evaluate the effect of the UK reforms on total market income.
As a starting point, Table 8 presents data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) on the
level and rank of GDP per capita for 13 leading countries. Real GDP figures for each country have been
converted to a comm on currency (1998 US dollars) using purchasing power parity (PPP) adjusted
exchange rates.12 A comparison of 1960 and 1979 figures for the UK suggests that prior to 1980 UK
relative economic performance was declining relative to the US (from 74 to 68 percent of the US average)
and relative to most other countries, including Germany and France. In 1960 UK output per capita was
similar to the level in W est Germany and 15 percen t higher than in France. By 1979, GDP per capita in
Britain was 15 percent lower than in W est Germany, 12 percent lower than in France, and a little lower
than in Italy. Britain’s position in the league table fell from 3rd to 12th. Over the 1980s and 1990s the UK
did better. Relative to the US, per capita GDP in Britain fell slightly, from 68 to 66 percent of the US
average. Relative to Germany and France the UK gained slightly. Nevertheless, the UK remained 12th
among the 13 countries in the table.
The comparisons in Table 8 open up a series of questions about how the UK m ight have done
absent its market reforms. Would U K output per capita have continued to decline relative to other
countries in the 1980s and 1990s in the absence of a sustained reform effort? Or, was the relative decline

12

The PPP factors used by the BLS are very similar to those used by OECD. For the time periods
shown in the table, the use of PPP-adjusted real GDP (versus G DP at market exch ange rates) mainly
effects cross-country comparisons in 1980. PPP factors suggest that exchange rates for most European
countries (except the UK and Italy) were significantly over-valued relative to the US. Thus, 1980 PPPadjusted real GDP figures for Germany and France are 30 percen t lower than market-based figu res, while
PPP -adjusted GD P figures for the N ordic countries are 60 percent lower.

18
of the UK in the 1960s and 1970s driven by particular forces that would have come to end anyway? To
help answer this question we delve into the sources of differential growth of the UK and three key
competitors: Germany, France, and the US in the pre-1980 and post-1980 periods. We also present some
limited comparisons with Italy and Ireland.
a. Trends in the Growth Rates of G DP per C apita a nd Its C om ponents
Tables 9 and 10 summarize decompositions of the changes in the relative rate of growth of GDP
per w orking age ad ult (age 15-64 in most cases) between the U K and the key com pariso n countries. W e
analyze GDP per working age adult rather than GDP per capita to remove the variation in per capita GDP
that is attributable to shifts in the fraction of children or elderly in the population, and that are thus
independent of econom ic reforms. 13 The first three columns of Table 9 present the rates of growth of
GDP per working age adult in the 1960-1979 and 1979-1999 periods for each country. The underlying
data for the UK, the US, and Germany and France, which we plot in Figure 1,14 show that the UK had
slower growth in output per working age adult than Germany or France in the 1960s and 1970s, but
somewhat faster growth than the US. The UK also grew more slowly than Italy or Ireland. After 1979,
the UK and the US experienced similar growth rates of around 2.0 percent per year while Germany,
Fran ce, and Italy had slow er growth. Only Ireland, w hich achieved a 3.7 percent an nual grow th rate in
real GDP per working age adult, out-performed the UK and US in the 1980s and 1990s. In terms of
changes in growth rates before and after 1979 the UK performed well relative to Germany, France, and
Italy, and about the same as the US.
The growth rate in G DP per w orking age ad ult can be decomp osed into the sum of the grow th
rate in GD P per unit of labor input and the growth in labor input per working age adult. The upper panel

13

The data on popu lation are taken from U S Bureau of L abor Statistics (2000a). Appendix T able
1 presents data on the changing shares of young and old people in the populations of the UK, Germany,
France, Italy, Ireland, and the US.
14

The series for West Germany and France track each other very closely and we have averaged
them to avoid clutter in the graphs.

19
of Table 9 presents this decomposition using employment per working age adult as a measure of labor
input, while the lower panel shows a decomposition based on hours of work per working age adult. The
underlying series for the UK, Germany, France, and the US are plotted in Figures 2 and 3.15 The figures
show that all countries experienced a slowdown in the rate of growth of productivity after 1979. The
slow dow n was bigger in Germany, France, and Italy than in the UK , and bigger in the UK than the US.
Com pared to the 1960s and 1970s, when growth rates in output per worker ranged from 1.6 percent per
year in the US to 3.6 percent per year in G ermany and France, the grow th rates of outpu t per w orker in
the 1980 s and 1990s were rem arkably similar across countries. The sam e story characterizes the grow th
rates in GDP per hour. In the 1960s and 1970s the UK lagged about 1 percent per year behind Germany
and France in the growth of productivity per hour and even further behind Italy, but after 1979
productivity per hour grew at similar rates in all four countries.
Unlike the productivity trends, which converged across countries in the post-1979 period, trends
in labor input show little evidence of convergence. Prior to 1979, the UK, Germany, France, Italy, and
Ireland all had declining employment-population rates, although the rate of decline was slower in the UK
than elsew here in E urope. After 1979, the U K (and Ireland) moved to a more “US -like” pattern of rising
employ ment rates, while Germ any, France and Italy continued to experience declining em ploym ent rates,
albeit at a slower pace than pre-1979. Hours per working age adult show a similar pattern of divergence.
In Germ any, France, and Italy, hours declined at abou t 3/4 to 1 percent per year in the 1980s and 1990s,
whereas in the UK the post-1979 trend was negligible, and in the US the tren d was positive.
The implicatio ns of these shifting trends in prod uctivity and labor inp ut in the UK relative to
other countries are summarized in Table 10. The first column of the table shows the growth rate in GDP
per working age adult in the UK relative to a particular co mparison country. The second and third
columns divide this difference into differences in the growth of GD P per worker and employm ent per

15

For reference, Appendix Table 2 presents data on employment-population rates and average
hou rs per working age adu lt for the various countries.

20
working age adult, while the fourth and fifth columns divide the difference into relative growth of GDP
per hour and hours per working age adult. Panel A decomposes relative growth rates in the “pre-reform”
period (19 60-79), panel B decomp oses grow th rates in the “reform” period (1 979 -1999), and panel C
shows the decomposition of the relative change in growth rates between the two periods. For example,
panel A shows that in the 1960-79 period the UK had 0.63 percent per year slower growth in GDP per
working age adu lt than in W est Germany, and 1.02 percent per year slow er growth than in France. This
resulted from slower relative productivity growth in the UK dominating a more modest decline in the
growth of labor inp uts. Relative to the US, on the other hand, the UK had 0.48 percen t faster grow th in
GD P per working age adu lt in the 1960s and 1970s, due to relativ ely faster produ ctivity grow th
dom inating a relative decline in labor inputs.
Panel B show s that in the post-1980 reform era, UK productivity gro wth was roughly com parable
to rates in Germany and France, but the UK had stable or rising labor inputs while Germany, France and
most other European nations experienced continuing declines. Thus, the 0.8 percent per year faster
growth in UK G DP per working age adult relative to Germany or France in the 1980s and 1990s was
attributable almo st entirely to the growth in labor inp uts. Again, the contrast w ith the US is different:
relative to the US, the UK had som ewhat faster growing productivity but slow er growth in labor inp uts.
Finally, Panel C show s that the UK accelerated its econom ic performance relative to W est
Germany and F rance in the post-reform period. Relative to Germany, the differential in GDP growth per
working age adu lt shifted from -0.63 percent per year in the pre-reform era to + 0.84 percent per year in
the reform era, for a net relative gain of 1.47 percent per year. Regardless of w hether labor inputs are
measured by em ploy ment or hours, mo st of this relative gain is attributable to the larg er drop in
productivity in Germany and France than in the UK. A fairly sim ilar story emerges in the com pariso n to
France, although in this case a larger fraction of the UK’s relative improvement is attributable to a relative
gain in labor inp uts in the U K. B enchm arked to the US econo my , how ever, the U K does not fare as well.
In the 1960s and 1970s the UK had faster productivity growth than the US, but this was partially offset by

21
relative declines in per capita labor inputs. After 1979 productivity growth slowed down everywhere, but
more in the UK than in the US, though productivity growth rates were still faster in the UK (see Figures
3A and 4A). Th is was only partially offset by the bigger turnaround in the trend toward declining work
activity in the UK.
Tables 9 and 10 show that the reform era coincided with a reversal of the faster growth in GDP
per w orking age ad ult in G ermany and France than in the UK, due m ainly to the slow er deceleration in
productivity growth in the UK. They also show that after 1979 UK labor productivity grew at about the
same rate as in Germany and France, but Britain had stable or slightly rising labor inputs per capita, w hile
Germany and France had declining labor inp uts. This relative rise in work effort led to higher growth
rates in British GDP per capita after 1979. Finally, the tables show no apparent turnaround in UK
performance relative to the US. Indeed, the comparison of the US to the UK has the same character as the
comparison of the UK to Germany/France. The US had a smaller productivity slowdown than the UK
and a bigger rise in the rate of growth of labor inp uts, with the net result that GD P per capita rose faster in
the US than the UK after 1979, whereas the opposite was true before 1979.
b. Explanations for Differential T rends in Labor P rodu ctivity G rowth
Much of the improvement in UK econ om ic perform ance relative to G ermany and France is
attributable to the closing of the gap in productivity growth rates. Similarly, the worsened performance of
the UK compared to the US in the post-1979 period relative to earlier decades is due mainly to the
narrowing of productivity growth rate differentials. In this section we consider three explanations for the
shifting trends in labour productivity growth: relative trends in the transition out of agriculture, relative
trends in the rate of growth of capital per unit of labor input; and relative trend s in the quality of labor.

(i) The Shift Out of Agriculture
One widely recognized source of economic growth is the movement of labor from low
productivity sectors such as agriculture to more highly productive sectors such as manufacturing and

22
distribution (e.g. Feinstein, 1999). By 1960, only 5 percen t of workers in the UK w ere em ploy ed in
agriculture. In W est Germany and France, however, the fractions w ere 14 and 23 percent, respectively.
The fall in agricultural emp loym ent in these countries in the 1960 s and 1970s can explain som e of their
rapid prod uctivity gro wth in this period. To the extent that the m ovement out of agriculture was comp lete
by the late 1970s, the slowdown in employment reallocation can also help explain the greater slowdown
in productivity growth experienced by Germany and F rance than the UK or the US. Table 11 presents a
share-shift analysis of the effects of declining agricultural em ploy ment on aggregate productivity grow th
rates in the pre-1979 and po st-1979 periods. 16 To a first order approxim ation, the change in aggregate
productivity associated w ith a shift )S in the share of agricultural employm ent is !)S × (1 !R), where R
is relative productivity in agriculture. The entries in colum ns 4 and 5, drawn from sectoral productivity
data reported by van Ark (1996 ), show that R w as about 33 percent in the UK and France, 18 percent in
Germany, and 60 percent in the US in the early 1960s. In light of these differentials, the 8.7 percentage
point decline in the share of agricultural employment in Germany in the 1960-79 period contributed about
0.4 percent per year to the trend rate of growth of labor productivity, while the 14.4 percentage point
decline in France contributed about 0.5 percent per year. By comparison, the much smaller shifts in the
UK and the US had negligible impacts on aggregate productivity (less than 0.1 percent per year). In the
1979-98 period the contributions of the movement out of agriculture were small in all four countries, but
particularly in the UK and U S. These calculations suggest that the declining share of agricultural
employm ent can explain one-quarter to one- third of the faster productivity growth of Germany/France
than the UK in the pre-1979 period17. The slowdown in sectoral reallocation explains about the same
fraction of the 1.2-1.4 percentage point faster slowdow n in productivity growth in Germany/France than

16

Appendix Table 3 presents employment shares in three sectors: agriculture, industry, and

services.
17

That is the differential shift explains 0.3 to 0.4 percent per year of the 1.2 percent per year gap
in the growth in produ ctivity per w orker.

23
the U K after 1979. A s these effects are presumably independent of the reform process in the U K, w e will
factor them out before attemp ting to evaluate the contribution of the UK reforms.

(ii) Chang es in the Ca pital-la bor Ratio
Standard growth accounting exercises decompose the growth rate of labor productivity into three
components: changes in the amount of capital available per unit of labor input; changes in the “quality” of
labor inputs; and technological change or other efficiency improvements.18 Specifically, assuming a
constant returns to scale aggregate production function,
(1)

) log (Y/L) . " ) log q + (1 !") ) log (K/L)

+

) log A

where ) log x represents the logarithmic differential (or percentage ch ange) in the variable x , Y/L
represents real output per unit of labor input, q is the relative quality of labor inputs, K/L represents real
capital per unit of labor inpu t, " represents labor’s share (the cost of labor inputs divided by the value of
output), and A is an index of overall efficiency. Since different institutions and policies potentially affect
the accumulation of physical and human capital, and the rate of growth of technological efficiency, we
next decom pose the shifts in the relative trends of UK labor productivity into these three components.
Figure 4 plots the trends in capital per worker for the UK, West Germany, France, and the US
from 1960 to 1999, using data on real net physical capital stocks from M ary O’Mahon ey. To maximize
international com parability, O ’Mahoney’s series use a consistent set of geom etric depreciation factors.
Similarly, for consistency with the practices in other countries, the underlying investment series for
computer related equipment in the US have been deflated by a traditional cost-based index, rather than by
the hedonic price index developed by the US Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) (see O’Mahoney,
1996, pp. 174-176). Consequently, the growth rate of the US capital stock in the 1990s is somewh at

18

See e.g. Griliches (1970). In this framework, sectoral shifts can be modeled as efficiency
improvements.

24
slower than shown by official BEA data. 19 The data in Figure 4 show that the growth rate in capital per
worker w as faster in all three European countries than in the US bo th before and after 1979. U K grow th
rates in capital per w orker are very sim ilar to those in West Germany, but slo wer than those in France in
the 1980s and early 1990s.
If labor’s share is constant, then equation (1) im plies that we can adjust the observed grow th in
labor productivity for the effects of rising cap ital per unit of labor input by subtracting (1 !") times the
growth rate in capital per unit of labor. This exercise is carried out in Table 12. As in previous tables, we
consider tw o measures of labor inpu t: employ ment, and total hours. The first three colum ns of the tab le
reproduce the estimated trends in G DP per unit of labor input from the middle of T able 9. Colum ns 4-6
show the corresponding trends in capital per unit of labor. Finally, columns 7-9 report estimates of
productivity grow th rates in the pre-reform and post-reform eras, adjusted for changing capital intensity.
In these calculations w e use an estimate of lab or’s sh are of 0.65 for all four countries. In view of this
over-simplification, the estimates in columns 7-9 should be interpreted as rough guides to the adjusted
productivity growth rates that would emerge from a more detailed calculation.20
We draw three conclusions from Table 12. First, the growth rates in capital per unit of labor were
similar in the UK, West Germany, and France in the pre-1979 period. Thus, the relatively slow rate of
UK prod uctivity gro wth in the pre-reform period does not reflect a shortfall in investm ent relative to
employment growth.21 Second, in all three countries the growth in capital per unit of labor input slowed
dram atically after 1979 . In the reform era capital per unit of labor inp ut grew at about the same pace in

19

The capital series for all four countries are very highly correlated (r>0.99) with the series in the
OEC D International Sectoral Database (1999 edition), and with an alternative set of series constructed
by O’Mahoney (1996) using som ewhat different methods.
20

Blanchard (1997) presents an interesting analysis of the so urces of variation in labor’s share
over time. In the UK , labor’s share of G DP was 65.9% in 1960, 69.0% in 1970, 68.5% in 1980, 65.9% in
19990, and 62.3% in 1996 (Office of National Statistics, 1997, Table 1.4).
21

Recall from Table 9 that in the 1960-79 period labor inputs per capita grew a little faster in the
UK than in Germany or France. So investment per capita grew slightly faster in the UK too.

25
the UK as in West Germany (especially when labor input is measured on an hours basis), and somew hat
slower than in F rance. Based on these co mparisons, w e believe that investm ent is not the primary
mechanism behind the gains in UK productivity growth relative to its European competitors in the period
of market reforms. For example, using an hours-based measure of labor inputs, the UK had a 1.21
percent per year gain in the rate of growth of productivity relative to W est Germany after 1979 (see Panel
C of Table 10). After adjusting for the impact of changing trends in capital per hour, the relative gain was
1.10 (!0.15+1.25). Similarly, the gain relative to France in the growth of productivity per hour was 1.21
percentage points per year: after adjusting for shifting trends in capital per hour, the relative gain was
slightly larger (1.43= !0.15+1.58).
But changing trends in capital growth per unit of labor input go a long way toward explaining the
changing relative trends in productivity growth between the UK and the US. Capital accumulation per
worker slowed less in the US than in the UK (or Germany/France), and after adjusting for this fact, the
trend rates of grow th of productivity are very sim ilar in the UK and US. Using an hours-based m easure
of labor inp ut, the trend grow th rate in productivity in the U K net of capital w as 1.57 percent per year in
1960-79, compared to a rate of 1.41 percent per year in the US. In 1979-99 the trend growth in UK
productivity net of capital was 1.42 percent per year compared to 1.40 percent per year in the U S. Thus,
the changing relative trends in productivity growth between the two countries are well explained by the
changing relative trends in capital per w orker.

(iii) Chang es in Labo r Qu ality
A final source of growth in labor produ ctivity is rising labor quality, driven by increases in
educational attainment or shifts in other skill characteristics of the labor force. Availab le data suggests
that the rise in form al education qualifications was bigger in the U K than in Germany (e.g., Broadberry
and W agner, 1996), although the disappearance of the apprenticeship system in the UK (Blanchflower
and Lynch, 1994) suggests that Britain has fallen behind other E uropean countries in one area of skill

26
formation. We evaluate the impact of changing labor quality on productivity by: 1) estimating a microlevel wage equation which relates individual earnings to observed characteristics such as education,
vocational qualifications, gender, and age; and 2) by u sing the estimated co efficien ts in a base year to
evaluate the changes in the relative quality of the labor force by calculating average predicted wages for
workers in two different years, and forming the ratio of these averages (see Griliches, 1970).22 This
method weights changes in different characteristics by the same market metric (relative earnings) that
und erlies the con structio n of G DP statistics. A prob lem is that co efficien ts from different base years will
give different estim ates of the ch ange in labor qu ality w hen the m arket returns to different skill
characteristics change over time.
We use different data sets for different co untries in this analysis. For the UK , there is no single
micro data source that spans the past four decades. T he best available source is the General Household
Survey (GHS ), which has sampled roughly 10,000 workers each year from 1974 onward, and includes
detailed inform ation on both academic and vocational qualifications. W e use GH S data to estimate
changing labor quality in the UK over the period from 1975 to 1996. For the US, the March Current
Population Survey (CPS) provides annual data from 1967 onward. Comparable data were collected in the
196 0 Censu s. Pooling there data sources it is possible to construct estim ates of changin g labor qu ality in
the U S econo my over the 1959 -99 period. For Germany there are no publically availab le data sets
com parable to the GHS or CP S. The Germ an Socio-Economic Panel (GSOEP) provides micro data for a
fixed panel of households starting in the early 1980s. Detailed cross-tabulations of the age, education,
and gender distribution of the G erman lab or force (based on the M ikrozensus) are available irregularly
starting in 1976. We use a combination of the GSOEP micro data (to estimate the coefficients) and the
Mikrozensus cross-tabulations to estimate changes in West German labor force quality over the period
from 1976 to 1999 . We drop France from our analysis due to the absence of publicly available micro data

22

In practice, we constructed weighted averages that weight each worker by his or her relative
hours of work.

27
sets on labor skills and earnings over time.
Table 13 summarizes our estimates of the relative rates of change in the quality of labor in the
UK , West Germ any, and the U S. For the UK , our micro level wage m odel includes a m easure of years
of total schooling, dummies for three levels of academic qualifications (university degree, A-levels, 3 or
more O-levels), dummies for three levels of vocational qualifications, and dummies for ten 5-year age
categories, fu lly interacted with gender. The estimates in T able 13 use coefficien ts from a model fit to
1984-86 data.23 The implied rates of growth in labor qu ality are abo ut 0.2 percentage points per year in
the late 1970s and 0.9 percentage points per year in the 1980s and 1990s. The relatively rapid pace of
quality growth in the 1980s and 1990s reflects a substantial rise in averag e education am ong UK workers
(+1.75 years fro m the mid-1970 s to the mid-1990s) coupled with rises in the fractions of w orkers with
university degrees and vocational qualifications (see Appendix Table 4). Offsetting these gains was a 10
percentage point rise in the fraction of women. Since women earn substantially less than men, this trend
has slowed down the growth of labor force quality in the UK.
For West German y, our wage determination model includes a full set of interactions of gender
with eleven 5-year age categories and five education categories. These 110 cells represent the finest level
of detail available in published cross-tabulations of age, education, and gender from the Mikrozensus. 24
Comp ared to the UK , the rate of growth of labor quality in W est Germany was relatively high in the late
1970s but much slower in the 1980s and 1990s. This is because the distribution of workers across

23

We use this for comparability with the German model, which is fit to 1985 GSOEP data. Use of
estimated coefficients from earlier years give slightly slower rates of growth, since the wage disadvantage
for women is higher and the return to education is lower. Estimates from later years give higher rates of
growth of quality.
24

The edu cation categories are: a regular university degree (or m ore); a techn ical college d egree; a
“meister” (master craftsman) qualification; a completed apprenticeship; and a residual category that
includes those w ith only a high school education and those w ho started but did not finish a postsecondary program. The 1999 cross-tabulations include all of Germany. This may lead to some
dow nward bias in the trend in education over the 1980 -99 period. Over the 1980-89 period the tren ds is
similar to that observed over the longer period.

28
education categories in Germany changed only modestly, while fraction of female workers increased from
38 percent in 1980 to 43 percent in 1999.
For the US our wage determination model includes years of education, a dummy for a college
degree, dummies for nonwhite race and Hispanic ethnicity, and full interactions of gender with ten age
categories. Over the 1959-79 period we estimate that the average quality of the US workforce rose by
about 0.3 percent per year. The main co ntributors were a rise in average edu cation (from 10.5 to 12.4
years) and in the fraction of workers w ith a college degree (from 8.8 to 17.5 percent). Working against
this trend were a rise in the fraction of y oun g workers (from 31 percent under the age of 31 to 41 percen t)
and a 10 percentage point rise in the fraction of women (from 35 to 45 percent). Over the 1980s and
1990s our mod el suggests that labor force quality growth was a little faster than in the 1960s and 1970s,
despite a slowdown in the rate of growth of average years of education. Contributing factors were a drop
in the fraction of young workers and a dramatic slowdown in the entry of women.
The key conclusion from T able 13 is th at labo r force quality grew faster in the UK in the post1979 reform era than in West Germany or the US. The differential relative to Germany is 0.66 percentage
points per year. Assuming that labor’s share is 65 percent, this gap would be expected to lead to about
0.4 percentage points per year faster growth in labor productivity in the UK than in Germany. A similar
calculation suggests that relative improvements in labor force quality contributed to a 0.3 percentage
point per year difference in productivity growth relative to the US. Since column 8 of table 12 shows
that labor produ ctivity adjusted fo r trends in capital grew at about the same rate in all three countries in
the 1979-98 period, the implication is that UK productivity growth net of labor quality growth was slower
than expected in the reform era, relative to Germany and the US. The absence of data on the
characteristics of UK and Germ an workers in the 1960s, preclude any definitive assessment of whether
shifts in the trend grow th in labor quality can account fo r the bigger slow dow n in productivity gro wth in
West Germany than Britain. Extrapolating from limited data for the late 1970s, it appears that the
growth rate of labor force quality accelerated in the UK and declined in G ermany after 1979/80. These

29
patterns are consistent with the relative changes in productivity growth rates.

(iv) Summ ary of Chang ing T rend s in Productivity Gro wth
Table 14 summarizes our attempt to decompose productivity growth in the UK, West Germany,
France, and the US into compon ents attributable to the movement out of agriculture, the rise in capital per
unit of labor input, and changing labor quality. For simplicity, we focus on trends in productivity per
hour 25. Sectoral shifts out of agriculture help explain some of the more rapid productivity growth of
France and Germany relative to the UK (or US) prior to 1979. After 1979, most of the adjustment was
com plete, leading to a bigger productivity slowdow n for France and Germany than the U K or US .
Increasing capital per unit of labor is an im portant co mp onent of productivity gro wth in all countries.
Trend rates of capital growth are similar in the UK, Germ any, and France, however, suggesting that
relative investment trends have not been a major source of differential productivity growth am ong these
three countries. The slowdown in capital accumulation was smaller in the US, and an adjustment for
capital brings the productivity trends in the US and the U K into close alignm ent.
Adjusting for sectoral shifts and capital trends, the productivity growth rate in the UK in the
1960-79 period was 1.5 percent per year – 0.7 to 0.9 percent per year lower than in West Germany or
France, but 0.2 p ercent per year higher than in the US. Given the lim itations of the available data we are
unable to estimate ho w m uch of the gap betw een the U K and its major European comp etitors w as due to
slower growth in labor quality: we suspect this may be a part of the story for the UK-Germany
differential. After 1979 adjusted UK productivity growth was 1.4 percent per year – only slightly below
the rate in the previou s decades, and about equal to the rates in Germany, France, and the US. We
estimate that the UK had somewhat faster growth in labor quality than Germany or the US in the 1980s
and 1990s. The growth rate in productivity in the UK attributable to efficiency gains, technological

25

The calculations for trends in produ ctivity per w orker are similar.

30
change, and other unobserved factors was therefore slower than in West Germany or the US.
The bottom line is that while the various factors that we have examined explain some of the
imp roved relative p erformance of the UK in the era of market reform s, there still remains an upswing in
the growth of GDP per working age adult (and per capita) in the UK compared to its major EU
comp etitors.

3. Relating Reforms to Performance
Did the economic reform s adopted in the UK in the 198 0s and 1990s cause the changes in
economic performance documented in the previous section? Given the complexity and overlapping
nature of the reforms, and the difficulty of specifying w hat w ould have hap pened in the U K econom y in
the absence of refo rm, this is a difficult question. Rather than attempt to answ er it, we address a more
modest question: is there a plausible link between some of the major reforms and the economic changes
we have identified? Our analysis highlights two key facets of the change in the economic performance of
the British economy after 1979:
1. (Produ ctivity). Pre-1 979 , UK prod uctivity gro wth was about 1 percen t per year slower than in
Germany or France (net of sectoral shifts). After 1979 the gap disappeared. None of the
convergence is explained by trends in capital accumulation; some may be due to rising labor
quality in the UK. After adjusting for trends in capital accumulation, trends in relative
productivity growth in the UK and US were very similar before and after 1979.
2. (W ork Effort). Pre-1 979 , employ ment rates and hours per capita were declining more slo wly
in the UK than Germany/France. After 1979 this difference widened, contributing to faster
growth in GDP per capita. Although work effort rose relative to Germany and France, it has not
kept pace with trends in the US.
Potential explanations for the productivity resu lts include reform s that lowered barriers to
productivity growth in the UK, or that generated once-for-all increases in the productivity of UK

31
businesses. Potential explanations for the work effort results include reforms that increased the incentives
for work in the UK relative to continental Europe.

a. Productivity-enhancing Reforms
Many UK po licy reforms could have contributed to rising labor productivity, including laws that
have weakened the coverage and power of trade unions, leading to changes in union policies;
privatization of nationalized industries; the creation of incentives for self em ploym ent and share
ownership.
Some of the most prominent early reforms introduced by M rs. Thatcher were designed to reduce
trade union power. The Employment Acts of 1980, 1982, and 1984 limited secondary picketing,
abolished statutory un ion recognition procedures, weakened the closed shop, and m andated chan ges to
internal union governance (including compulsory pre-strike balloting). In addition, other government
actions, such as the privatization of highly unionized state-owned industries and the removal of contract
requirem ents to pay union-negotiated w ages, substantially weakened the governmen t’s indirect support
for unionism and collective bargaining (Pencavel, 2002). Union membership rates, which had reached a
peak of over 50 percent in 1980, declined steadily in the subsequent decades and by 1999 stood at under
30 percent of wage and salary workers (see Appendix Table 5). Strike activity plummeted in the 1980s
(Pencavel, 2002). The presence of multiple unions in the same work place, which contributed to some of
the worst excesses of British industrial relations in the pre-1980 period, also fell. The evidence shows
that the relationship between productivity and collective bargaining shifted in this period. Using data
from the Workplace Industrial Relations Survey (WIRS) conducted in 1998 , Pencavel (2002) concludes
that by the end of the 1990s union ized establishm ents w ere no less productive on average than their
nonunion counterparts. By comparison, Pencavel’s analysis of similar data from the 1990 WIRS, and
studies by other researchers (e.g., Machin, Stewart, and van Reenan, 1993) suggest that unionized
establishm ents suffered a significant prod uctivity disadvantage in earlier years.

32
These findings suggest that reforms linked to reductions in trade union power had some impact
on measured UK productivity. For example, if the 43 percent of private sector employees in 1979 that
were working in unionized establishments had 10 percent lower productivity than other workers, then the
elimination of the union productivity gap could contribute to a 4.3 percentage point gain in aggregate
productivity between 1979 and 1999. Some analysts have argued that the changed industrial relations
climate in the UK has led to a permanent shift in the prod uctivity gro wth rate (Bean and Crafts, 1996).
However, the em pirical analy sis on this is relatively limited (see Pencavel, 2002), and we regard the 4.3
percentage point gain over the entire period as a generous upper bound on the potential gains associated
with elimination of the negative prod uctivity effect of trade unions. 26
What about the effect of privatization of industries on productivity? In 1979 12% of UK GDP
was produced in publicly owned co mp anies; in 19 97, just 2% of UK G DP was produced in publicly
owned co mpanies. W hile, as Haskell and Green (2002 ) show , productivity grow th was not the primary
imp etus fo r privatization in the early Thatcher years, the widespread belief that private businesses operate
more efficiently than state-run businesses suggests that privatization of this magnitude could have
contributed to the improvem ent in relative productivity in the 1970s-1990s. Their industry-level evidence
shows that privatization per se had no large effect on pro ductivity, but that in many cases prod uctivity
increased in the period before privatization as the governm ent sough t to improve operations in order to
make the business attractive to the private sector. Labor productivity between 1980 and 1992 went up for
plants that were public in 1980 and private in 1992, with the increase concentrated in the period

26

One way in which union s might in theory have reduced lab or produ ctivity is by causing firm s to
invest less through a “hold-up” effect: a unionized firm that invests in new equipment can expect to have
to pay higher wages in the future, thereby reducing the effective return on capital (Grout 1984). Our
evidence gives no indication that this occurred in the UK. Despite the decline in unionization rates in the
UK, and the apparent shift toward more co-operative relations with employers, the rate of growth of
capital per worker (o r capital per hour) did not accelerate in the U K relative to West Germany or France.
Either the under-investment effect was relatively small before the reforms of the 1980s and 1990s, or deunionization and an improved industrial relations climate have had little effect on the investment calculus
of British employers.

33
immediately preceding privatization. They, and other analysts, have stressed that increased competition
after privatization appears to be the key factor differentiating sectors where privatization was associated
with improved productivity and sectors w here it was associated with stagnation or declines in
productivity relative to private firms or international benchm arks.
To get a rough estimate of how much this might have added to aggregate productivity growth, we
assume, as they do, that the process of privatization accounts for this improvement. Appendix Table 7
shows that 1.4% of the UK workforce was employed in nationalized industries in 1995 compared to 7.3%
of the UK w orkforce in 1975, which indicates that privatization shifted nearly 6% of the work force from
the public to private sector. While there is no single “best” estimate of the effect of privatization on
productivity, a generous estim ate based on Haskell and Green’s plant data (T able 6, labour prod uctivity
line) is that privatization induced a gain in labour productivity of nearly 20% above the private sector
increase. This would imply an increase in aggregate productivity of 1.1% between 1979 and 1999.27 W e
regard this as a generous upper boun d on the potential gains associated with privatization since it gives all
of the privatized sectors the 19% gain, w hereas productivity did not in fact improv e in some indu stries.
Another area where the UK has made major micro market-oriented changes is in the introduction
of various “shared compensation” programs which give employees a stake in the firm performs, either
through profit-sharing or share ownership. Evidence in Conyon and Freeman (2001 ) shows that
productivity is higher in firms that have such programs compared to those that do not have such
programs. Not all of the programs that the UK government has favoured with tax relief have a positive
impact on productivity, but the most important programs -- the approved profit sharing scheme introduced
in the 1978 Finance Act, which the government replaced with an all-employee share plan in 2000 -- has
an estimated productivity effect in the area of 10% (Canyon and Freeman, 2002, Exhibit 5c, based on

27

Our 1.2% estimate comes from taking the 1992-1980 rate of prod uctivity gro wth in the plants
that moved from public to private of .44 log points, subtracting the 1992-1980 productivity growth of
private plants (.27 log points) to obtain a privatization boon of .17 log points, which is 19%. Multiplying
this by the 6 percentage point shift gives an estimate of 1.1%.

34
stock market returns) to 18% (exhibit 4, based on production function estimates). Millward, Bryson, and
Forth (2000, Table 6.13) show that there was an increase in the proportion of industry and comm erce
establishm ents w ith 25 or more emp loyees having profit-sharing plans from 19% in 1984 to 46% in 1998.
Inland Revenue data also show a large increase in the number of workers who received tax advantaged
payments under government approved profit-related schemes. In 1979 approximately one quarter as
many workers w ere likely to have been covered by plans. 28 On the basis of the establishment surveys and
Inland Revenue data, we estimate that the proportion of British workers covered by these plans increased
by approxim ately 2 0 percentage points. This implies a gain in productivity gain on the order of 2.0% to
as high as 3.8%.29
The British reforms also encouraged workers to become self-employed. Appendix Table 6
shows that the proportion of the w ork force in the UK that w as self-emp loyed rose from 8.4% in 1980 to
13.1% in 1990, and then stabilized . Over the entire period, the prop ortion self-employ ed rose by 4.3
percentage points. In general, self-employed workers earn less than wage and salary workers, with about
a 10% differential between the tw o. Interpreting this differential as the result of differences in
productivity, the implication is that this reform reduced productivity by 0.4 percent. By contrast, the
percentage of workers who were self-employed in Germany and the US fell over this period, with the
decline in German self-employ ment due largely to the drop in agricultural em ploy ment.
Sum ming up the estimated effects on productivity of the change in the relation between unionism
and productivity (4.3% ) , privatization (1.1%), profit and share ow nership schem es (2.0% ) and self-

28

Inland Revenue Service, Em ploy ee Share Schemes and Profit-Related Pay: Table 6.1
http://w ww .inlandrevenue.gov.uk/stats/ giv es the num ber of workers who actu ally received paym ents
under various schemes. 225,000 received payments in 1979 under the Finance Act of that year compared
to 960,000 in 1907-98, but an additional 1,170,000 employees were granted options under the Finance
Act of 1980. Since workers may be covered by plans but not receive pay ments in a given year, these data
show a big trend but sm aller m agnitudes than in the establishm ent survey.
29

We base this estimate by multiplying the 10% productivity effect by the 20 point increase in the
proportion of workers covered by profit-sharing option plans.

35
employ ment (-0.4% ), we estimate the micro-ev idence of the effect of particular reform s on prod uctivity
may have raised UK productivity on the order of 7% or approximately 0.35% per year, which is about
one quarter of the d ifference in growth rates betw een the p re-reform 1960-79 and the 1979-99 reform
period shown in part C of Table 10, and a potentially higher proportion of growth rates adjusted for the
improved quality of the work force. These estimates are, to be sure, crude. They are based solely on
changes in the UK rather than changes in the UK relative to other countries, though we have seen that the
UK reform s were considerably greater than those in France, Germany, and the U S. W hat w e con clude is
that the estimated effects of the micro-reforms cumulate to an order of magnitude that suggests that they
explain part of the acceleration in U K productivity gro wth com pared to G ermany or France.

b. Reforms in the Incentives for W ork
Many important reform s have affected the econom ic incentives for w ork in the UK relative to
other advanced countries, including West Germany and France. These include changes that lowered the
generosity and availability of un employ ment benefits; taxation of v arious prev iously untaxed socially
provided benefits, elimination of the earnings-related supplem ent, suspen sion of indexing of b enefit
levels for several years in the 1980s, elimination of unemployment benefits for young people,
establishm ent of the R eStart and later New Deal program s to m onito r job search effort of benefit
claim ants (v an R eenan, 2002 ); lowering of marginal tax rates; and the introd uction of the Family Credit in
1988 and ensuing 1999 Working Families Tax Credit (WFTC) to improve the work incentives for
families with low incomes (Hoynes and Blundell, 2002); reforms in pensions designed to increase labor
mobility. The Thatcher era reforms sought to increase the incentive to work (Blanchflower and Freeman,
1993) and ensuing reforms had a similar intent. If these reforms exceeded those in France and Germany,
they might help explain the improved employment rate in the UK versus those (and other) advanced
OE CD countries.
Con sistent with the picture given by our indices on the labo r market (Tables 5 and 6), it appears

36
that in som e dim ensions that might affect em ploy ment, the UK did indeed undertake greater m arketoriented changes than other advanced countries. Table 15 shows that from 1965-72 to 1988-95 the UK
reduced the average replacement rate of the unemployment benefit system (the ratio of unemployment
benefits to the previou s wage) by more than an y other country, so that by the 1990s it had the lowest rate
among covered countries. B ecause unemploy ed w orkers receive other benefits – housing subsidies, child
support, and so on – the reduction in support is arguably less than that indicated by the fall in the
replacement rate. Still, the table captures the greater effort by the UK than m ost other countries to reduce
the disincentive to work. Studies that look at the impact of changes in the replacement rate and other
measures of unemployment benefit on unemployment or employment show that reforms that lessen the
payoff and in particular the length of access to benefits tend to increase em ploy ment, though only
modestly.30
Hoynes and Blundell (2002) have examined the shift in UK welfare support toward “in-work”
benefits. By shifting supp ort to w orking families, the W FTC reform should also increase em ploy ment.
They show, how ever, that any such effects are relatively sm all, in large part because U K in-wo rk benefits
are counted as income for other benefits, notably rent rebates under the Housing Benefit, so that the effect
of these reforms on incentives to work were relatively modest. In addition, the UK increased the
generosity of other welfare program s at the same time, further reducing the employm ent incentive in these
reforms. The result is that very little of the rise in the employm ent rate of women can be plausibly related
to these changes. Van Reenan’s (2002) analysis of the New Deal programme initiated by the Labour
Government gives a similar picture of modest impacts of reforms on employment. In this case, the
combination of assistance in job search, wage subsidies to employers, education and training coupled
with time limited benefits produced an estimated gain of 17,000 employed yo ung person s – a mod est

30

See OECD, Employment Outlook, July 1996, chapter 2, and Atkinson and Mickelwright
(1999). The most recent work covering the US tells a similar story, see Ashenfelter, Ashmore, and
Deschenes (1999).

37
amoun t in an econ om y with some 27 m illion w orkers in 2000 .
Some might argue that the decline in union power and increase in inequality that the various
labour market reforms helped bring about may have contributed to the expansion of employment. Since
unionisation fell rapidly in manufacturing, where employment was decimated, it is difficult to make any
sectoral link between changes in union power and growth of jobs. On the wage side, the fact that real
wages in the UK rose throughout the 1980s and 1990s makes it hard to tell a story in which declining
wages created em ploym ent. Similarly, the fact that groups and sectors where wages increased the most
had the biggest increase in employment also raises doubts about any simple micro reform-job creation
story. The biggest problem in assessing the contribution of the reform s on em ploym ent from micro
studies is, of course, that the macro-performance of the British economy dominates overall employment
patterns. In the 1980s through the early 1990s the UK had relatively high unemployment despite the
various economic reforms because of poor macro-economic policy and outcomes. The adverse effects of
high and rising unemp loyment masked any positive effects of micro-institutional changes on labor market
outcomes. From the mid 1990s to early 2000s the employment-creating effects of an extended boom
dominated any impacts of micro-reforms on outcomes. If the market-oriented policy reforms in the
labour m arket contributed to the length and extent of the econ om ic exp ansion they would indeed help
explain the good performance of the UK in employment in this period, but such a contribution cannot be
readily determined from micro-economic data.

c. An alternative approach
There is an other way to assess the impact of the UK reform s on econ om ic perform ance. This is
to relate country-level economic performance to indicators of market-oriented institutions and policies
such as the Fraser Institute Index (FII), and then use the estimated coefficients to estimate how much the
UK reforms affected UK outcomes. As with other cross-country analyses, this procedure has some
advantages and disadvantages. O n the plus side, it provides a statistical assessment of purported effects

38
of reforms, with an explicit counterfactual posed by the economic performance of countries that did not
change their regulatory stance. Using the Fraser Institute data from 1970 to 1995 w e can estimate m odels
that include country specific fixed effects, thus focusing on the effects of country-specific changes in the
regulations and institutional features summarized in the FII. On the negative side, this method does not
isolate the effects of reforms in the UK per se. Rather, the estimated coefficients will reflect the
comb ined experience of all the countries that undertook sub stantial free market reforms, including those
that have not done particularly well in recent decades, like New Zealand. Pro-market reforms may have
been the right medicine for the UK but not for New Zealand. Or, reforms in countries like New Zealand
may have been overpowered by other forces. Still, it is useful to examine what such an analysis shows
about the impact of reform s similar to those adop ted in the U K on advanced countries in general.
Table 16 records the coefficients and standard errors for a set of cross-country regressions of the
level and grow th of various macro-econom ic outcom es on the Fraser In stitute Indexes reported in Table
1. Since the FII is reported every five years, the calculations relate to five year intervals starting in 1970.
When the dependent variable is the log of the level of an outcome, it refers to average over the same five
year period. Wh en the dependent variable is the log change in the outcome, it refers to the ensuing five
year period: thus, the FII for 1970 is related to the change from 1970 to 1975. For 1995, the change
relates to 1995-199 9, adjusted to allow for the fact that this change covers 4 rather than 5 years.
Each line in the table comes from a separate regression. The odd numbered regressions include
unrestricted year effects, and are effectively pooled cross-sectional com pariso ns across coun tries with
different levels of the FII. The even numbered regressions include both y ear and country dumm ies: these
models relate changes in the dependent variable to changes in the FII within countries, while controlling
for average changes across countries that had no change in the value of the FII.
The odd-num bered estim ates that hav e the dependent variable in levels show that countries with
greater market freedoms have higher GDP per capita, higher productivity per employee, and higher
employ ment per adu lt in the population. In part this reflects the fact that the countries with the highest

39
FII scores include the US and Canada w hile those w ith the lowest scores include Portugal and Greece.
By com parison, the odd-numbered estimates with the dependent variable in differences suggest that
countries w ith higher values of the FII have slow er growth in GDP per capita an d GDP per w orker.
Again, this presumably reflects that growth rates have tended to be slowest in countries like the US and
Canada with higher values of the FII, and faster in countries like Portugal and Greece.
Arguably, more weight should be given to the estimates in the even-number rows, which include
country dum mies, and therefore reflect the effects of reforms on the levels or gro wth rates of the m acro
outcom es, relative to past levels or growth rates in the same country. Examination of these estimates
suggests that reforms have moderate positive effects on the growth in employment per capita, but no
systematic effect on any of the other outcome variables. This is consistent with the evidence that the UK
reforms contributed to the country‘s improved employment record but raises some doubt about the impact
of the reforms on prod uctivity. Th e weakness o f the cross country evidence means that the case for a
linkage between market-oriented reform and prod uctivity gro wth must rest on the kinds of U K-specific
micro-level analyses conducted in Green and Haskell (2002), Conyon and Freeman (2002), and Pencavel
(2002).

4. Conclusion
This paper has examined two main facets of recent British experience: the market-oreinted
reforms that the UK undertook in the 1980s and 1990s; and the relative econom ic progress of the country
compared to other advanced countries. The evidence shows that the UK made greater market reforms
than most other advanced countries and that it arrested the nearly century-long trend pattern of decline
relative to its historic competitors, Germany and F rance. It is difficult to link the reforms to the improved
economic performance relative to these other countries, but at the minimum our analysis has shown the
change in the UK economy cannot be readily explained by standard macro-economic changes in labor or
capital. Related studies present some of the more micro-based evidence that we used to judge the

40
contribution of the reforms, and examine some of the accompanying costs. Absent a unequivocal
counterfactual of what would have happened had UK not proceeded with its reforms, we cannot
definitively judge the market reforms, though weighing the diverse evidence, they do seem to have played
a positive role in aggregate econo mic grow th.

41
Bibliography
Ashenfelter, O rley, D avid Ash mo re, Olivier D eschenes. 1999. D o Unem ploy ment Insurance Recipients
Actively Seek W ork? Rando mized Trials in F our U.S. States,” NBE R W 698 2 (Feb).
Atkinson, A.B. and I. Micklewright. 1999. “Unemployment Compensation and Labour M arket
Transitions: A Critical Review” Journal of Eco nomic Literature no 4:1679-1727.
Bean, Charles, and Nicholas Crafts. 1996. “British Econom ic Grow th since 19 45: R elative Econom ic
Decline....and R enaissance?” In Nicholas Crafts and Gianni Toniolo , eds., Economic Growth in Europe
since 1945. (Cam bridge: Cam bridge University Press).
Bertola, Giuseppi. 1990. “Job Security, Employment and W ages,” European Econ omic Review 34: pp.
851-886.
Blanchard, Olivier J. 1997. “The Medium Run,” Brookings Papers on Econom ic Activity 2: 89-141.
Blanchflower, David and Richard Freeman. 1993. “Did the Thatcher Reforms Change British Labour
Performance?” In CUP/National Institute of Economic and Social Research Conference Volume Is the
British Lab our Ma rket D ifferent? (London).
Blanchflow er, David G. and Lisa M. Lynch. 199 4. “Training at W ork: A Comp arison of U.S. and B ritish
Youths”. In L isa M. Lynch (ed) Training and the Private Sector. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press
for NB ER).
Broadberry, Stephen N. and Karin Wagner. 1996. “Human Capital and Productivity in Manufacturing
During the Twentieth Century: Britain, Germany, and the United States”. In Bart van Ark and Nicolas
Crafts (eds). Quantitative Aspects of Post-w ar European Economic Grow th. (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press).
Bruno, M ichael and Jeffrey Sachs. 1985 . Economics of Worldwide Stagflation.. (Cambridge MA: H arvard
University Press).
Calmfors, Lars and John D riffil. 1988. “Bargaining S tructure, Co rporatism and Macroeconom ic
Perform ance”. Econom ic Policy 6: 13-62.
Conyon, M artin J. And Richard B. Freeman. “Shared Modes of Com pensation and Firm Performance:
UK Evidence.” In Rich ard B lund ell, David C ard, an d Richard B. Freeman, editors, Seeking a Premier
League Economy. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER), forthcoming, 2002.
Detroit News. 2000. “Global Automotive Report”(June 13) www .detnews.com/2000.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2000. “The
Regulation of Entry,” N BE R W P #7 892 (September).
Farb er, Henry S. and Bruce Western. 2000. “Roun d Up The U sual S uspects: The D ecline of Union s in
The Private Sector, 1973-1998.” Princeton University Industrial Relations Section Working Paper #437
(April).
Federal Republic of Germany, Federal Statistical O ffice. 1998 . Statistiches Jahrbuch. (Wiesbaden,
Germ any: Statistiches Bundesamt).

42
Feinstein, C harles H. 1999 . “Structural Change in the Developed Coun tries During the Tw entieth
Century”. Oxford Review of Economic Policy 15 (Winter): 35-55.
Fraser Institute. 2001 . Econo mic Freedom of The World 2001 Annual Report. ww w.fraserinstitute.ca.
Freeman, Richard B. 1998. “Spurts in Union Growth: Defining Moments and Social Processes” in The
Defining M oment: The Great Depression and the A merican Economy in the Tw entieth Century. Michael
Bordo, Claudia Goldin, and Eugene White (editors). University of Chicago Press for NBER.
Green, Richard and Jonathan Haskell. “Seeking a Premier League Econom y: the Role of Privatisation.”
In Richard Blund ell, David C ard, an d Richard B. Freeman, editors, Seeking a Premier League Economy.
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER), forthcoming, 2002.

Griliches, Z vi. 1970. “Notes on the Role of Education in Production F unctions and Growth Accounting ”.
In W . Lee Hansen , ed., Education, Income and Human C apital. (New York: Columbia University Press).
Grout, Paul A.. 1984. “Investment and Wages in the Absence of Binding Contracts: A Nash Bargaining
Approach,” Econom etrica 52 (March): 449-460.
Grubb, David, and William Wells. 1993. “Employment Regulation and Patterns of Work in EC
Countries”, OEC D Economic Studies 21: 7-58.
Gwartney, James and Robert Lawson (with Dexter Samida). 2000. Econom ic Freedom of the Wo rld, 2000
Annual Report (Vancouver, British Colum bia Canada: The Fraser Institute).
Hanke, Steve and Stephen Walters. 1997. “Economic Freedom, Prosperity, and Equality: A Survey” The
Cato Journal 17:2 (Fall).
Harvard Cen ter for In ternational Developm ent. 2000 . The Global Competitiveness Report 2000. (Geneva:
World Economic Forum )
Hicks, Stephen. 2000. “Trade Union Membership 1989-99: An Analysis of Data from the Certification
Officer and Labour Force Survey”. Labour Market Trends (July): 329-340.
Hoynes, H ilary and Richard Blundell. “Has ‘In W ork’ Benefit Reform Helped the L abour Market?” ” In
Richard Blundell, Dav id Card, an d Richard B. Freeman, editors, Seeking a Premier League Economy.
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER), forthcoming, 2002.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1999. “Investor
Protection and Corporate V aluation,” NB ER Working P aper #74 03 (O ctober).
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1997. “Legal
Determinants of External Finance,” NBE R W orking P aper #58 79 (January).
Lazear Edward P. 1990. “Job Security Provisions and Employment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
105 (August): 699-726.
Machin, Stephen, Mark Stewart, and John van Reenan.. 1993. “Multiple Unionism, Fragmented
Bargaining and Economic Outcomes in Unionized U.K. Establishments,” in David Metcalf and Simon

43
Milner (eds.) New Perspectives on Industrial Disputes (London: Routledge).
Metcalf, David. 1994. “Transformation of British Industrial Relations? Institutions, Conduct, and
Outcomes,” In Ray Bu rrell (ed) The UK Labour Market: Comparative Aspects and Institutional
Developments. (Cam bridge: Cam bridge University Press).
Millward, Neil, Alex Bryson, and John F orth. 2000. All Change at Work?: British employment relations
1980-98. (NY, Routledge).
Nicoletti, Giuseppe, Stefano Scarpetta and Olivier Boylaud. 2000. “Summary Indicators of Product
Market Reg ulation with an Extension to E mp loym ent Protection L egislation,” OE CD Econom ic
Departm ent W orking P aper Numb er 226, (ECO /WKP (99)18) (Ap ril).
O’M ahony, Mary. 1996. “M easures of Fixed Capital Stocks in the Post-war Period: A Five C ountry
Study”. In Bart van Ark and Nicolas Crafts (eds), Quantitative Aspects of Post-w ar European Economic
Growth. (Cam bridge: Cam bridge University Press).
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). 1999. “Cross-Country Patterns of
Product Market Reg ulation”. OECD Economic Outlook 66. Paris: OECD.
Org anization for Econom ic Co operation and Developm ent (O EC D). 1999 . OECD Historical Statistics.
(Paris: OE CD ).
Org anization for Econom ic Co operation and Developm ent (O EC D). 1998 . Labor Force Statistics, 19771997. Paris: OECD.
Org anization for Econom ic Co operation and Developm ent (O EC D). 1995 . Main Economic Indicators:
Historical Statistics 1960-1994. Paris: OECD.
Org anization for Econom ic Co operation and Developm ent (O EC D). 1997 . OECD Employment Outlook.
Org anization for Econom ic Co operation and Developm ent (O EC D). 1994 . OECD Jobs Study. Paris:
OECD.
Pencavel, John. forthcoming, this volume 2 002. “The S urprising Retreat of Union Britain”. In Richard
Blundell, David Card , and Richard Freeman (eds.) Seeking a Premier League Economy. (Chicago:
University of C hicago Press for N BER, CEP, IFS).
Rabushka, Alvin. 2000. “The Director’s Column,” Institute for Advanced Strategic and Policy Studies
Quarterly Report (Winter). www.israeleconomy.org/quarterly/winter00/rebushka.htm.
Schmitt, John. 1995. “The Changing Structure of Male Earnings in Britain, 1974-1988,” in Richard B.
Freem an and Law rence F. Katz (eds.) Differences and Changes in Wa ge Structures. (Chicago: University
of Chicago P ress for NBER).
United K ingd om Office of N ational Statistics. 1997. Economic Trends. Annual Supplement 1997.
Londo n: The Stationery O ffice..
United States D epartment of Comm erce, B ureau of the Census. Various years. March Current Population
Survey. (Washington, DC : Data U ser Services Division).

44
United States Dep artment of Labor. 2000a. Bureau of Labor Statistics. “Comparative Real Gross
Domestic Produ ct Per Capita an d Per E5mp loyed Person for Fourteen Countries, 1960-199 8.
Washington DC: USDOL Bureau of Labor Statistics Office of Productivity and Technolog y (M arch).
United States Department of Labor. 2000b. Bureau of Labor Statistics. “Comparative Civilian Labor
Force Statistics for Ten Countries, 1959-1999. Washington DC : USDO L Bureau of Labor Statistics
Office of Productivity and Technology (A pril).
van A rk, Bart. 1996. “Sectoral Growth Accounting and Structural Chan ge in Post-war Europe”. In Bart
van Ark and Nicolas C rafts, eds., Quantitative Aspects of Post-w ar European Economic Grow th.
(Cam bridge: Cam bridge University Press).

Van Reenan, John. “Active Labour M arket Policies: The B ritish N ew Deal for the Youn g Unem ploy ed in
Context.” ” In R ichard Blund ell, David C ard, an d Richard B. Freeman, editors, Seeking a Premier
League Economy. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER), forthcoming, 2002.

45
Tab le 1: Fra ser Institute Econom ic Freed om Ratings:
the UK and other Advanced OECD Economies in 1970-1999

Change
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

1999

1980-1999

United Kingdom

64

63

66

79

84

87

88

22

[Rank out of 22]

[19]

[13]

[15]

[5]

[2]

[2]

[2]

[2]

Germany

80

73

77

77

81

80

80

3

France

72

60

63

63

76

79

75

12

US

77

80

84

85

88

87

87

3

Major Com parisons:

Other Developed Countries:
Australia

80

65

74

78

80

84

85

11

Austria

71

60

67

67

74

76

80

13

Belgium

91

75

78

79

80

82

79

1

Canada

80

73

79

81

84

80

82

3

Denmark

72

63

65

67

77

80

80

15

Finland

77

62

69

72

76

79

81

12

Greece

63

58

57

52

61

72

73

16

Ireland

68

61

66

67

73

86

85

19

Italy

68

54

56

59

72

72

78

22

Japan

73

69

75

76

81

81

79

4

Luxemb ourg

91

91

89

92

82

83

84

-5

Netherlands

85

71

78

79

82

84

84

6

New Zealand

69

56

64

63

80

90

89

25

Norway

69

57

60

67

76

79

78

18

Portugal

58

33

56

56

64

79

78

22

Spain

67

59

61

63

69

80

76

14

Sweden

57

56

61

67

73

79

79

18

Switzerland

88

79

83

86

84

83

85

2

Notes: A higher score denotes a more favorable ranking. In several cases, the UK is tied with one or
more other countries at the particular rank.

Source: Data from Fraser Institute, Econom ic Freedom of The W orld 2001 Annu al Report web -site
www .fraserinstitute.ca.. The figures in this edition differ somewhat from those in earlier editions, as the
Fraser Institute updated its estimates for earlier y ears, as well as adding 1999 data.

46
Table 2: Indicators of Freedom in Markets in UK and other Advanced Economies 1980-1999

Structure of
Econom y and

Legal Structure/

Freed om in Capital

Use of M arkets

Property Rights

Financial M arkets

1980

1999

UK

33

[Rank out

[13]

Unweighted Average*

1980

1999

1980

1999

1980

1999

Change

77

82

99

81

100

65

92

27

[3]

[14]

[1]

[7]

[1]

[9]

[3]

[4]

of 22]
Major Com parisons:
Germany

43

49

91

99

76

81

70

76

6

France

35

47

79

86

71

81

62

71

9

US

53

81

100

98

92

93

82

91

9

Other Developed Countries:
Australia

50

66

85

98

67

93

67

86

19

Austria

24

53

96

99

55

85

58

79

21

Belgium

33

51

93

87

91

91

72

76

4

Canada

60

79

84

96

93

92

79

89

10

Denmark

33

51

84

99

83

98

67

83

16

Finland

42

57

79

100

68

87

63

81

18

Greece

21

49

62

58

35

73

39

60

21

Ireland

51

79

82

97

67

83

67

86

19

Italy

21

50

63

90

50

82

45

74

29

Japan

53

54

94

94

62

73

70

74

4

Luxemb ourg

–

68

100

100

100

92

–

–

–

Netherlands

41

73

88

99

91

96

73

89

16

New Zealand

37

92

96

98

58

93

64

94

30

Norway

21

55

82

96

59

88

48

80

32

Portugal

10

55

95

81

35

80

47

72

25

Spain

25

46

72

75

67

85

55

69

14

Sweden

24

57

76

95

61

87

54

80

26

Switzerland

72

74

97

98

75

85

81

86

5

Notes: A higher score denotes a more favorable ranking. Source: Fraser Institute, Economic Freedom of
The W orld 2001 Annu al Report.

* The three indices that we have selected are weighted in the Fraser Index as follows:
(II) Stru cture of the Econom y and Use of M arkets (14.2% ); (V) Legal Structure and Property Rights
(16.6%); (VII) Freedom of Exchange in Capital and Financial Markets (17.2%). Thus, they make up
approximately half of the overall index. Their weights are sufficiently similar that our treating the three
equally does not pro duce markedly different results than if we had used the Institutes’s weighting scheme.

47
Table 3: Rank of UK and Other Advanced Countries in Economic Competitiveness 2000

Selected Sub-Indices
Gro wth

Current

Market Freedoms

Public Capital

Govt
Bureaucracy

Property
Rights

Infrastructure

Schools

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

UK

7

8

2

6

17

20

France

18

14

13

7

2

8

Germany

12

3

19

14

7

11

US

1

2

14

9

6

18

Australia

9

9

11

8

12

9

Austria

15

12

17

5

8

1

Belgium

14

11

19

11

14

6

Canada

6

10

12

15

9

12

Denmark

11

6

8

3

4

10

Finland

5

1

1

2

1

3

Greece

21

21

21

21

21

22

Ireland

4

17

16

13

22

4

Italy

22

19

22

22

20

17

Japan

17

13

5

19

13

13

Luxemb ourg

2

--

3

1

5

2

Netherlands

3

4

15

4

11

7

New Zealand

16

15

6

10

15

14

Norway

13

16

7

16

16

15

Portugal

19

20

20

20

19

21

Spain

20

18

18

17

18

19

Sweden

10

7

9

18

10

16

Switzerland

8

5

4

12

3

5

SOU RCE : World Econom ic Forum / Harvard Center for International Development, The Global
Com petitiveness Report 2000: (1) growth com petitiveness ranking, Table 1; (2) current comp etitiveness
index ranking , Table 2; (3) time with governm ent bureaucracy, p. 246; (4) Protection of property rights
(property rights are clearly delineated and protected by the law) p. 240; (5) Overall infrastructure (the
quality of the infrastructu re is am ong the best in the world) p. 256; (6) public-funded schools (the public
schools are of high quality) p. 268.

48
Table 4: Country R egulatory Policies of UK and other Advanced Eco nomies,
Indices from OE CD 1998 R egulatory D ata Base

Inward Oriented Regulations:

Outward-oriented

Barriers to

Regulations:

State

Entrepre-

Admin.

Econ.

Barriers to

TOTAL PRODUCT

Control

neurship

Regs.

Regs.

TOTAL

Trade/Invest.

MARKET REGS.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

UK

55

48

50

60

50

43

50

[Rank out

[1]

[1]

[1]

[1]

[1]

[1]

[1]

Of 21]
Major Com petitors:
Germany

176

210

270

140

190

54

140

France

263

273

310

230

270

103

210

US

85

126

70

100

110

87

100

Ireland

94

120

150

80

80

43

80

Other Developed Countries:
Australia

126

113

110

130

120

43

90

Austria

211

160

160

210

118

54

140

Belgium

278

255

300

240

270

63

190

Canada

129

80

90

110

100

Denmark

246

132

110

230

190

54

140

Finland

268

193

220

210

230

63

170

Greece

387

166

200

310

270

Italy

392

274

300

350

330

Japan

129

233

270

140

180

Nether

228

141

150

210

180

54

140

Norway

319

133

140

270

220

215

220

New Zealand

166

121

150

140

140

95

130

Portugal

283

146

150

250

210

107

170

Spain

259

177

230

210

220

68

160

Sweden

151

180

200

130

170

84

140

Switzerland

208

224

260

190

220

132

180

215

132
49
102

150

220
230
150

Notes: A higher score indicates more burdensome or complex regulations. Source: Nicoletti, Scarpetta,
and Boylaud, 1999. D ata on state control (column 1) from T able A3-1. Data on barriers to
entrepreneurship (colum n 2) from Table A3-2. Data on adm inistrativ e regulations (co lum n 3) from Table
A3-4. Data on economic regulations (column 4) from Table A3-5. Data on total inward oriented policies
(column 5) from T able A3-6. Data on barriers to trad e and foreign investment (colum n 6) from Table
A3-3. Data on total product market regulations (column 7) from Table A3-7.

49

Table 5: Rank ing of Ad vanced Countries
in Centralization/Decentralization in Wage Setting (Higher=More Centralized)
Late
Early 1980s
1979

1981

Mid 1980s
1984

1984

1986

Change

1980s
1986

1988

1990s

1980s to
1990s

1990 1991 1995 (coded 1-3)

Australia

10

-

9

3

3

10

8

-

4

7

2,1988+ ,1

Austria

16

15

16

15

17

16

17

10

18

17

3

Belgium

8

9

15

10

9

6

10

-

10

11

2

Canada

1

5

5

3

2

5

1

-

2

3

1

Denmark

13

12

13

10

11

12

14

-

14

17

3

Finland

12

12

14

10

10

8

13

-

11

17

3 -> 2

France

5

3

2

18

5

3

7

3

7

11

2

Germany

9

8

11

10

16

15

12

6

12

14

3

Italy

3

1

6

6

4

1

5

4

6

7

1,1992+ ,3

Japan

6

-

3

18

8

14

4

11

9

11

1

Netherlands

7

10

12

15

15

9

11

5

15

11

2,1988+ ,3

New Zealand

11

-

-

3

7

4

9

-

3

3

2,1991+ ,1

Norway

15

14

17

17

13

11

16

8

17

17

3

Portugal

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2

Spain

-

-

1

-

-

-

-

-

-

7

3,1985+ ,2

Sweden

14

12

18

15

13

13

15

7

16

17

3->2

Switzerland

-

7

7

10

12

-

3

9

13

11

-

UK

4

2

10

6

6

2

6

2

5

3

2->1

US

2

5

4

3

1

7

2

1

1

3

1

Source: OECD Employment Outlook, July 1997, table 3.4. The columns are from the following studies
included in the OECD Employment Outlook: 1979, Blyth; 1981, Schmitter; 1984 (first entry), Cameron;
1984 (second entry), Lehmbruch; 1986 (first entry), Bruno and Sachs; 1986 (second entry), Tarantelli; 1988,
Calm fors/Driffil; 199 0, Sosk ice; 1991, Lipjphart/Crep az; 1991, Layard, Nick ell, Jackman; 1995. Th e entry
in the last column is from E lmeskov, M artin, Scarpetta, 1998. In cases where there is a single entry it refers
to the entire period, with codes of 1 (decentralized wage setting) to 3 (centralized wage setting). In cases
where there are two entries separated by a date, the first refers to the period before the date and the second to
the period after. In cases where there are two entries with an arrow, the entries refer to a general trend.

50
Table 6: Em ployment Protection Indices

Late 1980s

Late 1990s

Change

A

A

B

A

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Austria

2.2

2.2

2.3

0

Belgium

3.1

2.1

2.5

-1.0

Denmark

2.1

1.2

1.5

-0.9

Finland

2.3

2.0

2.1

-0.3

France

2.7

3.0

2.8

0.3

Germany

3.2

2.5

2.6

-0.7

Greece

3.6

3.6

3.5

0.0

Ireland

0.9

0.9

1.1

0.0

Italy

4.1

3.3

3.4

-0.8

Netherlands

2.7

2.1

2.1

-0.6

Norway

3.0

2.6

2.6

-0.4

Portugal

4.1

3.7

3.7

-0.4

Spain

3.7

3.1

3.1

-0.6

Sweden

3.5

2.2

2.6

-1.3

Switzerland

1.0

1.0

1.5

0.0

United Kingdom

0.5

0.5

0.9

0.0

Australia

0.9

0.9

1.2

0.0

Canada

0.6

0.6

1.1

0.0

Japan

–

2.4

2.3

--

New Zealand

–

2.6

0.9

--

US

0.2

0.2

0.7

0.0

European Union

non-EU countries

Source: Columns, 1-3, OECD, Employment Outlook, 1999, table 2.5 Columns 1 and 2 use a measure of
protection for regular and temporary contracts. Column 3 uses a more comprehensive m easure that also
includes collective dismissal legislation. Column 4 gives the difference between columns 1 and 2.

51
Table 7: Regulation of Business Formation and P rotection of Investors in Advanced OE CD C ountries

Protection of Investors (higher= better)

Business Formation
# Procedures

Days to get

Cost/GDP

Rule of Law

required

Approval

Australia

3

3

.0209

10

4

1

Austria

12

154

.4545

10

2

3

Belgium

8

42

.1001

10

0

2

Canada

2

2

.0140

10

4

1

Denmark

5

21

.0136

10

3

3

Finland

4

32

.0199

10

2

1

France

16

66

.1970

8.98

2

0

Germany

7

90

.0851

9.23

1

3

Greece

13

53

.4799

6.18

1

1

Ireland

4

25

.1145

7.80

3

1

Italy

11

121

.2474

8.33

0

2

Japan

11

50

.1144

8.98

3

2

Neth

8

77

.3031

10

2

2

N Zealand

3

17

.0042

10

4

3

Norway

6

24

.0249

10

3

2

Portugal

12

99

.3129

8.68

2

1

Spain

11

83

.1269

7.80

2

2

Sweden

4

17

.0254

10

2

2

Sw itz

12

88

.1336

10

1

1

UK

7

11

.0056

8.57

4

4

US

4

7

.0096

10

5

1

Per Capita

Anti-Director
Rights

Creditor
Rights

Source: Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer, 2000; La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and
Vishny, 1999; La Porta Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny, 1997 . The num ber of procedures entry is a
count of the numb er of safety & health , environment, taxation, labor, and screening procedures needed to
legally start a new business. The time entry is an estimate of the num ber of days before a new firm can start
operation. The cost entry is an estimate of the monetary time and direct cost of meeting requirements as
fraction of GDP per capita in 1997. The rule of law entry is an index from the International Co untry Risk
Guide. The an ti-director rights entry is an index that measures shareholder rights (scaled from 0 to 5) w hile
the creditor rights entry is an index of creditor rights (scaled from 0 to 4).

52
Table 8: Real Gross Domestic Product Per Capita
for Various Countries, 1960-1998

In 1998 U.S. Dollars
Using PPP Exchange Rates

1960

Relative to U.S.=100
Based on PPP Exchange Rates

1979

1998

9,974

15,202

21,502

74

68

66

West Germany

9,842

17,769

24,868

73

80

77

France

8,546

17,064

22,255

64

77

69

13,414

22,254

32,413

100

100

100

Italy

7,286

15,369

22,234

54

69

69

Austria

7,666

15,817

23,930

57

71

74

Belgium

8,069

16,016

24,239

60

72

75

Denmark

9,793

16,807

26,176

73

76

81

Netherlands

9,351

16,736

24,008

70

75

74

Norway

8,120

16,244

27,581

61

73

85

Sweden

9,894

16,765

21,218

74

75

65

Japan

4,672

14,812

24,170

35

67

75

10,503

19,099

25,496

78

86

79

12th

12th

United Kingdom

1960

1979

1998

Major Competitors:

United States

Other Countries:

Canada

UK Rank (out of 13)

Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2000).

3rd

53
Table 9:

Growth Rates in Real Gross Domestic per Capita and Its Components

GDP/Capita

GDP/Labor Input

Pre-1979 Post-1979 Change

Pre-1979 Post-1979 Change

Labor Input/Capita
Pre-1979 Post-1979 Change

A. Labor Input Measured as Number of Workers
U.K.

W. Germany

France

Italy

Ireland

U.S.

2.32

2.03

(0.09)

(0.09)

2.95

1.19

(0.10)

(0.10)

3.34

1.27

(0.09)

(0.09)

3.66

1.49

(0.10)

(0.10)

3.48

-0.29

2.50

1.76

(0.07)

(0.07)

3.67

1.55

(0.07)

(0.07)

3.66

1.76

(0.08)

(0.08)

4.56

1.99

(0.14)

(0.15)

(0.15)

3.71

0.23

4.29

3.20

(0.17)

(0.17)

(0.23)

(0.09)

(0.09)

1.84

1.98

0.14

1.56

1.49

(0.13)

(0.12)

(0.17)

(0.10)

(0.10)

(0.12)
-1.76
(0.14)
-2.07
(0.12)
-2.17

-0.74

-0.18

0.27

0.45

(0.10)

(0.07)

(0.07)

(0.10)

-2.12

-0.72

-0.35

(0.10)

(0.07)

(0.07)

(0.10)

-1.90

-0.32

-0.49

-0.16

(0.12)

(0.04)

(0.04)

(0.05)

-2.56

-0.90

-0.50

(0.21)

(0.07)

(0.07)

(0.10)

-1.09

-0.81

0.51

1.32

(0.12)

(0.18)

(0.18)

(0.25)

0.28

0.50

0.21

(0.13)

(0.06)

(0.06)

(0.08)

-1.34

-1.11

-0.07

(0.09)

(0.09)

(0.09)

-2.55

-1.78

-0.99

(0.09)

(0.08)

(0.08)

-2.55

-1.24

-0.75

(0.11)

(0.08)

(0.08)

-3.15

-1.70

-0.72

(0.19)

(0.08)

(0.08)

(0.11)

-0.55

-0.22

0.47

0.69

(0.12)

(0.06)

(0.06)

(0.09)

-0.08

0.36

0.39

B. Labor Input Measured as Total Annual Hours
U.K.

W. Germany

France

Italy

U.S.

2.32

2.03

(0.09)

(0.09)

2.95

1.19

(0.10)

(0.10)

3.34

1.27

(0.09)

(0.09)

3.66

1.49

(0.10)

(0.10)

1.84
(0.13)

-0.29

3.44

2.10

(0.06)

(0.07)

4.74

2.18

(0.07)

(0.06)

4.57

2.02

(0.08)

(0.08)

5.36

2.21

(0.14)

(0.13)

(0.13)

1.98

0.14

2.06

1.51

(0.12)

(0.17)

(0.09)

(0.09)

(0.12)
-1.76
(0.14)
-2.07
(0.12)
-2.17

1.04
(0.13)
0.79
(0.11)
0.48
(0.11)
0.98

Notes: Coefficients (and standard errors in parentheses) obtained from linear regression models fit
to annual data from 1960 to 1999.

GDP per capita represents real GDP divided by total civilian

working age population (age 15/16 or older).

54
Table 10: Decomposition of Relative Growth Rates of GDP per Capita
Between the United Kingdom and Other Countries

Difference

Decomposition 1

Decomposition 2

In Growth
Rate of
GDP/Capita

A.

GDP/Worker

Capita
(3)

Hours/
GDP/Hour
(4)

Capita

(1)

(2)

(5)

-0.63

-1.17

(0.13)

(0.11)

-1.02

-1.16

(0.13)

(0.11)

0.48

0.94

(0.16)

(0.12)

(0.08)

0.84

0.21

0.62

(0.13)

(0.10)

(0.10)

(0.09)

(0.12)

0.76

0.00

0.76

0.08

0.68

(0.13)

(0.11)

(0.08)

(0.11)

(0.12)

0.05

0.27

(0.15)

(0.12)

1960-1979

United Kingdom
- West Germany
United Kingdom
- France

United Kingdom
- United States

B.

Employment/

0.54
(0.10)
0.14
(0.08)

-0.46

-1.30
(0.09)
-1.13
(0.10)

1.38
(0.11)

0.67
(0.12)
0.12
(0.12)

-0.89
(0.11)

1979-1999

United Kingdom
- West Germany

United Kingdom
- France

United Kingdom
- United States

-0.23
(0.09)

-0.08

0.59

0.92

-0.54

(0.11)

(0.11)

C. Difference in Growth Rates: 1979-99 Compared to 1960-79
United Kingdom
- West Germany
United Kingdom
- France

United Kingdom
- United States

1.47

1.38

0.09

1.21

0.25

(0.18)

(0.14)

(0.14)

(0.13)

(0.17)

1.78

1.16

0.61

1.21

0.56

(0.17)

(0.16)

(0.11)

(0.14)

(0.17)

-0.43

-0.66

(0.21)

(0.16)

0.24
(0.13)

-0.79
(0.15)

0.35
(0.16)

Notes: Entries in column 1 represent the difference in the estimated trend growth rate
in GDP per capita between the UK and the comparison country. Decomposition 1 in columns
2 and 3 divides GDP per capita into GDP per employed worker and employment per capita.
Decomposition 2 in columns 4 and 5 divides GDP per capita into GDP per hour worked, and
hours per capita. Estimated standard errors in parentheses.

55
Table 11: Contributions of Shift Out of Agriculture
to Labor Productivity Trends

Relative
Percent of Workers
In Agriculture

Productivity
of Agriculture

1960

1979

1998

1960

1979

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

4.7

2.7

1.7

32.6

West Germany

13.9

5.2

2.8

France

23.2

8.8

8.5

3.6

United Kingdom

United States

Growth Effect of
Shift out of Agric.
(Percent per year)
1960-79

1979-98

(6)

(7)

56.9

0.07

0.02

17.8

31.6

0.38

0.09

4.2

32.1

51.1

0.52

0.12

2.6

59.3

75.3

0.11

0.01

Notes: Entries in columns 1-3 represent the fraction of civilian employment in
agriculture. Source: US BLS (2000b). The entries in columns 4 and 5 represent
estimates of the value added per worker in agriculture relative to other sectors
of the economy (in percent). Source: based on data reported in van Ark (1996,
Appendix Tables 1 and 2). The entries in columns 6 and 7 represent share-shift
estimates of the effect of the movement out of agricultural employment on the
annual growth rate of labor productivity for the economy as a whole.

56
Table 12: Contributions of Capital Accumulation to Relative Trends in Labor Productivity

Productivity Growth
GDP/Labor Input
1960-

1980-

1979

1999

(1)

(2)

Capital/Labor Input
1960Change

1979

(3)

19801999

Net of Capital Effects
1960-

Change

(4)

(5)

(6)

4.39

1.59

-2.80

(0.11)

(0.11)

4.55

1.27

(0.11)

(0.11)

4.39

2.27

(0.12)

(0.12)

1.36

0.28

(0.08)

(0.08)

1980-

1980

1999

(7)

(8)

Change
(9)

A. Labor Input Measured as Number of Workers
U.K.

W. Germany

France

U.S.

B.

2.50

1.76

(0.07)

(0.07)

3.67

1.55

(0.07)

(0.07)

3.66

1.76

(0.08)

(0.08)

1.56

1.49

(0.10)

(0.10)

-0.74
(0.10)

-2.12
(0.10)

-1.90
(0.12)

-0.08
(0.13)

0.96

1.20

0.24

(0.08)

(0.08)

(0.11)

2.08

1.11

(0.08)

(0.08)

2.12

0.97

(0.09)

(0.09)

(0.13)

1.08

1.39

0.30

(0.10)

(0.10)

(0.14)

1.57

1.42

(0.07)

(0.08)

2.78

1.52

(0.08)

(0.07)

2.72

1.13

(0.22)

(0.10)

(0.10)

-1.56

1.41

1.40

(0.10)

(0.10)

(0.15)

-3.28
(0.15)

-2.12
(0.17)

-1.08
(0.12)

-0.97
(0.11)

-1.16

Labor Input Measured as Total Annual Hours

U.K.

W. Germany

France

U.S.

3.44

2.10

(0.06)

(0.07)

4.74

2.18

(0.07)

(0.06)

4.57

2.02

(0.08)

(0.08)

2.06

1.51

(0.09)

(0.09)

-1.34
(0.09)

-2.55
(0.09)

-2.55
(0.11)

-0.55
(0.12)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses.

5.33

1.93

(0.12)

(0.12)

5.61

1.90

(0.11)

(0.11)

5.30

2.54

(0.15)

(0.16)

1.86

0.31

(0.09)

(0.09)

-3.40
(0.17)

-3.71
(0.16)

-2.76

(0.13)

-0.15
(0.11)

-1.25
(0.11)

-1.58
(0.13)

-0.00
(0.13)

Entries in columns 1-6 obtained from linear regression

models fit to annual data from 1960 to 1999 for real GDP per unit of labor input, and real net
capital per unit of labor input.

Entries in columns 7-9 represent differences between growth rate

of GDP per labor input, and 0.35 times the growth rate in capital per unit of labor input.
equation (1).

See text

57
Table 13: Estimates of the Rate of Growth of Labor Quality

Growth Rate of Labor Quality
(Percent per year)
Country

Data Sources

United Kingdom

General Household Survey

Pre-1979/80

Post-1979/80

0.23 a

0.87

0.49 b

0.21

0.33 c

0.39

(GHS) microdata, 1975-96
Weights from wage equation
fit to 1984-86 data

West Germany

Unpublished tabulations from
Microcensus, 1976-99 for
110 gender×education×age
cells
Weights from wage equation
fit to GSOEP microdata in
1985

United States

Current Population Survey
(CPS) microdata, 1979-99
plus 1960 Census microdata
Weights from wage equation
fit to 1984 CPS data
Hours-based index

Notes: See text for description of method.
a

Based on changes from 1975 to 1980.

b

Based on changes from 1976 to 1980.

c

Based on changes from 1959 to 1979.

58
Table 14: Summary of Contributions to Trends in Growth Rate
of Labor Productivity per Hour Worked

Adjusted
Productivity
Productivity

A.

Contributions of:

Growth

Shift Out

Capital

Rate

of Agric.

per Hour

Growth Rate:

Labor
Quality

Excluding Including
Quality

Quality

1960-79:

United Kingdom

3.44

0.07

1.87

–-

1.50

--

West Germany

4.74

0.38

1.96

--

2.40

–-

France

4.57

0.52

1.86

--

2.19

--

United States

2.06

0.11

0.65

0.21

1.30

1.09

United Kingdom

2.10

0.02

0.68

0.57

1.40

0.83

West Germany

2.18

0.09

0.67

0.14

1.42

1.28

France

2.02

0.12

0.89

--

1.01

--

United States

1.51

0.01

0.11

0.25

1.39

1.14

B.

1979-99:

C. Change from Pre- to Post-1979:
United Kingdom

-1.34

-0.05

-1.19

–-

-0.10

--

West Germany

-2.56

-0.29

-1.29

–-

-0.98

--

France

-2.55

-0.40

-0.97

--

-1.18

--

United States

-0.55

-0.10

-0.54

0.04

0.09

0.05

Sources: Productivity grow th rates from Table 9. Contributions of shift out of agriculture fro m T able 11.
Con tributions of grow th in capital per hour estimated by m ultiplying trends in capital per hour in columns 4-5
of Table 12 by 0.35. Contributions of labor quality obtained by multiplying entries in Table 13 by 0.65.

59
Table 15: Unemployment Benefit Replacement Ratios, 1960-95

1965-72

1973-79

1980-87

1988-95

Australia

0.15

0.23

0.23

0.26

Austria

0.17

0.3

0.34

0.34

Belgium

0.4

0.55

0.5

0.48

Canada

0.43

0.59

0.57

0.58

Denmark

0.35

0.55

0.67

0.64

Finland

0.18

0.29

0.38

0.53

France

0.51

0.56

0.61

0.58

West Germany

0.41

0.39

0.38

0.37

Ireland

0.24

0.44

0.5

0.4

Italy

0.06

0.04

0.02

0.26

Japan

0.38

0.31

0.29

0.3

Netherlands

0.64

0.65

0.67

0.7

Norway

0.13

0.28

0.56

0.62

New Zealand

0.3

0.27

0.3

0.29

–

0.17

0.44

0.65

Spain

0.48

0.62

0.75

0.68

Sweden

0.16

0.57

0.7

0.72

Switzerland

0.02

0.21

0.48

0.61

UK

0.36

0.34

0.26

0.22

US

0.23

0.28

0.3

0.26

Portugal

Source: OECD . Based on the replacement ratio in the first year of an unemployment spell averaged over three
family types.

60
Table 16: Coefficients and Standard Errors on the Fraser Index of Economic Freedom in Regressions of
the level and ln change in Macro-economic variables, OEC D countries, 1970-1999

Fraser Institute Index
Dependent Variable

log G DP /Capita

) log GDP/Capita

log GDP/Worker

) log GDP/W orker

log Employment/Pop.

) log Employment/Pop.

Line No.

Coefficient Std Error

Year
Dumm ies?

Country
Dumm ies?

R-squared

1.

0.144

-0.017

Yes

No

0.593

2.

-0.001

-0.016

Yes

Yes

0.929

3.

-0.006

-0.006

Yes

No

0.183

4.

0.001

-0.011

Yes

Yes

0.449

5.

0.332

-0.149

Yes

No

0.053

6.

-0.001

-0.015

Yes

Yes

0.998

7.

-0.012

-0.005

Yes

No

0.170

8.

-0.004

-0.009

Yes

Yes

0.425

9.

1.349

-0.759

Yes

No

0.044

10.

0.351

-0.606

Yes

Yes

0.87

11.

0.005

-0.005

Yes

No

0.113

12.

0.020

-0.010

Yes

Yes

0.213

Source: Calculated using OEC D Historical Statistics (199 9); and Fraser Institute Index data as repo rted in
Table 1.

61
Appendix Table 1: Age Structure of the Population, 1960 and 1997

1960

1997

Percent
Under 15

Percent
Age 15+

Percent
of 15+
Over 64

Percent
Under 15

Percent
Age 15+

Percent
of 15+
Over 64

United Kingdom

23.3

76.7

15.2

19.3

80.7

19.5

Germany

21.3

78.7

13.7

15.9

84.1

19.3

France

26.7

73.4

15.8

19.1

80.9

19.1

Italy

23.4

76.6

11.7

15.3

84.7

18.5

Ireland

30.5

69.5

15.7

23.1

76.9

14.8

31

69

13.3

22.3

77.7

15.4

United States

Note: Based on data in OECD Labour Force Statistics 1977-1997.

62
Appendix Table 2: Employment-Population Rates and
Annual Hours per Capita, 1960-1999

United
Kingdom

West
Germany

United
France

Italy

Ireland

States

A. Employment-Population Rate (ages 15+ or 16+)
1960

60.6

59.2

58.6

54.0

53.1

56.1

1965

61.0

58.5

56.4

49.6

53.8

56.2

1970

59.2

56.6

56.0

47.4

52.0

57.4

1975

59.7

53.2

54.8

46.0

48.4

56.1

1980

58.1

53.1

53.8

46.1

48.3

59.2

1985

55.5

50.7

50.9

44.4

42.4

60.1

1990

59.6

52.6

50.9

43.9

44.2

62.8

1995

57.2

49.6

48.7

41.5

46.9

62.9

1999

59.1

48.8

49.6

42.3

54.1

64.3

1137

1096

B. Annual Hours per Capita (ages 15+ or 16+)
1960

1250

1260

1184

1132

1965

1219

1192

1130

970

-

1970

1128

1091

1084

933

-

1091
1071
*

1975

1063

947

991

847

1000

1016

1980

993

916

927

824

913

1052

1985

933

849

816

770

766

1068

1990

992

851

815

759

764

1100

1995

924

775

776

712

797

1106

1999

956

755

788

724

920

1138

Notes: Employment and population data from BLS (2000). Population refers
to the adult population (ages 16 and older in the US, ages 15-64 in other
countries). Hours data for the U.K., Germany, France, and the U.S. are
based on estimates of annual hours per worker from O’Mahoney (unpublished
tables), updated using data from the OECD and the International
Comparisons of Output and Productivity (ICOP) project. Hours data for
Italy are based on data from OECD. Hours data for Ireland are based on
data from ICOP.

63
Appendix Table 3: Employment Shares in Three Major Sectors, 1960-1998

United Kingdom

West Germany

France

U.S.

Agr.

Ind.

Srv.

Agr.

Ind.

Srv.

Agr.

Ind.

Srv.

Agr.

Ind.

Srv.

1960

4.7

46.1

49.2

13.9

46.0

40.1

23.2

37.5

39.3

8.5

33.4

58.1

1979

2.7

37.3

60.0

5.2

42.9

51.9

8.8

35.4

55.8

3.6

30.2

66.2

1998

1.7

26.1

72.2

2.8

33.6

63.6

4.2

23.9

71.9

2.6

22.2

75.2

Notes: Entries represent civilian employment shares in agriculture (agr.),
industry (ind.) and services (srv.). Source: US BLS (2000b).

64
Appendix Table 4: Changes in Skill Characteristics of UK Workers, 1975-96

Percent with
Mean Years
Period

Schooling

Higher Vocational
Qualifications

Percent with
University Degree

Percent
Male

1975-77

10.8

6.5

4.6

59.5

1978-80

11.1

7.6

5.8

57.7

1981-83

11.2

8.5

6.6

56.8

1984-86

11.6

11.5

9.0

54.8

1987-89

11.8

13.1

9.9

53.0

1990-92

12.0

13.7

10.6

51.1

1993-96

12.4

14.8

13.3

49.8

Notes: Based on unweighted tabulations of individuals who were employed
during the survey week in the 1975-96 General Household Surveys. Mean
years of schooling is calculated following Schmitt (1996). Higher
qualifications include National Higher Certificate or Diploma, City and
Guilds Advanced and Full Technological Certificates, qualifications
obtained from Polytechnical and similar institutions, and Ordinary
National Certificate or Diploma.

65
Appendix Table 5: Union Membership Rate Among Wage and Salary Employees
in the United Kingdom and the United States, 1960-1999

United Kingdom
(1)

(2)

United States

1960

41.3

–-

30.4

1965

40.5

–-

27.6

1970

48.2

–-

26.4

1975

49.4

–-

24.6

1980

52.9

–-

22.2

1985

46.6

–-

17.5

1990

40.0

38.1

15.3

1995

–-

32.1

14.0

1999

–-

29.5

13.5

Notes: Column (1) is taken from Metcalf (1994, Table 4.1) and is estimated from
union membership data. Column (2) is taken from Hicks (2000, Table 2) and is
based on Labor Force Survey data.
Column (3) is taken from Freeman (1997),
updated by Farber and Western (2000), and is based on a combination of data
sources.

66
Appendix Table 6: Self-Employment Rates in the United Kingdom,
West Germany, and the United States, 1960-1999

West
United Kingdom

Germany

United States

(1)

(2)

(3)

1960

7.2

--

--

1965

6.7

--

8.9

1970

7.7

16.6

8.3

1975

8.0

14.0

8.9

1980

8.4

11.7

9.6

1985

11.3

11.4

9.9

1990

13.1

10.6

10.6

1995

13.0

11.0

10.9

1999

12.7

11.3

10.3

Notes: Column (1) is derived from data in Economic Trends (Annual Supplement,
1997, Table 3.8), updated with data from the Labor Force Survey. Column (2) is
derived from data in Statistisches Jahrbuch (1998, Table 6.3): the estimated
self-employment count includes family workers. Column (3) is based on authors’
tabulations of March Current Population Survey. 1965 entry for U.S. is based on
1967 data.

67
Appendix Table 7: Fraction of Employment in Government or Public Sectors

United Kingdom
Nationalized
Government

Industries

General Government

United States

Germany

(Public Sector)

(3)

France

(1)

(2)

(4)

(5)

1960

15.2

8.8

8.1

--

--

1965

16.3

7.5

--

--

15.3

1970

18.7

7.6

10.9

--

15.6

1975

21.7

7.3

13.0

17.4

17.5

1980

21.9

7.1

--

--

16.2

1985

22.7

4.6

15.5

22.9

15.0

1990

21.3

2.5

15.1

22.8

15.0

1995

19.7

1.4

15.1

24.8

14.4

1999

--

--

--

--

14.1

Notes: Data in columns (1) and (2) are derived from data in Economic Trends
(Annual Supplement, 1997, Table 3.8). Government includes general government and
National Health Service Trusts (after 1991). Nationalized industries include the
Post Office. Data in columns (3) and (4) are taken from OECD Historical
Statistics, 1960-1994, Table 2.13. Data in column (5) are based on authors’
tabulations of March Current Population Survey, and include employees who report
that they work for the government.

Figure 1: Trends in Real GDP per Capita Relative to 1979 for United Kingdom, West Germany
and France, and the United States

0.6

Real GDP per Capita Relative to 1979

0.4

0.2

0.0

-0.2
United Kingdom
Germany/France
-0.4

United States

-0.6

-0.8
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Figure 2: Trends in Real GDP per Worker and Employment per Capita Relative to 1979 for
United Kingdom, West Germany and France, and the United States
A. Real GDP per Worker
0.4

Real GDP per Worker Relative to 1979

0.2

0.0

-0.2

-0.4
United Kingdom
Germany/France
United States

-0.6

-0.8
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

1980

1985

1990

1995

B. Employment per Working Age Person
0.20

Employment/Population Relative to 1979

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

-0.05

-0.10
United Kingdom
Germany/France
United States

-0.15

-0.20
1960

1965

1970

1975

Figure 3: Trends in Real GDP per Hour and Hours per Capita Relative to 1979 for United
Kingdom, West Germany and France, and the United States
A. Real GDP per Hour
0.6

Real GDP per Hour Relative to 1979

0.4

0.2

0.0

-0.2

-0.4

-0.6
United Kingdom
Germany/France
-0.8

United States

-1.0
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

B. Hours per Working Age Person

0.3

Hours per Capita Relative to 1979

0.2

0.1

0.0

-0.1
United Kingdom
Germany/France
-0.2

United States

-0.3
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Figure 4: Trends in Capital per Worker In the United Kingdom, West Germany, France, and the
United States

0.6

Capital/Worker Relative to 1979

0.4

0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.4
United Kingdom
West Germany

-0.6

France
United States
-0.8
-1.0
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

