                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           HEALTH CARE AND THE PUBLIC SECTOR


                                            David M. Cutler


                                          Working Paper 8802
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8802


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2002




This paper was prepared for the Handbook of Public Economics. I am extremely grateful to Dan Altman and
Sarah Reber for research assistance, to Alan Auerbach and Richard Zeckhauser for helpful comments, and
to the National Institutes on Aging for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by David M. Cutler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Health Care and the Public Sector
David M. Cutler
NBER Working Paper No. 8802
February 2002
JEL No. H11, H21, H51, I11, I18



                                                  ABSTRACT

          This paper summarizes the many aspects of public policy for health care. I first consider government
policy affecting individual behaviors. Government intervention to change individual actions such as smoking and
drinking is frequently justified on externality grounds. External costs of smoking in particular are not very high
relative to current taxes, however. More important quantitatively are the internal costs of smoking to the smoker.
A recent literature has debated whether such internalities justify government action.
          I then turn to markets for medical care and health insurance. Virtually all governments provide health
insurance for some part of the population. Governments face several fundamental choices in this provision. The
first choice is between operating the medical system publicly or contracting for care from private providers. The
make-or-buy decision is difficult in medical care because medical quality is not fully observable. Thus, private
sector efficiency may come at the expense of quality. A second choice is in the degree of cost sharing. More
generous insurance reduces the utility cost of illness but also leads to overconsumption of care when sick. Optimal
insurance balances the marginal costs of risk bearing and moral hazard. In the US, government policy has
historically tilted towards more generous insurance, by excluding employer payments for health insurance from
income taxation. The welfare loss from this subsidy has been a theme of much research. Finally, governments face
issues of competition and selection. Sick people prefer more generous insurance than do healthy people. If insurers
know who is sick and who is healthy, they will charge the sick more than the healthy. This differential pricing is
a welfare loss, since it denies sick people the benefits of ex ante pooling of risk type. Even if insurers cannot
separate sick from healthy, there are still losses: high costs of generous plans discourage people from enrolling in
those plans. Generous plans also have incentives to reduce their generosity, to induce sick people to enroll
elsewhere. Adverse selection is empirically very important. To date, public policies have not been able to offset
it.
          Finally, I turn to the distributional aspects of medical care. Longstanding norms support at least basic
medical care for everyone in society. But the generosity of health programs for the poor runs up against the
possibility of crowding out private insurance coverage. Analysis from Medicaid program expansions shows that
crowdout does occur. Still, coverage expansions are worth the cost, given the health benefits they bring.



David M. Cutler
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
Tel: 617-496-5216
Fax: 617-495-7730
dcutler@harvard.edu
          Governments are involved in the medical sector in many ways. The most noticeable role of

government is as a health insurer. In most developed countries, governments guarantee health

insurance to the entire population. The United States is an outlier; governments insure some, but

not all, of the population. Some governments also provide medical services. Medical care delivery

is entirely public in some countries and even in the privately-dominated US, governments run 15

percent of the hospitals. The tax side of the ledger is also important. In the United States, the

Federal government subsidizes employer-provided health insurance by excluding contributions for

this insurance from taxable income. The amount of revenue foregone by this exclusion is nearly $60

billion in income taxes alone per year, or about 15 percent of direct government payments for

medical care. In addition, governments tax goods with adverse health consequences, such as

smoking and drinking, with the idea of improving health. Finally, governments regulate health care.

Governments restrict insurance companies (what can be offered and to whom), license medical care

providers, and approve new drugs and devices before they can be sold.

          What role should the government have in health care? What is the empirical evidence about

the efficacy of government interventions? Since health care is so central to the public sector,

addressing these questions is a prime concern of public economics. I pursue these questions in

stages.

          Figure 1 shows a conceptual diagram underlying the public sector role in health care.

Individual utility depends on health and other goods. Health, in turn, depends on many factors.

Individual behaviors are important; behaviors influence health and also utility directly. The

environment affects health, more so in the past when water and sanitation were serious health

hazards than today, but even today environmental issues are important. Medical care is a third factor
influencing health. Medical care cannot be understood without analyzing the health insurance

market, its subsidiary. Other factors noted in the figure might also influence health but are farther

removed from the public sector, including genetics and socioeconomic status.1 I thus focus on

behavioral, environmental, and medical influences on health.

       The simplest situation to analyze is the health-related behaviors that people engage in. The

canonical individual cases here are smoking and drinking; both have benefits to the individual

(direct consumption value), but adverse health consequences for the individual using them and

possibly others. At the firm level, pollution has similar characteristics; it helps to produce goods

and services that individuals want, but has byproducts that are harmful to health.

       The classic economic rationale for government involvement in such activities is on

externality grounds; people who smoke, drink, or pollute cause harm to others, and these costs

should be internalized when people make their behavioral decisions. As we shall see, however, the

situation is not so clear. Estimating the external costs of smoking and drinking is not so

straightforward in part because smoking, and to a lesser extent drinking, is associated with some

external benefits, as people pay taxes over their working life but die at a younger age. There is a

spirited debate about whether these activities are on net costly or beneficial to society, and thus

whether the optimal tax is high or low.

       In addition to concerns about externalities, governments may also want to intervene to

prevent people from worsening their own health. Rational people will take personal health harms

into account when making behavioral decisions. But if consumption decisions are not rational,



       1
        There is some literature claiming that in societies with more inequality in income,
average health is lower (Wilkinson, 1996). Such claims are controversial, though (Deaton,
2001).

                                                 2
driven by impulse, fashion, or fad, taxes might be needed for ‘internality’ reasons. While it is

difficult to know how much of these costs are accounted for in the individual consumption decision,

the total internal costs of smoking and drinking dwarf the external costs, making this issue

particularly salient. Economic research on the external and internal costs of health-related

individual behaviors is summarized in Section II.

       By far the largest government involvement in the health sector is in the market for medical

care, and its derivative health insurance. Medical care markets are plagued by a host of potential

problems, presented in section III: incomplete information on the part of patients; asymmetric

information between consumers and producers about what patients really need; inability to tell

whether services are justified, even ex post; externalities from consumption; moral hazard from

insurance; adverse selection in insurance; and redistributive goals not met by the market. With such

a litany of problems, it is no surprise that free markets for medical care function poorly.

       These market failures sometimes lead governments to provide medical care directly. The

choice between government and private provision of services is an important one, and countries

differ on this decision. The central issue in this debate is whether public and private incentives are

properly aligned. Government provision is generally believed to be less technically efficient than

private provision, and medical care is no exception. But lack of a profit motive may be a virtue in

some cases. When private providers would not act in the public interest, as for example a for-profit

hospital that skimps on medical care because skimping is hard to detect, government provision may

be superior to private sector provision. The empirical import of this argument is unknown. But such

an analysis offers a lens through which to view institutional norms in the medical care field (the

Hippocratic Oath; not-for-profit firms) that have traditionally worked to keep medical care quality

high. These issues are explored in Section IV.

                                                  3
       While governments are only sometimes involved in medical service provision, they are

universally involved in health insurance provision. No developed country has an entirely private

system of health insurance, even though many countries have (essentially) private medical care

delivery systems.

       In the case of one individual purchasing insurance, there is a classic economic tradeoff that

governments must respect. Insurance smooth s the financial risk associated with medical costs.2

Optimal insurance from a risk-bearing perspective involves no out-of-pocket spending. But

insurance also creates moral hazard; people spend more when they have insurance than they would

otherwise because the price of medical services is lower. As insurance increases in generosity, the

marginal gain from risk bearing falls while the marginal loss from moral hazard rises. The optimal

level of insurance is the point at which the marginal gain in reduced risk bearing from additional

insurance just equals the marginal loss from additional moral hazard. For a government running a

health insurance system, this is the rule it needs to know.

       Even in a private health insurance system, this rule has significant import. In the United

States, the tax treatment of health insurance distorts the tradeoff between risk sharing and moral

hazard. Where out-of-pocket spending on medical care must be purchased with after-tax dollars,

employer payments for health insurance are not counted as income for personal tax purposes and

thus receive an implicit subsidy. This subsidy encourages the provision of overly generous

insurance. This has been alleged to lead to too much moral hazard, with empirical estimates

suggesting a welfare loss of up to 10 percent of medical spending. There is substantial uncertainty



       2
        As discussed below, this is not technically right. The goal of insurance is to equalize
the marginal utility of income in different states of nature. In many cases, this can be achieved
by smoothing the financial costs of medical care, but not always.

                                                 4
about the true welfare loss, however, because the relevant elasticities are not all known, because this

calculation does not account for the dynamics of technological innovation, and because the tax

subsidy may offset other market failures such as adverse selection and crowding out of private

insurance by other public programs. Section V examines this host of issues.

       Traditional analysis of optimal insurance, including the welfare loss from the tax subsidy,

has concentrated on the demand side of the medical care market, controlling utilization by making

patients pay more for the services they receive. Insurance might also affect the supply side of the

market, by changing what physicians and hospitals provide. Managed care in the United States,

along with virtually all medical care systems in other countries, uses supply side measures to limit

overall spending. Theoretical analysis suggests, and empirical evidence confirms that supply-side

measures are a complement to demand-side measures, since physicians respond to payment

incentives along with price. The optimal use of supply and demand side restrictions, and the

implications of supply side measures for other government policies such as the tax exclusion of

employment-based health insurance is explored in section VI.

       If individuals are heterogeneous with respect to their underlying medical risk, even more

problems arise. Individuals who are greater risk for medical care spending like more generous

health insurance than those who are lower risk. If insurers know who is high risk and who is low

risk, they can price policies accordingly. Individuals will be fully insured, but higher risk people

will pay higher premiums. While this is efficient ex post (after risk types are known), it is a welfare

loss ex ante. People would like to insure their risk type but do not get to do so.

       In other settings, knowledge of individuals’ risk type is limited or insurers are not allowed

to use such information in pricing. This situation might appear better than the previous one, since

insurers cannot segment risks on their own. But problems arise here as well. As people sort

                                                  5
themselves across plans, the sick will drive up the price of more generous plans, while the less

generous plans remain much cheaper. This process, termed adverse selection, leads to three sources

of welfare loss. First, the sick once again pay more for insurance than the healthy, leading to the

same risk segmentation loss noted above. Second, marginal people are induced to enroll in less

generous insurance plans, so that they can benefit from the lower insurance premiums that being

with healthy people allows. Third, plans are encouraged to reduce the generosity of their benefits,

to attract the healthy and repel the sick. Empirical evidence shows large distortions from adverse

selection. In nearly every setting without a mandatory, universal insurance plan, the sick wind up

paying more for insurance than the healthy.

       A variety of public sector activities may address problems of risk segmentation and adverse

selection, ranging from mandatory pooling in one plan (as is done in many countries), to restrictions

on what private insurers can offer to individuals. To date, public policies to combat adverse

selection short of having a single national insurance plan have been only marginally successful.

Problems arising from heterogeneity and the impact of public policies in these situations are

discussed in section VII.

       The analysis of heterogeneity brings up a related topic: whether people should be allowed

to supplement public insurance with private insurance. Were everyone homogeneous, a single

public (or private) plan would be appropriate. When individuals are heterogeneous, however,

supplementation may be a valuable option. The most controversial form of supplementation is

allowing the wealthy to buy better care than the public system provides the rest of society. Some

countries forbid this on egalitarian grounds; others allow it.          Theoretically, this type of

supplementation need not harm, and could help the poor, if the government saves enough off of the

rich opting out to afford more care for the poor. I discuss this issue in Section VIII.

                                                  6
       Finally, Sections IX and X turn to intragenerational and intergenerational distributional

aspects of health and medical care policy. The goal of many governments is to ensure adequate

quality of medical care to the poor. In universal health insurance systems, such goals are relatively

easily met. When health insurance is not universal, special programs must be designed for the poor.

The United States has a patchwork of such programs: Medicaid provides health insurance for the

poor; public hospitals provide significant uncompensated care; and even private hospitals provide

‘free care’ to the uninsured. The design of health programs for the poor poses a classic economic

tradeoff: more generous public coverage promotes health but may also induce people who would

have bought private coverage to drop that coverage.

       The health and insurance consequences of programs for the poor can be evaluated using a

unique natural experiment: in the 1980s and 1990s, Medicaid eligibility was expanded to people

with somewhat higher incomes and different family circumstances. I review the literature on

whether the Medicaid expansions crowded out private insurance coverage, and whether they led to

health improvements for the poor. Crowding out is a significant empirical issue. Estimates suggest

that up to one-half of the increase in public coverage from Medicaid eligibility expansions is offset

by reductions in private coverage. Even with this crowding out, however, some evidence suggests

that the Medicaid spending is worth the cost. Because health is worth so much, even small

improvements in health from additional insurance can justify its high cost.

       Before starting the analysis it is important to note several background points. I focus on

public sector health issues exclusively. This chapter is not a synthesis of health economics writ

large. Readers interested in learning more about health economics as a whole should consult the

recent two volume Handbook series on the topic (Culyer and Newhouse, 2000a,b).

       I also focus to a large extent on the United States. This is in many ways inevitable; the data

                                                 7
with which to analyze medical care systems are better in the United States than in other countries.

Conceptually, the United States also presents many interesting economic issues, since the range of

institutions and observed outcomes is much greater.

       Finally, I note the crucial distinction between health and medical care. Good health is what

people want; medical care is a means to that end. I shall use the terms health and medical care

precisely, with one exception: I shall write about health insurance and not medical care insurance.

While the latter is technically more appropriate, the former is too ingrained in the literature for me

to do otherwise.

       Before turning to the analytic issues about the public sector role in health care, I start in the

next section by providing more background on medical systems generally and the role of the public

sector in those systems.



I.     Medical Care and the Public Sector



       The medical sector is a large part of most developed countries. The average country in the

OECD3 spent 8 percent of national income on medical care in 1995. The high was 14 percent (the

United States); the low was 6 percent (Greece). Further, the medical sector is growing rapidly.

Since 1929, the earliest year for which we have data, medical care in the United States has increased

at a rate of 3.8 percent in real, per person terms. GDP growth, in comparison, has been only 1.7

percent, more than 2 percentage points lower. This differential is large in other countries as well.



       3
         Throughout this section, I consider the 23 most developed countries in the OECD,
omitting Turkey and newer members such as the Czech Republic, Hungary, Korea, Mexico, and
Poland.

                                                  8
Medical spending in the average OECD country increased over 2 percentage points more rapidly

than GDP growth between 1960 and 1995.

       Governments pay for a significant share of medical expenses, as Figure 2 shows. In the

United States, governments pay for nearly 50 percent of medical spending. This is the lowest in the

OECD. The average share is 76 percent, and ranges as high as 93 percent (Luxembourg).

Government wasn’t always so important. In 1929, governments in the United States accounted for

14 percent of medical spending. As late as 1965, the government’s share was only one-quarter.

       By another metric, nearly 20 percent of Federal government spending in the United States

is devoted to medical care, with a similar share for state and local governments.

       Understanding what government does in the medical sector requires more detail about that

sector. Figure 3 depicts the medical sector in a fundamental fashion, via the medical care triad.

There are three actors in the medical care system, shown as the points on the triad: patients,

providers, and insurers. Patients pay money to insurers, and sometimes directly to providers.

Insurers pay for the bulk of medical services, and also set rules on when and where patients can seek

care. Providers diagnose medical problems, recommend appropriate treatment, and provide those

treatments.

       Governments can be involved in the medical care system at several levels (Besley and

Gouveia, 1994). Some countries have a largely private system of insurance and medical care

delivery, with government having a predominantly regulatory role. The United States is an example

of such a system, as table 1 shows. It is the only developed country without universal insurance

coverage.     Other countries, including Canada and Germany, have public insurance with

predominantly private providers. Finally, some countries have public insurance and public

ownership of medical care delivery. The United Kingdom is a leading example of this type of

                                                 9
country.

       The history of the public sector in medical care is a movement towards increasing

government involvement (Cutler and Johnson, 2001). The first government health insurance system

was enacted by Bismarck in the 1880s; health insurance was created with Old Age Insurance to give

people a stake in the survival of the state. The United Kingdom introduced a health insurance

program for the poor early in the 20th century. But such programs were small because medical care

could not do a lot. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, effective medical treatments were rare

and medical costs were not highly variable. Medical insurance became more valuable for reasons

other than redistribution as spending became more variable.

       It wasn’t until after World War II that medical care insurance became a priority. The

efficacy of penicillin was demonstrated around that time, and advances in surgery were made. With

technological change came variability in medical spending; having access to the medical sector

became more important. The post-World War II period saw a flowering of health insurance and

provision systems (Cutler, 2001). The British set up the first truly national medical care system in

1946. The NHS provided insurance and delivered medical services. This was followed in

subsequent decades by other European countries and Canada. Generally, the later the country

established national insurance, the less the government became involved in medical care delivery

and the more it took an insurance role.

       The United States was relatively late to enact public insurance. Private insurance coverage

grew steadily during and after World War II, but there was no significant public insurance until

Medicare and Medicaid were created in the mid-1960s. And while the United States has tinkered

with these systems continuously since then, there have been no major expansions in public insurance



                                                 10
since that point.4

        Because so much research on health economics is conducted using US data, it is instructive

to describe that system in more detail. Table 2 shows the sources of insurance coverage in the

United States. There are two significant public programs for medical care. Medicare is the larger

program, spending about $200 billion annually, or one-fifth of total medical care spending.

Essentially everyone over age 65 is eligible for Medicare, along with the blind and disabled and

people with end-stage kidney failure.5 Medicare insures 14 percent of the population.

        Most Medicare beneficiaries (about 85 percent) are in the traditional fee-for-service

insurance plan. Beneficiaries in that plan have complete choice about which providers to see. But

covered services are limited. Unlike essentially all private insurance policies, the traditional

Medicare program does not cover outpatient prescription drugs. It also does not cover chronic need

for long-term care services such as a nursing home or home health aid, although this is generally

absent from private policies as well. In total, Medicare beneficiaries account for 37 percent of

medical costs. This share is greater than Medicare’s share of spending (about 20 percent of total

costs), reflecting the relatively limited scope of Medicare covered services.

        About 15 percent of Medicare beneficiaries are in managed care arrangements. Medicare

pays managed care plans a fixed amount for each person they enroll. Because the payments

traditionally did not account for adverse selection adequately, these payment were believed to

exceed the cost of caring for Medicare beneficiaries. Medicare lost money when people enrolled


        4
         The Medicaid expansions of the late 1980s and early 1990s, discussed in Section IX,
were the most significant insurance expansions since then.
        5
         Formally, eligibility is for workers or dependents of workers with 40 quarters of Social
Security covered earnings. Only a few percent of the elderly are not eligible for Medicare. The
disabled are on Medicaid until they qualify for Medicare.

                                                11
in managed care (Sing, Brown, and Hill 1998). Medicare is now implementing a system to more

accurately account for adverse selection in plan payments, as discussed in Section VII.

       Medicaid is the other major public insurance program. Medicaid eligibility is more

heterogeneous. Two-thirds of program enrollees are poor, non-elderly women and children. These

beneficiaries were traditionally in fee-for-service policies but increasingly have been enrolled in

managed care plans. The blind and disabled are another recipiency group, prior to Medicare

eligibility. Medicare eligibles can receive Medicaid if they have low incomes, or if their medical

spending makes them have low disposable income. For these “dual eligibles”, Medicaid will pay

for cost sharing required by Medicare and uncovered services such as prescription drugs and long-

term care. Because the elderly and disabled are more expensive than women and children, program

spending is distributed relatively equally between the non-elderly poor, the blind and disabled, and

the elderly. Fourteen percent of people have Medicaid as their primary insurance policy; these

people in total account for 8 percent of medical spending.6

       Finally, there are other, small public programs, including services for veterans, Native

Americans, and dependents of active duty military personnel. These insure 1 percent of people and

account for 5 percent of total medical spending.

       The vast bulk of the non-elderly population (90 percent of those with insurance) has

insurance through employment; only 10 percent of private insurance is purchased individually. The

reason for this predominance of employment-based insurance is the tax subsidy to employer-

provided health insurance, discussed below. Private insurance spending accounts for nearly half of

total medical spending.


       6
        People with both Medicare and Medicaid coverage are included in the Medicare row,
since Medicare is their primary insurance policy.

                                                12
       Finally, about 12 percent of the population is uninsured.7 Such people still receive care and

account for about 4 percent of medical spending.8 But uninsured people do not pay for all of their

utilization. The average uninsured person pays for only 44 percent of the medical services he uses.

Part of the rest is financed by other government programs (for example, the Veterans Administration

system), while another part is financed indirectly, by providers marking up the bills to other payers

and using the additional revenues to offset the losses of the uninsured.



II.    Public Policy for Health-Related Behaviors



       Individual and firm behaviors are a clear factor affecting health, both positively and

negatively. Smoking and drinking reduce health, while exercise and vitamin consumption improve

health. At the firm level, pollution and the work setting also affect health. I start the analytic

analysis of government policy for health care by considering health-related behaviors. At first

glance, the analysis of health-related goods is no different than the analysis of any other good. If

people value consumption of cigarettes and are willing to pay the monetary and health consequences

of their actions, public policy need not intervene in this decision. This analysis is incomplete for

two reasons, however. First it ignores external effects – the harms these behaviors bring to others

that the individual smoker or drinker does not take into account. Governments may want to tax or

subsidize these activities to get people to account for these effects. Second, people may not make


       7
         Different surveys give somewhat different estimates of the uninsured population. The
most commonly used number is about 15 percent, from the Current Population Survey. The
MEPS data in table 2 show slightly lower shares, but the difference is not important in this
context.
       8
           Out-of-pocket payments in total account for one-fifth of medical spending.

                                                 13
be more appropriate.10

       Historically, government action was much more important than taxation or subsidies in

promoting health-improving behavior. Early in the 20th century, for example, the government

cleaned the water supply and built sewers to improve population health, when it could alternatively

have taxed dirty water or poor sanitation. In the case of these public health improvements, the gains

were so large (Preston, 1996) that government action may have been the efficient solution.



II.2   Estimating External Consequences of Smoking and Drinking

       There has been a spirited economic debate about the optimal Pigouvian taxes on smoking

and to a lesser extent drinking.11 The issue is particularly difficult because it is not even clear

whether these goods have negative external costs. Although smokers use more medical services for

smoking-related illnesses than non-smokers, they also die at younger ages. As a result, smokers pay

into social programs such as Social Security and Medicare throughout their working lives, but

collect much less in old age. This death benefit offsets some or all of the fiscal costs of smoking.



       Table 3 summarizes the literature on the external costs of smoking and drinking. The start

of any such analysis is defining internal and external costs. Damages that the smoker suffers as a

result of smoking are clearly internal. But are damages to other household members from second-



       10
          Taxation and regulation also differ in situations of uncertainty. Taxes allow quantities
to vary in situations where demand shocks change the marginal value of the good, while
regulation does not. Such variability may or may not be valuable, depending on the sensitivity
of social damages to changes in consumption (Weitzman, 1974).
       11
         See Chaloupka and Warner (2000) and Cook (2000) for discussions of the economics
of smoking and drinking respectively.

                                                 17
hand smoke? What about damages to an unborn fetus from a pregnant woman smoking? There is

no obvious answer here. The most common assumption is that the family is the unit of decision-

making, so that consequences of smoking and drinking for other family members are internalized.12

       One must then specify the external costs to consider. The most important financial costs are

medical care payments financed by insurance (either public or private), and Social Security

payments net of taxes paid in. Other more minor costs include life and disability insurance premia,

and the costs of fires from smoking. Possible health consequences from second-hand smoke are

more controversial. While the literature is clear that there are adverse health consequences for some

conditions such as childhood respiratory illnesses, there is more uncertainty about more costly

illnesses such as cancer and cardiovascular disease in adults.

       The first complete analysis of the external costs of smoking and drinking was presented in

Manning et al. (1989, 1991).13 Consistent with the literature at the time, Manning et al. assumed no

external costs from secondhand smoke. Thus, the only external costs they consider are financial.

Manning et al. conclude that the external costs of smoking are modest, ranging from -$.91 to $.24

per pack with different discount rates. The high estimates of external costs are associated with high

discount rates; at those rates, the external benefits of smokers dying young are minimized. With no

or low discounting, the external costs of cigarette usage are negative.




       12
          One could assert that some effects outside of the family are internalized. If a person
chooses to ride in a car with a friend who drives drunk and kills them both, the death of the
passenger is counted as an external cost but is conceptually similar to a fully-informed decision
to live with a smoker.
       13
           The relation between smoking and Social Security payments was first noted by Shoven
et al. (1989).

                                                 18
       Current cigarette taxes are substantially greater than this amount.14 Formal cigarette taxes

at the Federal and state level average about $.75 per pack in the United States. The recent Master

Settlement Agreement between the states and tobacco companies resulted in price increases of about

$.45 per pack, effectively a further increase in taxes (Cutler et al., 2000, 2002).15 Thus, by these

estimates cigarette taxes are well above the optimal tax based on externalities alone. This

conclusion has been refined by Viscusi (1995), with similar findings.

       The conclusion that cigarettes are overtaxed has drawn several critiques. One critique is the

omission of damages from second-hand smoke. Although the scientific evidence on the effect of

secondhand smoke on illness is still sketchy, some estimates indicate very large effects on health

(Environmental Protection Agency, 1992; Glantz and Parmley, 1995). Related to this issue is the

assumption that the family is the unit of decision-making and not the individual. If the individual

were the unit of analysis, external effects such as damages from secondhand smoke within the

family and the increased probability of pregnant women having low birthweight infants would also

enter into the analysis. Such effects can be very large. Viscusi (1995), for example, estimates that

the external costs of secondhand smoke including lung cancer and heart disease may be $.10 or more

per pack. Evans, Ringel, and Stech (1999) conclude that the external costs of smoking including

maternal behavior are extremely high, ranging from $.42 to $.72 per pack. Current cigarette taxes

are not unreasonable given these estimates.



       14
          Taxation is not the only government involvement in smoking. There is a long history
of cigarette regulations, including bans on radio and television advertisements, minimum
purchase and consumption ages, and restrictions on smoking in public places. On the other side
are subsidies to tobacco farmers. Generally, the literature finds that non-price policies do affect
consumption, although the effects are relatively modest (Chaloupka and Warner, 2000).
       15
            And in some other countries, cigarette taxes are even greater.

                                                  19
        The third, and more fundamental critique, has to do with the exclusion of internal costs. This

analysis implicitly assumes that individuals know about and adequately incorporate all adverse

health consequences to themselves. I return to this assumption below.

        Estimates of the external costs of drinking are complicated by the fact that not all drinking

is associated with adverse consequences. Most of the external costs of drinking result from

substantial drinking at one time – generally defined as alcohol above 2 ounces per sitting. About

40 percent of alcohol consumed is believed to be above this level. If taxes change the share of heavy

drinkers in comparison to light drinkers, it will also change the Pigouvian tax rate.

        The bottom panel of table 3 shows the estimates of the external costs of drinking. Manning

et al. estimated the external costs of alcohol at $1.19 per excess ounce of alcohol (in 1986 dollars).

The most important external costs are from with motor vehicle fatalities resulting from drunk

driving. Since these occur shortly after the drinking episode, the estimates of external costs are not

very sensitive to the discount rate chosen.

        Current alcohol taxes in the United States are below the optimal tax rates shown in Table 3.

Federal, state and local taxes are about $.27 cents per ounce for spirits, $.13 cents per ounce for beer,

and $.12 per ounce for wine. Thus, the Manning et al. estimates suggest that alcohol tax rates should

be substantially increased if they are designed to offset Pigouvian externalities.

        Other studies have refined, but not substantially changed, this analysis. Pogue and Sgontz

(1989) note that alcohol taxes involve a deadweight loss for light and moderate drinkers, who

currently face higher taxes than is optimal (since the costs of light and moderate drinking are low).

Pogue and Sgontz and Kenkel (1996) both conclude that even taking this into account, current taxes

are well below the optimal tax.

        There are a range of other goods that could be analyzed in a similar fashion, but have not

                                                   20
been. Gun ownership, for example, imposes substantial external costs, but there are no estimates

of external costs in the literature. Extending this analysis to other goods is a clear research priority.



II.3     Internal Costs and Rational Addiction

         Perhaps the most important economic issue in the analysis of individuals behaviors is the

question of whether individuals correctly account for the adverse effects of such behavior on their

own health. If individuals do not, the case for corrective government action is even stronger.

Consider just the case of smoking. Smokers on average die about 6 years younger than non-

smokers, a loss of roughly 2 hours per pack of cigarettes. Consensus estimates in the literature value

a year of life at about $100,000 per year (Viscusi, 1993; Tolley et al., 1994; Cutler and Richardson,

1997). 16 Thus, the cost to a smoker from early mortality alone (ignoring morbidity or out-of-pocket

medical expenses and not discounting) is about $22 per pack. Such costs dwarf the external costs

presented above.

         For most goods, economists are willing to assume that individuals correctly internalize these

costs. After all, if a person were buying a good he did not value, he could simply stop buying the

good. In the case of smoking and drinking, however, the situation is more complicated. Such goods

are addictive, and it is not as easy to end consumption of an addictive good as it is for non-addictive

goods.

         Addictiveness by itself does not mean that consumption is inefficient. Becker and Murphy

(1988) and Becker, Grossman, and Murphy (1994) present a theoretical model of rational addiction,



         16
          This estimate may not apply to specific years at older ages. In general, not much work
has examined how willingness to pay estimates differ by age, although Krupnick et al. (2000)
generally find similar willingness to pay estimates for the old.

                                                   21
showing that individuals may rationally decide to consume goods that are bad for them, if the

current and future consumption benefits are sufficiently high. The idea is straightforward: rational

smokers know that utility in the future depends on smoking decisions today, and factor in future

utility costs and benefits when they decide how much to smoke today. People who do this correctly

will not be helped by government intervention, other than providing information about true health

risks. This is in contrast to the pure myopic model of addiction, where individuals make

consumption decisions today without thinking about their future consequences. Government policy

can help such myopic individuals to account for the future consequences of their current actions.

       Testing the rational addiction model empirically is not easy, since the interesting alternative

hypothesis is not the myopic model, but instead a model of addiction in which consumption is

forward-looking but less than perfectly so. Most empirical analysis has focused on a test of forward

looking behavior itself: does higher anticipated price lower current consumption? In a rational

model, it would; if people know that future prices will be higher, they will value current

consumption less, since part of the benefit of current consumption is that it increases the marginal

utility of consumption in the future. When future prices are higher, the value of that future

consumption is lower.      In a myopic model, future prices are not associated with current

consumption.17

       Becker, Grossman, and Murphy (1994) were the first to test this prediction empirically.

Their test involves regressing current cigarette consumption on past consumption, current prices of

cigarettes, and future cigarette consumption. They instrument for past and future consumption with



       17
        A different type of test is whether smokers accurately perceive the health costs of their
smoking decision. Viscusi (1994) argues that smokers, if anything, overstate the health
consequences of smoking. Schoenbaum (1997) suggests this is not true for heavy smokers.

                                                 22
actions in a favorable way. For example, people might commit to give away a certain amount of

money if they do not stop smoking or commit to enter smoking treatment centers in the future. If

such commitment devices are effective, they can solve the time consistency problem.

       In the absence of such pre-commitment devices, however, government intervention will be

appropriate, including taxation or regulation. The goals of government intervention are not so

obvious, however. If one’s current self wants to smoke but one’s future self would prefer that one

not, which self should the government favor in making policy decisions?

       Overall, the optimal role of government for health-related goods with internal costs is

unknown. In light of the potentially large welfare consequences associated with this issue, however,

(internal costs up to 100 times greater than external costs considering mortality effects alone)

further theoretical and empirical work on understanding these issues is extremely important.



III.   The Market for Medical Care Services



       Once sick, an individual’s health depends to a significant extent on the medical care he

receives. Public intervention in medical care is pervasive, for good reason. I lay out in this section

why that is the case, and analyze particular aspects of public intervention in subsequent sections.19



       Information problems.      A first problem with medical care is the nature of information.

People do not know the complexities of medical care diagnosis or treatment. This is common of




       19
         Arrow (1963) was the first to highlight the conglomeration of difficulties in the
medical care marketplace and much of the subsequent literature draws from that analysis.

                                                 25
many goods.20 But in the medical care case, people often do not have enough time to learn this

information before consumption decisions must be made. In other settings, there is usually more

time.

          This information asymmetry gives physicians market power. Physicians recommend to

people what services are appropriate and often provide those services after they are recommended.

Physicians also have leeway in pricing, at a time when consumers have little ability to price shop.

Unless physicians have objective functions looking out for patient welfare, inefficient outcomes will

result.

          Further, determining the quality of services is difficult, even ex post. Medical care is a

credence good – a good where the quality of the service is often not learned even after it has been

provided (Tirole, 1988; Darby and Karni, 1973). If a patient had a bypass surgery operation, was it

truly necessary? Not all doctors would agree. If there were post-operative complications, were they

the fault of the surgeon, or simply a result of the patient’s underlying sickness? Again, there is room

for disagreement.

          Since quality is so hard to measure, competitive markets will not necessarily work to

improve quality. A surgeon wishing to improve his bypass surgery mortality rate could work on his

surgical technique or could simply avoid performing surgery on patients with a high mortality risk.

The latter step is easier and may have a larger impact on observed death rates. It will also be

inefficient, if the patients at high mortality risk are those who need surgery the most. Perceptions

that medical care may be provided inefficiently have been a factor contributing to public

involvement in medical care systems.



          20
               Perhaps the closest analogy is automobile repair. See Triplett (2001).

                                                     26
       Externalities. Some medical care has external effects. A person who is not vaccinated for

a communicable disease is at risk of infecting others. Similarly, a person who uses antibiotics but

stops in mid-course contributes to the development of antibiotic-resistant bacteria. These types of

externalities are conceptually identical to the externalities associated with smoking and drinking.

Thus, they are not considered further.



       Insurance and moral hazard. Medical care demand is unpredictable. Healthy people do not

need much medical care; sick people need substantial amounts. This large uncertainty about demand

is the central rationale for health insurance. Full insurance eliminates the risk associated with

uncertain medical expenses by having the insurer pay for the full cost of all treatments. But such

insurance creates its own problems, the most important of which is moral hazard21 – the

phenomenon where an individual uses more services because he is insured than he would choose

to do if he could contract for services before he knew what diseases he would have (Arrow, 1965;

Pauly, 1968, 1974; Zeckhauser, 1970; Spence and Zeckhauser, 1971; Kotowitz, 1987). Insurance

must balance this moral hazard against the gains from improved risk sharing.



       Heterogeneity, risk segmentation, and adverse selection. In a population of individuals

whose underlying health risks are heterogeneous, more and less healthy people will demand

different insurance policies. Sicker people generally want more extensive health insurance than

healthier people. This differential demand creates problems for the efficient provision of health



       21
           There are other problems as well, but these work in the same direction. For example,
administrative cost considerations argue for excluding small bills from coverage but paying for
larger bills. This is similar to the optimal insurance policy with moral hazard.

                                                27
insurance. If insurers can segment sick from healthy, all people will be insured but at different

prices. If they cannot, people will have incentives to pretend they are healthier than they truly are,

a factor termed adverse selection. In either case, there are problems with market equilibria: people

pay different amounts for insurance when they would have chosen to pool together ex ante; the

allocation of people across plans may be inefficient; and plans may skimp on quality to attract the

healthy and repel the sick. For all of these reasons, the government may want to be involved.



       Equity. Access to medical care is commonly viewed as a right, not a good in the sense of

luxury cars or expensive houses. People are unhappy when poor people are not able to get necessary

medical care. One might justify this concern for the poor on a public health argument; if one person

has a communicable disease and does not get treated, others are at risk as well. But this

characterizes only a small share of disease in a developed country. There is a fiscal externality

argument as well; when people are healthy, they earn more and pay more in taxes. But the argument

for redistribution is really much more basic. Medical care, along with food and shelter, is a good

that society feels everyone should have access to.

       This fact has enormous implications for public policy. Because medical care is so expensive,

the poor cannot be made to pay for it on their own. Thus, government intervention is necessary to

pay for the medical care of the poor. Designing such an income transfer system is a central public

economics question. In part, this is an optimal income tax problem of the type considered in the

chapter by Auerbach and Hines (2001). But there is a twist: some of the poor will have insurance

prior to the public subsidy. Thus, in addition to labor supply and savings issues that result from

redistribution, there is also the problem of ‘crowding out’, where an increased government subsidy

encourages more people to join the public program. Crowding out makes the value of public

                                                 28
insurance expansions difficult to determine ex ante.



IV.    Government Versus Private Provision



       Given the information problems noted above, it is not obvious that doctor-patient interactions

in an unregulated market will lead to efficient outcomes. Profit-maximizing physicians may skimp

on care when such skimping cannot be detected. They may provide more care than is appropriate

if they are paid more for doing so and patients do not know such care is unnecessary. And prices

may be above marginal cost because patients cannot easily shop for providers.

       Governments thus face a fundamental decision in the medical sector; should medical services

be provided privately, or should the government provide medical services itself? Countries have

made very different decisions about this issue. In the United Kingdom, hospitals at least historically

were run by governments. Governments set staffing levels, determined technology allocation, and

decided on appropriate investments. In the United States, in contrast, providers are mostly private.

Most hospitals are not-for-profit organizations, and physicians are independent practitioners working

(at least historically) on a fee-for-service basis. The government has a large say in how providers

are paid and what technology investments are made, but it does not control day-to-day resource

decisions. Other countries are in the middle.

       Countries also change systems over time. The United Kingdom has introduced some market

forces into the medical sector. General practitioners ‘fundholders’ can now bargain for rates among

different hospitals and send patients to the hospital of their choosing. Many hospitals are not-for-

profit trusts. In the United States, there have been substantial conversions of hospitals between

government, private not-for-profit, and for-profit organizational form over time (Cutler and Horwitz,

                                                 29
1999).

         The make or buy decision in health care has been a subject of debate for decades (see

Propper and Green, forthcoming, for discussion of health care, and Shleifer, 1998, and Poterba,

1996, for a more general discussion). The traditional debate pitted arguments of monopoly and

monopsony on the one side, and innovation on the other. Government intervention was justified

because of monopoly power of physicians and the information problems noted above. By

controlling medical provision, it was believed that the government could use its monopsony power

to purchase such services at a low price. The counter-argument focused on incentives for efficiency.

Without market incentives, it was feared that government production would be technologically

inefficient and innovation would be stifled.

         Empirically countries where the public sector runs the medical system spend less on medical

care than countries with private providers. In OECD countries, for example, the correlation between

the public sector share of financing and the share of GDP devoted to medical care is -0.41. More

formal analysis controlling for additional variables also finds this conclusion (Globerman and

Vining, 1998). There is also evidence for the inefficiency view. People in many European countries

are disenchanted with the quality of medical care, and these countries have struggled to increase the

efficiency of the medical care system in recent years (Cutler, 2001).

         A recent literature emphasizing the role of public sector contracting has expanded the

dimension of this analysis, considering issues of allocational as well as technical efficiency (Hart,

Shleifer, and Vishny, 1997; Shleifer, 1998). Consider the question of whether a government should

provide hospital services itself or contract with a for-profit hospital company to provide the services.

For-profit companies will respond to financial incentives more rapidly than government-run

companies, since for-profit managers receive more of the payoff from responding to these

                                                  30
incentives. Thus, contracting to a for-profit provider will be preferred if the incentives that the firm

faces are the correct ones. If the incentives are not correct, however, having more responsive for-

profit firms may lead to poor outcomes, and providing the service in house might be preferred.

       Suppose, for example, that hospitals can skimp on quality without being detected. For-profit

hospitals will skimp more than government-run hospitals, since the for-profit firm benefits

financially from such skimping. If skimping results in substantial welfare loss, government

provision would be preferable to contracting out, even though the for-profit firm may be more

technically efficient. In contrast, if the government can write a contract that appropriately

incentivizes the for-profit firm or penalizes the firm for skimping on quality, contracting out would

be superior to in-house provision. Neither in-house production nor contracting out is necessarily

preferred. It depends on the contracts the government can write, and the regulatory and monitoring

ability of the government.

       Taking this analysis further, one can think about social institutions in the medical care field

as a form of quasi-government institution designed to counteract the adverse incentives that pure

profit-maximization would lead to.22 Two such institutions are important. First, doctors have an

ethic to earn the trust of their patients. This is codified in the Hippocratic Oath of promoting the

best medical outcomes for patients. Second, not-for-profit firms dominate the medical sector. Two-

thirds of hospitals in the United States are private not-for-profits, many of them associated with

religious institutions. By renouncing the ability to turn profits into personal gain, not-for-profit

hospitals commit themselves to less strict incentives for profit-maximization (Glaeser and Shleifer,

2001; Hubbard and Hassett, 2000). Each of these institutions may help to counteract the adverse



       22
            Arrow (1963) was the first to make this argument.

                                                  31
results that profit maximization with poor information and distorted incentives might produce.

        The relative performance of different organizational forms within a system, or different

levels of public and private ownership across systems, is ultimately an empirical question.

Substantial recent literature has explored this question. In the United States, comparisons of the

quality of medical care between for-profit, private not-for-profit, and government hospitals generally

suggest that quality is about the same in different organizational forms (see Sloan, 2000, for a

review).23 But there is substantial heterogeneity in quality within each organizational type, the

source of which is not readily apparent.

        Quality of care comparisons at the level of particular institutions are of limited value,

however, because different organizational forms will influence each other in the marketplace.

Hansmann (1980) argued that quality at for-profit hospitals was kept high because their not-for-

profit competitors provided high quality, making deviations from quality by for-profit hospitals

more readily detectible. On the other hand, Cutler and Horwitz (1999) and Silverman and Skinner

(2000) argue for an ‘inverse-Hansmann effect’, where for-profit hospitals lead not-for-profit

hospitals to change their behavior in socially-adverse ways.

        Thus, a more relevant question may be whether quality differs across markets with different

overall levels of organizational form: predominantly public, predominantly private not-for-profit,

or predominantly private for-profit. Such analyses might be conducted in the United States, or

across countries. Research along these lines has not progressed as rapidly as research at the

institutional level. It is clear that medical care quality differs substantially across areas; what is less



        23
          The organizations may differ along other lines, though. Duggan (2000) shows that for-
profit and private not-for-profit hospitals respond similarly to incentives to cream-skim the
healthiest patients, while government hospitals are less responsive.

                                                    32
clear is why (Fisher, Skinner and Wennberg, 1998). Examining how quality relates to overall

organizational form is an important research priority.



V.     Moral Hazard and the Tax Subsidy to Insurance



       Medical spending is extremely variable, as Table 4 shows. In any year, the top 1 percent of

medical care users consume about 30 percent of all medical care services, and the top 10 percent use

about 70 percent of resources. Much of this differential use is uncertain; people may know they are

at risk of a serious disease, but rarely do they know the exact amount of their future spending.

       This uncertainty about medical care needs drives the demand for health insurance. Health

insurance redistributes money from when people are healthy to when they are sick, alleviating the

financial cost associated with illness and allowing people to afford medical services they would

otherwise not be able to afford. But health insurance creates problems of its own. In particular, by

making it easier for people to get medical care when sick, it encourages people to use too much care.

The use of excessive medical services because people are insured is termed moral hazard. In this

section, I discuss the tradeoff between risk bearing and moral hazard.



       V.1     Optimal insurance with fixed spending

       To see the value of insurance most clearly, consider a one-period model where initially

identical individuals are either healthy or sick. People are sick with probability p; if they get sick,

they need a fixed amount of medical care, m, after which they are restored to perfect health.24


       24
         I assume m is affordable given y, and that the person will always want to pay for the
medical care if sick. If medical care does not restore a person to perfect health, the situation is a

                                                  33
states to sick states until marginal utility is equalized maximizes total expected utility. Health

insurance carries out this transfer.

        The form of insurance imagined by this policy is indemnity insurance. Indemnity insurance

is a fixed payment made to an individual or provider depending on the diagnosis of the individual.

The simplest indemnity policy, first offered by private insurers, reimbursed people a fixed amount

per day they were in the hospital (for example, $5 per day). Such policies were common in the

United States as recently as the 1960s. More sophisticated indemnity insurance policies might

condition payment on the diagnosis of the individual, for example $5,000 payment if a person has

pneumonia and $15,000 if the person has cancer.

        Indemnity policies are closely related to their precursor, a pre-payment policy. In this policy,

a person pays a doctor a fixed amount of money each year, with the doctor agreeing to care for the

person whenever he is sick. The first Blue Cross/Blue Shield policies were like this. Blue Cross,

and later Blue Shield, plans were sponsored by providers. In exchange for fixed monthly payments,

people were guaranteed a certain number of days in the hospital if they were needed (Blue Cross)

and physician services (Blue Shield).

        Indemnity insurance is optimal if medical costs conditional on a disease are known

(Zeckhauser, 1970). Prepayment is optimal if the providers one wants to use are all part of the plan

and the providers can bear the payment risk that is required of them. But neither of these conditions

is necessarily true. If there is variability in disease severity within indemnity groups which cannot

be contracted on – for example variation in the particular intervention needed or in recovery time

– a fixed indemnity payment still exposes the individual to substantial risk. Exposure to this risk

involves a welfare loss. As medical technology has become more complex and optimal treatments

have become more differentiated, the ability to adequately design such policies has declined.

                                                  36
       Thus, in practice health insurance has moved to a third model, a service benefit policy.28

Such a policy pays for a percentage of the actual costs of treatment. Service benefit policies are

characterized by three features, shown in figure 5: a deductible (the first amount that a patient pays

before receiving any reimbursement); a coinsurance rate (the share of costs the patient pays above

the deductible); and a stop-loss (the maximum amount the patient can pay). In the United States,

private service benefit policies generally have a family deductible of about $500 (roughly $200 for

an individual), a coinsurance rate of 20 percent, and a stop-loss of $1,500 to $2,000 (Kaiser Family

Foundation and Health Research and Educational Trust, 2000). The Medicare program has much

higher cost sharing. Inpatient care has an $800 deductible per episode. Outpatient care has a $100

annual deductible and 20 percent coinsurance rate, with no stop loss.

       Service benefit policies insure a greater share of risk than do indemnity policies. The central

problem created by service benefit insurance is moral hazard. By lowering the cost of medical care

at the time of use, the service benefit policy encourages excessive use of services. This limits the

optimal degree of insurance coverage, as I now show.



       V.2     Optimal insurance with moral hazard

       To illustrate the impact of moral hazard, I modify the model presented above. Suppose that

rather than being healthy or sick, the individual has a range of potential illness severities, s, with s

distributed with density function f(s). Health is given by H=H[s,m]. The patient’s s will determine

the optimal treatment. A simple way to depict uncertainty about optimal care is to assume that the



       28
          Unfortunately, the service benefit policy is typically called indemnity insurance (and
contrasted with managed care insurance) in the literature. I retain the terminology of service
benefit to contrast it with true indemnity insurance.

                                                  37
will pay for their care if they do get sick. Ex post moral hazard refers to people using more services

when they are sick than they would have used if they could perfectly commit to service use before

they become sick. Ex post moral hazard is likely more important in the medical care context than

ex ante moral hazard, since the uncompensated losses of not taking care of oneself in the first place

(possible death and disability) are so large. But ex ante moral hazard is present to some extent;

cigarette consumption, for example, would certainly fall if people faced the full cost of smoking in

higher out-of-pocket medical payments.

       In addition, there are losses from the variability in the marginal utility of income across

states of nature. If the coinsurance rate varies with medical spending, the marginal rate of

substitution between health and other goods will vary as well. When coinsurance rates are lower,

even more is spent on medical care and the marginal rate of substitution between health and other

goods falls. Smoothing the marginal rate of substitution across states of nature would improve

welfare.

       Not all of the demand response to having insurance is moral hazard. The thought experiment

is whether the individual would pay for the medical expenditure in expectation, before he knew his

condition, not ex post, given his income while sick. Suppose that bypass surgery optimally costs

$50,000. Before a person knows if he will have a heart attack, he might agree to pool economy-wide

the $50,000 cost for people who have a heart attack. Now suppose that ex post two people have a

heart attack: one with insurance and one without. The person without insurance finds the bypass

surgery too expensive and does not receive it. The person with insurance has the operation, and

because he is insured uses $60,000 of medical care. The moral hazard here is the $10,000 of use

above the optimal amount, not the $60,000 of total spending difference between the insured and

uninsured person. In other words, moral hazard is the substitution effect of people spending more

                                                 40
(17)




Gruber and Poterba (1996) estimate this expression for a representative sample of individuals in

1994. The average person with employer-provided insurance faced a relative price of insurance of

0.66, a 34 percent subsidy to insurance payments relative to out-of-pocket spending. The tax

subsidy varies over time with changes in tax rates; as marginal tax rates have declined in the 1980s

and 1990s, the tax subsidy has fallen.

       This tax subsidy to insurance encourages employees and employers to offer generous health

insurance: lower deductibles, coinsurance rates, and stop-loss limits (Feldstein, 1971, 1973; Pauly,

1987). When paid for by insurance, these bills cost less in total than when paid for out-of-pocket.

Indeed, one might particularly want to buy insurance for predictable expenditures, since the tax

benefits of this transaction are most readily realized. Excessively generous insurance, in turn, leads

to more moral hazard than is optimal.

       The magnitude of the resulting welfare loss depends on the elasticity of insurance coverage

with respect to price, and the price elasticity of demand for medical care. A substantial economic

literature has examined these two issues. Table 5 presents estimates of the response of health

insurance design to price.

       Four aspects of the health insurance demand have been estimated. One strand of literature

examines the response of firms offering insurance to prices. The most convincing studies examine




                                                 44
how variation in tax rates across states or over time influence firm decisions to offer coverage.34

Elasticity estimates in these studies range from relatively small (-.4) to quite large (-2.9). A related

set of studies examines the effect of taxation on overall firm spending for insurance. This includes

the offer decision and other decisions such as the generosity of benefits and the share of premiums

that employers pay for. These studies also find a significant response of insurance spending to price,

with a general range of -0.2 to -1.0. The fact that this is less than the offering response in some

studies may indicate that the lower values of elasticity of offering is correct, or may simply reflect

the difficulty of estimating the overall firm response to taxation.

        A third set of studies examines the responsiveness of individual purchase decisions to price.

Again, the studies using taxes as the source of price variation are most convincing. The responses

are of comparable magnitude and variability to the firm estimates, ranging from -0.6 to -1.8.

        A final set of studies examines the responsiveness of individual choices of insurance policies

when offered multiple plans. One would expect the choice of a particular plan to be more

responsive than the decision to purchase insurance at all, and this is indeed the case. While the

studies do not all present elasticities, those that do generally report elasticities greater in magnitude

than -2 and sometimes as high as -8.

        Thus, it is clear that insurance coverage decisions are responsive to price, although the exact


        34
           Other study designs are more problematic. One alternative strategy is to examine
whether employers offered higher premiums are less likely to offer insurance (Feldman et al.,
1997, Marquis and Long, 1999). The difficulty with this strategy is that insurance premiums are
not observed for firms not offering insurance. Thus, some imputation method must be devised,
and the results depend critically on that method. In practice, the studies give very different
elasticity estimates. A second strategy is to analyze the response of firms to pilot programs that
subsidized insurance (Helms et al., 1992; Thorpe et al., 1992), or to hypothetical questions about
insurance coverage (Morrisey et al., 1994). The difficulty with these studies is the permanence
of the tax change and the relevance of the hypothetical question. These studies also give quite
variable answers.

                                                   45
magnitude is not so clear. And the literature has not addressed perhaps the most important question

for the welfare loss – the response of specific cost sharing provisions to price. It is the cost sharing

provisions, after all, that lead individuals to overconsume medical care. Still, one suspects that this

dimension of insurance is responsive to price.

        The second empirical question is the effect of insurance generosity on medical care spending.

A comprehensive review of the literature on the elasticity of demand for medical care is contained

in Cutler and Zeckhauser (2000). Table 6 shows a summary of that literature. A substantial

literature in the 1970s estimated the elasticity of demand for medical care using cross-sectional data,

or cross-sectional time series data. Pre-eminent among these papers are Feldstein (1971), Phelps

and Newhouse (1972), Rosett and Huang (1973), and Newhouse and Phelps (1976). Feldstein

(1971) was the first statistically robust estimate of price elasticities using time-series micro data, in

this case on hospitals. Feldstein identified the effect of coinsurance rates on demand using cross-

state variation in insurance coverage and generosity, estimating a demand elasticity of about -0.5.

The subsequent papers use patient-level data and more sophisticated study designs. The elasticities

that emerged from these papers ranged from as low as -.14 (Phelps and Newhouse, 1972) to as high

as -1.5 (Rosett and Huang, 1973). The implication of this range of elasticity estimates was that

moral hazard was likely a significant force.

        To identify this key parameter more precisely, the Rand Health Insurance Experiment was

designed (Newhouse et al., 1993). That experiment randomized people into insurance plans with

different levels of cost sharing and estimated demand elasticities for medical spending. The ultimate

elasticity that emerged was -0.2, at the low end of the previous literature. This estimate is generally

taken as the gold standard in current research and policy work.

        The fact that insurance provision is responsive to price and medical spending is responsive

                                                   46
to insurance implies that there is a welfare loss from the tax subsidy to health insurance. The

magnitude of the loss has been estimated by several papers. Feldstein and Friedman (1977) was the

first estimate of the magnitude of the loss. Using estimates of insurance and medical care demand

from Feldstein’s earlier work, Feldstein and Friedman estimate the welfare loss at about 10 percent

of medical care spending.

       As the elasticities of medical care demand were refined, the estimated welfare loss from the

tax subsidy fell. Chernick, Homer, and Weinberg (1987) used a similar methodology and more

recent data to estimate the loss from the tax exclusion at about 5 percent.

       Other analyses have not examined the tax exclusion per se but have simulated optimal

insurance policies and compared them to actual policies. Some of these studies find that optimal

insurance is less generous than current insurance policies, consistent with the tax loss hypothesis

(Feldstein, 1973; Blomqvist, 1997). Other studies, however, find that current policies are roughly

optimal (Buchanan et al., 1991; Newhouse et al., 1993; Manning and Marquis, 1996).35 The

difference between these studies has not been fully reconciled. In light of the empirical evidence

above, one suspects that there must be some welfare loss from the tax exclusion. The magnitude is

unlikely to be as high as 10 percent, however.



       V.4     Qualifications

       Several factors are omitted in this analysis. The first is dynamics – insurance can influence

the development and diffusion of new technology. As noted above, cost growth in medical care has

been persistently above that in the economy as a whole for many decades. A majority of this cost


       35
         Feldman and Dowd (1991) compared welfare under a free care plan and a plan with
moderate cost sharing (a $1,000 deductible) and found the latter to be preferred.

                                                 47
growth is a result of technological change in medical practice (Newhouse, 1992). The introduction

of new procedures and devices, and their application to more patients, have been prominent in

medical care. At least some of this technological change likely results from the generosity of health

insurance (Weisbrod, 1991). Generous health insurance encourages the diffusion of innovations

once they are available, and in turn the development of new innovations.

       To the extent that tax policy has led to more generous medical insurance, it has also

encouraged additional innovation in medical care. This will have significant welfare consequences,

but the direction of these effects is unknown. If medical innovation would have been at the efficient

level in the absence of the tax subsidy, the static estimates of welfare loss of the tax subsidy

underestimate the true welfare loss. But free markets are not guaranteed to produce the right amount

of innovation. Some of the return to medical innovations cannot be appropriated privately, for

example general knowledge about physiological and biochemical functioning. The public good

nature of this innovation suggests that private market innovation would be too low. In this case, the

tax subsidy would be a welfare improvement.

       Other arguments suggest that free market innovation might be too high. The patent race

literature shows how the prospect of a patent can encourage excessive research, as potential

innovators race to become the first discoverer of the good. By further exacerbating this trend, the

tax subsidy would result in additional welfare loss.

       There has been some empirical work on the value of technological change in medicine.

Studies of medical outcomes typically find that the average product of changes in medical

technology over time is high (Cutler and McClellan, 2001). Thus, technological change may not

have been too rapid, and the tax subsidy may be efficiency enhancing.

       A related point is that the tax subsidy may influence the direction of technological change.

                                                 48
For example, it might be the case that without the tax subsidy there would be more innovation in

cost-reducing but quality-neutral innovation, while with the tax subsidy innovations are biased

towards those that increase quality and cost. The welfare implications of such a bias depend on the

same factors that were highlighted in the previous paragraphs.

       The second qualification about the welfare loss from the tax exclusion is that it ignores the

value of the subsidy in promoting overall rates of insurance coverage. By subsidizing insurance

through employment, the tax subsidy encourages more people to be insured than would otherwise

be the case. This is important because there are other public subsidies, discussed below, that

encourage people to be uninsured. Counteracting these incentives could therefore improve welfare.

       This effect may be substantial. Recall that the tax subsidy to insurance is, on average, about

34 percent. If the demand elasticity for insurance is -0.5, well within the range indicated above, the

reduction in insurance coverage from eliminating the tax exclusion is about 17 percent.36 If all these

people became uninsured, the uninsurance rate would double. For this reason, many policy

proposals have suggested capping, but not eliminating, the tax subsidy to health insurance. If the

subsidy were capped at a level roughly equal to relatively inexpensive plans, people would still

receive an inframarginal subsidy to purchase insurance, but face no marginal subsidy to choose more

generous insurance. The reduction in coverage would be smaller.

       Finally, the tax subsidy encourages the provision of insurance through employment. Without

the tax subsidy, there would be relatively little reason for employers to provide health insurance

rather than just giving employees cash. The link between insurance and employment has both good



       36
          Using individual data and a similar elasticity of -0.5, Gruber and Poterba (1996)
estimate that employer spending would decline by about 25 percent if the subsidy were
eliminated.

                                                 49
and bad consequences. Since employment groups are formed relatively independently of sickness,

encouraging insurance through employment minimizes some of the problems of adverse selection

that occur when individuals buy insurance on their own. On the other hand, employment-based

insurance leads to a host of labor market problems associated with people being ‘locked’ into jobs

because their health insurance would have to change if they changed employers. Some estimates

suggest that this job lock plays a significant role in reducing overall rates of turnover in the labor

market, although the issue is not settled (Gruber, 2000; Krueger and Meyer, 2002).



VI.     The Supply Side



        This analysis of optimal insurance has focused entirely on the demand-side of the market –

designing incentives to get individuals to reduce their demand for medical care while still reducing

risk. Implicitly, providers were being paid at cost, and thus acted as perfect agents for their patients.

Insurers and providers did not interact, other than for billing purposes. This was a moderately

accurate picture of the market for medical care in the United States up to the early 1980s,37 but it is

no longer a good description of how health insurance operates today. Nor is it relevant for other

countries.

        In the United States, the dominant trend in the medical care marketplace over the past two

decades has been the growth of ‘managed care’. Managed care is a collection of insurance

arrangements in which utilization and prices are limited on the supply, not the demand-side of the



        37
          There is some debate about whether providers were paid at or above cost. Most
economists believed that providers were paid above marginal cost and thus ‘induced demand’ for
their services (Fuchs, 1996).

                                                   50
market. Patients usually face little if any cost sharing at the time of service use. Instead, providers

face a variety of incentives to control utilization. There are many forms of supply-side restrictions,

including forming networks of providers that agree to lower fees, monitoring and prescribing what

doctors can and cannot do, and giving physicians financial incentives to reduce utilization.

       Figure 6 shows the transformation of the private insurance industry in the United States. In

1980, 92 percent of the population was in unmanaged fee-for-service insurance. Today, the share

is below 5 percent. In its place are a variety of managed care plans, including Health Maintenance

Organizations [HMOs], Preferred Provider Organizations [PPOs] and Point of Service Plans

[POSs].38 Even traditional fee-for-service plans are generally managed, with the insurer monitoring

for excessive utilization and requiring pre-authorization for some services.

       Public programs in the United States also use supply side techniques in varying degrees. In

most states, a significant part of the Medicaid population is enrolled in managed care plans.

Managed care enrollment is much lower in Medicare (only about 15 percent), but the fee-for-service

program does make some use of supply side measures. For example, hospitals are paid on a per

admission basis for Medicare enrollees. Additional days in the hospital or minor tests and

procedures are not reimbursed at the margin.

       In most countries with universal insurance systems, medical care utilization is limited by

supply-side measures more than demand-side measures. For example, Canada and the United



       38
          PPOs are groups of physicians who accept lower fees for access to a network. Patients
face less cost sharing when using preferred providers than in using providers outside the
network. HMOs include group or staff model plans, where doctors work only for that plan and
patients can see doctors only in the plan, and looser network or independent practice
arrangement plans, where doctors in the community sign up with one or more plans and may see
patients with multiple plans. Point of service plans are HMOs that provide some reimbursement
if the enrollee chooses to use providers out of the network.

                                                  51
Kingdom both limit the capacity of hospitals to provide care (for example, by constraining the

number of open heart surgery units). As a result, fewer procedures are done, and overall spending

is lower. Indeed, the greater ability to use supply-side constraints is almost certainly the reason why

countries that operate the medical system spend less than those that provide universal coverage but

use private providers.

       The availability of supply side techniques opens up a host of issues for the public sector.

One central question concerns design of optimal insurance for a country providing such insurance

publicly. If one has appropriate supply-side cost sharing, is demand-side cost sharing useful? There

is a lengthy literature on this question. A rough summary (Cutler and Zeckhauser, 2000) is that

demand-side and supply-side constraints are not perfect substitutes. Both methods limit utilization,

but do so on somewhat different margins. Demand-side cost sharing has a relatively greater impact

on whether a person visits a provider at all, while supply-side cost sharing has a relatively greater

impact on what is done once someone gets into the system. Thus, the optimal public system

probably includes a combination of demand and supply side constraints.

       A related question concerns the impact of supply-side controls on the welfare loss from the

tax exclusion. If managed care eliminates excessive medical care utilization, has the welfare loss

from the tax exclusion declined? There is no empirical information on this question. The fact that

demand and supply side cost sharing are not perfect substitutes means that there is likely still to be

some welfare loss from excessive moral hazard in managed care plans, but it is almost certainly

smaller.

       Other issues are important as well. For supply-side or demand-side rationing to be efficient,

one needs to know that the people not receiving care are the ones who value the care the least. This

is not guaranteed to be the case. In the case of demand-side rationing, the evidence generally

                                                  52
suggests few adverse health effects from cost sharing, consistent with the efficient-rationing view

(Newhouse et al., 1993). Most estimates of the impact of managed care on health outcomes in the

United States reach a similar view; it is hard to find evidence that health is worse under managed

care plans (Glied, 2000; Miller and Luft, 1997). In other countries, however, outcomes do appear

to suffer because of supply side constraints (Cutler, 2001).

          These issues are too complex to be addressed in detail in this chapter, however. For

additional discussion, interested readers should consult Glied (2000) or Cutler and Zeckhauser

(2000).



VII.      Heterogeneous risks and selection



          I now turn from the analysis of a single individual purchasing insurance to a market setting

with multiple individuals. The central complication introduced by this is the heterogeneity of risk:

some people are at high risk of being sick, while others are at low risk. On average, people at higher

risk for disease want more generous insurance than those at lower risk. This fact creates enormous

difficulties for insurance markets, as I now demonstrate.



          VII.1 Risk segmentation

          To illustrate the problems that result from individual heterogeneity in insurance demand,

consider a simple model with two risk types. Low risks have a small probability of being sick, while

high risks have a greater probability. Both groups would like to purchase insurance, because for

each group there is uncertainty about whether they will be sick. To keep matters simple, I suppose

there is no moral hazard or other insurance market imperfection. I further assume that insurers know

                                                  53
as well as individuals their expected risk; with genetic tests and medical histories, such knowledge

is becoming increasingly common.

        The analysis of this situation is shown in Figure 7. Rather than one line with fair insurance,

as presented in figure 4, there are now separate fair odds lines for high and low risks. The fair odds

line for high risks lies inside that of low risks, since a greater premium is required to get a given

payment when sick.

        Offered the option of purchasing insurance at actuarially fair prices, both high and low risks

will choose to buy full insurance; in the absence of moral hazard there is no reason not to do so. The

equilibrium will therefore be at A and B. Both groups are fully insured, but high risks pay more for

insurance than low risks.

        In practice, if high risks are sufficiently risky or expensive, the insurer may simply choose

not to offer these very high risk groups coverage rather than charge the required price and face

public relations difficulties. High risks might then be “medically uninsurable. This is a more of a

political than an economic term, however.

        The equilibrium in Figure 7 is efficient given risk types. But from an ex ante perspective,

before people know their risk type, it is not. Consider asking people before they know if they are

high or low risk – potentially before birth – whether they would like to buy insurance against the

probability that they will be high risk and thus face higher insurance premiums. Individuals would

be willing to purchase this insurance were it sold at an actuarially fair price; they get a reduction in

financial uncertainty at no expected cost. The fact that people wind up paying different prices for

insurance reflects the failure of this insurance market.

        This loss seems counterintuitive: everyone has full information and gets full insurance every

year. What is the source of the loss? The welfare loss derives from a missing market for insurance

                                                  54
against one’s risk type. Risk averse individuals would like to insure against the possibility of being

discovered to be high risk. There is no market where they can do so. Given that a market is

missing, there is no guarantee that efficient pricing on the basis of known information as opposed

to level pricing (as if ignorant) will enhance welfare. This is a classic illustration of the theory of

the second best.

       The market failure might also be thought of as stemming from a contracting failure.

Contracts for health insurance are renegotiated after medical information is known. Such periodic

recontracting allows new information to enter into the contractual arrangement over time, which

individuals ex ante would choose to keep out.

       It is possible to imagine private contracts that solve this problem (Cochrane, 1995; Pauly,

Kunreuther, and Hirth, 1995). Suppose that people purchase two insurance policies each year; one

to cover their medical costs that year, and a second “premium insurance” policy to cover any

increase in premiums they may face in the future as a result of information learned that year. Full

premium insurance would give people an amount of money equivalent to the discounted expected

increase in their future medical spending from events that year.

       Such premium insurance does not exist; the question is why. Several factors have been

identified. Regulatory barriers have been suggested as the culprit (Cochrane, 1995). Moral hazard

(people with premium insurance would take insufficient care of their health) and adverse selection

(people expecting declines in health would more likely take up the insurance) are possibilities. The

aggregate risk phenomenon provides a fourth explanation (Cutler, 1996). Implementing such

contracts requires a lot of information about how changes in health status today affect the entire

future course of expected medical spending. There is substantial uncertainty in this forecast which

full premium insurance would have to insure against. But future medical cost changes will be

                                                  55
common to everyone with the contract. As a result, insurers will be unable to diversify this risk.39

For all but the first explanation, private markets will be imperfect, and government intervention is

warranted.



       VII.2 Adverse selection and market failure

       The government might respond to the risk segmentation problem by requiring insurers to

offer everyone the same price for each contract. Many employers who run health systems for their

employees do this. Indeed, information systems were historically not well enough developed for

insurers to differentiate who was high and low risk; they could only set one price for each group.



       This pooling at first glance seems to solve the risk segmentation problem, since everyone

can enroll in each plan at the same terms. But the solution is illusory. It moves from a system of

full information to one of asymmetric information: individuals know more than insurers about their

risk types. In such an situation, market outcomes will again be inefficient. This analysis was first

demonstrated by Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976) and Wilson (1977).

       This inefficiency can be demonstrated using Figure 8. Constrained to charge only one price

per plan, suppose that insurers offer plan C, full insurance at the group average price (assuming

equal numbers of high and low risks). Plan C is a pooling equilibrium; it fully insures ex ante risk,

thus solving the risk segmentation problem. But plan C is not stable. Consider an insurer that came

along and offered a policy that was a bit less generous than plan C but cost less, such as plan D.



       39
          Insurers might get around this the way that they do with term life insurance:
guaranteeing the right of renew at then prevailing prices. But then the value of the insurance
product is limited, as people are locked into one policy.

                                                 56
Low risk people would choose plan D over plan C; since they are overpaying for insurance, low

risks prefer less generous insurance if they can get it at existing prices. High risks prefer C to D;

given the implicit subsidy they receive, high risks want full insurance. As a result, introducing plan

D would break the pooling equilibrium. Rothschild and Stiglitz and Wilson show that in a

competitive insurance market with two risk types, pooling is not an equilibrium; low risks will never

voluntarily pool with high risks.

       There is only one possible equilibrium, shown in Figure 9. That equilibrium involves high

risks in plan A and low risks in plan F. Plan A provides full insurance at actuarially fair rates for

high risks. Plan F is the most generous actuarially fair plan for low risks that is not preferred by the

high risks to plan A. High risks are tempted to join plan F by the low premium, but are discouraged

by the incomplete coverage. Plan F is just stingy enough to make switching unattractive for high

risks. Low risks would prefer more generous coverage at their risk-specific cost, but this cannot be

obtained without also pooling with the high risks.40

       There are two inefficiencies in this equilibrium. First, high risks have to pay more for their

coverage simply because they are high risk, the risk segmentation problem noted above. Second,

low risks do not obtain full insurance coverage, even though full insurance is optimal. Plans distort

themselves to attract low risks, in the process reducing the value of their insurance.

       In this model, the generosity of insurance coverage is measured by the amount paid in the

sick state; but in practice other dimensions of the plan may be used as screening devices. For



       40
          This discussion has been presented in a case where individuals are paying for the cost
of insurance and thus pay less when they join plans with low risk people. A related situation is
present if all people are given a uniform voucher for insurance. Then, low risks do not benefit
by having plans for low risks only, but insurers do. As a result, insurers will design the same
sort of policies.

                                                  57
example, having good cancer care is likely to appeal to the sick more than the healthy; thus, plans

for low risks will avoid such specialists.        Well baby care or complementary health club

memberships, which appeal to the low risks, would be better. Even advertizing and location can be

used to select good and bad risks.

        Rothschild and Stiglitz go further and show that even the separating equilibrium may not be

stable. Figure 9 also shows this situation. Suppose that instead of an equal mix of low and high

risks, the economy consists almost entirely of low risks. Thus, the fair odds line for the two risks

together is the dashed line. Relative to utility at point F, the low risks would prefer a pooled policy

such as G. The high risks would prefer G as well, since they get a much lower premium and only

somewhat less coverage. Point G would thus undermine the separating equilibrium. But the

analysis above still holds; the pooling equilibrium is not stable either. Thus, with no stable pooling

equilibrium and no stable separating equilibrium, the market will not reach an equilibrium.41

        The simple two-risk example of adverse selection suggests that if an equilibrium exists, high

risks will receive full coverage, while low risks will receive only partial coverage. Very different,

but still inefficient, equilibria can be achieved with multiple risk types (Feldman and Dowd, 1991;

Cutler and Reber, 1998; and Cutler and Zeckhauser, 1998). Suppose there are two health plans, a

generous plan and a moderate one. It is easiest, although not necessary, to think of the generous

plan as a traditional service benefit policy and the moderate plan as a managed care policy. There

is a continuous distribution of risks in the population, denoted by s. For simplicity, I take s to be the


        41
          Many papers have analyzed equilibrium in such markets. Some equilibrium concepts
do yield an equilibrium, but in no case is the equilibrium first best efficient. Wilson (1977) and
Riley (1979) proposed equilibria where insurers do not offer plans if those plans would become
unprofitable if other plans left the market (Wilson) or if other plans entered the market (Riley).
Grossman (1979) proposes a model where insurers can screen applicants before selling them
insurance, thus limiting losses from high risks.

                                                   58
from the moderate plan sufficiently large to prompt switching.45 The disappearance of generous

plans as a result of dynamic processes of adverse selection is termed a “death spiral”. Thus, in this

example too few people will have generous insurance coverage.

        Considering the various equilibria, there are no guarantees about what an equilibrium with

adverse selection will involve, if in fact there is an equilibrium. But the final equilibrium will

involve potential welfare losses from three sources. First, people may be in the wrong plans.

Adverse selection prompts people at the margin to enroll in less generous policies, when on the basis

of their own preferences and costs more people would choose generous plans. Second, plans have

incentives to distort their coverage to attract the low risks and repel the high risks. This incentive

is present for all plans. Every plan gains by being less generous, because at the margin it changes

the risk balance towards a lower risk population. This is true even if every person would be willing

to pay for it at his actuarially fair rate.46 Third, people pay more for insurance when they are sick

than when they are healthy. This denies people the ex ante pooling of risk types that people would

want at a fair price.


        45
          A numerical example illustrates this possibility. Suppose that the highest cost person
has expected spending of $50,000 and that average costs of the population as a whole in the
moderate policy (with or without this person, if he comprises a small part of the total risk) is
$3,000. Suppose further that the high cost person values the generous policy at $20,000 more
than the moderate policy, and that he spends only $5,000 less in the moderate policy than with
the generous policy (a 10 percent savings). Efficiency demands that he should be in the
generous policy; the additional value of that policy ($20,000) is greater than the additional cost
he imposes there ($5,000). If the high cost person were the only person in the generous policy,
however, the cost of that policy would be $47,000 more than the cost of the moderate policy
($50,000 versus $3,000), which would lead him to opt for the moderate policy.
        46
          There is an apocryphal story such a situation. A firm was providing benefits to its
employees and noticed that all plans put a 90 day limit on inpatient care for mental health
benefits. The employer when to the various insurers and asked about the cost of removing the
cap. The insurers all replied that they didn’t have such a cap in practice, they just said they did
to discourage people with severe mental health problems from enrolling in their plan!

                                                 61
       VII.3 Evidence on the Importance of Biased Enrollment

       A substantial literature has looked for biased enrollment in insurance markets, the key to

adverse selection. This literature is summarized in Cutler and Zeckhauser (2000). Table 7, taken

from that paper, shows evidence of enrollment differences along three dimensions: traditional

insurance versus managed care; overall levels of insurance coverage; and high versus low option

coverage.

       Most empirical work on adverse selection involves data from employers who allow choices

of different health insurance plans of varying generosity; some of the studies look at the Medicare

market, where choices are also given. In essentially all of these cases, the data show strong evidence

of adverse selection.47 Adverse selection is present in the choice between fee-for-service and

managed care plans (8 out of 12 studies, with 2 findings of favorable selection and 2 studies

ambiguous), in the choice between being insured and being uninsured (3 out of 4 studies, with 1

ambiguous finding), and in the choice between high-option and low-option plans within a given type

(14 out of 14 studies).



       VII.4 Evidence on the Importance of Plan Manipulation

       There are substantially fewer empirical studies on whether plans manipulate their benefits

to attract a healthier mix of enrollees than on biased enrollment. Plans, of course, differ greatly in

their generosity. But it is difficult to know how much of this variation reflects manipulation by the


       47
          The metric to measure adverse selection is not the same in all studies, ranging from the
difference in premiums or claims generated by adverse selection after controlling for other
relevant factors (for example, Price and Mays, 1985; Brown et al., 1993) to the likelihood of
enrollment in a generous plan conditional on expected health status (for example, Cutler and
Reber, 1998) to the predominance of known risk factors among enrollees of more generous
health plans compared to those in less generous plans (for example, Ellis, 1989).

                                                 62
plans to attract healthy risks as opposed to differential estimates of the most efficient care

arrangements.

       Though evidence on plan structures is ambiguous, the marketing of managed care plans

shows clear efforts to promote favorable selection. Maibach et al. (1998) document the marketing

practices managed care plans use to attract healthy Medicare enrollees, including television ads that

show seniors engaged in physical and social activities and marketing seminars held in buildings that

are not wheelchair accessible.



       VII.5 Public policy with heterogeneous risks

       Risk segmentation and adverse selection create a clear case for government intervention.

This is unlike moral hazard, where private markets have as much ability to combat the problem as

the government. Here, the government’s ability to compel certain actions is important. The most

obvious public solution is to mandate that everyone have insurance, and that they belong to the same

plan. Mandatory coverage is required to prevent the healthy from declining coverage. A single plan

is required to prevent sorting by risk. This solution is termed single payer insurance. It is the

foundation of many health care systems around the world.48 Adverse selection was an explicit

concern in the foundation of many public insurance systems.

       Single payer systems have other drawbacks, however. Universal systems require substantial

income transfers to the poor. In addition to the political economy difficulty of taxing the rich to give

to the poor, there are efficiency considerations from raising the taxes used to finance the transfers.


       48
         In Canada, for example, everyone receives health insurance from their provincial
government; there is no choice about the policy and no option to be uninsured. In the United
Kingdom, a base insurance plan is required for everyone, although people can supplement that
plan with private insurance.

                                                  63
Further, issues of government efficiency, noted in Section IV in the case of government versus

private provision, are raised here as well. For these reasons, governments have pursued other

options as well.

       A second solution is to regulate some degree of pooling more than private markets alone

would provide. In the early to mid-1990s, state governments in the United States passed a number

of pieces of legislation to limit risk segmentation. This was followed by Federal legislation in 1996.

Problems of premium variability are much more acute for small firms than for large firms, since

large firms have an internal risk pool that can be used to smooth spending. Thus, this legislation

generally applies only to small firms, for example those with fewer than 50 employees. This

insurance legislation consisted of some or all of the following: limitations on the rates that could be

charged high and low risk purchasers, for example that such rates be no more than 15 percent above

or below average; requirements that insurers guarantee enrollment to new or existing purchasers

seeking to renew; and requirements that people moving from one policy to another policy not face

pre-existing conditions exclusions or length of service requirements before enrollment.

       The impact of this legislation has been the subject of some research. One would expect such

legislation in the first instance to compress premium variability. This, in turn, might then affect

rates of insurance coverage. The predicted change in coverage is unclear, however. On the one

hand, some high risk people whom insurers had previously refused to underwrite or who decided

to be uninsured because of high premiums might now purchase coverage. On the other hand, some

healthy people could choose not to purchase insurance as their rates increased. The overall

implications for rates of insurance coverage are not known a priori.

       Premium data are much less available than coverage data. Thus, most of the research on the

impact of this legislation has focused on overall rates of insurance coverage. Some studies also

                                                  64
examine other outcomes, such as who has access to insurance (sick or healthy) and whether small

firms offer insurance to their workers. These studies are summarized in Table 8. The studies use a

variety of approaches; some use a difference-in-differences approach, comparing changes in

insurance coverage in states that adopted reforms at different times; some also compare changes for

small and large firms in states that passed such legislation versus states that did not pass such

legislation. Other studies do more detailed case studies of reforms in particular states.

       A consensus from the studies in Table 8 is that there is no effect or very small effects of

insurance regulation on overall rates of coverage; negative impact on coverage are more commonly

found in studies of individual market regulations, although these effects tend to be small.

Additionally, where the authors attempt to look at the effects of regulations on insurance coverage

by risk type, they often find that rates among the sicker rise, while rates among the healthy fall

somewhat.

       There are several possible explanations for a lack of large findings. One problem has to do

with the scope of the legislation. States are allowed to regulate purchased insurance but not rates

for firms that self insure. A small firm that formally purchased insurance can choose, after the

legislation, to self-insure and purchase stop-loss coverage for individual claims exceeding certain

levels. This alternative insurance arrangement, often through the same insurer, involves little or no

change in risk born by the firm but gets the firm out of the legislative mandate. A trend towards

self-insurance occurred after these regulations were put in place.

       A second explanation is that the legislation was undone by the presence of multiple plans.

While legislation sometimes required insurers to offer all groups the same price for each policy,

groups of healthy employees can still choose less generous policies as a whole and maintain their

lower rates, provided that less healthy groups choose not to enroll in those plans. In some cases,

                                                 65
insurers were not required to make all plans available to all firms, thus allowing healthy firms an

option separate from less healthy firms. In other cases, adverse selection appears to be the source

of the failure. Buchmueller and DiNardo (forthcoming) show that many firms moved into managed

care plans after such legislation was passed, presumably for adverse selection reasons. In light of

all the evidence, it thus seems clear that regulation by itself cannot offset the problems resulting

from biased enrollment. Some other solution is also needed.

       Since the problems of risk segmentation and adverse selection ultimately result from plans

not receiving enough money for high-risk people compared to low risk people, one can think about

subsidizing plans that enroll high risk people as a way to combat this situation. Figure 11 shows

how a system of subsidies would work. Starting from the initial separating equilibrium at plans A

and F, consider increasing required payments by the low risks and using the money to lower

required payments by the high risks. High risks still receive full insurance but have more income

available when sick and healthy; their equilibrium point moves out along the 45 degree line. As low

risks are made to pay more without receiving additional benefits, their budget constraint rotates

inward. If the subsidy equalized rates, the equilibrium would be the pooling equilibrium in Figure

8.

       Some amount of subsidy is valued by low risks (Miyazawa, 1977; Spence, 1978). Although

low risks pay above expected cost to finance the transfer to the sick, the fact that the high risks can

afford insurance at lower cost makes them less likely to opt out of their plan for the low risk plan.

Thus, the healthy can increase the generosity of the policy they choose. But not all subsidies are so

valued. For complete equality to be achieved (plan C), the healthy must be mandated to participate

in the system.

       This form of differential payment by health status is termed “risk adjustment” (van de Ven

                                                  66
and Ellis, 2000). Risk adjustment must be carried out by a government, or a private agency acting

like a government,49 since given the choice, low risks would not voluntarily enter a risk adjustment

system.

       One way to implement risk adjustment is as a voucher system with differential vouchers for

high and low risks. A sufficiently high voucher for the high risks would be enough to offset their

higher expected costs. Alternatively, risk adjustment can also be implemented at the plan level. The

voucher amounts would be equal, but plans would receive subsidies or pay penalties based on the

risk distribution of their enrollees. Plans with low risks would pay money to plans with high risks.

       If governments can risk adjust perfectly, adverse selection can be solved and the first best

achieved. This is not surprising; it is tantamount to assuming away the information problem that

led to adverse selection in the first place. Designing such a system in practice is more difficult,

however, because of moral hazard. Typically, the way that one measures risk status is by looking

at medical care utilization. People with greater medical claims or more adverse diagnoses are

deemed less healthy. But such attributes are under the control of the individual and insurer. If the

government pays more for diabetics, for example, the plan can screen carefully for the disease. If

the government pays more for very expensive people in general, the incentives to hold down costs

are muted. This type of moral hazard limits the desired risk adjustment, just as moral hazard limits

optimal risk sharing in the standard case of insurance plan design.

       To date, few governments or other organizations have used formal risk adjustment systems

(Keenan, Beeuwkes-Buntin, McGuire, and Newhouse, 2001). The Medicare program in the United

States has just moved to such a system, however, and more information will be available in coming


       49
        For example, an employer running an insurance plan in the interests of all of his
employees.

                                                67
years. Evaluating the impact of these systems will help guide future policies.

       Returning to the discussion of section V, one can view the tax subsidy to health insurance

as an implicit risk adjustment system. By lowering the price of insurance through employment, the

subsidy bribes healthy people to pool with less healthy people at their workplace.             Since

employment is not perfectly correlated with health, this mutes the impact of poor health status on

insurance premiums.50




VIII. Combining public and private insurance



       The previous section examined the problems inherent when heterogeneous people wish to

choose different health plans. Without adequate risk adjustment, it was shown that plans might be

insufficiently generous, to avoid attracting high risk people. To get around this problem, some

countries have mandated that everyone be enrolled in a basic plan that covers services up to a

minimally acceptable level, and then allow people to supplement that package with more generous

insurance if they wish. This solution seems reasonable on first blush, but it too suffers substantial

problems.

       Private supplemental insurance might take one of three forms. One type of insurance is for

services that the basic plan does not cover. For example, Medicare in the United States does not




       50
         The extent to which costs are fully pooled depends on the degree to which individual
wages reflect individual health insurance costs. There is strong evidence that employees as a
whole bear health insurance costs, but little evidence about whether this occurs on a worker-by-
worker basis.

                                                 68
cover outpatient prescription drugs,51 or most long-term care expenses. Supplemental insurance to

cover uncovered services is allowed in most countries, including the United States. About half of

the elderly in the United States have private insurance to cover prescription drugs, largely through

Medicaid or a former employer.

       As one might imagine, adverse selection is a substantial problem for such markets. In the

individual market for insurance coverage to supplement Medicare, for example, very few people buy

packages with pharmaceutical coverage, and those that do pay dearly for the care (Ettner, 1997).

Supplemental insurance for uncovered services also has cost implications for the public sector.

People with coverage for a supplemental service will use more of that service than they would in

the absence of insurance. This additional service use might increase or decrease use of services

covered under the basic plan, depending on whether covered and uncovered services are

complements or substitutes. Coverage for prescription drugs in the United States seems to have

relatively little effect on use of physician and hospital services, but the impact of covering other

services such as long-term care could be larger (Cutler, 2000).

       A second type of insurance is to pay for cost sharing required under the basic plan. The cost

sharing required under the Medicare program is high: nearly $800 for inpatient care and 20 percent

coinsurance with no stop loss for outpatient care. At their discretion, Medicare beneficiaries can

obtain supplemental insurance to pay for these out-of-pocket costs.

       This form of supplemental insurance has even clearer cost implications for the government.

People who insure required cost sharing use more services than those who do not. Some of this

additional utilization is paid for by the public sector. For example, consider a person who has



       51
            The same is true in Canada for the non-elderly population

                                                 69
pneumonia and has the choice of staying in a hospital for observation or staying at home. Suppose

that the hospital stay will cost $2,000. If the person faces an $800 deductible, he might choose not

to enter the hospital. With a supplemental insurance policy covering the deductible, however, the

person enters the hospital. Only $800 of the additional utilization is paid for by the supplemental

insurer; the remaining $1,200 is paid for by the primary policy. The supplemental insurance policy

is in effect subsidized by the primary plan. This subsidy encourages essentially all elderly without

employer-based supplemental insurance or Medicaid to purchase this coverage. Between Medicaid,

employer-based supplemental insurance, and individually-purchased supplemental insurance, nearly

90 percent of Medicare beneficiaries have eliminated the cost-sharing in the Medicare policy. The

cost implications of this insurance are large.52 Christensen and Shinogle (1997), and United States

Physician Payment Review Commission (1996) estimate that people with supplemental insurance

use 20 to 30 percent more Medicare services than those without such coverage.

       The third form of supplemental insurance, and the most controversial,53 is insurance to pay

for services already covered under the basic package. The supply-side restrictions on medical

service use imposed in many countries have led to waiting lists for care. In some cases, people

might have to wait a year or longer for access to non-emergency services. In the face of these

waiting lines, some people would choose to pay for private insurance (or pay physicians privately)

which would allow them to jump to the front of the queue.



       52
          Estimating these additional costs is not straightforward. The additional utilization of
people with supplemental coverage over those without it is a product of both moral hazard and
adverse selection (since sicker people value supplemental insurance more than healthy people).
To estimate the importance of moral hazard, one must first back out the share due to adverse
selection or find an instrument for insurance coverage separate from health status.
       53
            See Propper and Green (1999) for discussion.

                                                70
       This type of insurance can increase total service utilization at low out-of-pocket cost.

Consider a person with a broken hip. On the public system, the person may face a year wait to visit

an orthopedist, who then schedules surgery several months later. Supplemental insurance might pay

for an orthopedist visit right away. The person can then join the smaller waiting list for the surgery

(perhaps moving up in that line, with additional payments to the surgeon), and have the public sector

pay for that care. For the cost of one orthopedist visit, the person cuts the length of the wait by a

year or more.

       The belief that supplemental insurance enables rich people to jump the queue at the expense

of poor people has led to this type of insurance being banned in many countries, such as Canada.54

In other countries such as the UK, supplementary insurance is allowed and is held by nearly 20

percent of the population. Still others pay out-of-pocket to jump the queue.

       While those with supplemental insurance certainly benefit from such a system, it is not

obvious that those left behind lose out. In the orthopedist example, when the person pays the

orthopedist privately, resources are saved by the public plan. If these resources are used to expand

the supply of medical services, the remaining enrollees in the queue will benefit as well, albeit not

as much as those with private insurance. In practice, it is not obvious that payments for salaried

physicians adjust in an appropriate manner, and some countries have notorious examples where

physicians abuse the system to collect multiple salaries. In that case, allowing supplemental

insurance could harm those not sufficiently wealthy to afford it.55


       54
         Canadians can come to the United States for care. Such events are relatively rare,
however, and they pay the full cost for the care.
       55
           The political economy of this type of supplemental insurance has also drawn attention.
If the rich can opt out of the public system at will, their demand for a high-quality public sector
may decline, potentially leading to an unraveling of support for public insurance (Gouveia,

                                                 71
IX.    Equity Concerns and Policy for the Poor



       Equity concerns dominate many public considerations about health care. They were a

driving force behind national health insurance in many countries and are a perennial issue in

countries like the United States without a national system. I start off by characterizing the medical

care utilization of the poor and then turn to the public policy issues.



       IX.1    Medical care for the poor in the United States

       The main health insurance program for the poor is Medicaid. Medicaid eligibility is

complex; only a brief summary is presented here (see Gruber, forthcoming, for a detailed discussion

of Medicaid and evidence on its effects). Traditionally, Medicaid eligibility was tied to receipt of

cash welfare assistance, formerly known as Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) and

currently known as Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF). AFDC eligibility was

restricted to low-income single women with children. Income cutoffs were generally about 50

percent of the poverty line.



1997). But the opposite result may also occur. The waiting lines the rich face in the absence of
supplemental insurance may diminish their support for public insurance entirely. Scattered
empirical evidence suggests that the political economy consequences of opting out have been
small (Burchardt, Hills, and Propper, 1999; Globerman and Vining, 1998).
        A further concern is whether having a private sector erodes the monopsony position of
governments. If being a monopoly purchaser is a key part of how governments hold down
prices, allowing other purchasers will result in increased government costs. In the short run, this
would be an efficiency loss, as suppliers are paid more for the same product. Over the long-
term, the welfare consequences depend on the supply elasticity of service provision.

                                                 72
       In practice, this left out a lot of needy people. Many pregnant women and young children

were not eligible for Medicaid because of family circumstances (the woman was married or living

with someone) or because they had income slightly above the AFDC eligibility line. Providing

health insurance for these groups was thought to be particularly valuable, and perhaps even cost

saving, since keeping pregnant women healthy might reduce the occurrence of costly care for

premature birth (Institute of Medicine, 1985).

       As a result, in the late 1980s and early 1990s, there was a dramatic expansion of the

Medicaid program. Figure 12 shows eligibility rules in 1999. All pregnant women and infants with

incomes below 133 percent of the poverty line are eligible for Medicaid, independent of whether

they live in a single or dual parent family. At state option, this can be extended to 185 percent of the

poverty line. Children aged 1 to 5 are eligible for Medicaid up to 133 percent of poverty, and

children aged 6 to 15 are eligible up to the poverty line. Children aged 16 and older are eligible only

up to lower incomes, about 41 percent of the poverty line, but this is being extended to the poverty

line as the youngest of these children age. These expansions doubled the share of women eligible

for Medicaid if pregnant and increased the share of children eligible by a third.

       More recently, there was a further expansion of health insurance eligibility for children. The

Child Health Insurance Program (CHIP) was enacted in 1997, with the goal of increasing coverage

to even higher levels of income. Under the CHIP, states can cover children in families with incomes

below 200 percent of poverty. The new coverage can be through Medicaid or other systems. CHIP

enrollment has been relatively slow (less than 2 million children covered within the first two years,

compared to Medicaid coverage of 12 million), however, so there has not been a lot of analysis of

this program to date.

       The net impact of these changes is shown in Table 9. I report health care coverage for the

                                                  73
non-elderly population by income in 1986, prior to most of the expansions, and 1998.56 The table

groups people into three income categories: the poor (income below the poverty line); the near poor

(income between poverty and twice poverty); and the non poor (income above twice poverty). The

impetus behind the Medicaid expansions is readily apparent; nearly as many people between poverty

and twice the poverty line were uninsured in 1986 as compared with those with lower incomes.

       Medicaid coverage has increased significantly among the near poor – the major expansion

group – from 12 percent to 17 percent of that group. Medicaid coverage fell among the lowest
                                                                                                   57
income group, as welfare reform and a strong economy moved people off the welfare rolls.

Medicaid coverage has historically been low among the non-poor.

       Being uninsured does not mean that one goes without medical care. Partly by law and partly

by tradition, hospitals provide care for all people with medical emergencies, whether or not they can

pay. This ‘uncompensated care’ has been estimated at about 5 percent of total hospital costs.

Physicians provide some care to the uninsured as well, but the amounts are lower. Of course, no care

can be truly uncompensated.58 Hospitals finance unreimbursed care by charging more to those with

insurance and using those revenues to pay for the uninsured.



       IX.2      Optimal policy for the poor

       The central question facing governments is how to design a medical care system for the poor.


       56
          There have been some minor changes in the CPS wording about health insurance over
this time period, but they are not sufficiently large to explain the trends shown.
       57
            The magnitude of this change is large, and it is not completely clear why it all
occurred.
       58
         Hospitals do receive donations, but donations have fallen over time relative to the costs
of medical care.

                                                   74
Universal insurance coverage is one option: the government could raise taxes (income, payroll, or

consumption) to finance universal coverage. The tax and insurance issues involved in this were

discussed above; I do not repeat that discussion here. A second option is a partial public program.

This is what the United States has pursued through the Medicaid program: some people are eligible

for public insurance but others are not. Overall coverage is a mix between public insurance, private

insurance, and uninsurance.

       The choice between universal and targeted programs is a classic tradeoff in public finance

(Akerlof, 1978).59 Because universal programs involve more public spending, the deadweight loss

from taxation is greater. But partial programs lead to other distortions that universal programs

avoid: people will change their behavior to qualify for a partial program, where they would not need

to do so under the universal system. Behavioral change might take several forms. People with

income above the eligibility line might work less than otherwise would, so they qualify for public

insurance. They might change their family circumstances as well, for example not being married.

Finally, they might drop their private insurance coverage if they are eligible for the public program.

In addition, partial programs have the problem that people may not know about them, and thus may

not use the services at the right time.

       The Medicaid expansions of the late 1980s and 1990s provide an ideal window to examine

these issues. By extending eligibility to higher income groups and dual parent families, the

expansions encouraged more Medicaid beneficiaries to work and provided incentives for families

to stay together. On the negative side, they also encouraged higher income people to drop their




       59
          Akerlof compared a program focused on income alone to one also conditioning on
another factor. The income-only program is effectively a universal one.

                                                 75
private coverage and enroll in Medicaid.60 This ‘crowding out’ of private coverage has become a

central concern of the literature because it increases the cost of the Medicaid program without

substantial health benefits.



       IX.3    Crowding Out: Theory and Empirical Evidence

       Figure 13, taken from Cutler and Gruber (1996a), shows the economics of crowding out.

Health insurance purchase is shown on the vertical axis; spending on other goods and services is on

the horizontal axis. Indifference curves I1, I2, and I3 show three people with the same income but

different valuations of health insurance. Person I1 is uninsured, I2 chooses moderate insurance, and

I3 chooses very generous insurance.

       Now suppose the government introduces a free61 health insurance program offering medical

care at quality m. The program is designed for people without insurance. But the program can only

be offered on the basis of income. Thus, all three people are eligible. This program is more

appealing than the status quo for both I1 and I2. The increased insurance coverage of I1 is intended;

I2 has been crowded out of private coverage.

       Crowding out increases the cost to the government of public programs relative to the

benefits. The coverage expansion may have a positive benefit-cost analysis for I1 but a negative

benefit-cost difference when I2 joins the program.



       60
         The incidence of employer payments for insurance has been a subject of much debate.
Theoretical and empirical work generally agree that employees pay for health insurance costs in
the form of lower wages. But whether this incidence is on a worker-by-worker basis or a more
aggregated level is not clear. See Gruber (2000) and Krueger and Meyer (2000) for discussion.
       61
        For simplicity, I ignore the impact of the taxes needed to finance the program. They
would not alter the conclusions of the analysis.

                                                 76
        Table 9 provides some evidence on the potential magnitude of crowding out. In 1986, before

the Medicaid expansions, half the near poor population had private insurance. Roughly one-third

were uninsured. Thus, unless the Medicaid expansions were carefully designed to discourage those

with private insurance from enrolling, there could be significant crowdout.

        A central empirical issue is how extensive this crowding out has been. Significant research

has been directed to this question, which is summarized in Table 10. The first study to examine this

question was Cutler and Gruber (1996a).62 They analyzed the magnitude of crowding out using data

from the 1988-93 Current Population Surveys (CPS). Different states raised their Medicaid

eligibility criteria at different times, and started from different initial levels of coverage. Thus, there

is significant geographic variation in the size and timing of the Medicaid expansions. Cutler and

Gruber used this variation to identify crowding out. They estimated that crowdout was about 50

percent: for every two people taking up Medicaid, one person left private coverage.

        The surprising magnitude of this finding has sparked a number of additional studies using

different sources of data and methodologies. All of the studies find evidence of crowdout, although

the magnitude of the crowdout varies. Studies using CPS data, based on repeated cross-sections of

the population and examining cross-state as well as time series variation, tend to give similar

findings to Cutler and Gruber (Shore-Sheppard, 1996). Studies using the Survey of Income and

Program Participation or the National Longitudinal Survey of Youths, generally following particular

individuals over time, find smaller estimates of crowdout, in the 10 to 20 percent range (Dubay and

Kenney, 1996, 1997; Blumberg, Dubay, and Norton, 2000; Yazici and Kaestner, 1998). One would

not expect panel data to yield the same estimate of crowdout as repeated cross sections, since it



        62
             See also Cutler and Gruber (1996b,c).

                                                    77
examines only whether people drop private coverage when made eligible for Medicaid. Other

effects could lead to crowdout, since as people not taking up coverage as their income changes.

Whether the differences in results are due to the different methodologies or different data sets is not

generally known.

       While most of the studies look at the impact of Medicaid on private insurance, one study

examined whether areas with greater uncompensated care provision had less private insurance

coverage (Rask and Rask, 2000). Rask and Rask found significant crowdout from these programs.

       Crowding out might result from individual decisions to drop coverage or employer decisions

to increase cost sharing or perhaps drop coverage entirely. Two studies (Cutler and Gruber, 1996a,

and Shore-Sheppard, Buchmueller, and Jensen, 2000) have considered this question. Although the

effects of Medicaid generosity on cost-sharing and offering care are imprecisely estimated (it is hard

to learn about firm behavior with existing data), both studies suggest that crowding out is a function

of employee decisions to drop coverage more than employer decisions to limit or cancel their

insurance.

       The magnitude of crowding out bears directly on welfare loss from the tax exclusion of

employer-provided health insurance. The analysis above highlighted the welfare loss from

excessive moral hazard. The crowdout evidence suggests a countervailing benefit of the subsidy:

it offsets other incentives to switch to public insurance. No studies have estimated how the welfare

gain from minimizing crowdout compares to the welfare loss from excessive moral hazard.



       IX.4    Medicaid Expansions and Other Behaviors

       Crowdout is not the only behavior that may be affected by the Medicaid expansions. The

expansions increased the ability of women to work and still retain health benefits, and allowed

                                                  78
women to be married and still collect benefits. It also reduced the need for precautionary savings

in the event a person became sick. A smaller body of research has examined the empirical import

of these effects. In the interests of space, I do not review this literature at length; Gruber (2000) and

Krueger and Meyer (2000) provide detailed summaries.

        By allowing women to collect health benefits at higher levels of income, the Medicaid

expansions increased incentives for women to work. This should result in increased employment

and lower welfare participation among this group of the population. Several studies have addressed

this issue empirically. Yelowitz (1995), using the cross-state time series methodology described

above, found significant evidence that labor supply increased with the expansions. He estimated

that increasing the income cutoff for eligibility by 25 percent of the poverty level increased labor

force participation among low income women by 3 percentage points. Meyer and Rosenbaum

(2000) find counter evidence, however. Using the same methodology but a slightly different

measure of eligibility, they find no evidence that labor supply increased after the expansions. Ham

and Shore-Sheppard (1999) find evidence that Medicaid expansions led some women to leave

welfare for work. Thus, the overall evidence on welfare and work decisions is mixed.

        Less evidence has been directed at how Medicaid expansions affect marriage, fertility, and

savings. Yelowitz (1998) finds that the Medicaid expansions increased the share of women who got

married, consistent with the expansion of coverage to dual-parent families. Joyce, Kaestner, and

Kwan (1998) find that Medicaid increases fertility rates, presumably by making the cost of birth and

subsequent medical care cheaper. The increase in fertility comes about largely as a result of reduced

abortions (Joyce and Kaestner, 1996). Finally, Gruber and Yelowitz (1999) present evidence that

savings falls by 16 percent in families made eligible for Medicaid, consistent with reduced need for

precautionary savings. The research on all of these issue is just beginning, however.

                                                   79
       IX.5    Medicaid Expansions and Health Outcomes

       The primary goal of the Medicaid expansions was to improve the health of the poor. Thus,

they ultimatley need to be evaluated along that margin. Several studies, shown in Table 11, have

estimated the health impacts of Medicaid expansions.

       The evidence suggests the health benefits are relatively modest. Piper et al. (1990), Haas

et al. (1993), and Joyce (1999) look at the effect of Medicaid expansions on health in particular

states or cities – Tennessee, Massachusetts, and New York City respectively. The first two studies

find no impact of the expansions on health; Joyce finds a modest positive impact. Other studies

have taken a national approach. Currie and Gruber (1996a, b) and Kaestner, Joyce, and Racine

(2001) use the cross-state and time series methodology described above to evaluate the health

impacts of the Medicaid expansions. Currie and Gruber find small but statistically significant

improvements in health following the Medicaid expansions. Kaestner et al. find weak, if any,

support for the hypothesis of improved health.

       Even relatively modest health benefits might be worth it if the value of life is high. Only one

study has explicitly done a cost-effectiveness analysis for the Medicaid expansions (Currie and

Gruber, 1996a). Currie and Gruber estimate that the Medicaid expansions had a cost-effectiveness

ratio of roughly $1 million per life, considering only the mortality impact. While this is relatively

high, in comparison to the Viscusi (1993) summary of the value of a life ($3 million to $7 million

for a middle-aged person), the Medicaid expansions seem to be worth it. Thus, at least some studies

find that the Medicaid expansions did have a positive benefit in mortality impacts alone, although

the rate of return is not enormously high.

       Some explanation for why the health benefits are not larger is provided by Piper et al. (1990).

They show that many women did not enroll in Medicaid for prenatal care until very late in the

                                                 80
pregnancy – often at the time of delivery. Thus, they were missing much of the prenatal care that

may have the highest cost-effectiveness ratio (Institute of Medicine, 1985). This may be a result of

the incremental nature of the program: information about program eligibility may only diffuse over

time, and eligibility rules are complex. A universal system might increase utilization of services

more.

        The finding of very late use of services, in turn, suggests an important reason why the

estimated cost-effectiveness analysis presented above may be understated.           The Medicaid

expansions provided hospitals with additional revenue they would not otherwise have had – the

reimbursement for a delivery that used to be uncompensated. To the extent that these revenue

increases led hospitals to provide high quality care more generally, the benefits of this additional

care for health should be accounted for as a benefit fo the expansions. Only one study has traced

how the Medicaid funds were used. Duggan (2000) shows that hospitals receiving a large amount

of money from the Disproportionate Share Hospital Program (DSH) of Medicaid generally saved

those funds in the short-term, adding them to balance sheet assets. It will be important to trace

through the effects of these funds over time. If used well, it may be that public programs have a

more favorable benefit-cost analysis than the individual calculations suggest.



X.      Intergenerational Aspects of Medical Care



        While most analysis has focused on the intragenerational aspects of medical care programs,

there are intergenerational consequences to these programs as well. Public medical care systems

are almost always financed on a pay-as-you-go basis. Medicare in the United States, for example,

is predominantly pay as you go, with a small surplus currently but the prospect of large deficits

                                                81
looming.

          Pay as you go systems involve substantial intergenerational transfers. Generations alive

when these systems were created or when the benefits expanded rapidly receive large benefits, while

future generations bear the cost. A few studies in the literature have attempted to estimate the

magnitude of these intergenerational transfers        (Steuerle and Bakija, 1997; United States

Congressional Budget Office, 1997; Gokhale and Kotlikoff, 1999; Cutler and Sheiner, 2000). Most

of this research has focused on the intergenerational aspects of the Medicare program in the United

States.

          Figure 14, taken from Cutler and Sheiner (2000) presents the most recent set of estimates.

Cohorts born around 1920, and thus reaching Medicare eligibility around 1985, are expected to

receive net benefits of over $60,000 from Medicare. Cohorts born today are expected to pay more

into the system than they receive out. The rates of return are also high for older cohorts. The 1910

cohort is expected to receive a rate of return of over 25 percent, compared to 2.2 percent for cohorts

born in 1980.63

          These estimates use the assumptions of the Medicare actuaries, which project that medical

cost increases will slow down in the next 25 years to the growth rate of the economy as a whole.

Young cohorts today therefore pay for the rapid cost growth experienced by older cohorts but do

note receive benefits from rapid growth themselves. An alternative projection allowing medical cost

growth to continue avoids the very large losses for current young populations. But these groups still

fare worse than the cohorts that were elderly or near elderly when the program was implemented.



          63
           Rates of return are extremely high for the very oldest cohorts because they paid so little
into the system but get a lot out. For this reason, we do not report rates of return for cohorts
prior to those born in 1910.

                                                 82
        Appropriate government policy towards this intergenerational distribution is a broader

question than just Medicare policy, involving issues of savings and labor market behavior, among

other behaviors. I do not pursue these issues at length here.



XI.     Conclusions



        As this brief (!) tour through the health sector indicates, the public policy issues raised by

health care are vast. I conclude by highlighting what has been learned and providing some direction

for future research.

        At the most basic level, governments are involved in what people do to themselves –

smoking and drinking on the bad side, exercise and eating well on the good. One concern about

such behaviors is the externalities they impose; financial and health consequences need to be

considered. ‘Internalities’ may be important as well; there are many reasons to think smokers

themselves would be better off if induced not to smoke. The literature has made substantial progress

on the externality question, but much less progress has been made on the internality question. Since

the potential magnitude of internal damages dwarfs the magnitude of external damages, more

research on this question is a clear priority.

        Once an individual becomes sick, the medical system takes over. Governments face a first

choice about how to provide medical services: through the public or private sector. The answer is

complex. Private firms respond to incentives more rapidly than public firms, but the incentives need

to be the right ones for the system to be efficient. The wealth of different delivery systems in the

United States and abroad creates a host of experimental situations to help judge the appropriate

delivery system for medical care. Empirical research on this question is a clear need.

                                                 83
        In every country, the government is involved in influencing the health insurance that people

receive. In designing such policies, the second best is the goal. More generous insurance increases

the gains from risk sharing but also the losses from moral hazard. The optimal policy balances the

marginal insurance gains against the marginal moral hazard losses. An individual in isolation

designing such a policy for himself would get the tradeoff right. But government may be involved

where it is not warranted. By subsidizing employer-provided insurance at the expense of out-of-

pocket spending, the Federal government in the United States encourages more generous insurance,

and perhaps too much moral hazard. The ‘perhaps’ is key, however; the tax benefits of insurance

may encourage valuable innovation, may offset other public subsidies encouraging people to be

uninsured, or may encourage risk pooling at the expense of adverse selection. Understanding the

total impact of the tax subsidy through all of these channels is still to be done.

        Putting health insurance in a market creates even more problems. People with different

health risks want different insurance plans; low risks will not voluntarily subsidize high risks. As

a result, the market will attempt to segregate the two groups, either explicitly (by charging high risks

more than low risks) or implicitly (by encouraging low risks to move to less generous plans to avoid

the high risks). The problems from such attempts are three-fold: the less healthy will pay more for

insurance the healthy, denying people the ex ante risk pooling that they would want; people are

encouraged to join plans that are less generous than they would prefer if they faced actuarially fair

prices, because such switching saves them from subsidizing the high risks; and plans will have

incentives to make their policies less generous, so as to discourage high risks from enrolling.

        At the extreme, governments may respond to these problems by mandating insurance in a

common plan at a common price. Short of this, the government might enact regulatory barriers to

segregation or put in place financial incentives for the sick and healthy to remain together.

                                                  84
Empirical evidence on the effects of these policies is not entirely clear; policy action is now awaiting

such knowledge.

       Finally, governments are involved in distributional issues for the poor, as they always are.

Equity in health care is valued more than equity in most other markets; as the saying goes, health

care is a right and not a good. Equity is a bigger problem in countries without universal coverage

than in those with universal coverage; the United States struggles with equity more than most other

developed countries. In recent years, the United States has had incremental expansions of coverage

for the poor. These programs have been effective, but marginally so. The costs are high and the

benefits only modest. Learning how to design such programs is a key question facing the public

sector. This question is particularly pressing because medical care markets are changing so rapidly.

The rise of managed care and cutbacks in government payments are squeezing profits from medical

care providers. The impact these policies will have on the implicit subsidy system for the poor is

worrisome.

       Some evidence of the sheer diversity of opinion about public policy for health care is

provided by the recent debate about Medicare in the United States. Some look at Medicare and see

an inefficient, government-provided insurance system. Thus, one contingent supports a voucher

system in the hopes that plan competition will eliminate wasteful spending from the program (Aaron

and Reischauer, 1995). A second group considers the lack of adequate benefits the major problem

with Medicare. The poor elderly are faced with high cost sharing, and those without employer-

provided supplemental insurance or Medicaid are often uninsured for prescription drugs. Thus, this

group favors expanding the Medicare package and promoting increased service use (Moon, 1996).

Finally, some see the high and rising cost of Medicare as the central problem. Increased Medicare

spending worsens the Federal budget and reduces national saving. Thus, a third group favors

                                                  85
shifting the costs of the current system to the elderly, or forcing middle aged people to save more

for medical care needs when they are retired (Gokhale and Kotlikoff, 1999; Feldstein, 1999). Each

of these positions is credible in its own right, but the solutions are diametrically opposed. In perhaps

no other area of public finance is the range of differing policy prescriptions so great.

       This broad range of questions demands serious research attention. Which direction should

policy go? What are the next steps? This chapter provides an outline, but only that.
                                   References

Aaron, H. J., and R. D. Reischauser (1995), “The Medicare Reform Debate: What
Is The Next Step?” Health Affairs, 14:8-30.

Akerlof, G. (1978), “The Economics of Tagging as Applied to the Optimal Income
Tax”, American Economic Review, 68:8-19.

Altman, D., D. M. Cutler and R. J. Zeckhauser, (1998), “Adverse Selection and
Adverse Retention,” American Economic Review, Vol. 88, No. 2, pp. 122-26.

Arrow, K. (1963), “Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care,”
American Economic Review 53(5), 941-973.

Arrow, K. (1965), Aspects of the Theory of Risk Bearing (Helsinki: Yrjo Jahnssonin
Saatio).

Auerbach, A. and J. Hines (2001), “Taxation and Economic Efficiency”, In: A.
Auerbach and M. Feldstein, eds., Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 3
(Amsterdam: Elsevier).

Beck, R. G., (1974), “The Effects of Co-Payment on the Poor,” Journal of Human
Resources, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 129-142.

Becker, G. S., and K. M. Murphy (1988), “A Theory of Rational Addiction,”
Journal of Political Economy 96: 675-700.

Becker, G. S., M. Grossman, and K. M. Murphy (1994), “An Empirical Analysis of
Cigarette Addiction,” American Economic Review 84:396-418.

Besley, T. and M. Gouveia (1994), “Alternative Systems of Health Care
Provision,” Economic Policy: A European Forum 9:199-249.

Bhattacharya, J., W. B. Vogt, A. Yoshikawa and T. Nakahara, (1996), “The
Utilization of Outpatient Medical Services in Japan,” Journal of Human Resources,
Vol. 31, No. 2, pp. 450-76.

Bice, T. W., (1975), “Risk Vulnerability and Enrollment in a Prepaid Group
Practice,” Medical Care, Vol. 13, No. 8, pp. 698-703.

Blomqvist, A. G. (1997), “Optimal Non-linear Health Insurance,” Journal of
Health Economics 16:303-21.

Blomqvist, A. G., and P. Johansson (1997), “Economic Efficiency and Mixed
Public/Private Insurance,” Journal of Public Economics 66:505-16.



                                                                                 1
Blumberg, L. J., L. Dubay, and S. A. Norton (2000), “Did the Medicaid Expansions
for Children Displace Private Insurance? An Analysis Using the SIPP,” Journal of
Health Economics 19:33-60.

Bovenberg, A. L. and L. Goulder, (2001). “Environmental Taxation and
Regulation”, In. A. Auerbach and M. S. Feldstein, eds., Handbook of Public
Economics, Vol. 4 (Amsterdam: Elsevier).

Brown, R. S., et al., (1993), The Medicare Risk Program for HMOs -- Final
Summary Report on Findings from the Evaluation, Final Report under HCFA
Contract Number 500-88-0006 (Princeton, NJ: Mathematica Policy Research, Inc.,)

Buchanan, J. L., E. B. Keeler, J. E. Rolph and M. R. Holmer, (1991), “Simulating
Health Expenditures Under Alternative Insurance Plans,” Management Science
Vol. 37, No. 9, pp. 1067-89.

Buchmueller, T. and J. DiNardo (forthcoming), “Did Community Rating Induce
and Adverse Selection Death Spiral? Evidence from New York, Pennsylvania and
Connecticut,” American Economic Review.

Buchmueller, T. C., and P. J. Feldstein (1997), “The Effect of Price on Switching
Among Health Plans,” Journal of Health Economics 16:231-47.

Buchmueller, T. C., and G. A. Jensen (1997),“Small Group Reform in a
Competitive Managed Care Market: The Case of California, 1993 to 1995,” Inquiry
34:249-63.

Burchardt, T., J. Hills, and C. Proper (1999). Public Welfare and Public Policy,
(York: Joseph Rountree Foundation).

Cardon, J. and I. Hendel, (2001), “Asymmetric Information in Health Care and
Health Insurance Markets: Evidence from the National Medical Expenditure
Survey,” Rand Journal of Economics, 32:408-427.

Chaloupka, F. (1991), “Rational Addictive Behavior and Cigarette Smoking,”
Journal of Political Economy 99:722-42.

Chaloupka, F. and K. E. Warner (2000), “The Economics of Smoking,” in A.
Culyer and J. Newhouse, eds., Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 1(B),
(North Holland, Amsterdam) 1539-1627.

Cherkin, D. C., L. Grothaus and E. H. Wagner, (1989), “The Effect of Office Visit
Copayments on Utilization in a Health Maintenance Organization,” Medical Care,
Vol. 27, No. 7, pp. 669-79.




                                                                                    2
Chernew, M., K. Frick, and C. G. McLaughlin (1997), “The Demand for Health
Insurance Coverage by Low-Income Workers: Can Reduced Premiums Achieve
Full Coverage?" Health Services Research, 32:453-70.

Chernew, M., and K. Frick (1999), “The impact of managed care on the existence
of equilibrium in health insurance markets”, Journal Of Health Economics, 18:573-
592.

Chernick, H. A., M. R. Holmer, and D. H. Weinberg (1987), “Tax Policy toward
Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical Services,” Journal of Health
Economics 6:1-25.

Christensen, S. and J. Shinogle (1997), “Effects of Supplemental Coverage on Use
of Services by Medicare Enrollees,” Health Care Financing Review, 5-17.

Cochrane, J., (1995), “Time Consistent Health Insurance,” Journal of Political
Economy 103 (3), 445-73.

Colle, A. D. and M. Grossman, (1978), “Determinants of Pediatric Care
Utilization,” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 13, pp. 115-53.

Conrad, D. A., D. Grembowski and P. Milgrom, (1985), “Adverse Selection Within
Dental Insurance Markets, Advances in Health Economics and Health Services
Research, Vol. 6, Richard M. Scheffler and Louis F. Rossiter, eds. (Greenwich,
CT: JAI Press), 171-90.

Cook, P. J. and M. Moore (2000), “Alcohol,” in A. Culyer and J. Newhouse ed.,
Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 1B, (North Holland, Amsterdam) 1629-
1673.

Culyer, A. and J. P. Newhouse (2000a), Handbook of Health Economics. Vol. 1A
(North Holland, Amsterdam)

Culyer, A. and J. P. Newhouse (2000b), Handbook of Health Economics. Vol. 1B
(North Holland, Amsterdam).

Currie, J. and J. Gruber (1996a), “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent
Changes in the Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women,” Journal of Political
Economy 104:1263-96.

Currie, J. and J. Gruber (1996b), “Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of
Medical Care, and Child Health,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111:431-66.

Currie, J. and J. Gruber (1997), “The Technology of Birth: Health Insurance,
Medical Interventions, and Infant Health,” NBER Working Paper No. 5985.




                                                                                    3
Cutler, D. M., (1996), “Why Don’t Markets Insure Long-Term Risk,” mimeo,
Harvard University.

Cutler, D. M. (2000), “Supplementing Public Insurance Coverage with Private
Insurance Coverage: Implications for Medical Care Systems”, mimeo, Harvard
University.

Cutler, D. M. (2001), “Equality, Efficiency, and Market Fundamentals: The
Dynamics of International Medical Care Reform,” mimeo.

Cutler, D. M., A.M. Epstein, R.G. Frank, R. Hartman, C. King III, J. P. Newhouse,
M. B. Rosenthal, and E. R. Vigdor (2000) “How Good a Deal Was the Tobacco
Settlement: Assessing Payments to Massachusetts,” Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty, 21:235-261.

Cutler, D. M. and J. Gruber (1996a), “Does Public Insurance Crowd Out Private
Insurance?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111:391-430.

Cutler, D. M. and J. Gruber (1996b), “Medicaid Crowd Out and the Inverse Bind:
Response to Editorial,” Inquiry 33:9.

Cutler, D. M. and J. Gruber (1996c), “The Effect of Medicaid Expansions on
Public Insurance, Private Insurance, and Redistribution,” American Economic
Review 86:378-83.

Cutler, D. M., J. Gruber, R. S. H., M. B. Landrum, J. P. Newhouse, and M.
Rosenthal (2002), “The Economic Impacts of the Tobacco Settlement,” Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management, 21:1-19.

Cutler, D. M., and J. Horwitz (1999), “Converting Hospitals from Not-for-Profit to
For-Profit Form: Why and What Effects?” In: D. Cutler, ed., The Changing
Hospital Industry: Comparing Not-for-Profit and For-Profit Institutions (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press).

Cutler, D. M. and R. Johnson (2001), “The Birth of the Social Insurance State,”
mimeo, Harvard University.

Cutler, D. M., and M. McClellan (2001), “Is Technological Change in Medicine
Worth It?”, Health Affairs, 20:11-29.

Cutler, D. M., and S. J. Reber (1998), “Paying for Health Insurance: The Trade-Off
between Competition and Adverse Selection,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
113:433-66.

Cutler, D. M., and E. Richardson (1997), “Measuring the Health of the U. S.
Population,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics, 217-271.



                                                                                  4
Cutler, D. M., and L. M. Sheiner (2000), “Generational Aspects of Medicare”,
American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 90: 303-307.

Cutler, D. M. and R. J. Zeckhauser, (1998), “Adverse Selection in Health
Insurance,” Frontiers in Health Policy Research, Vol. 1, Alan Garber, ed.
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).

Cutler, D. M. and R. J. Zeckhauser, (2000), “The Anatomy of Health Insurance” In:
A. Culyer and J. Newhouse, eds., Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 1A
(Amsterdam: Elsevier).

Dafny, L. and J. Gruber (forthcoming), “Does Public Insurance Improve the
Efficiency of Medical Care? Medicaid Expansions and Avoidable
Hospitalizations”, Journal of Public Economics.

Darby, M. R. and E. Karni (1973), “Free Competition and the Optimal Amount of
Fraud”, Journal of Law & Economics.16:67-88.

Davis, K. and L. B. Russell, (1972), “The Substitution of Hospital Outpatient Care
for Inpatient care,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 54, No. 2, pp. 109-
120.

Deaton, A. (2001), “Relative Deprivation, Inequality, and Mortality,” NBER
Working Paper, No. 8099.

de Meza, D., (1983), “Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care,”
Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 2 (1), 47-54.

Dowd, B. and R. Feldman, (1985), “Biased Selection in Twin Cities Health Plans,”
Advances in Health Economics and Health Services Research, Vol. 6, Richard M.
Scheffler and Louis F. Rossiter, eds. (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press) pp. 253-71.

Dowd, B. and R. Feldman (1994), “Premium Elasticities of Health Plan Choice,”
Inquiry 31:438-44.

Dubay, L. C., and G. M. Kenney (1996), “The Effects of Medicaid Expansions on
Insurance Coverage of Children,” The Future of Children 6:152-161.

Dubay, L. C. and G. M. Kenney (1997), “Did Medicaid Expansions for Pregnant
Women Crowd Out Private Coverage?” Health Affairs 16:185-93.

Dubay, L. C., S. A. Norton, and M. Moon (1995), “Medicaid Expansions for
Pregnant Women and Infants: Easing Hospitals' Uncompensated Care Burdens?”
Inquiry 32:332-44.




                                                                                     5
Duggan, M (1999). “Hospital Ownership and Public Medical Spending”, The
Quarterly Journal of Economics. 115:1343-73.

Eggers, P. W. (1980), “Risk Differential Between Medicare Beneficiaries Enrolled
and Not Enrolled in an HMO,” Health Care Financing Review, Vol. 1, pp. 91-99.

Eichner, M. J., (1998), “Incentives, Price Expectations and Medical Expenditures:
An Analysis of Claims Under Employer-Provided Health Insurance,” mimeo.

Ellis, R. P. (1985), “The Effect of Prior-Year Health Expenditures on Health
Coverage Plan Choice,” Advances in Health Economics and Health Services
Research, Vol. 6, Richard M. Scheffler and Louis F. Rossiter, eds. (Greenwich,
CT: JAI Press) pp. 127-47.

Ellis, R. P., (1989), “Employee Choice of Health Insurance,” Review of Economics
and Statistics, Vol. 71, No. 2 pp. 215-23.

Ettner, S. (1997), “Adverse Selection and the Purchase of Medigap Insurance by
the Elderly,” Journal of Health Economics, 16: 543-562.

Evans, W., J. S. Ringel, and D. Stech (1999). “Tobacco Taxes and Public Policy to
Discourage Smoking”. In: J. Poterba, ed., Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 13,
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).

Farley, P. J. and A. C. Monheit, (1985), “Selectivity in the Demand for Health
Insurance and Health Care,” Advances in Health Economics and Health Services
Research, Vol. 6, Richard M. Scheffler and Louis F. Rossiter, eds. (Greenwich,
CT: JAI Press), pp. 231-52.

Feldman, R. and Dowd, B., (1991), “Must Adverse Selection Cause Premium
Spirals,” Journal of Health Economics, 10:350-357.

Feldman, R., B. Dowd, S. Leitz, and L. A. Blewett (1997), “The Effect of
Premiums on the Small Firm's Decision to Offer Health Insurance,” Journal of
Human Resources 32:635-58.

Feldman, R., M. Finch, B. Dowd, and S. Cassou (1989), “The Demand for
Employment-Based Health Insurance Plans,” Journal of Human Resources
24:115-42.

Feldstein, M. S., (1970), “The Rising Price of Physicians’ Services,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 52, No. 2, pp. 121-33.

Feldstein, M. S., (1970), “Hospital Cost Inflation: A Study of Nonprofit Price
Dynamics,” American Economic Review, Vol. 60 (1971), pp. 853-72.




                                                                                    6
Feldstein, M. S., (1971), “Hospital Cost Inflation: A Study of Nonprofit Price
Dynamics,” American Economic Review, Vol. 60 pp. 853-72.

Feldstein, M. S. (1973), “The Welfare Loss of Excess Health Insurance,” Journal
of Political Economy 81:251-80.

Feldstein, M. S. (1999), “Prefunding Medicare”, American Economic Review,
Papers and Proceeding, 89: 222-227.

Feldstein, M. S. and B. Friedman, (1977), “Tax Subsidies, the Rational Demand for
Insurance and the Health Care Crisis,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 7, No. 2
pp. 155-78.

Feldstein, P. J., (1964) “General Report,” Report of the Commission on the Cost of
Medical Care (Chicago: American Medical Association, Part 1).

Finkelstein, A. (forthcoming), “The Effect of Tax Subsidies to Employer-Provided
Supplementary Health Insurance: Evidence from Canada,” Journal of Public
Economics.

Fisher, E., J. Skinner, and J. Wennberg, “The Efficiency of Medicare”, mimeo,
Dartmouth College.

Fuchs, V. R. and M. J. Kramer, (1972), “Determinants of Expenditures for
Physicians' Services in the United States, 1948-68,” National Bureau of Economic
Research Occasional Paper Series, No. 117.

Fuchs, V. R. (1996), “Economics, Values, and Health Care Reform”, American
Economic Review, 86: 1-24.

Gentry, W. M., and E. Peress (1994), “Taxes and Fringe Benefits Offered by
Employers,” NBER Working Paper 4764.

Glaeser, E. and A. Shleifer (2001), “Not-for-profit Entrepreneurs”, Journal of
Public Economics, 81:99-115.

Glantz, S. and W. W. Parmley (1995), Passive Smoking and Heart Disease:
Mechanisms and Risk. Journal of the American Medical Association. 273:1047-
1053.

Glied, Sherry (2000)., “Managed Care,” In: A. Culyer and J. Newhouse, eds.,
Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 1A (Amsterdam: Elsevier).

Globerman, S. and A. Vining (1998), “A Policy Perspective on `Mixed’ Health
Care Financial Systems of Business and Economics,” Journal of Risk and
Insurance 65:57-80.



                                                                                     7
Gokhale J. and L. J. Kotlikoff (1999). “Medicare from the Perspective of
Generational Accounting”, In: A. Redelmeyer and T. Saving, eds., Medicare
Reform: Issues and Answers, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), 153-174.

Goldman, F. and M. Grossman, (1978), “The Demand for Pediatric Care: An
Hedonic Approach,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 86, No. 2, pp. 259-80.

Gouveia, M. (1997). “Majority Rule and the Public Provision of a Private Good.”
Public Choice. 93:221-44.

Griffith, M., N. Baloff and E. L. Spitznagel, (1984), “Utilization Patterns of Health
Maintenance Organization Disenrollees,” Medical Care, Vol. 22, No. 9, pp. 827-
34.

Grossman, H. (1979). “Adverse selection, dissembling, and competitive
equilibrium.” The Bell Journal of Economics, 10:336¯343

Grossman, M., F. J. Chaloupka, and I. Sirtalan (1998), “An Empirical Analysis of
Alcohol Addiction: Results from Monitoring the Future Panels”, Economic Inquiry,
36:39-48.

Gruber, J. (2000), “Health Insurance and the Labor Market”. In: A. Culyer and J.
Newhouse, eds., Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 1, (Amsterdam:
Elsevier).

Gruber, J. (forthcming), “Medicaid,” In: R. Moffitt, ed., Means Tested Transfer
Programs in the United States, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Gruber, J. and B. Koszegi (2001), “Is Addiction ‘Rational’: Theory and Evidence,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116:1261-1304.

Gruber, J. and J. M. Poterba (1994), “Tax Incentives and the Decision to Purchase
Health Insurance: Evidence from the Self-Employed,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 109:701-33.

Gruber, J. and J. M. Poterba (1996), “Tax Subsidies to Employer-Provided Health
Insurance,” in: J. M. Poterba and M. Feldstein eds., Empirical Foundation of
Household Taxation (University of Chicago Press, Chicago).

Gruber, J., and A. Yelowitz (1999). Public Health Insurance and Private Savings.
Journal of Political Economy. 107:1249-74.

Haas, J. S., S. Udvarhelyi, and A.M. Epstein (1993), “The Effect of Health
Coverage For Uninsured Pregnant Women on Maternal Health and The Use of
Cesarean Section,” Journal of the American Medical Association 270:61-4.



                                                                                    8
Hall, M. (2000), “The Impact of Health Insurance Market Reforms on Market
Competition”, American Journal of Managed Care, 6:57.

J. Ham and L. Shore-Sheppard (1999), “The Effect of Medicaid Expansions for low
Income Children on Medicaid Participation and Insurance Coverage: Estimates
from the SIPP”, mimeo, Williams College.

Hansmann, H. (1980). “The Role of Nonprofit Enterprise”, Yale Law Journal,
89:835-901.

Hart, O., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1997), “The Proper Scope of Government:
Theory and an Application to Prisons.. [Journal Article] The Quarterly Journal of
Economics. 112:1127-61.

Helms, W. D., A. K. Gauthier, and D. M. Campion (1992), "Mending the Flaws in
the Small-Group Market," Health Affairs, Summer 11:7-27.

Hing, E., and G. A. Jensen (1999), "Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act of 1996: Lessons from the States,” Medical Care 37:692-705.

Holmer, M. (1984), “Tax Policy and the Demand for Health Insurance,” Journal of
Health Economics 3:203-21.

Hubbard, R. G. and K. Hassett (1999). “Noncontractible Quality and
Organizational Form in the US Hospital Industry”, mimeo, Columbia University.

Institute of Medicine (1985). Preventing Low Birthweight, (Washington, D.C.:
Institute of Medicine).

Jackson-Beeck, M. and J. H. Kleinman, (1983), “Evidence for Self-Selection
Among Health Maintenance Organization Enrollees,” Journal of the American
Medical Association, Vol. 250, No. 20, pp. 2826-29.

Jensen, G. A., and M. A. Morrisey (1999), “Small Group Reform and Insurance
Provision by Small Firms, 1989-1995,” Inquiry 36:176-87.

Joyce, T. (1999), “Impact of Augmented Prenatal Care on Birth Outcomes of
Medicaid Recipients in New York City,” Journal of Health Economics 18:31-67.

Joyce, T. R. Kaestner, and F. Kwan (1998), “Is Medicaid Pronatalist? Effects of the
Medicaid Eligibility Expansions on Abortions and Births.” Family Planning
Perspectives, 30:108-113.

Joyce, T., and R. Kaestner (1996). "The Effect of Medicaid Income Eligibility
Expansions on Abortion." Demography 30:181-192.



                                                                                    9
Juba, D. A., J. R. Lave and J. Shaddy, (1980), “An Analysis of the Choice of
Health Benefits Plans,” Inquiry, Vol. 17, pp. 62-71.

Kaestner, R., T. Joyce, and A. Racine (2001), “Medicaid Eligibility and the
Incidence of Ambulatory Care Sensitive Hospitalizations for Children.” Social
Science and Medicine. 52:305-313.

Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research and Educational Trust (2000).
Employer Health Benefits. (Washington, D.C.: Henry J. Kaiser Family
Foundation).

Kapur, K. (2000a), “Labor Market Implications of State Small Group Health
Insurance Reform”, mimeo, Rand Corporation.

Kapur, K. (2000b), “The Impact of the Health Insurance Market on Small Firm
Employment”, mimeo, Rand Corporation.

Keenan, P., M. Beeuwkes-Buntin, T. McGuire, and J. Newhouse, (2001). “The
Prevalence of Formal Risk Adjustment in Health Plan Purchasing”, Inquiry,
38:245-259.

Kenkel, D. S. (1996), “New Estimates of the Optimal Tax on Alcohol,” Economic
Inquiry 34:296-319.

Kotowitz, Y. (1987), “Moral Hazard,” in the New Palgrave Dictionary of
Economics.

Krueger, A. and B. Meyer (2002), “Social Insurance and Labor Supply”, In: A.
Auerbach and M. Feldstein, eds., Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 4,
(Amsterdam: Elsevier).

Krupnick, A., A. Alberini, M. Cropper, N. Simon, B. O’Brien, R. Goeree, and M.
Heintzelman (2000), “Age, Health, and the Willingness to Pay for Mortality Risk
Reductions: A Contingent Valuation Survey of Ontario Residents,” mimeo,
Resources for the Future.

Laibson, D. (1997), “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 112:443-77.

Langwell, K. M. and J. P. Hadley, (1989), “Evaluation of the Medicare
Competition Demonstrations,” Health Care Financing Review, Vol. 11, No. 2, pp.
65-80.

Laux, F. L. (2000), “Addiction as a Market Failure: Using Rational Addiction
Results to Justify Tobacco Regulation,” Journal of Health Economics 19:421-37.


                                                                                  10
Leibowitz, A., and M. Chernew (1992), “The Firm’s Demand for Health
Insurance”, in Health Benefits and the Workforce, 77-83 (Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Department of Labor).

Long, S. H., R. F. Settle and C. W. Wrightson, (1988), “Employee Premiums,
Availability of Alternative Plans, and HMO Disenrollment,” Medical Care, Vol.
26, No. 10, pp. 927-38.

Luft, H. S., J. B. Trauner and S. C. Maerki, (1985), “Adverse Selection in a Large,
Multiple-Option Health Benefits Program: A Case Study of the California Public
Employees’ Retirement System,” Advances in Health Economics and Health
Services Research, Vol. 6, Richard M. Scheffler and Louis F. Rossiter, eds.
(Greenwich, CT: JAI Press) pp. 197-229.

Maibach, E., K. Dusenbury, P. Zupp, et al., (1998), “Marketing HMOs to Medicare
Beneficiaries: An Analysis of Four Medicare Markets,” Menlo Park, CA: Kaiser
Family Foundation.

Manning, W. G. and M. S. Marquis, (1996), “Health Insurance: The Tradeoff
Between Risk Pooling and Moral Hazard,” Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 15,
No. 5 pp. 609-39.

Manning, W. G., E. B. Keeler, J. P. Newhouse, E. M. Sloss, and J. Wasserman
(1989), “The Taxes of Sin. Do Smokers and Drinkers Pay Their Way?” Journal of
the American Medical Association 261:1604-9.

Manning, W. G., E. B. Keeler, J. P. Newhouse, E. M. Sloss, and J. Wasserman
(1991), The Costs of Poor Health Habits (Harvard University Press, Cambridge).

Marquis, M. S. (1992), “Adverse Selection with a Multiple Choice Among Health
Insurance Plans: A Simulation Analysis,” Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 11,
No. 2, pp. 129-51.

Marquis, M. S. and S.H. Long (1995), “Worker Demand for Health Insurance in
the Non-Group Market,” Journal of Health Economics 14:47-63.

Marquis, M. S. and S.H. Long (2001), “To Offer or Not to Offer: The Role of Price
in Employers’ Health Insurance Decisions”, Health Services Research, 36.

Marquis, M. S. and C. E. Phelps (1987), “Price Elasticity and Adverse Selection in
the Demand for Supplementary Health Insurance,” Economic Inquiry 25:299-313.

Marsteller, J. A., L. M. Nichols, A. Badawi, B. Kessler, S. Rajan, and S.
Zuckerman (1998), “Variations in the Uninsured: State and County Results”,
mimeo, Urban Institute.



                                                                                  11
McAvinchey, I. D. and A. Yannopoulos, (1993), “Elasticity Estimates from a
Dynamic Model of Interrelated Demands for Private and Public Acute Health
Care,” Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 12, pp. 171-86.

McGuire, T. G., (1981), “Price and Membership in a Prepaid Group Medical
Practice,” Medical Care, Vol. 19, No. 2, pp. 172-83.

Merrill, J., C. Jackson and J. Reuter, (1985), “Factors That Affect the HMO
Enrollment Decision: A Tale of Two Cities,” Inquiry, Vol. 22, pp. 388-95.

Meyer, B. D. and D. T. Rosenbaum (2000). “Medicaid, Private Health Insurance,
and the Labor Supply of Single Mothers”, mimeo, Northwestern University.

Mirrlees, J. (1971), “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation.
The Review of Economic Studies. 38:175-208.

Miyazawa, H. (1977), “The Rat Race and Internal Labor Markets.” Bell Journal of
Economics, 8: 394¯418.

Moon, M. (1996), Medicare Now and In The Future, (Washington, D.C.: The
Urban Institute).

Morrisey, M. A., G. A. Jensen, and R. J. Morlock (1994), “Small Employers and
the Health Insurance Market,” Health Affairs 13:149-61.

Newhouse, J. P. (1992), "Medical Care Costs: How Much Welfare Loss?", Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 6:13-29.

Newhouse, J. P. and C. E. Phelps, (1974), “Price and Income Elasticities for
Medical Care Services,” The Economics of Health and Medical Care, Ch. 9 (New
York: John Wiley & Sons), pp. 140-61.

Newhouse, J. P. and C. E. Phelps, (1976), “New Estimates of Price and Income
Elasticities of Medical Care Services,” The Role of Health Insurance in the Health
Services Sector, Ch. 7 (New York: National Bureau of Economic Research), pp.
261-313.

Newhouse, J. P. and the Insurance Experiment Group, (1993), Free for All?
Lessons from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press).

Nichols, L. M., and L. J. Blumberg (1998), “A Different Kind of 'New Federalism'?
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996,” Health Affairs
17:25-42.




                                                                                 12
Nyman J. (1999), “The Value of Health Insurance: The Access Motive, Journal Of
Health Economics 18:141-152

Olekalns, N. and P. Bardsley (1996), “Rational Addiction to Caffeine: An Analysis
of Coffee consumption”, Journal of Political Economy, 104:1100-1104.

Orphanides, A. and D. Zervos (1998), Myopia and Addictive Behaviour”,
Economic Journal. 108:75-91

Pauly, M. (1968), “The Economics of Moral Hazard: Comment,” American
Economic Review, 58: 531-536.

Pauly, M. (1974), “Overinsurance and Public Provision of Insurance: The Roles of
Moral Hazard and Adverse Selection,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 88: 44-54.

Pauly, M. (1986), “Taxation, Health Insurance, and Market Failure in the Medical
Economy,” Journal of Economic Literature 24:629-75.

Pauly, M., H. Kunreuther, and R. Hirth, (1995), “Guaranteed Renewability in
Insurance,” Journal of Risk & Uncertainty, Vol. 10 (2), pp. 143-56.

Phelps, C. E. and J. P. Newhouse, (1972), “Effect of Coinsurance: A Multivariate
Analysis,” Social Security Bulletin pp. 20-28.

Phelps, C. E. and J. P. Newhouse, (1974), “Coinsurance, the Price of Time, and the
Demand for Medical Services, Rewivew of Economics and Statistics, 56:334-342.

Phelps, Charles E., (1973), “The Demand for Health Insurance: A Theoretical and
Empirical Investigation,” RAND Research Paper Series, No. R-1054-OEO.

Piper, J.M., W. A. Ray, and M. Griffin (1990), “Effects of Medicaid Eligibility
Expansion on Prenatal Care and Pregnancy Outcome in Tennessee,” Journal of the
American Medical Association 264:2219-2223.

Pogue, T. F. and L. G. Sgontz (1989), “Taxing to Control Social Costs: The Case of
Alcohol,” American Economic Review 79:235-43.

Poterba, J. (1996), “Government Intervention in Markets for Education and Health
Care: How and Why”, In: V. R. Fuchs, ed., Individual and Social Responsibility
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press), 277-304.

Preston, S. (1996), “American Longevity: Past, Present, and Future,” Syracuse
University Policy Brief No. 7/1996. Distinguished Lecturer in Aging Series, Center
for Economic Policy Research Policy Brief.




                                                                                   13
Price, J. R. and J. W. Mays, (1985), “Biased selection in the Federal Employees
Health Benefits Program,” Inquiry, Vol. 22 pp. 67-77.

Propper, C. and K. Green (forthcoming), “A Larger Role for the Private Sector in
Health Care? A Review of the Arguments,” Journal of Social Policy.

Rask, K. N., and K. J. Rask (2000), “Public Insurance Substituting for Private
Insurance: New Evidence Regarding Public Hospitals, Uncompensated Care Funds,
and Medicaid,” Journal of Health Economics 19:1-31.

Riley J. (1979), “Informational Equilibrium”, Econometrica. 47:331-59.

Rodgers, J. and K. E. Smith, (1996), “Is There Biased Selection in Medicare
HMOs?” Health Policy Economics Group Report (Washington, DC: Price
Waterhouse LLP).

Rosett, R. N. and L. Huang, (1973), “The Effect of Health Insurance on the
Demand for Medical Care,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 81 pp. 281-305.

Rosenthal, G., (1970), “Price Elasticity of Demand for Short-Term General
Hospital Services,” Empirical Studies in Health Economics, Herbert E. Klarman,
ed., (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Press), pp. 101-117.

Rothschild, M. and J. E. Stiglitz, (1976), “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance
Markets: An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 1976, 90: 629-650.

Royalty, A. B. (2000), “Tax Preferences for Fringe Benefits and Workers’
Eligibility for Employer Health Insurance”, Journal of Public Economics, 75: 209-
228.

Royalty, A. B. and N. Solomon (1999), “Health Plan Choice: Price Elasticities in a
Managed Competition Setting,” Journal of Human Resources 34:1-41.

Schoenbaum, M. (1997), “Do Smokers Understand the Mortality Effects of
Smoking? Evidence from the Health and Retirement Survey,” American Journal of
Public Health 87:755-759.

Scitovsky, A. A. and N. M. Snyder, (1972), “Effect of Coinsurance on Use of
Physician Services,” Social Security Bulletin, pp. 3-19.

Scitovsky, A. A. and N. McCall, (1977), “Coinsurance and the Demand for
Physician Services: Four Years Later,” Social Security Bulletin, pp. 19-27.

Scitovsky, A. A., N. McCall and L. Benham, (1978), “Factors Affecting the Choice
Between Two Prepaid Plans,” Medical Care, Vol. 16, No. 8, pp. 660-675.



                                                                                   14
Shleifer, A. (1998). State versus Private Ownership. Journal of Economic
Perspectives. 12:133-50.

Shore-Sheppard, L. D. (1996), “Stemming the Tide? The Effect of Expanding
Medicaid Eligibility on Health Insurance Coverage,” mimeo, Princeton University.

Shore-Sheppard, L. D. (2000), “The Effect of Expanding Medicaid Eligibility on
the Distribution of Children's Health Insurance Coverage,” Industrial and Labor
Relations Review 54:59-77.

Shore-Sheppard, L.D., T.C. Buchmueller, and G.A. Jensen (2000), “Medicaid and
Crowding Out of Private Insurance: A Re-examination Using Firm Level Data,”
Journal of Health Economics 19:61-91.

Shoven, J.B., J.O. Sundberg, and J.P. Bunker (1989), “The Social Security Cost of
Smoking,” in: D.A. Wise, ed., The Economics of Aging, (University of Chicago
Press, Chicago).

Showalter, M.H. (1999), “Firm Behavior in a Market with Addiction: The Case of
Cigarettes,” Journal of Health Economics 18:409-27

Simon, K. I. (2000a), “Adverse Selection in Health Insurance Markets: Evidence
from State Small-Group Health Insurance Markets”, mimeo, Cornell University.

Simon, K. I. (2000b), “The Effect of State Insurance Regulations on the Price and
Availability of Health Benefits in Small Firms”, mimeo, Cornell University.

Sing, M., R. Brown, and S.C. Hill (1998), “The Consequences of Paying Medicare
Managed Care Plans Their Costs,” Inquiry 35:210-22.

Silverman, E., and J. Skinner (2000) “Are For-Profit Hospitals Really Different?
Medicare Upcoding and Market Structure”, mimeo, Dartmouth College.

Sloan, F. A. (2000) “Not-For-Profit Ownership and Hospital Behavior”, In: A.
Culyer and J. Newhouse, eds., Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 1B,
(Amsterdam: Elsevier).

Sloan, F. A., and K. W. Adamache (1986), “Taxation and the Growth of Nonwage
Compensation,” Public Finance Quarterly 14:115-37.

Sloan, F.A., and C.J. Conover (1998), “Effects of State Reforms on Health
Insurance Coverage of Adults,” Inquiry 35:280-93.

Spence, A. M. and R. Zeckhauser, (1971), “Insurance, Information, and Individual
Action,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 61(2): 380-387.



                                                                                   15
Spence, A. M. (1978), Product Differentiation and Performance in Insurance
Markets. Journal of Public Economics. 10:427-47.

Steuerle C. E. and J. M. Bakija (1997), Retooling Social Security for the 21st
Century, (Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute Press).

Sung, H.-Y., T.-W. Hu, and T.-E. Keeler (1994), “Cigarette Taxation and Demand:
An Empirical Model”, Contemporary Economic Policy, 12:91-100.

Swartz, K. and D. W. Garnick (2000), "Adverse Selection and Price Sensitivity
When Low-Income People Have Subsidies to Purchase Health Insurance in the
Private Market," Inquiry, 37: 45-60.

Taylor, A.K. and G.R. Wilensky (1983), The Effect of Tax Policies on
Expenditures for Private Health Insurance. In: J. Meyer, ed., Market Reforms in
Health Care, (American Enterprise Institute, Washington, D.C.).

Thorpe, K. E., A. Hendricks, D. Garnick, K. Donelan, and J. Newhouse (1992),
“Reducing the Number of Uninsured by Subsidizing Employment-Based Health
Insurance”, Journal of the American Medical Association, 19:945-48.

Tirole, J. (1988), The Theory of Industrial Organization, (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press).

Tolley, G., D.S. Kenkel, and R.G. Fabian (1994), Valuing Health for Policy: An
Economic Approach (University of Chicago Press, Chicago).

Triplett, J.E. (2001), “What’s Different About health? Human Repair and Car
Repaid in National Accounts and in National Health Accounts”. In: D. Cutler and
E. Berndt, eds., Medical Care Output and Productivity, (Chicago, University of
Chicago Press).

Turner, R. W. (1987), Are Taxes Responsible for the Growth in Fringe Benefits?.
National Tax Journal. 40: 205-20.

United States Congressional Budget Office (1997). Long-term Budgetary Pressures
and Policy Options (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office).

United States Environmental Protection Agency (1992), Respiratory Health Effects
of Passive Smoking: Lung Cancer and Other Disorders. (Washington, DC:
Government Printing Office).

United States Department of Health and Human Services (1994), Preventing
Tobacco Use Among Young People: A Report of the Surgeon General,
(Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office).



                                                                                  16
United States Joint Committee on Taxation (1999), Estimates of Federal Tax
Expenditures for the Years 2000-2004, (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing
Office).

United States Physician Payment Review Commission (1996), Annual Report to
Congress, (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office).

Van de Ven, W., and R. P. Ellis (2000), “Risk Adjustment in Competitive Health
Plan Markets”, in A. Culyer and J. Newhouse, eds., Handbook of Health
Economics, Volume 1, (Amsterdam: Elsevier).

van de Ven, W. and R. C. J. A. van Vliet (1995), “Consumer Surplus and Adverse
Selection in Competitive Health Insurance Markets: An Empirical Study,” Journal
of Health Economics, Vol. 14, No. 2, pp. 149-69.

Viscusi, W.K. (1993), “The Value of Risks to Life and Health,” Journal of
Economic Literature 31:1912-46.

Viscusi, W. K. (1994), Smoking: Making the Risky Decision (Oxford University
Press, New York).

Viscusi, W. K. (1995), “Cigarette Taxation and the Social Consequences of
Smoking,” in: J. Poterba, ed., Tax Policy and the Economy (MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA).

Vroman, S. and G. Anderson (1984), “The Effect of Income Taxation on the
Demand for Employer-Provided Health Insurance,” Applied Economics 16:33-43.

Waters, T. M. and F. A. Sloan (1995), Why Do People Drink? Tests of the Rational
Addiction Model. Applied Economics. 27:727-36.

Weisbrod, B. (1991), "The Health Care Quadrilemma: An Essay on Technological
Change, Insurance, Quality of Care, and Cost Containment", Journal of Economic
Literature, 29:523-552.

Weissman, J. S. and A.M. Epstein (1994), Falling Through the Safety Net:
Insurance Status and Access to Health Care (Johns Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore).

Weitzman, M.L. (1974), “Prices vs. Quantities,” Review of Economic Studies
41:477-91.

Welch, W. P. (1986), “The Elasticity of Demand for Health Maintenance
Organizations,” Journal of Human Resources 21:252-66.

Welch, W. P. (1989), “Restructuring the Federal Employees Health Benefits

                                                                                 17
Program: The Private Sector Option,” Inquiry, Vol. 26, pp. 321-34.

Wilkinson, R. (1996), Unhealthy Societies: The Afflictions of Inequality,
(Routledge, New York).

Wilson, C. (1977), “A Model of Insurance Markets with Incomplete Information”,
Journal of Economic Theory. 16:167-207.

Woodbury, S. A. (1983), Substitution Between Wage and Nonwage Benefits..
American Economic Review. 73:166-82.

Woodbury, S. A., and D. S. Hamermesh (1992), “Taxes, Fringe Benefits and
Faculty,” Review of Economics and Statistics 74:287-96.

Wrightson, W., J. Genuardi and S. Stephens, (1987), “Demographic and Utilization
Characteristics of HMO Disenrollees,” GHAA Journal, pp. 23-42.

Yazici, E. Y., and R. Kaestner (1998), “Medicaid Expansions and the Crowding
Out of Private Health Insurance,” Inquiry 37:23-32.

Yelowitz, A. (1995) “The Medicaid Notch, Labor Supply, and Welfare
Participation: Evidence from Eligibility Expansions” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics. 110:909-39.

Yelowitz, A. (1998) “Will Extending Medicaid to Two-Parent Families Encourage
Marriage?” Journal of Human Resources. 33:833-65.
.
Zeckhauser, R. (1970), “Medical Insurance: A Case Study of the Tradeoff Between
Risk Spreading and Appropriate Incentives,” Journal of Economic Theory 2: 10-26.

Zuckerman, S. and S. Rajan (1999), “An Alternative Approach to Measuring the
Effects of Insurance Market Reforms.” Inquiry 36: 44-56




                                                                                18
                                             Percent
   Un
     ite
        dS


                                                                          100




                         0
                             10
                                  20
                                       30
                                            40
                                                 50
                                                      60
                                                           70
                                                                80
                                                                     90
           tat
               e
         Po s
           rtu
               g
         Au al
           str
              ali
                 a
                  Ita
          Ca ly
     Sw na
         itz da
            er
               lan
                     d
           Fin
                lan
                     d
            Au
                str
                    ia
   Ne Gre
      w ece
         Ze
    Ne alan
       the d
            rla
                nd
                    s
              Sp
        Ge ain
            rm
                 an
                     y
             Ja
                 pa
           Fr n
              an
                   ce
            Ire
                lan
          Sw d
               ed
        De en
             nm
                                                                                Figure 2: Public Sector Share of Medical Spending, 1995




                  ar
                     k
           No
                rw
Un                  a
  ite Ice y
     d K la
        ing nd
             do
                 m
          Be
    Lu lg
      xe ium
         m
            bo
                urg
                 Figure 6: Changes in Health Plan
                           Enrollments

               100%        8
                90%                       21
                                                          33
                80%
                                           8                           HMO
                70%
                                                                       POS
     percent




                60%                       26              16
                                                                       PPO
                50%        92                                          Managed FFS
                40%                                       26           Unmanaged FFS
                30%
                                          41
                20%
                                                          22
                10%
                                           4               3
                 0%
                         1980            1992           1996
                                         Year




The sample is people with private (employer or individual) insurance
Source: Data are from Lewin-VHI.
                          Figure 14: Intergenerational Aspects of Medicare

              $200,000                                                                                  30%

                                                                                                        25%
                    $0




                                                                                                              Rate of Return
                                                                                                        20%
Net Benefit




              -$200,000
                                                                                 Net Benefit            15%
              -$400,000                                Rate of return
                                                                                                        10%

              -$600,000
                                                                                                        5%

              -$800,000                                                                                 0%
                           1890   1900   1910   1920     1930      1940   1950   1960     1970   1980
                                                        Cohort born in



 Source: Cutler and Sheiner (1999).
     Table 1: Examples of Different Medical Care Systems
Private insurance,   Public insurance,    Public insurance,
private provision    private provision    public provision
United States        Canada               United Kingdom
                     Germany              Sweden
                     Japan                Italy
                     France
Source: OECD.
             Table 2: Insurance Coverage and Spending in the United States
                                                                    Share of Dollars
                                                   Share of     For Those    From That
Program            Eligibility                      People       People        Policy
Public
  Medicare         Age 65+; Blind/disabled;          14%           37%          21%
                   people with kidney failure
  Medicaid         Non-elderly poor; Blind and        10            8             9
                   disabled; Medicare cost
                   sharing for poor elderly;
                   Nursing home costs for
                   chronically impaired
  Other            Veterans; Native Americans;         1            1             5
                   Defense employees


Private
  Employer         Workers and dependents;            60            49
                   Retirees                                                       44
  Non-group        Families                            3            2


Uninsured                                             12            4            21*
Source: 1996 Medical Expenditure Panel Study (MEPS).
The fourth column is total spending for people with each type of insurance. The fifth
column is total medical care spending accounted for by that plan.
* Total out-of-pocket medical spending.
                                        Table 3: External Costs of Smoking and Drinking and Optimal Sin Taxes

Paper (date)                      Methodology                              Costs Included                             Results

Smoking

Manning et al. (1989, 1991)       Construct group of “non-smoking”         Medical care, sick leave, group life       Estimate of external costs is sensitive
                                  smokers who are similar to smokers in    insurance, nursing home, retirement        to discount rate; range from -$0.91 per
                                  terms of age, sex, education, drinking   pension, fires, taxes to finance above     pack (0 percent discount rate) to $0.24
                                  habits, etc. but have never smoked.      programs                                   per pack (10percent discount rate), in
                                  Estimate and compare spending                                                       1986 dollars.
                                  profiles for hypothetical profiles of
                                  men and women with and without
                                  smoking.

Viscusi (1995)                    Similar to Manning et al.; updates       Medical care, sick leave, group life       Net external costs to society excluding
                                  many of the estimates using more         insurance, nursing home care,              the effects of ETS are -$0.32 to -
                                  recent data; accounts for falling tar    retirement pensions, fires, taxes on       $0.23; including effect of ETS,
                                  content of cigarettes.                   earnings, environmental tobacco            estimates rise to as much as $0.41.
                                                                           smoke (ETS) related lung cancer and
                                                                           heart disease

Evans, Ringel, and Stech (1999)   Similar to Manning et al.; expand        ETS-related low birthweight, SIDS          The external costs of smoking range
                                  analysis to include additional costs.    deaths, infant mortality and fetal loss;   from $0.42 to $0.72 per pack in 1994.
                                                                           do not do additional analysis but
                                                                           include costs from Manning et al. And
                                                                           Viscusi

                                                                                                                      Estimates depend critically on the
SUMMARY                                                                                                               discount rate assumed and especially
                                                                                                                      on whether the costs of ETS-related
                                                                                                                      deaths due to heart disease, lunch
                                                                                                                      cancer and maternal smoking are
                                                                                                                      considered.
                                                                  Table 3 (cont)

Paper (date)                  Methodology                               Costs Included                            Results



Drinking

Pogue and Sgontz (1989)       Develop theoretical model of optimal      Use existing estimates of elasticities    Depending on assumptions about
                              alcohol taxes; tax depends on relative    and external costs to estimate optimal    relative elasticities, alcohol tax (in
                              elasticity of demand for abusers and      tax.                                      1983) ranges from about right to half
                              non-abusers, fraction of alcohol                                                    the optimal level. “Best guess” is that
                              consumed by abusers, and external                                                   optimal tax is twice actual tax.
                              costs associated with drinking

Manning et al. (1989, 1991)   Same as for cigarettes (described         Medical care, sick leave, group life      External costs less sensitive to
                              above).                                   insurance, nursing home, retirement       discount rate than for cigarettes; range
                                                                        pension, taxes on earning, motor          from 1.08 to 1.56 per excess ounce of
                                                                        vehicle accidents, costs associate with   alcohol . Forty percent of
                                                                        the criminal justice system               consumption is excess ounces,
                                                                                                                  implying an external cost per ounce of
                                                                                                                  about $0.48.

Kenkel (1996)                 Estimates elasticities for moderate and   Uses estimates from Manning (1989)        Current alcohol taxes are too low
                              heavy drinkers using cross-sectional      plus external costs of the risks drunk    (about half) the optimal tax; stricter
                              variation (at state level) in prices.     drivers create for others.                drunk driving laws and information
                              Uses 1985 Health Interview Survey.                                                  provisions would reduce optimal tax.

                                                                                                                  Current alcohol tax is well below
SUMMARY                                                                                                           optimal tax on externality grounds.
    Table 4: The Variability of Medical Care
                   Spending
                           Share of      Average
Distribution               Dollars       Spending
99+ percent                 27.5%        $56,459
95-99 percent                27.7         14,271
90-95 percent                14.0         5,778
70-90 percent                21.2         2,186
<70 percent                   9.6          281


Average                                   $2,060
Source: Data are from the 1996 Medical
Expenditure Panel Study (MEPS).
                                                        Table 5: The Elasticity of Demand for Insurance

Paper (date)                           Data (Years)                             Empirical Strategy                       Results

Price Elasticity of Demand for Firm Insurance Offering

Helms, Gauthier, and Campion           Pilot programs                           Analyzes firm responses to pilot         Finds wide range of responses across
(1992)                                                                          program providing subsidies to firms     sites; elasticities of -0.4 to -1.1.
                                                                                to offer insurance

Thorpe, et al. (1992)                  Pilot program in New York                Analyses firm response to 50%            Actual elasticity of -0.07; estimate
                                                                                subsidy to the price of insurance for    elasticity would have been -0.33 if
                                                                                small firms.                             all firms were aware of the program.

Leibowitz and Chernew (1992)           Health Insurance Association of          Models offering decision as a            Elasticity of -0.8 for premiums and -
                                       America survey of firms (1989)           function of premiums (variation          2.9 for tax subsidies.
                                                                                across areas) and tax subsidy for
                                                                                small firms. Average marginal tax
                                                                                rates for firms are imputed based on
                                                                                CPS.

Gentry and Peress (1994)               Occupation Compensation Survey           Models cross-city differences in the     The percentage of workers offered
                                       (1988-1992)                              average share of workers offered         insurance declines by 1.8 percent for
                                                                                insurance as a function of the state     a 1 percentage point increase in the
                                                                                after-tax price of insurance.            price of insurance.

Morrisey, Jensen, and Morlock          Survey of small firms (1993)             Use small firms’ answers to              Elasticity of offering of -0.92.
(1994)                                                                          hypothetical questions about whether
                                                                                they would offer insurance at
                                                                                different prices.

Feldman, Dowd, Leitz, and Blewett      Sample of Minnesota firms (1993)         Imputes premiums to firms not            Price elasticities of -3.9 for single
(1997)                                                                          offering coverage. Models offering       coverage and -5.8 for family
                                                                                as a function of premiums in cross-      coverage
                                                                                section.

Royalty (2000)                         CPS of Employee Benefits (1988,          Models offering as a function of tax     Elasticity of -0.68 across all
                                       1993)                                    subsidy. Uses cross-state variation in   employers.
                                                                                marginal tax rates to identify
                                                                                elasticity.
                                                                 Table 5 (continued)

Paper (date)                          Data (Years)                         Empirical Strategy                       Results

Marquis and Long (2001)               Robert Wood Johnson Foundation       Imputes premiums to firms not            40 percent reduction in premiums
                                      Employer Health Insurance Survey     offering coverage. Models offering       would inclrease offering by 2 to 3
                                      (firms in 10 states) (1993)          as a function of premiums in cross-      percentage points.
                                                                           section.

Finkelstein (forthcoming)             Canadian Social Survey (1991,1994)   Models (supplemental medical)            Elasticity of about -0.50.
                                                                           insurance offering as a function of
                                                                           after-tax price. DD comparing
                                                                           change in offering of insurance
                                                                           before and after repeal of tax subsidy
                                                                           in Quebec to change in rest of
                                                                           Canada.


SUMMARY                                                                                                             -0.14 to -5.8

Price Elasticity of Demand for Insurance Spending

Long and Scott (1982)                 Current Population Reports and       Time series analysis of fringe benefit   A 10 percent increase in marginal tax
                                      Employment and Earnings (1947-       share of income as a function of         rates increases the share of
                                      1979)                                marginal tax rates.                      compensation devoted to health
                                                                                                                    insurance by 4.1 percent.

Taylor and Wilensky (1983)            National Medical Care Expenditure    Individual-level analysis of             Price elasticity is -0.21; income
                                      Survey (1977)                        premiums as a function of price          elasticity is 0.02.
                                                                           (measured as 1 minus the marginal
                                                                           tax rate), income, and demographic
                                                                           controls
                                                        Table 5 (continued)

Paper (date)                 Data (Years)                          Empirical Strategy                      Results

Woodbury (1983)              Employee Compensation in the          Estimates demand for non-wage           Elasticity of demand for fringe
                             Private Nonfarm Economy (biennial,    compensation as a function of           benefits ranging from -1.2 to -3.0.
                             1966-1974), Census of Governments     imputed marginal tax rates; unit of
                             (1977)                                observation is a employee group-
                                                                   establishment-size cell (4 employee
                                                                   groups and 3 establishment sizes).
                                                                   Also estimates similar equations with
                                                                   school district as until of
                                                                   observation.

Holmer (1984)                Health insurance choices of Federal   Estimates discrete choice model of      Average price elasticity of demand
                             employees selecting family coverage   health insurance demand as a            for more generous health insurance
                             (1982)                                function of income and marginal tax     of -0.16; income elasticity of 0.01.
                                                                   rate.

Vroman and Anderson (1984)   National Medical Care Expenditure     Cross-sectional analysis of health      Loading factors are consistently
                             Survey - Employer Health Insurance    insurance spending per eligible         significant and negative. Mixed
                             Cost Survey (1977)                    employee; firm is unit of               results for effects of tax rates. In full
                                                                   observation. Independent variables      sample, 10 percent increase in
                                                                   are the average effective marginal      effective tax rate is associated with
                                                                   tax rate, loading factors (based on     7.4 percent increase in employer-
                                                                   firm size), wages, and region           based insurance coverage; effects of
                                                                   dummies.                                tax rates are insignificant when
                                                                                                           sample is split by wages.

Sloan and Adameche (1986)    Survey of Employer Expenditures for   Analyzes employer contributions to      Tax elasticity of 1.7 for life-health
                             Employee Compensation (1968,          life-health insurance and private       insurance per worker-hour and 0.6
                             1972, 1977); March CPS                pension plans (per worker and as a      for payments as a fraction of total
                                                                   fraction of compensation); imputes      compensation.
                                                                   average marginal tax rate for firm
                                                                   from March CPS.
                                                                    Table 5 (continued)

Paper (date)                          Data (Years)                              Empirical Strategy                       Results

Turner (1987)                         NIPA, Statistics of Income (1954-         Time series analysis of share of labor   Changes in tax rates can explain less
                                      1979)                                     income going to benefits, including      than 5 percent of the growth in the
                                                                                health insurance, as a function of       share of income going to fringe
                                                                                average marginal tax rate, controlling   benefits.
                                                                                for demographics.

Woodbury and Hamermesh (1992)         Panel of compensation and benefits        Estimate demand for fringe benefits      Significant negative effect of relative
                                      for faculty at 1477 institutions (1984-   among faculty as a function of           price of fringe benefits (due to
                                      85, 1988-89)                              average imputed marginal tax rate        differential tax treatment) on fringes’
                                                                                (with controls); also use instrument     share of compensation; estimates are
                                                                                capturing variation due to year-state-   twice as large in absolute value for
                                                                                specific tax rules; also estimate        IV and fixed-effects specifications,
                                                                                models with school fixed effects.        compared to OLS.


SUMMARY                                                                                                                  -0.2 to -1.0

Price Elasticity of Demand for Insurance Coverage by Individuals

Marquis and Phelps (1987)             Rand Health Insurance Experiment          Uses individuals responses to            Elasticity of demand for
                                      individual questionaire                   questions about willingness to pay       supplementary insurance of -0.6.
                                                                                for supplementary coverage.

Gruber and Poterba (1994)             Current Population Survey (1985-96,       Uses change in tax treatment of          Elasticity of up to -1.8.
                                      1988-89)                                  insurance for the self-employed to
                                                                                identify elasticity. DD comparing
                                                                                change in coverage among self-
                                                                                employed and employed before and
                                                                                after TRA86.

Marquis and Long (1995)               SIPP (1987) and May and March             Uses cross-area variation in             Elasticity of -0.3 to -0.4.
                                      CPS (1988)                                insurance premiums to identify
                                                                                responsiveness of demand for
                                                                                individual policies to price.
                                                                   Table 5 (continued)

Paper (date)                           Data (Years)                           Empirical Strategy                       Results

Chernew, Frick, and McLaughlin         Small Business Benefits Survey         Estimates probit regressions of          Elasticity of demand for employer-
(1997)                                 (1992, 1993)                           demand for health insurance among        provided coverage for those offered
                                                                              low-income workers in small firms;       coverage (take-up) with respect to
                                                                              price is employee contribution to        employee share of -0.09.
                                                                              premium.


SUMMARY                                                                                                                -0.6 to -1.8

Price Elasticity of Demand for Plan Switching

Welch (1986)                           BLS Level of Benefits Study (1981-     Models HMO market share at               Elasticity of demand for HMO
                                       82)                                    employer as a function of out-of-        (relative to conventional insurance) -
                                                                              pocket premium in cross-section.         0.6 with respect to out-of-pocket
                                                                                                                       premiums.

Feldman, Finch, Dowd, and Cassou       Survey of employees in 20              Models individual plan choice as a       Plan choice is very sensitive to out-
(1989)                                 Minneapolis firms (1984)               function of out-of-pocket premiums,      of-pocket premiums. A $5 (1984$)
                                                                              plan characteristics, and individual     increase in out-of-pocket premium
                                                                              characteristics.                         can causes a plan to lose 40 percent
                                                                                                                       of its market share.

Dowd and Feldman (1994)                Panel data on employees’ health plan   Models plans’ market share at an         Elasticity of demand for more
                                       choices in 5 Twin Cities employers     employer as a function of relative       generous plan with respect to out-of-
                                       (1988-1993)                            out-of-pocket premium. Includes          pocket premium of -7.9 for single
                                                                              firm, plan, type of coverage, and year   coverage.
                                                                              fixed effects.

Buchmueller and Feldstein (1997)       Panel data on UC Berkeley              Compare plan switching among             Employees facing $10 increase in
                                       employees’ health plan choices         employees experienced increases in       out-of-pocket premiums were5 times
                                       (1993-1994)                            out-of-pocket premiums due to            as likely to switch plans as those
                                                                              employer pricing reform to those         with constant premiums.
                                                                              whose premiums were unchanged.
                                                        Table 5 (continued)

Paper (date)                 Data (Years)                         Empirical Strategy                      Results

Cutler and Reber (1998)      Panel data on Harvard employees’     Compare plan switching behavior of      Elasticity of demand for generous
                             health plan choices (1994-1996)      employees affected by changes in        plan of -0.6 with respect to out-of-
                                                                  out-of-pocket premiums to those not     pocket premium (elasticity of -2 with
                                                                  affected.                               respect to total premium).

Royalty and Soloman (1999)   Panel data on Stanford employees’    Multinomial logit model of plan         Own-price elasticity of -0.2 to -0.5
                             health plan choices supplemented     choice as a function of out-of-pocket   (elasticity of -1 to -1.8 with respect
                             with employee survey (1993-1995)     premium and individual                  to total premium).
                                                                  characteristics.


SUMMARY                                                                                                   Wide variability, generally greater
                                                                                                          than elasticity of offering
                                          Table 6: Estimates of the Elasticity of Demand for Medical Care

                                                                                                     Total Price       Visits Price       Quality Price
Paper                        Data                    Restrictions           Estimation Method        Elasticity        Elasticity         Elasticity

Feldstein, P.J. (1964)       1953, 1958 Health       general care           cross-section            -0.19
                             Information                                    estimates of physician   (physician
                             Foundation and                                 visits                   visits)
                             NORC surveys

Feldstein, M.S. (1970)       BLS survey; NCHS        aggregated physician   time-series regression   1.67
                             1963-64 survey;         service data                                    (physician
                             physician interviews                                                    services)

Rosenthal (1970)             1962 sample of New      68 of 218 general,     univariate estimates     0.19 to -0.70
                             England hospitals       short-term hospitals   for short-term care
                                                                            categories

Feldstein, M.S. (1971)       AHA survey of           all hospitals,         time-series regression   -0.49 for total   -0.63 for visits
                             hospitals, 1958-1967,   aggregated by state                             bed days          to hospital
                             NCHS 1963-64
                             survey

Davis and Russell (1972)     1970 guide issue of     aggregated hospital    cross-sectional          -0.32
                             "Hospitals"             outpatient care;       estimates
                                                     48 states' not-for-
                                                     profit hospitals

Fuchs and Kramer (1972)      1966 Internal           physician services,    TSLS: IV's are           -0.10 to -0.36
                             Revenue Service         aggregated into 33     number of medical
                             tabulations             states                 schools, ratio of
                                                                            premiums to benefits,
                                                                            and union members
                                                                            per 100 population

Phelps and Newhouse (1972)   Palo Alto Group         physician and          natural experiment:      -0.14* OLS,
                             Health Plan, 1966-68    outpatient ancillary   introduction of          -0.118 Tobit
                                                     services               coinsurance              (physician
                                                                                                     visits)
                                                                   Table 6 (continued)

                                                                                                         Total Price      Visits Price   Quality Price
Paper                         Data                     Restrictions            Estimation Method         Elasticity       Elasticity     Elasticity

Scitovsky and Snyder (1972)   Palo Alto Group          physician and           natural experiment:       -0.060*          -0.14*
                              Health Plan, 1966-68     outpatient ancillary    introduction of           (ancillary)      (physician
                                                       services                coinsurance                                visits)

Phelps (1973)                 verified data from       hospitalization and     cross-sectional Tobit     not
                              1963 CHAS                physicians' services    estimates                 significantly
                              (University of                                                             different from
                              Chicago) survey                                                            zero

Rosett and Huang (1973)       1960 Survey of           hospitalization and     cross-sectional Tobit     -0.35 to -1.5
                              Consumer                 physicians' services    estimates
                              Expenditure

Beck (1974)                   random sample of         physicians' services    natural experiment;       -0.065*
                              poor population of                               introduction of
                              Saskatchewan                                     copayments

Newhouse and Phelps (1974)    1963 CHAS survey         employeds' hospital     cross-sectional OLS       -0.10 (length    -0.06
                                                       stays within coverage   (TSLS estimates           of stay)         (physician
                                                                               insignificant)                             visits)

Phelps and Newhouse (1974)    insurance plans in       general care, dental    arc elasticities across   -0.10
                              US, Canada, and UK       care, and               coinsurance ranges
                                                       prescriptions

Newhouse and Phelps (1976)    1963 CHAS survey         employeds and           cross-sectional OLS       -0.24
                              (larger sample than in   non-employeds           (TSLS estimates           (hospital),
                              previous work)                                   insignificant)            -0.42
                                                                                                         (physician)

Scitovsky and McCall (1977)   Palo Alto Group          physician, outpatient   natural experiment:       -2.56*           -0.29*
                              Health Plan, 1968-72     ancillary services      coinsurance increases     (ancillary)      (physician
                                                                                                                          visits)

Colle and Grossman (1978)     1971 NORC/CHAS           pediatric care          cross-sectional           -0.11            -0.039
                              health survey                                    estimates
                                                                   Table 6 (continued)

                                                                                                      Total Price       Visits Price     Quality Price
Paper                           Data                   Restrictions            Estimation Method      Elasticity        Elasticity       Elasticity

Goldman and Grossman            1965-66                pediatric care          hedonic model                            -0.060           -0.088
(1978)                          Mindlin-Densen                                                                          (compensated     (compensated
                                longitudinal study                                                                      -0.032)          -0.085)

McAvinchey and                  waiting lists from     acute hospital care     dynamic                -1.2
Yannopoulos (1993)              UK's National Health                           intertemporal model
                                Service

Newhouse et al. (1993)          RAND Health            general care            randomized             -0.17 to -0.31
                                Insurance                                      experiment             (hospital),
                                Experiment                                                             -0.17 to -0.22
                                                                                                      (outpatient)

Bhattacharya et al. (1996)      1990 Japanese          outpatient visits       Cox proportional       -0.22
                                Ministry of Health                             hazards model
                                and Welfare survey

Cherkin et al. (1989)           Group Health           non-Medicare HMO        natural experiment:    -0.035* (all
                                Cooperative of Puget   patients                introduction of        visits), -0.15*
                                Sound                                          copayments             to -0.075*
                                                                                                      (preventive)

Eichner (1998)                  1990-92 insurance      employees aged 25 to    one- and two-stage     -0.32
                                claims from            55                      Tobit regressions of
                                employees and                                  out-of-pocket costs
                                dependents of a
                                Fortune 500 firm



SUMMARY                                                                                               -0.20             -0.05 to -0.15

Note: See Cutler and Zeckhauser (2000) for details.
                                               Table 7: Evidence on Biased Enrollment in Health Insurance

Paper                 Data                          Empirical Methods           Highlights of Results                       Selection

Selection Between Managed Care and Indemnity Plans

Bice (1975)           East Baltimore public         tests of means of health    poor health and high expected use of        favorable
                      housing residents (random     status variables by         medical services is positively correlated
                      sample)                       Medicaid enrollment         with enrollment in prepaid plans;
                                                                                expected costs are reduced

Scitovsky, McCall     Stanford University           least-squares regression    fee-for-service patients are older and      adverse
and Benham (1978)     employees' enrollment and     of plan choice (note        more likely to be single or without
                      survey data                   dependent variable is       children
                                                    binary)

Eggers (1980)         Group Health Cooperative      comparison of usage         Length of stay 25 percent higher for        adverse
                      (GHC) of Puget Sound's        statistics with control     non-GHC patients; inpatient
                      Medicare Risk Contract,       sample from Medicare 20     reimbursements per person are 2.11 times
                      1974-76                       Percent (Part A) and 5      higher outside GHC
                                                    Percent (Part B) Research
                                                    Discharge Files

Juba, Lave, and       Carnegie-Mellon               maximum likelihood logit    lower family self-reported health status    adverse
Shaddy (1980)         University employees'         estimates of determinants   results in significantly less chance of
                      health insurance              of plan choice              selecting HMO enrollment
                      enrollment and survey,
                      1976

McGuire (1981)        Yale University               logistic regression of      women are less likely to join the prepaid   adverse
                      employees' health plan        health plan choice given    health plan than men, but no significant
                      enrollment statistics         some plan is chosen         effect is associated with age
                      (random sample)

Jackson-Beeck and     11 employee groups from       comparison of costs and     HMO joiners averaged 53 percent fewer       adverse
Kleinman (1983)       Minneapolis-St. Paul Blue     utilization for HMO         inpatient days before joining than those
                      Cross and Blue Shield,        enrollees and               who chose to stay in FFS
                      1978-81                       non-enrollees in period
                                                    before HMO availability
                                                                    Table 7 (continued)

Paper                   Data                         Empirical Methods            Highlights of Results                        Selection

Griffith, Baloff, and   physician visits in the      nonlinear regression of      high usage rates at managed care plan's      ambiguous
Spitznagel (1984)       Medical Care Group of St.    frequency of visits          initiation eventually fall to lower
                        Louis                                                     steady-state levels

Merrill, Jackson and    state employees'             tests of means in plan       HMO joiners are younger, more often          ambiguous
Reuter (1985)           enrollment and utilization   populations and logit        male, less likely to use psychiatric
                        data from Salt Lake City     regression of health plan    services, but have more chronic
                        and Tallahassee              choice                       conditions in their family units

Langwell and Hadley     1980-81 Medicare             comparison of HMO            non-enrollees' reimbursements are 44         adverse
(1989)                  Capitation Demonstrations    enrollees and                percent higher than enrollees in two years
                                                     non-enrollees using          before capitation; disenrollees have worse
                                                     two-tailed tests of means;   past health
                                                     comparison of enrollees
                                                     and disenrollees using
                                                     surveys

Brown et al. (1993)     Medicare spending for        Comparison of spending       enrollees who switch to managed care         adverse
                        enrollees who stayed in      in the two years prior to    had 10 percent lower spending than
                        traditional system versus    HMO enrollment               enrollees who stayed in traditional
                        those who moved into                                      system.
                        managed care

Rodgers and Smith       summary of 1992              measure cost differences     HMO patients are 5.7 percent costlier        favorable
(1996)                  Mathematica Policy           between elderly
                        Research study of            customers covered by
                        Medicare enrollees           standard Medicare FFS
                                                     and capitated HMO care

Altman, Cutler and      claims and enrollment data   age- and sex-adjusted        adverse selection accounts for               adverse
Zeckhauser (1998)       from the Massachusetts       analysis of costs among      approximately 2 percent of differences
                        Group Insurance              individuals with different   between indemnity and HMO plan costs
                        Commission (GIC)             plan choice histories


SUMMARY                                                                                                                        adverse
                                                                    Table 7 (continued)

Paper                  Data                          Empirical Methods           Highlights of Results                         Selection

Selection of Reenrollment versus Disenrollment / Uninsurance

Farley and Monheit     1977 National Medical         OLS and 2SLS estimation     ambulatory care expenditures have an          ambiguous
(1985)                 Care Expenditure Survey       of health insurance         insignificant impact on health insurance
                                                     purchases                   purchases

Wrightson,             disenrollees from seven       comparison of costs and     disenrollees have lower inpatient costs       adverse
Genuardi, and          plans offering different      disenrollment rates for     and occupy less risky demographic
Stephens (1987)        types of managed care         insurees                    groups than continuing enrollees

Long, Settle, and      enrollment patterns of        probit estimation for       likelihood of disenrollment rises             adverse
Wrightson (1988)       subscribers to three          chance of insuree           significantly with increases in relative
                       Minneapolis-St. Paul          disenrolling from each of   premium of own plan
                       HMOs                          three HMOs

Cardon and Hendel      National Medical              Tobit-style model of        individuals who are younger, male, or in      adverse
(2001)                 Expenditure Survey            insurance choice            "excellent" self-reported health are
                                                                                 significantly less likely to become insured


SUMMARY                                                                                                                        adverse



Selection of High-Option Plan within Type of Plan

Conrad,                1980 random sample of         2SLS and 3SLS               worse self-perceived dental health            adverse
Grembowksi, and        claims and eligibility data   estimation of demand        corresponds to higher valuation of
Milgrom (1985)         for dental health insurance   models for premiums and     insurance; experience rating does not
                       by Pennsylvania Blue          total expenditures          always lower premiums
                       Shield

Ellis (1985)           1982-83 employee health       logit estimates of health   age and worse previous year's health          adverse
                       plan enrollment and           plan choice                 expenses are associated with choice of
                       expense records of a large                                more generous health coverage for the
                       firm                                                      next year
                                                                  Table 7 (continued)

Paper                Data                          Empirical Methods           Highlights of Results                         Selection

Dowd and Feldman     survey data from 20           tests of means of           fee-for-service patients are older and        adverse
(1985)               Minneapolis-St. Paul firms    characteristics of health   more likely have serious medical
                                                   plan populations            conditions or relatives with such
                                                                               conditions

Luft, Trauner and    California state employees'   comparisons of risk         patient risk in high option indemnity and     adverse
Maerkis (1985)       enrollment and utilization    indices across plans and    fee-for-service plans increases faster than
                     data                          years                       risk in managed care

Price and Mays       Federal Employees Health      comparison of costs and     high option Blue Cross plan undergoes a       adverse
(1985)               Benefits Program              premiums across plan        premium spiral with enrollment cut in
                     proprietary data              choices                     half over only three years

Marquis and Phelps   Rand Health Insurance         probit estimation for       families in highest expenditure quartile      adverse
(1987)               Experiment                    take-up of supplementary    were 42 percent more likely to obtain
                                                   insurance                   supplementary insurance than those in
                                                                               lowest quartile

Ellis (1989)         claims and enrollment data    analysis of different       employees in high option plan are 1.8         adverse
                     from a large financial        plans' member               years older, 20.1 percent more likely to
                     services firm                 characteristics and         be female, and have 8.6 times the costs of
                                                   expenses                    the default plan.

Feldman, Finch,      survey of employee health     nested logit for plan       age varies positively with selection of a     adverse
Dowd and Cassou      insurance programs at 7       selection                   (relatively generous) IPA or FFS
(1989)               Minneapolis firms                                         single-coverage health plan

Welch (1989)         Towers, Perrin, Forster,      comparison of premiums      high-option premium is 79 percent higher      adverse
                     and Crosby Inc. study of      between high and low        than low option
                     Federal Employees Health      option Blue Cross plans
                     Benefits program              for government workers
                                                                     Table 7 (continued)

Paper                   Data                          Empirical Methods            Highlights of Results                         Selection

Marquis (1992)          plan selection of families    comparison of plan           73 percent more individuals in high risk      adverse
                        in Rand Health Insurance      choices with age/sex         quartile choose most generous plan than
                        Experiment                    adjustments under            those in low risk quartile, even with
                                                      various group-rating         age/sex/experience rating
                                                      regimes

Van de Ven and Van      survey and claims data        regression of risk factors   age- and sex-composition of plans             adverse
Vliet (1995)            from 20,000 families          on prediction error of       explain 40 percent of error in predicted
                        insured by largest Dutch      difference in costs          cost differential between plans
                        insurer, Zilveren Kreis       between members of
                                                      high- and low-cost plans.

Buchmueller and         University of California      historical analysis of       two high-option plans suffered fatal          adverse
Feldstein (1997)        Health Benefits Program       enrollment changes and       premium spirals in a six-year period; a
                        enrollment figures            premium increases            third was transformed from FFS into POS
                                                                                   to prevent a spiral

Cutler and Reber        claims and enrollment data    calculation of welfare       adverse selection creates a welfare loss      adverse
(1998)                  from Harvard University       loss and simulation of       equal to 2 percent of baseline health
                                                      long-run effects of          spending; price responses in long run are
                                                      changes in health plan       triple those in short-run
                                                      prices

Cutler and              claims and enrollment data    analysis of different        employees in GIC's FFS plan spend 28          adverse
Zeckhauser (1998)       from Harvard University       plans' member                percent more, are older, and have
                        and the Massachusetts         characteristics and          significantly more births and heart attacks
                        Group Insurance               expenses                     than HMO members
                        Commission (GIC)


SUMMARY                                                                                                                          adverse

Note: See Cutler and Zeckhauser (2000) for details.
                                              Table 8: Effects of Small-Group and Individual Market Regulation

Paper (date)                Data (Years)           Empirical Strategy               Reforms Examined                     Results

Buchmueller and             Survey of CA           Difference-in-difference of      Effect of California law requiring   13 percentage point increase in share
Jensen (1997)               employers, 1993 and    insurance coverage between       guaranteed issue, rate bands, and    of California firms offering insurance
                            1995; compared to      small firms in California        pre-existing condition limitations
                            national surveys in    versus the rest of the nation
                            same years

Marsteller, et al. (1998)   March CPS (1989-       State-level analysis of rates    Small group and individual           Significant positive effect of small
                            1995)                  of uninsurance, private          market regulations on issue and      group issue reforms on coverage
                                                   insurance, and Medicaid          rating.                              rates (strongest effects for
                                                   coverage. Model includes                                              guaranteed issue); negative effect of
                                                   state and year fixed effects,                                         rating reforms; these effects are
                                                   controls for economic                                                 offsetting in states with both reforms.
                                                   conditions and                                                        Reforms in individual market were
                                                   demographics.                                                         associated with statistically
                                                                                                                         significant decreases in coverage.

Sloan and Conover           CPS (1989-1994)        Cross-state changes in           Mandates; low cost plans; high       Mandates lower coverage by 4
(1998)                                             insurance coverage, public-      risk pools; open enrollment; rate    percent. No other policies affect
                                                   private mix of coverage, and     bands                                overall insurance coverage;
                                                   group-non group coverage                                              Community rating leads to less
                                                   for employees in small firms                                          private and more public coverage,
                                                   compared to large firms                                               and more coverage for the old in
                                                                                                                         comparison to the young.

Hing and Jensen (1999)      National Employer      Cross-sectional analysis of      Rating restrictions, guaranteed      Small positive relationship between
                            Health Insurance       small firms’ decision to offer   renewal, portability, guaranteed     regulations and percent of firms
                            Survey (1993)          insurance as a function of       issue, preexisting condition         offering coverage (3-4 percentage
                                                   small group regulations by       waiting period.                      points). Small, negative effect for
                                                   state.                                                                more recent reforms.
                                                                 Table 8 (continued)

Paper (date)           Data (Years)           Empirical Strategy                 Reforms Examined                      Results

Jensen and Morrissey   Health Insurance       Estimates probability of           Guaranteed issue, guaranteed          No significant effect of regulations
(1999)                 Association of         small firms’s offering of          renewal, portability of coverage,     on probability of offering.
                       America’s Annual       health insurance as logit.         pre-existing conditions, rating
                       Employer Health        Cross-sectional analysis           restrictions (rating restriction
                       Insurance Survey       using 4 years of data;             dummies are not included in
                       (1989, 1991) and       includes region dummies and        model due to collinearity).
                       survey conducted by    other controls. Variation in
                       authors (1993, 1995)   policy variables is at the state
                                              level.

Zuckerman and Rajan    March CPS (1989-       DD at state-level; analyzes        Separate analyses of regulation of    No statistically significant effect of
(1999)                 1995)                  “packages” of reforms that         group market (guaranteed issue,       reforms on coverage in small group
                                              tended to adopted together.        guaranteed renewal, rating            market. Individual market reforms
                                              Dependent variables are            restrictions, pre-existing            have positive, statistically significant
                                              uninsurance rate and rate of       condition restrictins, portability)   effect on uninsurance and negative,
                                              private coverage.                  and individual market (same           statistically significant effect on
                                                                                 expect not poratbility).              private insurance rate.

Hall (2000)            Case studies of        Case studies.                      Variety of reforms in small group     Reforms have improved access for
                       reforms in a number                                       and individual markets.               high-risks at high cost; little effect of
                       of states.                                                                                      small-group reforms on insurance
                                                                                                                       offering; negative effect of individual
                                                                                                                       reforms (guaranteed issue, pure
                                                                                                                       community rating) on coverage.

Simon (1999a)          CPS (1992-1997)        Cross-state changes in             Full reform (guaranteed issue and     Full reforms reduced coverage by 1.9
                                              insurance coverage for small       rate bands); Partial reform (rate     percentage points; Decline of 6.4
                                              firms versus large firms           bands only); Barebones (require-      percentage points for low risk
                                                                                 ment to offer basic plan to           workers (young, never married men);
                                                                                 uninsured)                            Statistically insignificant increase for
                                                                                                                       high risk workers (married women
                                                                                                                       while children); No effect of partial
                                                                                                                       reforms or barebones package on
                                                                                                                       coverage
                                                                Table 8 (continued)

Paper (date)            Data (Years)          Empirical Strategy              Reforms Examined                     Results

Simon (1999b)           Medical Expenditure   Cross-state changes in          Full reform (guaranteed issue and    Full reform increased single
                        Panel Survey          premiums, employee              rate bands); Partial reform (rate    premiums by 4 percent (marginally
                        Insurance             contributions, small firm       bands only); Barebones (require-     significant), increase in employee
                        Component List        offering, coverage, and         ment to offer basic plan to          contribution is 65 percent of total
                        Sample (1994) and     medical underwriting for        uninsured)                           premium increase. No significant
                        National Employer     small versus large firms                                             effect of full or partial reform on
                        Health Insurance                                                                           offering. Full reform has statistically
                        Survey (1997)                                                                              significant negative effect on
                                                                                                                   coverage; negative (insignificant)
                                                                                                                   effect on take-up.

Kapur (2000a)           CPS (1991-1999)       Difference-in-differences       Strong reform (guaranteed issue,     Portability and rating reforms have
                                              across states comparing who     rate bands, portability); Moderate   offsetting effects on employment,
                                              is hired in small firms with    reform (only some of these           with no net change in who is hired in
                                              health insurance by measures    factors); and no reform              small firms.
                                              of expected medical
                                              spending.

Kapur (2000b)           NMES (1987) and       Examines employment             Regulations making it hard for       Conditions that were a cause for
                        MEPS (1996)           changes by firm size            insurers to deny coverage or         denial in 1987 did not lead to
                                              conditional on being offered    exclude pre-existing conditions      employment distortions but did in
                                              health insurance                                                     1996, consistent with such conditions
                                                                                                                   being harder to deny.

Swartz and Garnick      State data on         Trends in enrollment in Blue    Establishment of Individual          IHCP may have prevented a
(2000)                  enrollment through    Cross and IHCP                  Health Coverage Program in New       continued decline in individual
                        IHCP                                                  Jersey                               coverage.

Buchmueller and         CPS (1987-1996) for   Difference-in-difference        Implementation of community          Large shift to managed care in New
DiNardo (forthcoming)   NY, PA, and CT        comparing small and large       rating in New York                   York; no change in insurance
                                              firms in New York versus the                                         coverage overall.
                                              other states


SUMMARY                                                                                                            No or small effect of regulations on
                                                                                                                   insurance coverage
     Table 9: Insurance Coverage by Income in the Non-Elderly United States Population
                                      1986                               1998
Income                   Private    Public   Uninsured      Private    Public   Uninsured
< Poverty                 12%        42%        45%          24%       40%         36%
Poverty - 2 x Poverty      50         12         38           52        17          31
> 2 x Poverty              80         3          17           85         3          12
Source: Data are from the March 1987 and 1999 Current Population Surveys.
                                  Table 10: Effect of Public Health Insurance Programs on Private Coverage

Paper (date)                     Data (Years)                          Empirical Strategy                      Results

Dubay, Norton, and Moon (1995)   American Hospital Association         Estimate effects of Medicaid            Overall, Medicaid expansions
                                 Annual Survey (1987-90); March        expansions on uncompensated care        reduced uncompensated care by
                                 CPS (1988, 1991); HCFA Area           provided by hospitals. (Need to get     5.4%; reduced uncompensated care
                                 Resource File                         full article)                           by 28.5% for hospitals with a
                                                                                                               significant commitment to maternity
                                                                                                               and infant care.

Cutler and Gruber (1996)         CPS (1988-1993)                       Identifies effects of expanding         Fifty percent of increase in Medicaid
                                                                       Medicaid eligibility on private and     coverage (women and children) was
                                                                       Medicaid coverage of women and          offset by reduction in private
                                                                       children using within-state variation   insurance. Does not appear that
                                                                       due to differential timing of           employers reduced offering of
                                                                       Medicaid expansions. Includes state     insurance in response to expansions.
                                                                       and year fixed effects.

Dubay and Kenney (1996)          CPS (1989, 1993)                      Estimetes effect of Medicaid            Crowd out of employer-sponsored
                                                                       expansions on private coverage for      coverage is estimated to be 17-26 %
                                                                       children. Medicaid eligibility is       of the increase in Medicaid coverage.
                                                                       estimated using TRIM2. Compares
                                                                       trends in employer-sponsored private
                                                                       coverage for poor children to trends
                                                                       for men ages 18 to 44.

Dubay and Kenney (1997)          CPS (1989, 1993)                      Estimates effect of Medicaid            Crowd-out is about 45% for near-
                                                                       expansions on private coverage for      poor women. Crowd-out of private
                                                                       pregnant women. Insurance               insurance is smaller for poorer
                                                                       coverage, Medicaid eligibility, and     women; overall 30% of increased
                                                                       pregnancy are simulated using Urban     Medicaid enrollment was offset by
                                                                       Institute TRIM2. Compares trends in     declines in private coverage.
                                                                       employer-sponsored coverage rates
                                                                       for near-poor pregnant women to
                                                                       those for near-poor men.
                                                      Table 10 (continued)

Paper (date)                  Data (Years)                       Empirical Strategy                       Results

Shore-Sheppard (1996)         March CPS (1988-1996)              Compares changes in state-age-           Estimates crowd-out between 31 and
                                                                 income cells with small and large        57 percent when data through 1996
                                                                 changes in Medicaid eligibility.         are included, 15 to 33 percent for
                                                                                                          1988-1993.

Yazici and Kaestner (1998)    NLSY (1988, 1992)                  Compares take-up of Medicaid and         Estimates that 14.5% of new
                                                                 dropping of private insurance among      Medicaid enrollment due to
                                                                 children made eligible for Medicaid      expansions came from private
                                                                 between 1988 and 1992 to trends for      insurance.
                                                                 the always eligible and never eligible
                                                                 in panel data.

Blumberg, Dubay, and Norton   SIPP (1990)                        Compares transitions from private        Estimate that 23% of movement
(2000)                                                           coverage and uninsurance to              from private coverage to Medicaid
                                                                 Medicaid between 1989 and 1990 for       was due to displacement. No
                                                                 children likely to have been affected    evidence that those moving from
                                                                 by expansions to a comparison group      uninsurance to Medicaid would have
                                                                 (older children with similar income)     otherwise taken up private insurance.
                                                                 in panel data.                           Overall estimate of displacement of
                                                                                                          private insurance is 4% of new
                                                                                                          Medicaid enrollment.

Rask and Rask (2000)          NMES (1987) and NHIS (1989,        Uses multinomial logit model of          Large negative significant
                              1992)                              insurance choice (Medicaid, private,     relationship between the presence of
                                                                 uninsured) for different income          a public hospital in the county and
                                                                 groups in cross-section to estimate      private coverage. Also significant
                                                                 relationship between availability of     negative relationship between
                                                                 public hospitals, uncompensated care     Medicaid generosity and uninsured
                                                                 funds, and Medicaid on insurance         care funds on private coverage rates.
                                                                 choices.
                                                             Table 10 (continued)

Paper (date)                       Data (Years)                         Empirical Strategy                       Results

Shore-Sheppard (2000)              March CPS (1988, 1989, 1994,         Uses variation in impact of Medicaid     Estimates of crowd-out between 7.6
                                   1995)                                expansions by region and income          percent and 45.3 percent. Concludes
                                                                        decile to identify changes in private    that expansions had and equalizing
                                                                        coverage, Medicaid coverage and          effect on coverage over the income
                                                                        uninsurance. Also uses single men as     distribution.
                                                                        additional control group. Uses those
                                                                        estimates to form counterfactual
                                                                        distributions of health insurance
                                                                        coverage for children.

Shore-Sheppard, Buchmueller, and   CPS and sample of firms (1989,       Examines effect of imputed fraction      No evidence Medicaid expansions
Jensen (2000)                      1990, 1991, 1993, 1995)              of employees eligible for Medicaid       effected offering of insurance to
                                                                        on employer offering of employee         employees. Statistically significant
                                                                        and family coverage and employee         negative effect of expansions on
                                                                        take-up. Uses CPS to impute              offering family coverage. Weak
                                                                        fraction of workers in firm who are      evidence of negative effect of
                                                                        Medicaid eligible according to           Medicaid expansions on take-up of
                                                                        states’ rules. Includes state and year   employer-provided insurance.
                                                                        fixed effects.


SUMMARY                                                                                                          Crowdout ranges from 10 to 50
                                                                                                                 percent of Medicaid increase
                                                Table 11: Effects of Public Programs on Health

Paper (Date)                    Data (Years)                             Empirical Strategy/Program                Results
                                                                         Evaluated

Piper, Ray and Griffin (1990)   Vital statistics linked to Medicaid      Compare prenatal utilization and          No effect of Medicaid expansion for
                                enrollment files for Tennessee           birth outcomes for births before and      pregnant women on birth outcomes
                                (1985-87)                                after Medicaid expansion fr pregnant      or initiation of prenatal care for any
                                                                         women; some specifications focus on       group. Increase in fraction of
                                                                         groups most likely to be affected by      Medicaid covered births where
                                                                         expansion.                                enrollment initiated in last 30 days of
                                                                                                                   pregnancy. Both before and after
                                                                                                                   expansion, more than two-thirds
                                                                                                                   enrolled in last 30 days of pregnancy.

Haas, Udvarhelyi, and Epstein   Massachusetts hospital discharge         Compare changes in outcomes of            No statistically significant
(1993)                          data for all in-hospital births (1984,   uninsured pregnant women before           differences in changes in adverse
                                1987)                                    and after implementation of               outcomes for uninsured patients,
                                                                         statewide program for uninsured           compared to Medicaid and privately
                                                                         pregnant women to changes for             insured. The probability of cesarean
                                                                         privately insured and Medicaid            section rose for uninsured relative to
                                                                         patients.                                 other groups.

Currie and Gruber (1996a)       National Health Interview Survey         Identifies effects of Medicaid            Medicaid eligibility reduces
                                (1984-1992)                              eligibility for children on medical       probability of no doctor’s visit in last
                                                                         care utilization (eg, doctor visit) and   year by 12.8 percent, increases
                                                                         child mortality using within-state        probability of hospitalization by 14
                                                                         variation in eligibility due to           percent. Ten percentage point
                                                                         differential timing of Medicaid           increase in fraction eligible for
                                                                         expansions (“simulated instrument”).      Medicaid reduces child mortality by
                                                                                                                   0.128 percentage points (3.4% of
                                                                                                                   paseline).

Currie and Gruber (1996b)       Vital Statistics (1979-1992),            Identifies effects of Medicaid            Thirty percentage point increase in
                                National Longitudinal Survey of          expansions for pregnant women on          eligibility is associated with 8.5
                                Youth (1979-1990)                        utilization and outcomes.                 percent reduction in infant mortality.
                                                                                                                   Early, targeted expansions were
                                                                                                                   more cost-effective than later, broad
                                                                                                                   expansions.
                                                                    Table 11 (continued)

Paper (Date)                         Data (Years)                              Empirical Strategy/Program               Results
                                                                               Evaluated

Currie and Gruber (1997)             Vital Statistics (1979-1992)              Same as above. Examines effects of       Medicaid eligibility was associated
                                                                               Medicaid eligibility on medical          with more intensive treatment and
                                                                               utilization and outcomes for births.     marginal improvements in neonatal
                                                                                                                        mortality. Larger effect on neonatal
                                                                                                                        mortality for mothers living near a
                                                                                                                        hospital with a Neonatal Intensive
                                                                                                                        Care Unit.

Joyce (1999)                         Medicaid administrative data linked       Cross-sectional analysis of              PCAP is associated with 20%
                                     to birth certificates for birth in New    relationship between birth outcomes      increase in WIC participation and 1.3
                                     York City (1989, 1991)                    and Prenatal Care Assistance             percentage point decrease in rate of
                                                                               Program (PCAP) participation,            low birth-weight. Financial savings
                                                                               controlling for demographics. Some       are insufficient to offset the cost of
                                                                               specifications stratify month of         the program.
                                                                               pregnancy prenatal care was
                                                                               initiated. IV estimates using number
                                                                               of PCAP providers in area as
                                                                               instrument for participation.

Kaestner, Joyce, and Racine (2001)   National Health Interview Survey          Examines effect of eligibility on        Weak, if any, support for the
                                     (1989,1992), Nationwide Inpatient         maternal reports of child’s health and   hypothesis that Medicaid improves
                                     Sample of ambulatory care sensitive       chronic conditions and bed days          health.
                                     discharges (ACS) (1988-1992)              (NHIS). Uses state-year-income and
                                                                               age-year interactions to instrument
                                                                               Medicaid eligibility for children aged
                                                                               2-9. DD: children assigned to
                                                                               treatment and control based on
                                                                               median income of zip code (NIS
                                                                               ACS).
                                                           Table 11 (continued)

Paper (Date)                     Data (Years)                         Empirical Strategy/Program              Results
                                                                      Evaluated

Dafny and Gruber (forthcoming)   National Hospital Discharge Survey   Identifies effects of Medicaid          Estimates 22 percent decline in
                                 (1983-1996).                         eligibility for children on avoidable   avoidable hospitalizations due to
                                                                      hospitalizations using within-state     expansions. Increase access to
                                                                      variation in eligibility due to         hospitalization on newly eligible
                                                                      differential timing of Medicaid         resulted in net increase of 10 percent
                                                                      expansions (“simulated instrument”).    in hospitalizations.


SUMMARY                                                                                                       Small improvements in health
