NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRADE INTEGRATION AND RISK SHARING

Aart Kraay
Jaume Ventura

Working Paper 8804
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8804

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2002

We thank Pol Antràs, Antonio Fatás, Philip Lane and participants in the International Seminar on
Macroeconomics at University College Dublin, June 2001, for their useful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research or
The World Bank.

© 2002 by Aart Kraay and Jaume Ventura. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Trade Integration and Risk Sharing
Aart Kraay and Jaume Ventura
NBER Working Paper No. 8804
February 2002
JEL No. F15, F36, G15

ABSTRACT
What are the effects of increased trade in goods and services on the trade balance? We study the
effects of reducing transport costs in a Ricardian model with complete asset markets and find that this
increases the volatility of the trade balance. This result applies regardless of whether supply or demand
shocks are the main source of economic fluctuations. Both type of shocks generate fluctuations in the
trade balance that are in part moderated by stabilizing movements in the terms of trade. Trade integration
dampens these terms of trade movements and, for a given distribution of shocks, amplifies fluctuations
in the trade balance. To overturn this result, one must assume that either trade integration is sufficiently
biased towards goods with strong comparative advantage and/or risk aversion is sufficiently extreme. We
calibrate the model to U.S. data and find that, for reasonable parameter values, increased trade in services
could double the volatility of the trade balance.

Aart Kraay
The World Bank

Jaume Ventura
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
jaume@mit.edu

In the last thirty years, the volume of trade among industrial countries has
more than tripled. During this same period, trade imbalances among these countries
have grown larger and more volatile. It is natural to ask whether there is a connection
between these two developments and, in particular, whether they are both driven by
the same set of economic forces. Many have argued that the increased volume of
trade is due to a reduction in the technological and policy-induced costs of trading
goods and services.1 Is it possible that these cost reductions are also responsible for
the increase in the size and volatility of trade imbalances? If so, what are the main
theoretical channels through which this happens? Are these channels quantitatively
important?

Unfortunately, there is little in the form of received “wisdom” that can help us
answer these questions.2 This state of affairs reflects in part the absence of a simple
workhorse model incorporating the main insights of the theories of goods and asset
trade and the key interactions between them. This paper attempts to fill this gap. Our
strategy is to build from the classic continuum model of Dornbusch, Fischer and
Samuelson [1977] and add asset markets to it. To motivate trade in goods and
services, we assume countries have different industry technologies. To motivate trade
in assets, we assume countries experience imperfectly correlated shocks to
technology (or “supply”) and to preferences (or “demand”). As usual, we assume that
some goods can be traded at negligible transport costs (the “traded” sector), while the
rest can only be traded at prohibitively high transport costs (the “nontraded” sector).
We interpret the process of trade integration as one in which some nontraded goods
become traded.

The main theoretical result of this paper is that trade integration increases the
volatility of the trade balance. This result applies regardless of whether supply or
1

Baier and Bergstrand (2001) find that about 31 to 45 percent of the increase in the volume of trade can
be explained by reductions in costs of trading goods and services. Of this total, tariff rate reductions and
preferential agreements account for 23 to 26 percent, and transport cost declines for 8 to 9 percent. We
think that these are very conservative estimates and the real numbers might be even higher.
2
A remarkable exception is Cole and Obstfeld [1991], who provide an example in which a drastic
reduction (from prohibitive to negligible) in the costs of trading all goods and services has no effect on
the trade balance. As we shall see later, their model obtains as a special case of ours.

1

demand shocks are the main source of economic fluctuations. Both type of shocks
generate fluctuations in the trade balance that are in part moderated by stabilizing
movements in the terms of trade. Trade integration dampens these terms of trade
movements and, for a given distribution of shocks, amplifies fluctuations in the trade
balance. To overturn this result is not easy in our framework, but it can be done in two
cases. The first one requires that trade integration be sufficiently biased towards
goods with strong comparative advantage. By this we mean that the newly-traded
goods must exhibit cross-country differences in productivity that are ‘large’ relative to
those of existing traded goods. The second case requires that risk aversion be
sufficiently extreme. That is, preferences must exhibit a coefficient of relative risk
aversion that is either ‘large’ or ‘small’ relative to the logarithmic benchmark.
However, these two exceptions are not likely to be empirically relevant.

Why does trade integration increase the effects of supply shocks on the trade
balance? Economy-wide fluctuations in labour productivity lead to fluctuations in the
production of each good and also in the range of traded goods produced by the
country. When the traded sector is small, shocks that raise labour productivity
primarily raise the production of goods already produced in the country, and this
lowers their prices and worsens the terms of trade. This in turn moderates the
increase in income and the trade surplus created by the shock. Similarly, shocks that
lower labour productivity improve the terms of trade, moderating the resulting trade
deficit. When the traded sector is large, shocks to labour productivity are mostly
reflected in fluctuations in the range of goods produced at home, with only small
effects on their prices and the terms of trade. By increasing the size of the traded
sector, trade integration decreases the effects of supply shocks on the terms of trade
and so raises the volatility of the trade balance.

Why does trade integration reduce the effects of demand shocks on the trade
balance? The intuition is simple and is based on the classic analysis of the transfer
problem. In the presence of transport costs, there is a home bias in consumption
since domestic goods are cheaper at home than abroad. Under these conditions,

2

shocks that increase spending re-direct demand towards domestic goods and
improve the terms of trade. This raises income and finances in part the increase in
spending, moderating the trade deficit. Through the same mechanism, shocks that
reduce spending worsen the terms of trade, moderating the trade surplus. By
weakening the home bias in consumption, trade integration lessens the effects of
demand shocks on the terms of trade and raises the volatility of the trade balance.

Armed with these theoretical findings, we calibrate the model to U.S. data to
provide a quantitative assessment of the effects of further trade integration. We argue
that future trade integration is likely to be concentrated in services. In industrial
countries, services account for almost 70 percent of value added but only for 20
percent of exports and imports.3 To some extent this mismatch reflects a wide variety
of technological and policy-induced barriers to trade that are specific to services. Our
premise is that some of these barriers are likely to fall significantly over the next
decade or two, spurred by improvements in communications technology as well as
reductions in regulatory barriers. We therefore study two scenarios in which trade in
services goes half the way and all the way towards “catching-up” with trade in the rest
of the economy. For plausible parameter values, we find that trade integration almost
doubles the volatility of the U.S. trade balance.

The paper is organized as follows: section one presents a version of the
Dornbusch-Fischer-Samuelson model of Ricardian trade with asset markets. Section
two uses the model to determine the main theoretical effects of trade integration on
the trade balance. Section three calibrates the model to actual data and provides a
quantitative assessment of the effect of increased trade in services on the U.S. trade
balance. Section four concludes.

3

Moreover, much of existing trade in services is concentrated in transportation and travel. For instance,
in the U.S. these two items constitute roughly half of service trade but only five percent of service
production.

3

1. The Dornbusch-Fischer-Samuelson Model with
Asset Markets
This section presents a simple model designed to study how the nature and
costs of commodity trade affect the behavior of the trade balance. We build on the
classic Ricardian trade model with a continuum of goods due to Dornbusch, Fischer
and Samuelson [1977], and then add asset markets to it. We consider a world that
lasts one period and consists of two countries: Home and Foreign.4 Each country is
endowed with labour, L and L*. As usual an asterisk refers to Foreign variables.
Countries use labour to produce a continuum of intermediate goods, indexed by
z∈[0,1]. These intermediates are then combined to produce a nontraded final good
that is used for consumption.

Countries trade in goods to exploit differences in the technology used to
produce intermediates. The extent to which they are able to do so depends on the
costs of trading these intermediates. In particular, we assume that a fraction τ of the
intermediates can be transported across countries without cost. We refer to these
intermediates as the traded sector and assign them a low index, z∈[0,τ]. The rest of
the intermediates cannot be transported across countries and we refer to them as the
nontraded sector, z∈(τ,1]. We shall interpret changes in the equilibrium as τ
increases as the effects of trade integration.

Countries trade in assets to insure against risks. At the beginning of the
period, countries are uncertain about their labour productivity and their taste for
consumption. As usual, we assume that they know the true probability distribution of
these variables, but not their realizations. In particular, we assume that there are S
4

It is not difficult to write a multi-period version of this model. But there is little point in doing so, since we
assume throughout that international financial markets are complete and factors of production are nonreproducible. Under the standard assumptions that shocks are independent and identically distributed,
and both countries have 'ex-ante’ identical time-separable and homothetic preferences, there is no
incentive to engage in intertemporal trade and the multi-period model is equivalent to a sequence of oneperiod models.

4

states of nature, indexed by s=1,…,S; and assign state s a probability πs. Since
countries are risk-averse, they have an incentive to share risks before the state of
nature is revealed. We rule out frictions in financial markets and allow countries to
freely trade a full set of Arrow-Debreu securities.

1.1 Firms, Technology and The Labour Market
Each country contains many competitive firms that produce the final good and
intermediates. In the final good sector, firms use a symmetric Cobb-Douglas
technology that requires the use of all intermediates. We shall see later that
consumption is strictly positive in all countries and states of nature. Since the final
good is nontraded, this means that the production of the final good is also strictly
positive in all countries and states of nature. Therefore, the prices of the final good in
Home and Foreign, Ps and Ps*, are given by:

(1)

1



Ps = exp ln ps ( z ) ⋅ dz 


0


∫

Ps*

and

1



= exp ln p *s ( z ) ⋅ dz 


0


∫

where ps(z) and ps*(z) are the prices of variety z of intermediates in Home and
Foreign. Since the final good is not traded, purchasing power parity (i.e. Ps=Ps*)
applies if the prices of intermediates are equalized across countries. In general, this
will not be the case.

In the intermediates sector, Home and Foreign firms produce intermediates
using only labour. The cost of producing one unit of intermediate z in Home and
Foreign is

Ws
W*
⋅ a( z ) and *s ⋅ a* ( z ) , respectively. We assume labour productivity
fs
fs

varies across countries and states of nature in a way that is captured by the indexes
fs and fs*. We shall refer to variation in fs and fs* as technology or supply shocks. This

5

is the first source of uncertainty in this model. We assume that unit labour
requirements vary across intermediates and across countries in a way that is
captured by the technology schedules a(z) and a*(z).

Given our assumptions about the technology used to produce the final good,
all intermediates are produced in equilibrium. To determine where the traded
intermediates are produced, it is useful to order them using the rule that z≤z’ if and
only if

a * ( z ) a * ( z' )
≥
, for all z,z’∈[0,τ]. This ordering rule implies that traded
a( z )
a( z' )

intermediates with low indexes are Home exports while traded intermediates with high
indexes are Home imports. To rule out states of nature in which one country
a * ( z)
a * ( z)
= ∞ and lim
= 0.
z →0 a( z )
z → τ a( z )

produces all the traded intermediates, assume that lim

Let zs be the index of the cutoff good that separates Home exports and imports, i.e.
the good for which costs of production in Home and Foreign are the same:

(2)

Ws
fs

⋅ a( z s ) =

Ws*
fs*

⋅ a* ( z s )

The prices of traded intermediates are the same in both countries and can be
written as follows:

(3)

 Ws
 f ⋅ a( z ) z ∈ [0, zs ]

*
ps ( z ) = ps ( z ) =  s*
 Ws ⋅ a* ( z ) z ∈ ( zs , τ]
*

 fs

Nontraded intermediates are produced in both countries, and their prices
might differ:

6

(4)

ps ( z ) =

Ws
⋅ a( z )
fs

and

p*s ( z ) =

Ws* *
⋅ a ( z)
fs*

if z∈(τ,1]

Equations (1)-(4) summarize firm maximization and provide all the relevant
relationships between goods and factor prices. To complete the production side of
model, we need to ensure that labour markets clear. Define Cs as Home’s
consumption of the final good. Then, we have that:

(5)

Ps ⋅ Cs
Ws ⋅ L
= zs + (1− τ) ⋅
*
*
Ws ⋅ L + Ws ⋅ L
Ws ⋅ L + Ws* ⋅ L*

Equation (5) states that Home’s share of world labour income or production
equals the share of world spending on goods produced by Home. The latter consists
of the shares of world spending on Home’s traded sector and nontraded sector,
respectively.

Equations (1)-(5) are almost identical to those of the original DornbuschFischer-Samuelson model. These equations determine the pattern of labour income
and goods trade as a function of the world distribution of spending. To complete the
model, we therefore need a consumption side for the model. Dornbusch, Fischer and
Samuelson [1977] assumed that Home’s shares of world labour income and spending
differ at most by an exogenously given transfer or trade balance. This modeling
strategy permitted an illuminating analysis of the economic effects of war reparations.
After World Wars I and II, cross-border financial transactions were severely restricted
and the transfers imposed on the defeated countries were determined mainly by
political factors. But this does not seem to be the appropriate modeling strategy
today, when a sophisticated international financial market exists in which countries
can buy and sell a large array of securities. Recognizing this change in the economic
environment, we next provide a market-based theory of the determinants of the
transfers or trade balances.

7

1.2 Preferences and Asset Markets
Each country contains a representative consumer that maximizes the
following utility function:

γ

S

1− γ

∑

(6)

γ

S

d ⋅ Cs − 1
U=
πs ⋅ s
1− γ
s =1

1− γ

d* ⋅ C*s − 1
U =
πs ⋅ s
1− γ
s =1
*

and

∑

where ds and ds* are variables that measure the value of consuming when the state of
nature is s. We assume that ds and ds* vary across states of nature, and refer to this
variation as preference or demand shocks. These shocks are the second and final
source of uncertainty in the model.

Representative consumers obtain income by inelastically supplying a labour
endowment equal to L and L*. Therefore, their income is equal to the wage times the
labour endowment, and their budget constraints can be written as follows:

S

∑

(7)

∑ Q ⋅ (P
S

Qs ⋅ (Ps ⋅ Cs − Ws ⋅ L ) ≤ 0

and

s

s =1

*
s

)

⋅ C*s − Ws* ⋅ L* ≤ 0

s =1

where Qs is the price of the Arrow-Debreu security that delivers one unit of income in
state s. These constraints simply state that the total (across states of nature) value of
consumption cannot exceed the total value of income. Naturally, in each state the
values of income and consumption need not be equal. Maximizing (6) subject to (7)
we obtain:

(8)

Qs ⋅ Ps ⋅ Cs
S

∑
s ' =1

Qs' ⋅ Ws' ⋅ L

1
γ

=

γ −1
Qs ⋅ Ps γ

πs ⋅ ds ⋅ (

)

1
γ

γ −1
Qs' ⋅ Ps' γ

S

∑

πs' ⋅ ds' ⋅ (

)

and

Qs ⋅ Ps*
S

∑
s ' =1

s ' =1

8

1
γ

⋅ C*s

Qs' ⋅ Ws*'

=

⋅L

*

(

πs ⋅ d*s ⋅ Qs ⋅ Ps*
S

∑
s ' =1

1
γ

(

)

γ −1
γ

πs' ⋅ d*s' ⋅ Qs' ⋅ Ps*'

)

γ −1
γ

Equation (8) describes how consumers distribute their spending across states
of nature. The share of spending is higher in states of nature that are more likely
(higher πs) and consumption yields higher utility (higher ds). The relationship between
spending and the price of consumption (Qs⋅Ps) is ambiguous. On the one hand,
consumers want to achieve the highest possible amount of total consumption. To
attain this objective they should spend more on those states in which the
consumption good is cheap. On the other hand, consumers are risk averse and want
to distribute their total consumption as evenly as possible across states of nature. To
attain this objective they should spend more on those states in which consumption is
expensive. As usual, the first consideration dominates if risk aversion is low, γ<1,
while the second consideration dominates if risk aversion is high, γ>1. In the magical
case of logarithmic preferences, γ=1, the two effects cancel and the distribution of
spending is not affected by the price of consumption.

Equilibrium in international financial markets requires that the world value of
consumption equals the world value of income in each state of nature:

(9)

Ps ⋅ Cs + Ps* ⋅ C*s = Ws ⋅ L + Ws* ⋅ L*

Equations (8) and (9) implicitly define the distribution of consumption and the
prices of all Arrow-Debreu securities as a function of the world distribution of labour
income and price levels.

This completes the presentation of the model. Equations (1)-(5) and (8)-(9)
describe the solution of the model up to a choice of numeraire. For a given
distribution of spending, the production side of the model (as described by Equations
(1)-(5)) determines the world distribution of labour income, price levels and the
pattern of goods trade. For a given world distribution of labour income and price
levels, the consumption side of the model (as described by Equations (8)-(9))

9

determines the world distribution of spending and the pattern of transfers or trade
balances.5

2. Determinants of the Trade Balance
Our goal in this section is to develop results about the effects of trade
integration on the trade balance. To do this, we make three strategic assumptions:6

A1. (Identical size) L=L*=1;
A2. (Symmetric technologies) Let the relative technology schedule for the traded
sector be A( z; τ) ≡

a* ( z )
for z∈[0,τ]. Then, A( z; τ) ⋅ A( τ − z; τ) = 1 for all τ;
a( z )

A3. (Symmetric shocks) Let δs =

ds
f
and φs = s* . If there exists a state s with πs=π
*
ds
fs

such that (φs,δs)=(φ,δ), then there exists another state s’ with πs’=π such that
(φs’,δs’)=(φ-1,δ-1).
Assumption A1 simply states that countries have the same size and
normalizes it to one. Assumption A2 centers the relative technology schedule at 0.5⋅τ
and forces (log) productivity differences to be symmetric. This can be understood as
saying that no country has a superior technology on average. By writing the
5

The Arrow-Debreu model of asset trade generates predictions about the transfers that countries make
in different states of nature. These predictions are robust in the sense that enlarging the menu of assets
consumers can choose from would not affect these transfers or trade balances. But it is difficult to find
assets that resemble the set of Arrow-Debreu securities that the theory postulates in existing financial
markets. Nevertheless, we do not believe that this observation invalidates the theory. The key
assumption underlying the model’s predictions for the trade balance is not that a full set of Arrow-Debreu
securities is actually traded, but instead that it is possible to manufacture them with the available menu
of assets. Whether this assumption provides a reasonably good description of actual financial markets is
a hotly debated question. Nevertheless, we shall adopt it in what follows. Since we do not specify the
available menu of assets, we interpret the theory as being silent on what specific assets are used to
implement the equilibrium transfers or trade balances. Recognizing this, we focus only on its predictions
for the trade balance.
6
We will relax these assumptions in the next section when we calibrate the model to the U.S. data.

10

technology schedule as an explicit function of the size of the traded sector, i.e. A(.;τ),
we recognize that its shape depends not only on our technology assumptions, i.e.
a(z) and a*(z); but also on how we distribute goods between traded and nontraded
sectors. Assumption A3 says that both countries face the same distribution of shocks.
Note that this distribution is defined in terms of relative shocks as opposed to
absolute shocks. This is in anticipation of the finding that only relative shocks can
generate fluctuations in the trade balance and the terms of trade. Together, these
three assumptions ensure that the two countries are symmetric and this simplifies the
algebra of the problem substantially.

An implication of assumptions A1-A3 is that both countries have the same real

∑Q ⋅ W ⋅L
s

wealth ‘ex-ante’, i.e.

∑

s∈S
1
πs γ ⋅ ds

∑Q ⋅ W

s

γ −1
Qs ⋅ Ps γ

⋅(

*
s

s

=

)

∑

s∈S
1
πs γ ⋅ d*s

⋅

(

⋅ L*

Qs ⋅ Ps*

)

γ −1
γ

. In this particular

s∈S

s∈S

case, Equations (8)-(9) admit a simple and intuitive closed-form solution for Home’s
share of world spending, es ≡

(10)

e s = e(ω s , δ s ; τ, γ ) ≡

Ps ⋅ Cs
:
Ps ⋅ Cs + Ps* ⋅ C*s

δ s ⋅ ωs

(1− τ )⋅

1 + δ s ⋅ ωs

where ωs =

γ −1
γ

(1− τ )⋅

γ −1
γ

Ws / fs
is Home’s relative labour costs or double-factoral terms of trade.
Ws* / fs*

This variable will play a crucial role in what follows and is closely related to the real
exchange rate or ratio of price levels since

Ps
1− τ
= ωs . Since higher terms of trade
*
Ps

lead to an appreciation of the real exchange rate, this means that

11

∂es
≥ 0 if γ≥1, and
∂ωs

∂es
≤ 0 if γ≤1. Note also that trade integration reduces the effects of changes in the
∂ωs

terms of trade on spending.

Let xs be the share of traded goods produced in Home, i.e. xs is implicitly
defined as A( τ ⋅ x s ; τ) = ωs . Assume A(.;τ) is invertible and let A-1(.;τ) be its inverse
function. Then, x s = x(ωs ; τ) ≡

∂x s
A −1(ωs ; τ)
, with x(ωs ; τ) = 1 − x(ωs−1; τ) and
≤ 0 . The
τ
∂ωs

effects of changes in τ on xs are ambiguous, since they depend on how the
distribution of unit labour requirements of the marginal traded goods compares to that
of existing traded goods. In the top (bottom) panel of Figure 1, we depict the case in
which the distribution of unit labour requirements is uniformly less (more) dispersed
across marginal goods than across existing traded goods. This leads to a counterclockwise (clockwise) rotation in the xs schedule. Since dispersion in unit labour
requirements is the source of comparative advantage, we say that in the top panel
trade integration is biased towards goods where comparative advantage is weak,
while in the bottom panel it is biased towards goods where comparative advantage is
strong.7

Using this notation, we can now rewrite Equation (5) to obtain:

(11)

φs ⋅ ωs
= τ ⋅ x(ωs ; τ ) + (1 − τ) ⋅ e(ωs , δs ; τ, γ )
1 + φs ⋅ ωs

7

This definition is not devoid of some ambiguity, since there is no reason for the distribution of unit
labour requirements of the marginal traded goods to always be uniformly more or uniformly less
dispersed than that of existing traded goods. For instance, if trade integration is biased towards goods
that exhibit either very strong or very weak comparative advantage, the distribution of unit labour
requirements of the marginal traded goods has more mass both in the tails and around the mean than
that of existing traded goods. In this case, the rotation of the xs schedule is counter-clockwise near the
middle, but clockwise in the extremes. Obviously, more complicated shifts are also possible. To eliminate
any ambiguity, we assume from now on that the distribution of unit labour requirements of the marginal
traded goods is either uniformly more or uniformly less dispersed than that of existing traded goods. It is
straightforward to extend the analysis to the general case.

12

The left-hand side of Equation (11) is Home’s share of world labour income or
production, while the right-hand side is world spending on Home produced goods.
Equation (11) implicitly defines the equilibrium value of ωs. Since Home’s trade
balance as a share of world income, ts, is the difference between exports, τ⋅xs⋅(1-es),
and imports, τ⋅(1-xs)⋅es, we can write:

(12)

t s = τ ⋅ [x (ωs ; τ ) − e(ωs , δs ; τ, γ )]

We shall next use Equations (11)-(12) to study the cyclical behavior of the
trade balance and the effects of trade integration. To streamline the discussion, in
sections 2.1 and 2.2 we assume that fluctuations in the terms of trade have no effect
on spending. That is, we restrict the analysis to the logarithmic case in which γ=1.
This restriction leads to a clean description of the effects of trade integration on the
trade balance. In section 2.3, we examine the consequences of removing this
restriction.

2.1 The Cyclical Behavior of the Trade Balance
In this world economy, countries use asset markets ex-ante to transfer income
to those states of nature in which their labour productivity is low and the value of
consumption is high. The trade balance records the transfers between countries that
are made ex-post. In general, the nature of these transfers depends on the
distribution of shocks and their effects. To isolate the main forces at work, we study
next two polar examples where all the shocks are of the same type.

Consider first an economy where fluctuations in the trade balance are driven
exclusively by technology or supply shocks. In the top panel of Figure 2, we assume
that there are two states of nature s=H,L; with (φH,δH)=(φ,1) and (φL,δL)=(φ-1,1) with
φ>1. We refer to these as the high and low states, respectively. The AS schedule

13

plots Home’s share of world labour income for different values of the terms of trade,
i.e. the left-hand side of Equation (11). The slope is positive because, ceteris paribus,
higher terms of trade raise Home’s relative wages and its share of labour income. The
AS schedule shifts across states since, holding constant the terms of trade, the larger
is Home’s relative productivity the larger is its relative labour income. The AD
schedule plots the share of world spending on Home produced goods for different
values of the terms of trade, i.e. the right-hand side of Equation (11). The slope of this
schedule is negative because ceteris paribus higher terms of trade reduce the
demand for Home traded goods. The top panel of Figure 2 also shows the TB
schedule plotting the trade balance for different values of the terms of trade, i.e.
Equation (12). The equilibrium value for ωs is obtained by crossing the AS and AD
schedules, while the equilibrium value for ts is obtained by projecting the equilibrium
value for ωs to the TB schedule.
The story depicted in the top panel of Figure 2 is quite standard. Home uses
asset markets to purchase income in the low state and finances this by selling income
in the high state. By running a trade surplus in the high state and a trade deficit in the
low state, Home is able to achieve the same spending in both states despite the
fluctuations in labour income. The size of the trade balances that are required to
achieve this depends on the effects of productivity gains on the terms of trade, i.e. on
the slope of the AD schedule. When Home’s productivity is high, its terms of trade
deteriorate moderating the increase in Home’s share of world labour income and
lowering the required trade surplus. Naturally, the opposite applies when Home’s
productivity is low. If these movements in the terms of trade are strong, trade
balances are small in absolute value.8

8

Cole and Obstfeld [1991] were the first to provide an influential example of how these terms of trade
movements could be large enough to eliminate trade balances. Their example is the special case of our
∂x s
model in which (i) there are only supply shocks, (ii)
= 0 and (iii) τ=0. Our model shows that their
∂ωs
result also holds if τ<1, provided that γ=1.

14

Consider next an economy where fluctuations in the trade balance are driven
exclusively by preference or demand shocks. In the bottom panel of Figure 2, we
assume there are two states of nature s=H,L; with (φH,δH)=(1,δ) and (φL,δL)=(1,δ-1);
and δ>1. Once again, we refer to these as the high and low states. The AD schedule
shifts across states because, ceteris paribus, the larger is Home’s share of world
spending the higher is the demand for Home nontraded goods. The TB schedule also
shifts because, ceteris paribus, the larger is Home’s share of world spending the
lower is the demand for Home exports and the higher is the demand for Home
imports.

The story depicted in the bottom panel of Figure 2 is also quite standard.
Home uses asset markets to purchase income in the high state and finances this by
selling income in the low state. By running a trade deficit in the high state and a trade
surplus in the low state, Home is able to spend more when the value of consumption
is high. The size of the trade balances that are required to achieve this depends on
the effects of increases in spending on the terms of trade, i.e. on both the shift and
the slope of the AD schedule. When Home spending is high, its terms of trade
improve, raising Home’s share of world labour income and lowering the required trade
deficit. Of course, the opposite applies when Home spending is low. Once again, we
find that if movements in the terms of trade are strong, trade balances are small in
absolute value.

The intuitions developed in these two polar examples carry almost directly to
the general case with many states of nature and with some of these states involving a
mixture of supply and demand shocks. We shall not pursue this point further though.
Instead, we build on these intuitions to address the main question of this paper: how
does trade integration change the cyclical behavior of the trade balance?

15

2.2 The Effects of Trade Integration
We have seen that supply and demand shocks generate fluctuations in the
trade balance that are moderated in part by stabilizing movements in the terms of
trade. Next, we show how trade integration dampens these terms of trade movements
and, for a given distribution of shocks, this amplifies fluctuations in the trade balance.
To see this, apply the implicit function theorem to Equations (11)-(12) with γ=1 to
obtain:

(13)

φs
+
φ
∂x 
dt s
(1 s ⋅ ωs )2
t
=
⋅ s + τ⋅ s 
φs
∂x
∂τ 
dτ
− τ⋅ s  τ
2
∂ωs
(1 + φs ⋅ ωs )

Our symmetry assumptions A1-A3 imply that the average trade balance is
zero. Therefore, a necessary condition for the volatility of the trade balance to
∂x s
 dt 
increase with τ is that sign( t s ) = sign s  for all s. Since
≤ 0 , we have
∂ωs
 dτ 

established the following result:
Result #1: Assume that changes in the terms of trade do not affect spending, i.e. γ=1;
and trade integration is unbiased, i.e.

∂x s
= 0 . Then, trade integration increases the
∂τ

volatility of the trade balance.

This is the main result of the paper and provides theoretical support for the
view that a reduction in the costs of trading goods and services is in part responsible
for larger trade imbalances. Note that Result #1 does not place any restriction on the
distribution of shocks beyond assumption A3. In particular, there could be any
number of states of nature with any mix of demand and supply shocks. The intuition
is simple: trade integration both flattens the AD schedule and makes it less sensitive

16

to changes in the world distribution of spending. The first of these effects reduces the
impact of supply shocks on the terms of trade and increases their impact on the trade
balance. The two effects combine also to reduce the impact of demand shocks on the
terms of trade while increasing their impact on the trade balance.

It is also immediate to provide a first qualification to our main result:

Result #2: If trade integration is sufficiently biased towards goods with strong
comparative advantage, it could lead to reduction in the volatility of the trade balance.

If trade integration is biased towards goods with strong comparative
advantage, the xs schedule rotates clockwise. If this effect is strong enough, the AD
schedule might become steeper in the middle range. Assume that shocks are not too
large and the equilibrium lies in this range. Then, trade integration increases the
impact of supply shocks on the terms of trade and reduces their impact on the trade
balance. Therefore, the economy with supply shocks of section 2.1 provides an
example that proves Result #2. It is also possible that trade integration increases the
effects of demand shocks on the terms of trade and reduces their impact on the trade
balance. But since trade integration makes the AD schedule less sensitive to changes
in the world distribution of spending, we need the extra requirement that the increase
in slope more than “compensates” for the smaller shift. When this happens, the
economy with demand shocks of section 2.1 provides an additional example that also
proves Result #2.9

Is there any reason to expect trade integration to be biased towards goods
with strong comparative advantage? Naturally, this question cannot be answered
without actual data. But some intuition can be obtained by comparing our model of
trade integration with its most popular alternative. We have modeled trade integration
as a situation in which the transport costs of a small set of goods falls dramatically

9

Note that in these two examples, τ ⋅

∂x s
∂τ

has different sign and is larger in absolute value than

17

ts
τ

.

from prohibitive to negligible, without placing any restrictions on the characteristics of
these goods. An alternative way to model trade integration is to assume the same
transport cost for all goods and consider a small reduction in this cost. In this case, at
high transport costs only goods with strong comparative advantage are traded. As
transport costs fall goods with weaker comparative advantage start to be traded as
well. In this alternative model, trade integration is always biased towards goods in
which comparative advantage is weak.

2.3 Spending and the Terms of Trade
We now return to the more general case in which changes in the terms of
trade affect spending. That is, we remove the restriction that γ=1. As will become
apparent shortly, it is not possible to derive general results on the effects of trade
integration on the trade balance. However, a detailed examination of the two polar
cases of section 2.1 allows us to derive useful intuitions. To simplify matters, we
assume throughout this section that trade integration is unbiased, i.e.

∂x s
=0.
∂τ

Consider first the economy where fluctuations are driven by supply shocks. If
risk aversion is high, γ>1, spending depends positively on the terms of trade and both
the AD and the TB schedules rotate clockwise with respect to the benchmark case of
logarithmic preferences. If risk aversion is low, γ<1, spending depends negatively on
the terms of trade and the AD and the TB schedules rotate counter-clockwise with
respect to the benchmark. If the effects of terms of trade changes on Home’s share of
spending are not too strong, i.e.

− τ ∂x s
∂x s ∂es
, the qualitative description of
⋅
≤
≤
∂ωs ∂ωs 1 − τ ∂ωs

the effects of supply shocks in Figure 2 still applies. The only difference with the
benchmark case is quantitative. If risk aversion is high, spending becomes countercyclical and this increases the volatility of the trade balance with respect to the
benchmark case. If risk aversion is low, the opposite applies.

18

Figure 3 shows what can happen if the effects of changes in the terms of trade
on spending are strong. The top panel shows the case in which risk aversion is so
high that the AD schedule becomes upward sloping in the region of the equilibrium,
∂es
− τ ∂x s 10
. When Home’s productivity is high, the deterioration in the terms
>
⋅
∂ωs 1 − τ ∂ωs

of trade is so large than Home’s share of labour income falls. However, the decline in
spending is even larger and, as a result, the qualitative behavior of the terms of trade
and the trade balance remain the same as in the benchmark case. The bottom panel
shows the case in which risk aversion is so low that the TB schedule becomes
upward sloping in some range,

∂es ∂x s
. That is, the Marshall-Lerner condition that
<
∂ωs ∂ωs

an improvement in the terms of trade worsens the trade balance fails. This is the only
case in which the qualitative behavior of the terms of trade and the trade balance are
different than in the benchmark case. When Home’s productivity is high, the
deterioration in the terms of trade leads to an increase in spending that exceeds the
increase in labour income. The opposite occurs when productivity is low. Unlike
Figure 2, the economy now runs trade deficits in the high state and trade surpluses in
the low state. An implication of this discussion is that, unless γ is so small that the
Marshall-Lerner condition fails, the volatility of the trade balance is increasing in risk
aversion.

In this more general model, the size of the traded sector affects the
relationship between spending and changes in the terms of trade. Trade integration
weakens this relationship as the real exchange rate becomes less sensitive to the
terms of trade. In the limit as τ→1, changes in the terms of trade have no effects on
spending regardless of risk aversion. This is a new channel through which trade
integration affects the volatility of the trade balance. If the Marshall-Lerner condition
holds, through this channel trade integration increases the volatility of the trade
10

The AD schedule might be increasing in some ranges and decreasing in others. Despite this, an
analysis of Equation (11) shows that the AD schedule always crosses the AS schedule from below and,
as a result, the equilibrium is unique.

19

balance if risk aversion is low, but lowers it if risk aversion is high. If the MarshallLerner condition fails, trade integration always lowers the volatility of the trade
balance through this channel.

If risk aversion is high enough, or else sufficiently low that the Marshall-Lerner
condition fails, this new channel might be strong enough to generate a negative
relationship between trade integration and the volatility of the trade balance. Figure 4
illustrates this by plotting the volatility of the trade balance against the size of the
traded sector for different values of risk aversion. Not surprisingly, we find that at
values of γ that do not depart much from one, trade integration monotonically
increases the volatility of the trade balance. But if risk aversion is sufficiently extreme,
there might be some ranges in which an increase in the size of the traded sector
lowers the volatility of the trade balance.

The other polar case in which fluctuations are driven only by demand shocks
is much simpler to analyze. Naturally, if the effects of terms of trade changes on
Home’s share of spending are not too strong, i.e.

∂x s ∂es
− τ ∂x s
, the
≤
≤
⋅
∂ωs ∂ωs 1 − τ ∂ωs

qualitative description of the effects of supply shocks in Figure 2 still applies. But
even if risk aversion is so high that the AD schedule becomes upward sloping or so
low that the TB schedule becomes upward sloping, the qualitative description in
Figure 2 still applies. This is shown in Figure 5. The only difference with the
benchmark case is quantitative. If risk aversion is high, increases in spending are
reinforced by improvements in the terms of trade and this increases the volatility of
the trade balance with respect to the benchmark case of logarithmic preferences. If
risk aversion is low, the opposite applies. An implication is that the volatility of the
trade balance is increasing in risk aversion. Unlike the case of supply shocks, this
relationship holds at all levels of risk aversion.

As we have already discussed, in the more general case of this section trade
integration has the additional effect of weakening the effects of the terms of trade on

20

spending. In the economy with demand shocks, through this channel trade integration
increases the volatility of the trade balance if risk aversion is low, but lowers it if risk
aversion is high. It is conceivable that if risk aversion is high enough this effect
becomes strong enough to create a range in which trade integration reduces the
volatility of the trade balance. We have however been unable to find a numerical
example in which this happens. Figure 6, which is analogous to Figure 4, shows how
the volatility of the trade balance changes as the size of the traded sector increases
for different values of γ. In all cases, the relationship is monotonically increasing.
The results of this section can now be summarized as follows:

Result #3: If risk aversion is sufficiently higher or sufficiently lower than the
benchmark case of logarithmic preferences, trade integration might lead to a
reduction in the volatility of the trade balance.

Figure 4 provides examples that prove this claim.

To sum up, Result #1 provides theoretical support for the view that trade
integration raises the volatility of the trade balance. Results #2 and #3 qualify this
view by showing what can go wrong if the two conditions stated in Result #1 are
violated. These cases however do not seem likely to be empirically relevant.

3. An Application to Trade in Services
Our objective in this section is to develop a sense of the quantitative
importance of the effects of trade integration on the trade balance. To achieve this
goal, we calibrate the model and use it to study the effects of an increase in the

21

tradeability of services.11 While further trade integration is likely to occur in many
different industries, we think that the example of services is particularly interesting
given the glaring mismatch between the share of services in production and their
share in international trade. In industrial countries, the service sector accounts for
almost 70 percent of value added but only 20 percent of exports and imports. To a
large extent, this bias in trade flows is the result of both technological and policyinduced barriers to trade in services. There are signs however that this is likely to
change in the near future.12

We interpret the two-country model in section 1 as describing the United
States (Home) and the rest of the O.E.C.D. countries (Foreign). We calibrate the
model using available data and then consider two scenarios. In the first one, we
increase the share of traded goods in services to half of that observed in the rest of
the economy. In the second one, we increase the share of traded goods in services to
that observed in the rest of the economy.

3.1 Calibration
To calibrate the model, we need three pieces of information: (1) the size of the
traded sector; (2) the relative technology schedule; and (3) the distribution of shocks.
11

Throughout this section, we will use the term services to refer to transportation, communication,
utilities, wholesale and retail trade, FIRE (finance, insurance and real estate), and other services (notably
health, education, and other professional services).
12
As the textbook example of haircuts suggests, many services are inherently more difficult to transport
than manufactures and commodities. Services also tend to be more vulnerable to a wide variety of nontariff barriers to trade, such as professional licensing requirements that discriminate against foreigners,
domestic content requirements in public procurement, or poor protection of intellectual property rights.
But this seems to be changing rapidly. The last decade has brought a series of technological
improvements that are making many services increasingly tradeable. As a result of advances in
telecommunications technology, outsourcing abroad of computer programming, data entry, and call
center services is becoming common practice. With the appearance of e-commerce, wholesale/retail
sales and brokerage services can now be offered worldwide online. And the development of new
software has raised the ability of architectural, engineering and other types of consulting firms to better
interact around the globe. But this is not all. Recent multilateral negotiations under the World Trade
Organization’s General Agreement on Trade in Services have made substantial progress towards
dismantling a wide array of policy-induced barriers to trade in services. The harmonization of rules and
regulations within the European Union has also contributed to this process.

22

For reasons of data availability, we choose 1997 as the reference year, and we
discuss how to obtain each of these three items in turn.

Item 1. The size of the traded sector: In all industries, some goods are traded
while others are not. Our objective here is to determine the size of the traded sector
for the economy as a whole, and at the industry level. We do so by taking seriously
the theoretical implication that every traded good is produced either at home or
abroad. Define X and M as overall U.S. exports and imports, and let v be the share of
the U.S. in O.E.C.D. GDP in 1997. O.E.C.D. spending on U.S. exportables is X/(1-v).
This is the sum of foreign spending on U.S. exportables plus U.S. spending on these
exportables. The former is simply X, and since all countries distribute their spending
equally across goods, the latter is simply X⋅v/(1-v). Following the same argument, we
can calibrate O.E.C.D. spending on U.S. importables as M/v. This means that the
traded sector of the O.E.C.D. is X/(1-v)+M/v. To obtain the nontraded sector in the
U.S., we simply take gross output, G, and subtract the traded sector, X/(1-v). Under
the assumption that the U.S. share in O.E.C.D. production is the same as its share in
GDP, the non-traded sector of the O.E.C.D. is (G-X/(1-v))⋅(1-v)/v. We use data on G,
X, and M from the 1997 U.S. input-output table to compute the traded and nontraded
sectors and find that the share of traded goods, τ, is roughly 10 percent. 13
To obtain the size of the traded sector industry-by-industry, we repeat the
procedure using data on G, X and M for 33 3-digit industries spanning the entire
economy. The first column of Table 1 reports the share of tradeables in gross output
or production by industry. There are substantial differences in the share of traded
goods across industries. In services, which account for 62 percent of production,
tradeables represent only 3 percent of production. In the rest of the economy
(primarily manufacturing which accounts for 28 percent of production), tradeables
represent 22 percent of production.

13

Note that we are expressing tradeables as a fraction of production, rather than value added. For the
U.S., the share of exports plus imports in value added in 1997 is 0.23.

23

Item 2. The relative technology schedule: We calibrate differences in industry
technologies to match data on trade in goods and services.14 To do so we need to
impose some additional structure on the data. In particular, we treat the distribution of
relative productivities within each of the 33 industries as unobservable, but assume
that it is well approximated by a lognormal distribution. This means that our calibration
procedure must come up with two parameters per industry, namely, the mean (µi) and
variance (σi) of log productivity differences. Unfortunately, we do not have enough
information to do so. We therefore set σi=σ=0.5 for all industries and use the trade
data to determine µi for each industry. This assumption means that we restrict the
relative productivity of goods in the 95th percentile to be roughly 5 times that of goods
in the 5th percentile within each industry. This does not seem unreasonable.
Moreover, we find that the results are robust to sensible changes in the value of σ.
Define the relative technology schedule for the traded sector of industry i
as A i ( z ) ≡

ai* ( z )
; and order goods by using the rule that z≤z’ if and only if
ai ( z )

ai* ( z ) ai* ( z' )
. Assume that, within an industry, the distributions of log productivities
≥
ai ( z ) ai ( z' )

in the traded and nontraded sectors are identical. Then, our assumptions imply that
ln A i ( z ) ~ N(µi , σ) for industry i. To obtain the value of µi for each industry, note that on

average the share of exports in the traded sector of industry i corresponds to the
share of traded goods for which A i ( z ) > ω . We therefore choose µi to ensure that
P[A i ( z) > ω] = x i where xi =

Xi /(1 − v )
. Inverting this probability gives:
Xi /(1 − v ) + Mi / v

14

Could we have estimated productivity differences directly? A vast number of papers report crosscountry estimates of productivity levels. However, only very few provide disaggregated productivity
comparisons based on disaggregated purchasing power parity adjustments for inputs and outputs, which
are essential for meaningful productivity level comparisons (see Harrigan (1999) for a review). Because
of the difficulties in collecting disaggregated price data, these papers focus on only a subset of industries
(for example, Harrigan (1999) reports estimates for machinery and equipment manufacturing productivity
levels across several O.E.C.D. countries). But without information on productivity levels comparisons for
all sectors and for all potential trading partners, it is impossible to construct a relative technology
schedule.

24

(14)

µ i = ln(ω) − σ ⋅ Φ −1 (1 − x i )

where Φ(.) denotes the cumulative normal distribution function. To implement this
procedure, we need information on the average values of productivity-adjusted
relative wages, ω. We obtain average relative wages by equating the U.S. share of
O.E.C.D. income with the observed 40 percent U.S. share in O.E.C.D. GDP in 1997.
We interpret differences in average productivity as reflecting differences in human
capital between the U.S. and the rest of the O.E.C.D., and measure them using data
on years of total education.15 This leads us to an estimate of the productivity-adjusted
wage of ω = 1.33 .
With this number at hand, and the assumption that σ=0.5, we use Equation
(14) to obtain a set of estimates for the µis. The results are shown in the third column
of Table 1. There are large differences across sectors in calibrated mean relative
productivities, ranging from 0.47 to 2.68. By construction, these differences in
average relative productivities reflect differences across industries in exports as a
share of tradeable production (reported in the second column of Table 1). Perhaps
the most noticeable feature of column 3 is again the difference between services and
the rest of the economy. Although tradeables as a fraction of services production is
quite small, exports as a share of tradeables is much larger in services than in the
rest of the economy (79 percent versus 30 percent). This implies that average relative
productivity must be substantially higher in services than in the rest of the economy
(2.54 versus 1.31).
Given values of µi obtained in this way, we can construct the empirical analog
of the inverse of the relative technology schedule as a weighted average of the
industry distributions of relative productivities:
15

Specifically we use the Barro-Lee (2000) data on human capital stocks to find that average total years
of education in the U.S. and in the rest of the O.E.C.D. in 1995 are 12.2 and 8.3, respectively. We then
assume a Mincer coefficient of 0.1, and adjust relative wages by a factor of e

25

0.1⋅(12.3 − 8.3 )

= 1.07 .

(15)

x(ω; τ) ≡

A −1 (ω ; τ ) 33 
 ln(ω) − µ i  
= ∑ t i ⋅ 1 − Φ
 
τ
σ


i=1


where ti denotes the share of industry i in the overall traded sector. The results of this
procedure are depicted in Figure 7 under the label “baseline”. Note that there are
substantial cross-country differences in productivities. The ratio of productivities
between goods in the 95th and 5th percentiles is around 7.5.

The schedules labeled “Scenario 1” and “Scenario 2” correspond to our
assumptions that the share of traded goods in services increases from 2.5 to 10, and
to 22 percent, respectively. In particular, for each industry i within services, we
assume that the share of traded goods in that industry increases to half the level of
the trade share in the rest of the economy (in the first scenario), and increases all the
way to the level of the trade share in the rest of the economy (in the second
scenario). This in turn increases ti (the share of industry i in the overall traded sector)
for each of the industries within services, in Equation (15). To understand the effects
of trade integration on the relative technology schedule, remember that our
calibrations indicate that US relative productivity in services is substantially higher
than in the rest of the economy. This means that in our example, trade integration is
biased towards goods in which the U.S. has comparative advantage. As a result, the
relative technology schedule shifts to the right and becomes steeper than in the
benchmark case. Note also that such a rightward shift in the relative technology
schedule was not possible in the examples in Section 2 where we restricted attention
to the case of symmetric technology differences across countries.

Item 3. The distribution of shocks: We calibrate shocks to demand and supply
to match the cyclical properties of the U.S. trade balance. To do this, we first need to
know the value of the risk aversion coefficient, γ. It is clear from the discussion in
section 2 that this coefficient plays an important role in determining the volatility of the
trade balance. In the absence of strong priors on the magnitude of this parameter, we

26

consider scenarios in which γ takes the values 0.5, 1 and 5. We then assume that
there are two equally likely states of nature s=H,L; in which (φH,δH)=(φ,δ) and (φL,δL)=(
φ-1,δ-1). As in Section 2, the parameters φ and δ regulate the standard deviation of
shocks to supply and demand, respectively. We then choose φ and δ to match the
cyclical properties of the U.S. trade balance as a share of O.E.C.D. income over the
period 1970-1999, as summarized by (1) its standard deviation, which is 0.5 percent;
and (2) its comovement with income measured as the slope of a regression of the
U.S. trade balance on U.S. income (both as a share of O.E.C.D. income), which is –
0.3. We do this for each of the three values of the coefficient of relative risk aversion
that we consider.

The results of this procedure are presented in the first two columns of Table 2.
In the benchmark case of γ=1, a combination of supply shocks with a standard
deviation of 2 percent and demand shocks with a standard deviation of 10 percent
are required to match the cyclical properties of the trade balance. Since the U.S.
trade balance tends to decline when incomes are high, we require large demand
shocks and small supply shocks in order to match the data. If γ=5, we need a smaller
difference between demand and supply shocks (with standard deviations of 8 percent
and 5 percent, respectively). If γ=0.5, we need a larger differences in the volatility of
demand and supply shocks (with standard deviations of 17 percent and 3 percent
respectively) in order to match the observed cyclical properties of the trade balance.
To understand these differences, remember that fluctuations in the terms of trade
magnify (dampen) the effects of demand shocks if γ>1 (γ<1). This is why we need
smaller demand shocks the larger is γ.

3.2 Results
The remaining columns of Table 2 summarize the result of our trade
integration exercise, reporting the predicted standard deviation of the U.S. trade

27

balance as a fraction of O.E.C.D. income in the baseline 1997 scenario, and the two
integration scenarios discussed above. By construction, the standard deviation of the
trade balance is equal to its observed value of 0.5 percent of O.E.C.D. income in all
three rows of the first column. Moving to the right illustrates the effects of goods and
services trade liberalization on asset trade.
In the benchmark case of γ=1, we find quite substantial effects of further trade
integration on the volatility of the trade balance, which rises from 0.5 percent to 0.7
percent when services are half as tradeable as the rest of the economy, and to 0.9
percent when services are equally tradeable than the rest of the economy. This
suggests that the main effect of trade integration on the volatility of the trade balance
summarized in Result #1 is quantitatively important. On the other hand, Result #2
which qualifies our main result does not appear to be empirically very important.
Although in this example trade integration is biased towards goods in which the U.S.
has comparative advantage, we find that the quantitative effects of this bias are trivial.
To isolate the effects of this bias, we re-estimate Scenario 2, but do so under the
assumption that the relative technology schedule does not change relative to the
baseline scenario. In this case, we find that the standard deviation of the trade
balance is 0.95%, as opposed to 0.94% when we allow for a bias in trade integration.
Finally, the rows with γ=5 and γ=0.5 show the effects of trade integration when
we allow for the possibility that changes in the terms of trade also affect spending.16
When γ=5 we find that the effects of trade integration on the standard deviation of the
trade balance are substantially smaller, with the latter rising to only 0.6 percent in the
second integration scenario. To understand this difference, remember that when γ>1,
fluctuations in the terms of trade induce fluctuations in spending which amplify
fluctuations in the trade balance. As trade integration proceeds, the effects of
fluctuations in the terms of trade on spending fall, and so the volatility of the trade
16

Remember that we have re-calibrated the underlying shocks in each row of Table 2 to replicate
observed fluctuations in the trade balance. As a result, changes in the volatility of the trade balance
aross different values of γ for a given level of trade integration reflect changes in our assumptions about
both (i) the shocks which drive fluctuations, and (ii) the degree of risk aversion.

28

balance increases by less than in the benchmark case of γ=1. When γ=0.5, we find a
much larger effect of trade integration on the volatility of the trade balance, with the
latter rising to 0.9 percent in the first scenario, and 1.2 percent in the second. The
intuition for this is just the converse of the case where γ=5: through their effects on
spending, fluctuations in the terms of trade attenuate fluctuations in the trade
balance, and the importance of this attenuation declines with trade integration.

To sum up, our empirical example suggests that the effects of trade
integration on the volatility of trade balance can be substantial, with the volatility of
the trade balance almost doubling in the benchmark case of log preferences.
Although in our example trade integration is biased towards goods in which the U.S.
has comparative advantage, the quantitative effects of this bias are negligible.
Departures from the assumption of log preferences do affect the quantitative effects
of trade integration, with larger (smaller) increases in the volatility of the trade balance
when risk aversion is low (high). However, in our calibrations the additional effects of
risk aversion are never sufficiently strong to reverse our qualitative conclusion that
trade integration will increase the volatility of the trade balance.

4. Concluding Remarks
In this paper, we have used a simple model of trade in goods and assets to
analyze the question of how trade integration affects the trade balance. We hope our
contribution will induce others to explore this issue from alternative theoretical
perspectives. We have motivated trade in goods and assets by postulating
differences in technology and imperfectly correlated shocks. But one could for
instance allow for differences in factor endowments and/or increasing returns to scale
as an additional motive for trade in goods. Similarly, one might introduce differences
in time preference and/or rates of return to capital as an additional motive to trade in
assets. We conjecture that the main results of this paper would survive in these more

29

general frameworks, except for extreme cases. The interesting question is whether
new and realistic effects would arise that cannot be studied in our simple framework.

Finally, we hope that our contribution also provides a good theoretical
grounding to empirical studies of the effects of trade integration. By isolating key
theoretical channels, the model here can sharpen the interpretation of econometric
studies on this subject. By providing a fully specified model, we also hope to aid in the
task of developing quantitative assessments of the effects of trade integration on the
trade balance. In this respect, our calibration exercise should be interpreted only as a
simple illustration or example. A serious quantitative analysis of the effects of trade
integration on the trade balance would be a major project on its own.

References
Baier, S.L. and J.H. Bergstrand [2001], “The Growth of World Trade: Tariffs,
Transport Costs and Income Similarity,” Journal of International Economics, 53, 1, 127.
Barro, R.J. and J. Lee [2000], "International Data on Educational Attainment:
Updates and Implications," Harvard University Center for International Development
Working Paper No. 42.
Cole, H. and M. Obstfeld [1991], “Commodity Trade and International Risk Sharing:
How Much Financial Markets Matter?” Journal of Monetary Economics, 28, 1, 3-24.
Harrigan, J. [1999], “Estimation of Cross-Country Differences in Industry Production
Functions,” Journal of International Economics, 47, 267-293.
Dornbusch, R., S. Fischer and P. Samuelson [1977], “Comparative Advantage, Trade
and Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods,” American Economic
Review, 67, 823-839.

30

Table 1: Trade and Relative Productivity by Industry

Agriculture and Mining
Agriculture
Metallic ores mining
Coal mining
Crude petroleum and natural gas
Nonmetallic minerals mining
Construction
Construction
Manufacturing
Food
Tobacco
Textiles
Apparel
Lumber and wood products
Furniture and fixtures
Paper
Printing
Chemicals
Petroleum Refining
Rubber and Plastics
Leather
Nonmetal Production
Primary Metals
Fabricated metals
Industrial Machinery
Electrical machinery
Motor Vehicles
Other Transportation Equipment
Other Manufacturing
Services
Transportation Services
Communications
Electric Utilities
Gas Utilities
Trade
FIRE
Other Services
Weighted Averages (2)
Overall
Rest of Economy
Services

Tradeables/
Production

Exports/
Tradeables

Average
Relative
Productivity(1)

0.13
0.21
0.09
0.38
0.11

0.41
0.31
0.84
0.03
0.29

1.34
1.18
2.46
0.60
1.15

0.00

0.00

0.47

0.10
0.15
0.17
0.44
0.15
0.21
0.16
0.05
0.26
0.11
0.17
0.75
0.16
0.22
0.13
0.39
0.50
0.37
0.44
0.40

0.39
0.74
0.32
0.09
0.22
0.18
0.36
0.49
0.39
0.33
0.28
0.06
0.23
0.22
0.31
0.43
0.31
0.16
0.51
0.30

1.32
2.08
1.19
0.78
1.03
0.96
1.25
1.49
1.30
1.22
1.13
0.71
1.04
1.02
1.18
1.37
1.18
0.92
1.53
1.16

0.12
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.05
0.02
0.01

0.77
0.00
0.15
0.00
0.71
0.88
0.77

2.17
0.89
0.89
0.89
2.00
2.68
2.19

0.10
0.22
0.03

0.37
0.30
0.79

1.49
1.31
2.54

Notes:

(1) This column reports E[ A i ] = e

µi + σ

2

/2

(2) The first column uses shares in total production as weights; the remaining columns uses shares in
tradeables production as weights.

31

Table 2: Calibration Results
Standard Deviation of US Trade Balance/OECD GDP
γ

φ

δ

Before

Scenario 1

0.5
1
5

1.03
1.02
1.05

1.17
1.10
1.08

0.50%
0.50%
0.50%

0.91%
0.74%
0.58%

After
Scenario 2
1.24%
0.94%
0.60%

Notes:

(1) To obtain the standard deviation of the trade balance as a fraction of U.S. GDP simply multiply by 2.5.

32

Figure 1: Effects of Trade Integration on Relative Technology Schedule
Case 1: Trade Integration Weakens Comparative Advantage

2
Low τ

High τ

A

A(τ x;τ ) , ω

B

1
B'
A'

0
0

0.5

1

x

Case 2: Trade Integration Strengthens Comparative Advantage

2
Low τ

High τ
B

A(τ x;τ) , ω

A

1
A'
B'

0
0

0.5
x

33

1

Figure 2: Effects of Supply and Demand Shocks, γ=1
Supply Shocks
ω

TB

ASL
ASH

EL

EL

EH

EH

AD
Trade Balance

0

AS, AD

Demand Shocks
TBL

TBH

ω

ADL

ADH

AS

EH
EH

EL

Trade Balance

EL

0

AS, AD

Note: These figures are drawn under the assumption that x(ω)=ω-α/(1+ω-α) with α=0.2;
τ=0.5; φH=1.5 in the top panel and δH=1.5 in the bottom panel; and γ=1.
34

Figure 3: Effects of Supply Shocks
γ>>1
TB

ω

AD

ASH

EL

EL

EH

EH

Trade Balance

ASL

0

AS, AD

γ<<1
ω

TB

ASL
ASH

EL

EL

EH

EH

AD
Trade Balance

0

AS, AD

Note: These figures are drawn under the assumption that x(ω)=ω-α/(1+ω-α) with α=0.2,
τ=0.5; φH=1.5; and γ=5 in the top panel and γ=0.2 in the bottom panel.
35

Figure 4: Effects of Trade Integration with Supply Shocks

0.03

Standard Deviation of t

γ =5
γ =2
0.02

γ =1
γ =0.5
γ =0.2

0.01

0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

τ

Note: This figure is drawn under the assumption that x(ω)=ω-α/(1+ω-α) with α=1; τ=0.5;
φH=1.5; and for the indicated values of γ.

36

Figure 5: Effects of Demand Shocks
γ>>1
TBL

TBH

ω

ADL

ADH
AS

EH

EH

EL

EL

0

Trade Balance

AS, AD

γ<<1
TBL

ω

TBH

ADL

EH

EH
EL

EL

Trade Balance

AS

ADH

0

AS, AD

Note: These figures are drawn under the assumption that x(ω)=ω-α/(1+ω-α) with α=0.2;
τ=0.5; δH=1.5; and γ=5 in the top panel and γ=0.2 in the bottom panel.

37

Figure 6: Effects of Trade Integration with Demand Shocks

Standard Deviation of t

0.05

0.04

γ =5

0.03

γ =2

γ =1

γ =0.5

0.02

γ =0.2

0.01

0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

τ

Note: This figure is drawn under the assumption that x(ω)=ω-α/(1+ω-α) with α=1; τ=0.5;
δH=1.5; and for the indicated values of γ.

38

Figure 7: Estimated Relative Technology Schedule

5
4.5
4
3.5

Baseline
Scenario 1
Scenario 2

A(τ x;τ)

3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

x

39

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

