                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    POST-ISSUE PATENT “QUALITY CONTROL”: A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF US
       PATENT RE-EXAMINATIONS AND EUROPEAN PATENT OPPOSITIONS


                                         Stuart J. H. Graham
                                          Bronwyn H. Hall
                                          Dietmar Harhoff
                                          David C. Mowery


                                         Working Paper 8807
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w8807


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2002




We are grateful to the STEP Board of the National Research Council, Washington, DC, for financial support
of this project. We also appreciate helpful comments by Robert Blackburn, Wesley Cohen, Markus Herzog,
Mark Lemley, Richard Nelson, Cecil Quillen, F. M. Scherer, Rosemarie Ziedonis and seminar audiences in
Berkeley, Cambridge (Mass.), Heidelberg, Munich and Washington, D.C. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Stuart J. H. Graham, Bronwyn H. Hall, Dietmar Harhoff and David C. Mowery. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Post-Issue Patent “Quality Control”: A Comparative Study of US Patent Re-examinations
and European Patent Oppositions
Stuart J. H. Graham, Bronwyn H. Hall, Dietmar Harhoff and David C. Mowery
NBER Working Paper No. 8807
February 2002
JEL No. K41, L00, L20



                                               ABSTRACT

        We report the results of the first comparative study of the determinants and effects of patent
oppositions in Europe and of re-examinations on corresponding patents issued in the United States. The
analysis is based on a dataset consisting of matched EPO and US patents. Our analysis focuses on two
broad technology categories - biotechnology and pharmaceuticals, and semiconductors and computer
software. Within these fields, we collect data on all EPO patents for which oppositions were filed at the
EPO. We also construct a random sample of EPO patents with no opposition in these technologies. We
match these EPO patents with the "equivalent" US patents covering the same invention in the United
States. Using the matched sample of USPTO and EPO patents, we compare the determinants of
opposition and of re-examination. Our results indicate that valuable patents are more likely to be
challenged in both jurisdictions. But the rate of opposition at the EPO is more than thirty times higher
than the rate of re-examination at the USPTO. Moreover, opposition leads to a revocation of the patent
in about 41 percent of the cases, and to a restriction of the patent right in another 30 percent of the cases.
Re-examination results in a cancellation of the patent right in only 12.2 percent of all cases. We also find
that re-examination is frequently initiated by the patentholders themselves.




Stuart J. H. Graham                                                 Bronwyn H. Hall
UC Berkeley                                                         UC Berkeley and NBER
                                                                    bhhall@econ.berkeley.edu

Dietmar Harhoff                                                     David C. Mowery
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat Munchen and CEPR                     UC Berkeley and NBER
                                                                    mowery@haas.berkeley.edu
1. INTRODUCTION

Beginning in the 1980s, a series of administrative, judicial, and legislative actions strengthened
the economic value of U.S. patents and extended their coverage in such areas as computer
software and “business methods.” Although many of these actions were undertaken at the behest
of the U.S. business community, concerns have been raised since the early 1990s about the
potential economic burdens of low-quality patents in an environment of greater deference to the
rights of the patentholder (Merges 1999; Barton 2000). A number of experts have suggested that
the U.S. patent examination system does not impose a sufficiently rigorous review of patent and
nonpatent prior art, resulting in the issue of patents of considerable breadth and insufficient
quality. Many of these critics advocate the reform or extension of procedures that would enable
interested parties other than USPTO examiners to bring relevant information to bear on this
process either before or shortly after the issue of a patent. But much of this debate has occurred
in an empirical vacuum. Little is known about the characteristics or effectiveness of existing
procedures for such post-issue challenges within the U.S. patent system, and virtually no
research has compared the characteristics or effects of U.S. post-issue challenge procedures with
those available elsewhere in the industrialized world’s patent systems.

At present the primary procedure for such a challenge to the validity of a U.S. patent is the “re-
examination” proceeding, which may be initiated by any party during the life of the patent. A
more elaborate and adversarial procedure in the European Patent Office (EPO) is the opposition
process. This paper uses new data in an exploratory comparative analysis of these post-issue
challenge proceedings, pursuing two main questions:

    1) What are the determinants of post-issue challenges to the validity of patents in the United
       States and Europe?1
    2) How do patents pertaining to the same invention fare in the two different systems?

In answering these questions, we use data from both the European and the United States Patent
Offices, including a newly created dataset of “twin” patents, that is, patents taken out in both
jurisdictions on the same invention.

The institutions that allow for post-grant challenges of patent validity differ considerably
between the U.S. and Europe. An important feature of the proceedings at the European Patent
Office (EPO), the significance of which has been remarked upon widely by practitioners but
minimally analyzed, is the “opposition process.”2 For nine months following the issue of a patent
by the European Patent Office (EPO), interested parties can contest its validity by filing an
opposition. Typically, opponents argue that an issued patent is invalid because it fails to meet the
standard requirements of patentability (novelty, inventive step, industrial application, non-

1
    We use the terms European patents or opposition in Europe as short-hand descriptions for patent applications,
    grants, and challenges administered by/at the European Patent Office. Strictly speaking, a European patent (that
    is, a patent valid throughout Europe) does not exist, since patent rights are defined within the respective national
    law. Despite some harmonization, these laws are still heterogeneous.
2
    The opposition process at the EPO resembles the opposition process at the German Patent Office. The frequency
    of opposition is also quite similar.


                                                                                                                      2
prejudicial disclosures) or the patent does not disclose the invention with sufficient clarity or
completeness.3 In response to an opposition, the EPO may reject the opposition, amend the
patent, or revoke the patent entirely.4

Patents issued by the EPO designate the European states in which the applicants wish to patent
their inventions. Since EPO patent applications cost roughly three times as much as national
applications in most European states, the EPO patents have significant cost advantages for
inventions requiring protection in a number of European markets. But the centralization of
application and examination also allows a centralized legal challenge: under the European Patent
Convention (EPC), any third party can use an opposition proceeding to challenge the granted
patent within nine months after the granting date for all of the designated states, rather than
having to pursue legal proceedings in each of the European nations designated in the patent. The
EPO opposition process has been cited by Merges (1999) as a more effective means of ensuring
“high quality” patents, especially in novel technological areas, than those available in the United
States.

U.S. patents are issued on the basis of criteria that are broadly similar to those employed by the
EPO. The reliance by the US Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) on searches of “prior art”
that are frequently confined to prior patents, however, means that in areas such as computer
software or biotechnology, a lack of patent-based prior art can result in the issue of patents of
dubious merit or quality. Interested parties wishing to challenge a U.S. patent after its issue have
two options: (1) Challenge the patent in federal court; or (2) Request a “re-examination” of the
patent by the USPTO. In absolute terms, patent litigation has grown significantly in the United
States during the period from 1985 to 2000, although the rate of litigation relative to the number
of issued patents has remained constant. But, as we suggest below, litigation is a costly and time-
consuming means for establishing the validity and/or claims of a patent. In addition, costly patent
litigation may contribute to growth in “defensive” patenting, another resource-intensive process
with limited social returns (Hall and Ziedonis, 2001).

The patent re-examination procedure was created by federal legislation during the 1980s. The
number of annual re-examination requests grew from the mid-1980s through the early 1990s, but
has scarcely grown since 1994. Unlike litigation or oppositions, the re-examination process is not
an adversarial proceeding in which advocates for each side introduce evidence and arguments in
support of their position, and there are limits on the types of issues that can be raised within a re-
examination. Moreover, Merges (1999) points out that the requirement that any opposition be
filed within nine months of the issue of an EPO patent means that the validity of EPO patents is
determined at a much earlier point in their term than is true of the re-examination or litigation
processes.5 Merges estimates that almost 7% of EPO patents trigger opposition proceedings,
while only 0.3% of U.S. patents result in re-examination requests. In addition, oppositions result
in much higher rates of patent revocation than do re-examinations. According to Merges, more
than 34% of oppositions filed in 1995 resulted in the revocation of the relevant EPO patent,

3
    Article 100 EPC
4
    Article 102 EPC
5
    Balanced against this is the fact that EPO patents take longer to issue than U.S. patents, so the median lag
    between patent application and opposition challenge is in fact longer than the median re-examination lag in our
    data (see Table 1).


                                                                                                                 3
considerably higher than the 12% of re-examination requests producing a similar result in U.S.
patents during this period.6

In this paper, we report the results of the first comparative study of the determinants and
outcomes of patent oppositions in Europe and of re-examinations on corresponding patents
issued in the United States. Our analysis focuses on two broad technology categories -
biotechnology and pharmaceuticals, and semiconductors and computer software.7 Within these
fields, we collected data on all EPO patents for which oppositions were filed at the EPO. We
then constructed a random sample of EPO patents in these technology classes that triggered no
opposition proceedings. We matched these EPO patents with the “equivalent” USPTO patents
covering the same invention in the United States. This approach allows us to compare the post-
issue quality control processes for technologically identical patents. Using the sample of matched
USPTO and EPO patents, we compare the determinants of either opposition or re-examination.

We explore issues related to the first main topic of the paper by addressing the following
questions:

    1. How does the rate of opposition (number of oppositions/all issued patents) vary by patent
       class within the EPO data, and similarly for USPTO re-examinations? Which EPO and
       USPTO patent classes exhibit the highest opposition and re-examination rates,
       respectively?

    2. What are the outcomes of the opposition and the re-examination processes? Do the two
       procedures consistently lead to a large number of patent revocations or amendments? Do
       types of outcomes differ significantly with the characteristics of the patent or
       characteristics of the patent owner or the challenger? For example, is there any evidence
       suggesting that patents owned by “independent inventors” are more likely to be
       challenged than patents owned by corporations?8


    3. How do the lengths of the average opposition re-examination processes compare? What
       is the total time lag between application date and resolution of legal disagreements? Do


6
    See Merges (1999), pp. 612-614. Our data focus on selected technical fields and show similar numbers: we find
    a slightly lower opposition rate over the whole period 1980-1999 and a higher revocation rate, once the results of
    appeals are taken into account.
7
    The IPC classes included were A61K (except A61K/7), C07G, C12M, C12N, C12P, and C12Q
    (biotechnology/pharmaceutical) and G01R, G06F, G06K, G11C, H01L, H03F, H03K, H03M, and H04L
    (semiconductors/computers/software).
8
    The U.S. re-examination process was altered considerably during Congressional consideration in response to
    pressure from the “independent inventor” community within the United States, and there is some reason to
    believe that any effort to strengthen the re-examination process or institute an opposition proceeding would
    encounter considerable opposition from this group. Much of the group’s opposition to such changes stems from
    the belief by many independent inventors that stronger re-examination or opposition proceedings would
    significantly raise the costs of patenting, because of the added costs of defending patents within these
    proceedings. Accordingly, information on the incidence of re-examination and opposition proceedings among
    different classes of patentholders will shed light on the likelihood that a disproportionate share of any such
    increased costs would be borne by the independent inventor.


                                                                                                                    4
       oppositions, for example, enable a faster resolution of issues of patent quality and/or
       validity?

Using our matched sample of patents, we address the second main topic (see above) by
investigating the following questions:

   1. Do EPO oppositions and US re-examinations focus on relatively “important” patents,
      measured in terms of citations to these patents in subsequent patents? How do the US
      patents that match opposed EPO patents compare to the US control sample (equivalents
      to unopposed EPO patents) in terms of the number of post-issue citations?

   2. Do we observe significant differences in the probability that a US patent corresponding to
      an EPO patent for which an opposition is filed will be challenged through a re-
      examination request or through litigation, by comparison with patents in the U.S. “control
      samples”?

More broadly, we wish to use this preliminary analysis as one component of an assessment of the
comparative cost and efficiency of the re-examination and opposition processes, including a
comparison of the costs, outcomes, and duration of these processes with those of litigation. This
more ambitious goal is beyond the scope of the current paper because of the lack of US and
European litigation data. Nevertheless, the results reported here provide a useful starting point
for the broader analysis.



2. INSTITUTIONAL BACKGROUND

At present, the U.S. and European patent systems have similar aims and requirements for
patentability, but differ in the allowable subject matter and in their administrative procedures. In
this and the next section of the paper, we provide a brief overview of the operations of the two
systems.

In the United States, an invention (“process, machine, manufacture or composition of matter”)
must satisfy three requirements to be patentable: novelty, usefulness, and non-obviousness. Since
1978, firms and individuals have been able to submit a single application to the European Patent
Office that specifies up to 19 national jurisdictions within Europe where they desire patent
protection for an innovation. The patentability requirements are broadly similar but not identical
to those of the United States: novelty, industrial application, and inventive step. The last two are
similar but not identical to the U.S. requirements of “usefulness” and “non-obviousness.”

Figure 1 shows a rough timeline covering the period between patent application and grant in the
two systems. During the period covered by our dataset, the U.S. patent application was kept
secret until the patent issued, which meant that the median time between application and
publication was 18 months to two years, with a long tail. As part of the patent system
harmonization called for in the TRIPS agreements, the U.S. instituted a policy of publication 18
months after application in November 2000 for many patents with applications pending in



                                                                                                  5
jurisdictions outside the United States.9 In contrast, EPO applications have always been
published with an 18-month lag, regardless of whether they have issued.

Both systems have a post-grant procedure through which the validity of the patent can be
challenged by other parties, but the two patent systems’ post-grant challenge procedures differ
significantly. In both systems, interested parties can also bring suit in court over infringement
and validity (with some restrictions as to when a suit can be filed). We discuss these
administrative processes for post-grant challenges in the following section.


3. THE ADIMISTRATIVE PROCESSES AT THE USPTO AND EPO


3.1 USPTO Examination and Re-Examination Procedures

In the United States, inventors may claim a utility patent10 by making application to the United
States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). Before a patent issues, the USPTO is charged
with ensuring that the invention covers patentable subject matter11 and is useful,12 novel,13 and
nonobvious.14 Procedurally, the application must be filed within one year of the invention's
public use or publication,15 must contain an adequate description with one or more claims,16 and
must be accompanied by the payment of a fee.17

The USPTO patent examiner is the arbiter of the patentability, novelty, usefulness, and non-
obviousness requirements cited above, judging these standards against the "prior art," i.e., prior
inventions, in the field. Prosecution of the patent has been characterized as a "give-and-take-
affair," with negotiation and re-negotiation between the patentee and the examiner that ordinarily
continues for 2-3 years (Merges, et al., 1997). The costs of prosecuting a patent through the



9
     The American Inventors Protection Act (1999) requires publication of all applications after 18 months but
     excepts applicants making a declaration that a patent will not be sought in a foreign jurisdiction requiring 18
     month publication. 35 USC §122.
10
     While the vast majority of US patents--and the focus in this paper--are the so-called Utility patents authorized by
     35 USC §101, patents are also available on Plants (35 USC §161) and Designs (35 USC §171).
11
     35 USC §101. See Diamond v. Chakrabarty, 447 US 303 (1980)(determining that man-made living micro-
     organisms are patentable subject-matter).
12
     35 USC §101. See Brenner v. Manson, 383 US 519 (1966)(upholding examiner's determination that a the output
     of a chemical process was not useful if merely similar to a useful compound).
13
     35 USC §101, 102. See Jamesbury v. Litton Industrial, 756 F.2d 1556 (CAFC 1985)(finding that an invention
     was "novel" when no prior art was precisely equivalent).
14
     35 USC §103. See Graham v. John Deere Co., 383 US 1 (1966)(finding an invention invalid on grounds that the
     improvement would have been obvious to a person of ordinary skill in the art).
15
     35 USC §102(b).
16
     35 USC §112, 113, 114. The "written description" requirement is intended to allow any person skilled in the art
     to either make or use the invention. See Permutit v. Graver Corp., 284 US 52 (1931), finding that the absence of
     any writing was an insufficient description when only drawings were provided. Claims are intended to delimit
     the subject-matter that constitutes the invention. See Flick-Reedy Corp. v. Hydro-Line Mfg., 351 F.2d 546, 7th
     Cir. 1965, holding that withholding information from the claims failed to adequately describe the invention.
17
     USPTO regulations set the basic filing fee at $710 for utility patents. 37 CFR §1.16(a). Additional claims may
     raise the fees payable, and all fees are generally lower for "small entities." . 37 CFR §1.16(b),(c),(d).


                                                                                                                      6
USPTO range from $15,000-$100,000 (including the USPTO issue fee), depending on the nature
of the technology.18

Reexamination, originally envisioned as an alternative to expensive and time-consuming
litigation, was created by the 1980 Act to Amend the Patent and Trademark Laws. The
legislative history of this Act suggests that the reexamination was intended to be a mechanism
that would be less expensive and less time-consuming19 than litigation. During the legislative
process, however, the Act20 was purged of its intended adversarial characteristics under pressure
from various interest groups (notably, the independent inventor lobby), reducing the usefulness
of the procedure for opponents of a given patent.

Procedurally, the reexamination proceeding permits the patent owner or any other party to notify
the USPTO and request that the grounds upon which the patent was originally issued be
reconsidered by an examiner. Initiation of a reexamination requires that some previously
undisclosed “new” and relevant piece of prior art be presented to the agency. Under the statute,
this new prior art must be disclosed in either a prior patent or prior publication—no other source
of prior art can serve as grounds for the reexamination.

After being initiated by the proponent through a notification and the payment of a fee to the
USPTO,21 the reexamination goes forward only if the Patent Office finds a "substantial new
question of patentability."22 Such a determination was intended by lawmakers to prevent the re-
opening of issues deemed settled in the original examination (Merges, 1997). The Patent Office
must make this determination within 3 months of the request, and, having made the
determination, must notify the patent owner.

When the owner is not the reexamination proponent, the patentee is allowed to file a response to
the newly discovered prior art within 2 months. If the owner chooses to respond, the requester is
afforded an opportunity to reply within 2 months. By choosing not to respond, the owner can
limit the requester’s participation in the process. Under the most favorable circumstances, the
reexamination is essentially an ex parte proceeding between the patent owner and the Patent
Office, with limited opportunities for third-party involvement.

Any third party, such as a competitor or other opponent of the patent, thus has a limited role in
the re-examination process. The requester is entitled to notify the USPTO of the triggering “prior
art,” to receive a copy of the patentee’s reply to the reexamination (if any), and to file a response
to that reply. The owner’s role in the process is much more involved: the reexamination statute
contemplates a second examination, with the same type of “give and take” negotiation between
owner and patent office which occurs during the initial issuance of a patent. The examiner
remains the final arbiter of the process and it is not uncommon for the original examiner to be

18
     Gable and Montague (2001); utility issue fees have been set at $1,240. 37 CFR §1.18(a).
19
     Our evidence suggests that the average reexamination takes less than two years, slightly shorter than the average
     duration of a patent lawsuit (31 months). But this difference is not large (especially in view of the high variance
     of the “average duration” estimate for a trial), some observers have criticized the reexamination system for not
     having provided a fast and cheap alternative to trial.
20
     "Act to Amend the Patent and Trademark Laws," Pub.L.No. 96-517, 94 Stat. 3015 (1980).
21
     $2,520 in 2001. 37 CFR §1.20(c).
22
     35 USC §303.


                                                                                                                      7
assigned the follow-up reexamination, thus putting the question of whether prior art was
overlooked in the hands of the same government official responsible for ensuring that no prior
art was overlooked in the previous search.

Once the reexamination goes forward, however, the statute requires that the Commissioner make
a validity determination.23 The original patent is afforded no statutory presumption of validity in
the proceeding, although the practice of assigning reexaminations to the original examiner may
produce such a de facto presumption. The reexamination may be neither abandoned nor
postponed awaiting the result of concurrent litigation proceedings.24 The result of the
reexamination may be a cancellation of either all or some of the claims, or the confirmation of all
or some of the claims. Nothing in the reexamination procedure can expand the scope of the
original patent’s claims, but claims may be amended or new claims added during the
renegotiation between the patent owner and the examiner.

In summary, for parties seeking to invalidate an issued patent, the reexamination procedure
involves considerable costs and risks. The filing fee for the reexamination is not insubstantial,
and practitioners estimate the average costs of a reexamination costs at $10,000-$100,000
depending upon the complexity of the matter. Although the costs of a re-examination are lower
than litigation ($1 - 3 million), the third-party challenger in re-examination is denied a
meaningful role in the process, and the patentholder maintains communications with the
examining officer, offering amendments or adding new claims during the reexamination.
Reexamination also may create additional barriers for challengers seeking redress in court
because the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has given added weight to the claims
confirmed by the reexamining officer.25. As a result, challengers face powerful incentives to
forego reexamination in favor of litigation, a process that may well be more expensive, more
time-consuming, and less expert for testing post-issue validity.

3.2 Patent Litigation in the United States

In the United States, post-issue validity can also be tested in court. The U.S. federal courts
obviously are a unified system operating under the same substantive legal requirements, in
contrast to the multi-state system facing litigants in Europe. Because patent suits are filed at the
district court (trial) level, litigants have considerable control, e.g., through their choice of district
court, over the manner in which litigation unfolds. This opportunity for control is partially
mitigated by the existence of the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, which hears all patent
appeals. But a very small percentage of patent cases are appealed to the CAFC, which means that
any differences in judicial philosophy among the many U.S. district courts may influence the
outcomes of litigation.26

Procedurally, litigation differs markedly from the reexamination procedure. Unlike the
reexamination procedure, litigation is an adversarial appeal to a court-arbiter in which the litigant
has a choice over the final arbiter of the dispute, and may elect to have the case heard by either a
23
     35 USC §307. There is no time limit on the duration of a reexamination per se.
24
     Although reexaminations may be stayed during other USPTO proceedings, including reissue or interferences.
25
     Kaufman Company v. Lantech, Inc., 807 F.2d 970 (CAFC, 1986).
26
     Although it is likely true that more valuable patents are more likely to be the subject of an appealed trial verdict.


                                                                                                                             8
judge or a jury. Because patent suits generally arise from a charge of infringement by the patent
owner, the patentee exerts considerable control over the timing of enforcement and litigation in a
patent dispute.27

Legal standards create a relatively hostile environment in the Federal Courts for challengers
seeking to invalidate an issued patent. Under the statute, patents are “born valid,” enjoying a
strong presumption of validity during the court proceedings.28 Furthermore, the evidentiary
standard for proving a claim invalid is “clear and convincing” evidence, a standard considerably
higher than the mere “preponderance” of proof required in the typical civil suit. Because judges
and juries may have limited technical expertise, these presumptions and evidentiary barriers
create high costs for challengers. The pro-patent environment signaled by the creation of the
Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has compounded these barriers: according to one study,
successful challenges to patent validity fell from 50% to 33% in the years after the creation of
the Court (Lemley and Allison, 1997).

Direct costs in litigation are also high compared to reexamination. Estimates of legal costs in
patent litigation run from $1-3 million per suit (AIPLA, 1999) to $500,000 per claim at issue, per
side (Barton, 2000). One important driver of these costs is the extensive use of pre-trial
discovery. The lag between filing a patent suit and reaching a resolution can also be
considerable: one study estimates the average length of a district court patent suit at 31 months
(Magrab, 1993). These relatively high costs and long lags have led a number of scholars (e.g.,
Merges, 1999) to argue that a stronger post-grant challenge system could reduce uncertainty
regarding the validity of individual patents and, arguably, contribute to higher patent quality, in a
less expensive and time-consuming manner. As we noted earlier, the adversarial elements
originally contained in the legislation that established the U.S. re-examination system were
largely removed this procedure during Congressional debate of the bill. In contrast, adversarial
processes form the basis for the “opposition” procedure adopted by the European Patent Office.

3.3 EPO Examination and Opposition Procedures29
Patent protection for European member states can be obtained by filing several national
applications at the respective national patent offices or by filing one EPO patent application at
the European Patent Office. The EPO application designates the EPC30 member states for which
patent protection is requested. The total cost of a European patent amounts to approximately
€29,800, roughly three times as much as a typical national application.31 Thus, if patent

27
     This owner-initiation occurs in many cases in which declaratory validity determinations are being sought by a
     challenger-3rd party: these suits which make the patentee the defendant are often initiated only after a demand by
     the patent holder to the challenger to stop infringing the patent, thus putting the initial move in the hands of the
     patent holder.
28
     35 USC §282.
29
     This section is largely based on the description of the EPO examination and opposition system in Harhoff and
     Reitzig (2001).
30
     The Convention on the Grant of European Patents, also referred to here as the European Patent Convention
     (EPC) was enacted in October of 1973. It is the legal foundation for the establishment of the EPO. The full text
     of the convention is available at http://www3.european-patent-office.org/dwld/epc/epc_2000.pdf.
31
     As in other patent systems, the official patent office fees are a relatively small part of the costs (in this case
     €4,300). Professional representation before the EPO amounts to €5,500 on average, while translation into the
     languages of eight contracting states requires €11,500. Renewal fees for a patent maintained for ten years


                                                                                                                       9
protection is sought for more than three designated states, the application for a European patent
is less expensive than independent applications in several jurisdictions. This cost advantage has
made the European filing path particularly attractive for applicants selling goods and services in
multiple European markets. Increases in the number of patent applications and grants have given
the European Patent Office a level of economic importance that now resembles to that of the
United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO).

EPO patent grants are issued for inventions that are novel, mark an inventive step, are
commercially applicable, and are not excluded from patentability for other reasons.32 After the
filing of an EPO application, a search report is made available by the EPO to the applicant. The
search report is generated by EPO’s search office in The Hague and then transferred to the
examining staff in the Munich office. The search report describes the state of prior art regarded
as relevant according to EPO guidelines for the patentability of the invention, i.e., it contains a
list of references to prior patents and/or non-patent sources.33 Within six months after the
announcement of the publication of the search report in the EP Bulletin, applicants can request
the examination of their application. This request is a compulsory prerequisite for the patent
grant. If examination is not requested, the patent application is deemed to be withdrawn.
Eighteen months after the priority date the patent application is published. At this point, the
application is normally under examination; thus, the patent owner is generally required to reveal
some information about his/her invention prior to the grant of the patent even if no patent is ever
issued.

After examination (if requested) has been performed, the EPO presents an examination report. At
this point, the EPO either informs the applicant that the patent will be granted as specified in the
original application or requires the applicant to agree to changes in the application that are
necessary to grant the patent. In the latter case, a negotiation process similar to that in the US
system may ensue. Once the applicant and EPO have agreed concerning the scope of the
allowable subject matter, the patent issues for the designated states and is translated into the
relevant national languages. If the EPO declines to grant a patent, the applicant may file an
appeal.34 On average, the issue of a European patent takes about 4.2 years from the date of filing
the application (Harhoff and Reitzig, 2000). Within nine months after the patent has been
granted, any third party can oppose the European patent centrally at the European Patent Office
by filing an opposition against the granting decision. The outcome of the opposition procedure is
binding for all designated states. If opposition is not filed within nine months after the grant, the
patent’s validity can only be challenged under the legal rules of the respective designated
countries, some of which have their own opposition proceedings.

The EPO opposition procedure thus is the only centralized challenge process for European
patents. An opposition to a European patent is filed with the EPO. The opponent has to
substantiate his opposition by presenting evidence that the prerequisites for patentability were

     amount to roughly €8,500. See “Cost of an average European patent as at 1.7.99“, http://www.european-patent-
     office.org/epo/new/kosten_e.pdf (Jan. 14, 2002).
32
     See Article 52 EPC.
33
     It is important to note that applicants at the EPO are not required to supply a full list of prior art – as it is the case
     in the US system. See Michel and Bettels (2001, 191f.).
34
     See Article 106 EPC. Any decisions made by the EPO receiving, examining, opposition sections and legal
     division can be appealed and the appeal has suspensive effect.


                                                                                                                           10
not fulfilled, e.g., the opponent must show that the invention lacked novelty and/or an inventive
step, or that the disclosure was poor or insufficient. At the EPO, an opposition division
determines the outcome. The examiner who granted the patent is a member of the three-person
opposition chamber, but may not be the chairperson. The opposition procedure can have one of
three outcomes: the patent may be upheld without amendments, it may be amended,35 or it may
be revoked.36 As we pointed out earlier, revocation occurs in about one third of all opposition
cases.37

Another interesting aspect of the opposition procedure concerns the restrictions imposed by this
process on the opponent’s ability to settle “out of court”. Once an opposition is filed, the EPO
can choose to pursue the case on its own, even if the opposition is withdrawn.38 Thus, the
opponent and patentholder may not be free to settle their case outside of the EPO opposition
process once the opposition is filed. This provision of the opposition proceeding may discourage
its use by opponents seeking to force patentholders to license their patents.

Both the patentholder(s) and the opponent(s) may appeal the outcome of the opposition
procedure.39 The appeal must be filed within two months after receipt of the decision of the
opposition division, and it must be substantiated within an additional two months. The Board of
Appeal affords the final opportunity at the EPO to test the validity of the contested European
patent. Both parties can bring expert witnesses into the proceedings, and there are various
options for having deadlines extended. For the two technical fields considered in this paper, the
median duration of the challenge procedures (opposition and any appeal40) is 3.07 years,
although there is considerable variation in the duration of individual cases (the interquartile
range is 2.8 years).

The official fee for filing an opposition is €613; for filing an appeal against the outcome of
opposition, the fee is €1022. But the total costs to an opponent or the patentholder are much
higher. Estimates by patent attorneys of the costs of an opposition range between €15,000 and
€25,000 for each party. Patent attorneys interviewed by us agreed that there is not much room for
the opponent to drive up the patent owner’s cost of litigation, since attorney fees are regulated in
most European countries, including Germany, where many patent lawyers who have the required
EPO registration reside.




35
      See Article 99ff EPC. An amendment normally results in a reduction of the “breadth” of the patent by altering
      the claims which define the area for which exclusive rights are sought.
36
      On average, the opposition procedure takes around 2.2 years if the patent is revoked and about 4 years if the
      patent is amended. See Table 2 for similar information on our samples.
37
      See EPO (1999), p. 17 and Merges (1999), pp. 612-614. There are no publicly available data as to the frequency
      and extent of amendments, or the frequency of rejected oppositions. For the technical fields considered in this
      paper, we compute these figures below.
38
      Rule 60 EPC: “In the event of the death or legal incapacity of an opponent, the opposition proceedings may be
      continued by the European Patent Office of its own motion, even without the participation of the heirs or legal
      representatives. The same shall apply when the opposition is withdrawn.”
39
      Article 99ff. EPC
40
     For the two technical fields studied in this paper, an appeal occurs in about one third of all opposition cases.


                                                                                                                  11
3.4 Patent Litigation in Europe

Although the EPO provides a centralized application and examination process, there is no supra-
national or centralized process of patent litigation in Europe. The attractiveness of the EPO
opposition process stems in part from the fragmentation of patent litigation processes in Europe.
Unfortunately there have been very few systematic studies of patent litigation within the various
European nations. We therefore confine ourselves to a brief review of the few facts that are
known.

After the grant, the EPO patent becomes a bundle of national patent rights that are treated like
“normal” national patents that can be attacked by third parties through legal means allowed for in
the respective national legislation. Outcomes in these “local” litigation cases are restricted to the
“local” level, e.g., the patent may be invalidated in Spain, but this does not affect its validity in
Italy. During the past decade, national patent courts have increasingly taken evidence and
decisions from litigation in other EC nations into account, but no systematic study has analyzed
such legal “spillover” effects (Stauder 1996). Other spillover effects link the outcome of
oppositions and those of subsequent litigation. The national authorities involved in the
adjudication of these suits can refer to previous proceedings, which may make it more difficult
for a plaintiff to win a national validity suit after having lost an EPO opposition proceeding. But
no systematic analysis of these spillovers has yet been undertaken.

The differences among national jurisdictions within Europe are enormous, requiring substantial
investments in each national suit and driving up the costs of challenging the national patents
emerging from an EPO grant in several of the designated states. The costs of litigation in any
national court have been estimated to be between €50,000 and €500,000, depending on the
complexity of the case. This cost structure makes an attack at the European level using the
opposition procedure particularly attractive for a current or potential competitor of the
patentholder. The litigation rate (computed as the number of cases for which a suit is filed
divided by the number of patents) in most European countries is roughly one percent, slightly
lower than in the United States (Stauder 1996, 1989). But the quantitative evidence is too sparse
to conclude from these figures that the existence of the opposition mechanism leads to a
reduction in litigation.


4. Extent and Determinants of Post-Issue Challenges
4.1 Aggregate Statistics

This section presents some aggregate statistics on EPO patent oppositions and USPTO re-
examinations during the past two decades. First we look at the rate at which these post-grant
challenges are pursued for all granted patents and for our two broad technology classes. We then
analyze the length of time until challenge occurs and until it is resolved. Finally, we examine the
characteristics of patents that influence the frequency of post-grant challenges in our two
technology classes.

Any comparison of opposition and re-examination must begin with a recognition of the fact that
there are far more opposition cases (33,599 between 1980 and 1998) than re-examination cases


                                                                                                  12
(2,949) during the period of this analysis. This difference reflects the fact that the re-examination
proceeding operates very differently than does an opposition proceeding. Indeed, one salient
difference between the re-examination and opposition procedures concerns the identity of the
challengers in these processes. In nearly 44% of the re-examination cases during this period, the
party initiating the proceeding is identified by USPTO as the patent’s “owner.” Obviously, there
are virtually no circumstances under which the patentholder initiates an opposition proceeding in
the EPO. Moreover, since many of the other parties initiating re-examinations are law firms that
may be acting on behalf of patentholders, the share of re-examinations initiated by patentholders
almost certainly approaches 50%. In many cases, patentholders initiate re-examinations to
address failures to properly cite prior art, correct claims, or to repair other flaws in the issued
patent. But this difference between re-examinations and oppositions in the identity of the
initiating parties highlights the very different roles of the re-examination and opposition
procedures and underscores the need for caution in drawing analogies between these types of
post-issue challenges.

Because our technology classes contain relatively few re-examination cases, much of our
discussion of re-examinations in this section uses data for all U.S. re-examinations, rather than
only those from our two broad technology classes. Figure 2 displays the opposition and re-
examination “rates” in all technology sectors during 1980-98 (based on the year of patent grant),
while Figure 3 shows the rates for our two technology classes during 1980-96. The opposition
and re-examination “rate” is defined as the share of patents granted in a given year that are
ultimately challenged through opposition or re-examination. Our measure of the re-examination
rate is truncated because challenges can happen any time during the lifetime of a patent,41 and we
use a simple model of the re-examination lag to compute a minor correction for this truncation.
Two facts are immediately apparent from Figures 2 and 3:
     1. The opposition rate at the EPO is much higher than the re-examination rate at the USPTO
        for all technology classes (Figure 2), as has been noted previously by Merges (1999) and
        Harhoff and Reitzig (2000). The average re-examination rate during the 1981-1998
        period was 0.2% and the average opposition rate during the period was 8.3%. Thus,
        during 1980-98 oppositions were about 40 times more likely to be filed than re-
        examinations.
     2. The opposition rate for patents in the semiconductors, computing, and software sector is
        substantially lower than that for patents in the biotechnology/pharmaceutical sector and
        for patents in all sectors. Our two technology classes display far smaller differences in
        their re-examination rates, nor do their re-examination rates differ significantly from
        those for patents in other sectors. The lower opposition rates in semiconductors and
        software may reflect technological differences, but it is also plausible that firms in the
        semiconductor and computing industries have developed a pattern of private negotiations
        (e.g., cross-licensing negotiations) for resolution of some emerging disputes
        (Hall/Ziedonis 2001). The relatively modest inter-class differences in re-examination
        rates reflect the limited utility of this process for use by patent opponents or competitors.


41
     Figure 4 depicts the distribution of the lag between patent application and challenge. Roughly three-fourths of
     the re-exam requests are filed within 8 years of the application date. Since the average pendency period for a US
     patent application is 2 years, this lag corresponds to approximately 6 years after the grant date.


                                                                                                                  13
Figure 4 displays the distribution of the average lag between applying for a patent and the filing
of a re-examination or opposition request.42 Because oppositions must be filed within 9 months
of a patent grant, its lag distribution is much tighter than that for re-examinations. But the grant
lag in Europe is longer, making the mean lag between application and the filing of an opposition
or re-examination action similar for the two proceedings: 5.5 years elapse between the
application date and initiation of an EPO opposition, only slightly less than the average lag of 6
years between patent application and a re-examination request in the United States.

Figure 5 depicts the distribution of the time lag between a patent application and final resolution
of the post-grant challenge in the two systems. Since prompt resolution of uncertainty over
patent validity is one potential source of welfare gain from an efficient system for post-issue
challenges, the length of time from patent application to final resolution is an important criterion
for evaluating the respective benefits of oppositions and re-examinations. The distributions of the
duration of these proceedings differ considerably, and it is clear that the European opposition
system takes somewhat longer to resolve patent disputes. The median length of time between
application and final outcome of the challenge proceeding is 8.4 years at the EPO and 6.4 years
at the USPTO. Confining our analysis to patents applied for before 1991, in order to minimize
the effects of lag truncation, reduces the difference between these means, reflecting the more
diffuse distribution of these lags at the USPTO. Nevertheless, the duration of the period from
application to resolution remains longer for EPO oppositions on average than is true of re-
examinations.

Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of the lag distributions that were shown in Figure 5 for
the two systems. The median lag between patent application date and final opposition outcome at
the EPO is two years greater than for re-examination at the USPTO for the overall time period,
although this differential lag shrinks to less than one year for pre-1991 applications. The
interquartile range is slightly more than one year smaller within the EPO data for the entire time
period and more than two years smaller for pre-1991 applications. The EPO opposition
proceedings thus are longer on average, but the variance of these lags is greater within the US re-
examination proceedings. Since the re-examinations can be initiated at any time during the life of
a US patent, this greater variance in the distribution of the “procedural lags” for US re-
examinations is hardly surprising.

The Appendix to this paper presents two brief case studies of USPTO and EPO patents covering
similar inventions that were opposed in the EPO system (in our terminology, these are “twin”
patents). The cases, both of which cover biomedical inventions, indicate that parties opposing
patents in the EPO may well pursue litigation simultaneously against the EPO patentholder’s US
patent. The cases also underscore the point made earlier about the lengthy duration of the EPO
opposition system—one lawsuit in the United States over Ortho Pharmaceuticals ‘799 patent was
settled five years before the opposition proceeding on the corresponding EPO patent reached a
conclusion. The other U.S. lawsuit involving this patent, however, was not settled for two years
after the conclusion of the opposition process for the EPO “twin.” The other case study of the
Liposome Corporation’s U.S. and EPO patents reveals a similarly complex interaction between
the processes of post-grant review or litigation in the U.S. and European systems. In this case, as

42
     With the exception of the data in Figure 2, the EPO data are based on all oppositions in our two selected
     technology classes, a sample of approximately 2400 oppositions filed between 1980 and 1999.


                                                                                                           14
in the Ortho Pharmaceuticals case, a defendant in an infringement suit filed in the U.S. by
Liposome Corporation was engaged as an opponent to the Liposome Corporation’s EPO patent.
This case also highlights the strategic use by a patentholder of the U.S. re-examination process to
(apparently) strengthen its claims and weaken the position of a competitor. The cases thus
indicate considerable interdependence between the EPO opposition process and post-grant
challenges in the United States. The dimensions and timing of this interdependence are an
important topic for future research.

Summarizing our descriptive findings, the EPO opposition system does not reach a conclusion
more rapidly than the US re-examination procedure, when this procedural duration is estimated
as the length of time from patent application date to final resolution. The average lag between
application date and the initiation of a challenge is substantially greater within the U.S. re-
examinations than in the EPO oppositions, but this difference reflects the different time limits on
the initiation of such proceedings (the EPO requirement that opposition be filed within 9 months
of patent grant). Should we conclude from these comparative data that the longer lags in the EPO
opposition system imply a lengthier period of uncertainty, legal expense, and therefore, a higher
welfare burden within the innovation systems of these economies? Such a conclusion is
unfounded, since it relies on a characterization of the re-examination and opposition proceedings
as analogous in their characteristics, rigor, and outcomes. The data presented above on the
identity of the parties initiating re-examinations, as well as the abundant evidence discussed
earlier of significant procedural differences between the re-examination and opposition
processes, should dispel any such analogies. Any such comparison of challenges also must
incorporate data on the next stages of these challenges, which in both Europe and the United
States involve litigation. Unfortunately, the analysis of litigation data is beyond the scope of this
paper.


4.2 Analyzing the Determinants of Re-Examination at the USPTO

What are the characteristics of the U.S. patents that undergo re-examination? Do they differ from
the characteristics that have been identified as determinants of EPO opposition challenges in the
study by Harhoff and Reitzig (2001)? To address these questions, we analyzed the characteristics
of re-examined patents by analyzing patents issued between 1975 and 1999 in all patent classes
for which re-examinations were requested between 1975 and 1999 (a total of 3,078 patents),
comparing the characteristics of these patents against those in a 1% sample of all U.S. patents
issued during this period (yielding a “control sample” of 23,444 patents). In order to deal with
truncation issues, we also analyzed a sample of pre-1991 patents from each system (a sample
including 2058 re-examined patents and 12,160 control patents).

The results for our probit regressions analyzing the determinants of re-examinations of all U.S.
patents, which use variables similar to those used by Harhoff and Reitzig (2000), are shown in
Table 2. The first panel shows results for the whole 1975-1999 sample, while the second panel
restricts the sample to patents granted before 1991, because our measure of forward citations
(those during the first 9 years of patent life) is truncated for patents issued in the 1990s. The
variables have fairly high predictive value, with a pseudo R-squared of about 0.15 and an error
rate of about 13-17% compared to 23% for random assignment.


                                                                                                  15
Similarly to the findings of Harhoff and Reitzig in their analysis of oppositions, we find that re-
examination requests are more likely for patents that are cited more frequently by other patents
following their issue. Patents owned by individual inventors are no more likely to be re-
examined than those held by corporations. Patents held by government entities are about 8-11
percent less likely to be reexamined, ceteris paribus.

As we noted earlier, our data include re-examinations in all technology classes, in contrast to the
analysis of oppositions by Harhoff and Reitzig. Our analysis of re-examinations of patents in the
classes examined by Harhoff and Reitzig indicates that biotechnology/pharmaceutical patents are
no more likely to be re-examined and patents in the semiconductor, computer hardware and
software classes are less likely to be re-examined, by comparison with patents overall.43 For
patents granted prior to 1991, both biotechnology/pharmaceuticals and semiconductor/computer
hardware have re-examination rates that are approximately the same as those for other industries.
Only software is lower, by about 8 percent, although sample sizes are small.

The nationality of the patentholder has little effect on the likelihood of re-examination, although
patents held by U.S., Canadian, Australian, or Israeli assignees are slightly more likely to be re-
examined. Finally, the results for dummy variables indicating the number of claims in the patent
suggest that the probability of re-examination rises monotonically with the number of claims;
more complex patents are more likely to be re-examined.

4.3 Re-examination Outcomes

Table 3 summarizes the results of re-examinations conducted by the USPTO between 1980 and
1999. The top panel shows all 3127 re-examinations for which we have outcome information and
the bottom panel shows the results for our two main technology classes.44 The proportions are
similar, although claim amendment appears to be more likely than the mere addition or
cancellation of claims in our two technology classes, both of which cover relatively new areas of
inventive activity.

About 24 per cent of the patents are confirmed in full on re-examination, while only about 10
percent are revoked in full, a number similar to the 12 percent reported by Merges (1999) for
1995. For the newer technologies, confirmation in full is less likely and revocation more likely.
The next section compares the results of re-examination to those achieved by the EPO opposition
system for these two technology classes.

4.4 Sampling Strategy for US-EPO Equivalents



43
      Looking at the detailed classes, the following are less likely to be re-examined: C12P (fermentation or enzyme-
      using processes), G06F (electronic digital processing), and H01L (semiconductor devices). More likely to be re-
      examined are H03K (electronic switching (pulse) devices), G11C (static information storage), and H03F
      (amplifiers).
44
     The sample of outcomes is slightly larger than the sample of re-examinations used in Table 2 because a few
      observations were deleted from the sample used in Table 2 due to missing data problems.


                                                                                                                 16
Thus far, we have examined data on the determinants of re-examinations at the USPTO. We now
examine the similarities and differences between the US and European challenge systems, both
in terms of the characteristics of patents that trigger challenges and in terms of the outcomes of
these challenges. This analysis requires that we control for possible differences between US and
EPO patents. To that end, we assembled a dataset that includes “twins,” i.e., EPO patents that are
also issued in the United States or vice versa.

Assembling this dataset of “twin” patents relied on a sampling strategy that could produce a set
of US-EPO “twins” and control samples that are similarly distributed among years and
technology classes within the U.S. and EPO patent data. We used the International Patent
Classifications for our patents, since it is employed by both the USPTO and the EPO. We based
our sampling strategy on the IPC classifications done at the European Patent Office, since these
assignments are more reliable than the IPC assignments done after the fact at the USPTO.45 We
began by drawing a sample of approximately 2,000 EPO patents that met the following criteria
(Figure 6 provides a graphic depiction of this sampling strategy):
     • They were granted between 1980 and 1997 (applied for between 1978 and 1995).
     • They were classified in one of our two broad technology classes (62% in
       biotechnology/pharmaceuticals and 38% in semiconductors/computers/software).
     • An opposition was filed against them after grant.

These patents are shown in the upper left hand corner of Figure 6. Using these 2,027 patents as
our sampling frame, we then drew an 8% sample of unopposed EPO patents in these technology
classes to use as controls in our analysis of oppositions, stratifying on the filing date (month and
year) and IPC class, yielding a total of 2,861 patents. These are shown in the upper right hand
corner. Because biotech/pharma patents are opposed at a higher rate, our 8% sample of
unopposed patents yields a smaller control sample.46

U.S. equivalents for these two samples of patents (Equivalents are members of the same patent
family which have exactly the same priority or priorities in common) were then collected,
yielding the patents in the two bottom panels.47 In about 2-3 percent of the cases, an EPO patent
has more than one U.S. equivalent; three patents have more than 3 US equivalents. The
likelihood that an EPO patent has a USPTO equivalent is higher for semiconductor/software
than for biotechnology and pharmaceuticals. We have no explanation for this difference at
present. It may reflect a greater tendency for patent applicants to pursue national rather than
global IP protection strategies in biotechnology and pharmaceuticals, or it may reflect a greater
presence of non-industrial assignees (universities and government laboratories, both of whom

45
     This conclusion is based on private communications from more than one U.S. Patent Examiner. The search
      system at the USPTO is based on the U.S. patent classification system and IPCs are assigned only after the fact,
      based on a rough concordance.
46
      16 patents in the EPO opposed sample and 3 in the control sample described in Section 4 had twins that
      encountered re-examination requests, implying re-exam probabilities of 1.6% and 0.15% respectively. This
      means the re-exam probability is ten times as high for opposed patents, but still very small overall.
47
      See http://gb.espacenet.com/espacenet/gb/en/help/161.htm for definitions of patent families and equivalents.
      Equivalents can be identified using the ESPACENET service of the European Patent Office. This database is
      available at http://ep.espacenet.com.


                                                                                                                   17
are less likely to pursue global filings) in the biotechnology and pharmaceuticals patent
databases. But these possibilities are purely speculative, and additional analysis of our data is
needed.

The probability that an EPO patent has a U.S. equivalent is also higher for the controls than for
the opposed patents, even when we control for broad technology class. It is possible that this
result reflects interdependence between the EPO oppositions and patent filings in the US
system. For example, a an applicant receiving a relatively “weak” USPTO patent may be less
likely to file for an EPO patent, simply because of the nonzero probability that an opposition to
the EPO patent could result in the revocation or significant amendment of the EPO patent. But
this issue requires additional analysis.


4.5 Incidence of Opposition

Table 4 displays the results of a series of probit regressions that relate the probability that a
patent is opposed in the EPO system to the characteristics of the patent, its assignee, and the U.S.
twin, if there is one. All of the right-hand variables are dummies and the estimates shown are the
change in the probability if the dummy changes from 0 to 1. The first data column of the table
gives the number of observations for each variable for which its respective dummy variable was
equal to one.

When we included only grant year dummies, the biotech/pharma dummy, and the U.S. twin
dummy in the probit, we obtained the following estimate:

Prob(opposition) = year effects + 0.290 D(biopharm) – 0.117 D(U.S. twin exists)
                                 (0.015)             (0.016)

This result essentially summarizes the results of our sampling strategy: biotechnology/pharma
patents are 30 per cent more likely to be opposed, and patents with U.S. twins are approximately
12 per cent less likely to be opposed. Including only these variables along with grant year
dummies yielded an R-squared of 0.09.

Columns (1) and (2) relate opposition to a number of characteristics of the patent and its holder.
In column (2) we replace the biotech/pharma dummy by a full set of dummies for the 15 4-digit
IPC classes we are considering. These dummies are clearly significant (χ2(12) = 99.5), but they
have little effect on the estimate of the other coefficients.48 The other variables in the regression
are the following:
     • A set of dummies for the number of EPO citations received by the patent between its issue
       date and 1999. One additional forward cite raises the opposition probability about 3-5 per

48
     The degrees of freedom are lowered by the fact that some cells are sparse and therefore not identified in the
     regression. Those that had much lower opposition probability than average were G06F, G11C, H01L, H03K,
     H03M, and H04L, which are most of the semiconductor/computing classes. Those that were higher were C07G
     and C12M. This result essentially confirms the fact that the biopharm dummy captures most of the difference in
     opposition rates for these technologies.


                                                                                                                18
        cent, with some diminishing returns, a result that is consistent with the Harhoff-Reitzig
        results cited earlier.
     • A set of dummies for the number of EPO states in which the patent was taken out (1-5, 6-
       10, and more than 10). Designating more states raises the probability of opposition, which
       again is consistent with Harhoff and Reitzig (2001).
     • A set of dummies for the number of claims (1-5, 6-9, 10, 11-15, more than 15). Having
       more claims raises the probability of opposition, but only if the number of claims exceeds
       10.49 The meaning of this result is ambiguous, because the number of claims in a patent is
       itself subject to multiple interpretations. On the one hand, patents with a large number of
       claims could be seeking protection for a very narrowly defined invention. In other words,
       these patents are occupying a space in a relatively “crowded” field populated by many
       similar inventions, raising the probability of an opposition. On the other hand, patents with
       large numbers of claims are broader, rather than narrower, and may therefore face a lower
       probability of opposition (i.e., they could be early occupants of a less crowded invention
       space). The coefficient implies that the “crowding” effect, which raises the probability of
       an opposition, becomes significant as the number of claims in the patent exceeds 10.
     • Whether the patentholder is an independent inventor,50 a dummy variable for which the
       coefficient is insignificant.
     • Whether an accelerated search was requested by the patent applicant at the EPO, which
       lowers the probability of opposition by about 14 per cent.51 Accelerated search is often
       requested when the applicant is unsure of the state of the art, or of whether their invention
       is patentable. We therefore interpret this result as indicating a relatively “low-quality” (or
       less important) patent that is less likely to trigger an opposition.
     • Whether an accelerated examination was requested by the patent applicant, which raises
       the probability of opposition by 24 per cent. This request indicates that the applicant
       attaches high value to the patent, e.g., because a patent race is underway. As a result, it is
       more likely that there will be a competitor that wishes to oppose the patent.
     • Filing a Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) application, something that enables the applicant
       to file for protection later in up to 80 countries at WIPO. A PCT application raises the
       probability of an opposition by about 10-12 per cent, which may reflect the higher value of
       an invention for which broad international patent protection is sought.
     • A set of dummies for the country of the patentholder. Although they are jointly significant,
       none are significant individually. Since those for Germany and the rest of Western Europe
       are marginally significant, we retain them.

49
     The focal point at 10 claims is apparently caused by the fact that EPO charges a separate claims fee of €40 for
     the eleventh and each subsequent claim (Rule 31, 51 and 101 EPC).
50
     This variable disagrees with the U.S. assignment code for the twin in about one third of the cases, which seems
     unlikely to us. Some of the differences occur because the EPO records multiple owners for the same patent, both
     individual and corporate, where the USPTO records only the corporation (or university, in many of these cases).
     We include both the US and the EPO independent inventor variable in the regression in order to cover all
     possibilities.
51
     We are grateful to Markus Reitzig for suggesting inclusion of this and the next two variables. A detailed
     assessment of their usefulness for assessing the value of patent rights is given in Reitzig (2002).


                                                                                                                 19
   • A dummy for the presence of one or more U.S. twins. Once we control for other patent
     characteristics, the relative probability that a patent with a twin is opposed increases
     slightly, from minus 12 per cent to minus 9 per cent. This finding is puzzling and requires
     further analysis. We speculate that this result may once again reflect some interdependence
     between the issue by the USPTO of a patent and the perceived strength or quality of the
     “twin” EPO patent. The EPO “twins” of patents that are survive USPTO review may be
     viewed as stronger by potential opponents, and therefore are less likely to trigger an
     opposition. Obviously, this speculative interpretation requires additional analysis of the
     timing of filings and oppositions in the US and EPO systems.
In general the results from the regressions in columns (1) and (2) confirm the findings in Harhoff
and Reitzig (2001) that variables positively correlated with the value of a patent increase the
probability that the patent will be subject to opposition. It is suggestive that patents held by
independent inventors are no more likely to be opposed than other patents, other things equal. If
we do not control for patent characteristics, however, patents held by independent inventors are
11 per cent more likely to be opposed; the main reason seems to be that they are more likely to
be biotechnology/pharmaceutical patents. This result may reflect the greater presence of
European university inventions within the biotech/pharma patent class, ownership of many of
which remains with the individual faculty member.
Column (3) presents our preferred specification. Eliminating the insignificant variables does not
affect the remaining coefficient estimates substantially. Patents held by German and West
European assignees are about 7-9 per cent more likely to be opposed than patents held by
residents of other countries. We explored the identity of the opposers, finding that they are more
likely to come from countries that share a language with Germany or are in close proximity to a
country that does. This suggests that the opposition system is more heavily used by those who
are familiar with the language and culture of the country in which it is operated. It is natural
therefore that the opposed patents also come from nearby countries, either because the (potential)
opposers are more informed about them, or simply because they are more likely to be in the same
narrow line of business. On the other hand, this finding may be caused by the choice of
designated states for patent coverage, with Germany being the most favored choice. Inventors
and corporations in European countries for which patent protection is not sought will have lower
incentives to challenge patents that are not valid in their home country.
Finally, in column (4), we add the following variables concerning any U.S. twins for these
patents:
   • Whether the patent has more than one U.S. twin, a variable that is insignificant.
   • A set of dummies for the number of USPTO citations received by the patent in the first ten
     years of its life. One additional forward cite of this type raises opposition probability 1 per
     cent, with some diminishing returns at high citation levels. The slightly lower coefficient
     for US citations relative to EPO citations may reflect the fact that USPTO patents have
     many more citations per patent than EPO patents. Although the EPO citation variables fall
     slightly in the presence of USPTO citation variables, both enter the equation significantly.
   • A set of dummies for the number of claims in the U. S. patent (1-5, 6-9, 10, 11-15, more
     than 15). Unlike citations, these variables are not significant in the presence of the dummy
     variable for the number of claims in the EPO patent application. When we exclude the
     dummies for EPO claims, the dummies for the U.S. claims become slightly significant and


                                                                                                 20
        negative. This result may well reflect the difficulty, noted earlier, of interpreting the
        meaning of the number of claims in a patent.
     • Whether the U.S. application date was prior to the EPO application date. This reduces the
       probability of opposition by about 4 per cent, possibly reflecting the fact that more of the
       value of these patents relies on their exploitation in the U.S. market, making opposition in
       Europe less important. But the finding also is consistent with the “signaling” interpretation
       of U.S. patent issue that was noted earlier.
     • Whether the USPTO coded the inventor as an independent inventor. This increases the
       probability by about 8 per cent, but the coefficient is insignificant. Measuring this more
       accurately is of some concern, given the reluctance of the US independent inventor
       community to embrace an opposition system.52 Controlling for grant year and nothing else,
       the raw difference in probability is 9.4 per cent with a standard error of 4.8 per cent.
The set of variables that describe the U.S. twin are jointly significant, with a χ2(11) = 42.6.
Adding them has little effect on the other coefficients, beyond a reduction in the size of the
coefficient for the “U.S. twin” dummy to minus 14 per cent.


4.6 Opposition Outcomes

The outcomes of the oppositions for our sample are shown in Table 5. The category “opposition
closed” refers to cases in which the patentholders do not renew patent protection after the
opposition has been filed, which causes the patent to lapse into the public domain. Thus, these
cases will mostly reflect a successful challenge of the patent’s validity. Two facts are particularly
striking: first, oppositions against patents with U.S. equivalents are more likely to be rejected.
This may be due to the fact that patents from non-European applicants are selected carefully for
patenting in Europe and are therefore more robust against the opposition challenge. It is also
consistent with the argument that USPTO review does have a “quality-enhancing” effect on the
issued patent. This result may also be a plausible explanation for the previously discussed
negative impact of the “twin status” variable on the likelihood of opposition.

Second, the probability of outright revocation of a patent subjected to opposition is much higher
than for re-examination: a total of 35.1 percent of the patents are revoked, not counting the
opposition cases that are closed because the patent lapses (recall that only 9-11% of re-examined
US patents are revoked in full). Presumably, these results reflect the wider grounds allowed for
opposition and the presence of a third party in the opposition process.

Table 6 explores the relationship between patent characteristics and outcomes using a simple
logit model of the following form:

                                 Pj = Pr(outcome j|Xi) = exp(Xiβj)/Σexp(Xiβk)



52
     As we indicated earlier, there are many cases for which the U.S. variable is coded as unassigned that are
     currently (and perhaps, erroneously) included in the independent inventor class. In EPO applications, the listing
     of the applicant and of the inventors is compulsory.


                                                                                                                  21
Where j = outcome of the opposition (still pending, rejected, amended, closed, or revoked) and Xi
are various characteristics of the ith patent. In Table 6 we show the change in probability of each
outcome type induced by a one-unit change in the right hand side dummy variable, holding all
other variables constant:

                        ΔPj (ΔXil= 1) = Pj[βjl - Σ βklexp(Xiβk)/ Σ exp(Xiβk)]

where l indexes the right hand side variables. All effects are measured relative to the opposition
pending outcome, so the rows in Table 6 sum to zero.

The results in Table 6 support the following conclusions:
   1. Oppositions to patents with more citations or wider European coverage, or where there are
      multiple oppositions or multiple U.S. twins, tend to take longer to resolve.
   2. Oppositions to biotech/pharma patents and/or highly cited patents, or where there are
      many claims, tend to result in amendment rather than a simple yes or no decision.
      Amendment is less likely when there are multiple oppositions or the inventor is an
      individual. More important patents or patents in relatively new, dynamic areas of
      inventive activity appear on this evidence to be more likely to be amended rather than
      revoked in an opposition.
   3. Amendment is also more likely when an accelerated examination was requested for the
      patent. Recall that accelerated examinations are associated with a 25 percent higher
      probability of opposition in the first place. The two facts together suggest that these
      patents are in relatively new areas that are characterized by higher uncertainty about the
      technology, prior art, novelty, etc.
   4. Revocation is more likely when there are multiple oppositions or few claims and
      substantially less likely when the patent is in the biotech/pharma area, when the patent is
      heavily cited by subsequent patents, when an accelerated search was requested, or when
      there are US twins.




                                                                                                   22
5. CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER QUESTIONS

The determinants and characteristics of patent-challenge procedures are an important issue in any
assessment of the U.S. or other industrial economies’ intellectual property systems. In a
“knowledge-based” economy, intellectual property systems are constantly challenged by the
advance of technology, a process that among other things creates new artifacts to which the
necessarily backward-looking patent system must respond. A “knowledge-based” economy also
is one in which the high political salience of national and global intellectual property systems
means that they are the focus of political lobbying to strengthen, adapt, or weaken specific
features of intellectual property regulation, administration, and law in order to favor particular
interests. Both of these forces have been at work within the US intellectual property system
during the past quarter-century, a period of significant strengthening of patentholder rights has
triggered a debate over the appropriate level and limits of such rights. Moreover, this debate has
important trans-Atlantic and global echoes and analogues.

This paper has explored one dimension of the operations of the post-issue systems for
challenging patent validity in the US and European intellectual property systems. The analysis
presented here is preliminary and many issues remain open for further research. One of the most
important gaps in our current data is the lack at present of data on rates of litigation for US
patents that are re-examined and EPO patents (and their US “twins”) that are opposed. The lack
of these data prevents us from examining whether the use of oppositions results in lower rates of
litigation, lowering costs and resolving uncertainty more rapidly. Any such conclusion requires
that we extend the analysis to incorporate post-challenge litigation, which we hope to do in
future research.

Nonetheless, the analysis in this paper (which itself needs to be extended to cover a broader array
of patent classes and to incorporate the length and costs of litigation in the United States and
Europe) highlights several interesting features of the patent-challenge systems of the US and
EPO systems. First, the US re-examination procedure differs dramatically from the EPO
opposition procedure in virtually all of its features. Perhaps the most significant of these
contrasts is the identity of the party requesting a re-examination, which our data indicate is the
patent owner in more than 40% of the cases. This characteristic of re-examination hardly
qualifies it as the sort of adversarial procedure that EPO oppositions represent. With this fact in
mind, comparisons of US re-examinations and EPO opposition proceedings must be treated with
great caution.

Keeping in mind the significant differences between the re-examination and opposition
processes, our comparative analysis suggests that EPO oppositions do not resolve validity
challenges more quickly than the USPTO re-examination proceedings. In other words (and
keeping in mind the incomplete nature of our data), for any given patent the EPO opposition
process does not resolve uncertainties over the quality and breadth of patents more rapidly than
the re-examination process. Indeed, opposition proceedings in some cases (and almost certainly,
in important, complex cases with numerous opponents, appeals, etc.) may well take as much time
to be resolved as litigation in the US system. Nonetheless, the higher frequency of opposition
(which is presumably due to the lower cost associated with opposition as compared to the cost of



                                                                                                23
litigation in the US) within the EPO system is at least consistent with the hypothesis that the
opposition process handles many more legal disputes over patent validity than are addressed by
the U.S. re-examination process.

Our analysis also indicates that patent amendment, rather than revocation, is more likely for
oppositions in relative new fields of inventive activity, for more “complex” patents, or for
oppositions in which numerous opponents participate. Since we lack evidence on the extent to
which oppositions are followed by litigation in the European patent system, we cannot determine
whether the lack of any “speed advantage” for oppositions in resolving patent disputes quickly is
offset by a reduction of litigation rates associated with oppositions. The EPO system may offer
few advantages over the U.S. system for post-issue patent challenges, but we cannot address this
issue without analyzing litigation data for both the U.S. and European systems Any
comprehensive assessment of the social costs and benefits of the two challenge systems requires
that we consider both the “patent office” processes of post-grant challenge (opposition or re-
examination) and litigation.

The analysis of EPO oppositions and USPTO re-examinations also indicates that more
“valuable” or technologically important patents, based on the usual indicators of such
characteristics, are more likely to trigger challenges. This conclusion is consistent with prior
research, and if the private and social values of patent rights are correlated, higher levels of
scrutiny for more important or valuable patents are welfare-enhancing. Misspecifications of the
claims or other characteristics of important patents are likely to produce relatively large welfare
losses, e.g., deviations from an optimal trade-off between market power allocated to the patent
owner and incentives for R&D (Harhoff and Reitzig 2001).

Our analysis of “twin patents” also suggests a complex interdependence between the probability
of an EPO challenge and the issuance of a US “twin” patent. This interdependence must be
explored further, but at least some evidence is consistent with the interpretation that “twin status”
reflects selection issues that we have not addressed in this paper. There also appear to be some
interesting issues of the timing of applications and issue of USPTO and EPO patents within these
data, and we intend to analyze these issues in greater detail. The existence of such
interdependence is hardly surprising in an integrated global economy, but these linkages have
received little scrutiny from scholars of intellectual property policy.

The heading for this section thus is used advisedly, since we have raised as many questions as
conclusions in this analysis. But this highlights the richness of the agenda for further research.




                                                                                                  24
6. REFERENCES
American Intellectual Property Law Association, 1999. “Report of Economic Survey,” Washington, D.C.
Arora, A., 1997. "Licensing tacit knowledge: Intellectual Property Rights and the Market for Know-how,"
      Economics of Innovation and New Technology 4: 41-59.
Arrow, K., 1962. “Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention,” in The Rate and
     Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors. Princeton: Princeton University.
Baron, David P. "The nonmarket strategy system." Sloan Management Review, Fall 1995, 37(1): 73-85.
Barton, J.H. 2000. “Reforming the Patent System,” Science 287: 1933-1934.
Bebchuk, L., 1984. "Litigation and Settlement under Imperfect Information," 15 Rand Journal of
     Economics 404.
Coase, R.H., 1960, "The Problem of Social Cost", Journal of Law and Economics 1-44
Cohen, W., R. Nelson, and J. Walsh. "Appropriability Conditions and Why Firms Patent and Why They
     Do Not in the American Manufacturing Sector," OECD working paper, 1996.
Cooter, R., and D. Rubinfeld. “Economic Analysis of Legal Disputes and their Resolution,” Journal of
      Economic Literature, 27: 1067-97.
Courts Grant Them Preclusive Effect?”, Journal of the Patent & Trademark Office Society 125: 127-35.
Gable, R.L., and M. Montague, 2001. “Strategies to Defer Costs of Patenting: Use Provisional PCT
      Applications,” New York Law Journal, March 5.
Hall, Bronwyn H., and Rosemarie Ham Ziedonis. 2001. “The Patent Paradox Revisited: An Empirical
      Study of Patenting in the U.S. Semiconductor Industry, 1979-1995,” Rand Journal of Economics
      32: 101-128.
Harhoff, Dietmar, and Markus Reitzig. 2001. “Determinants of Opposition against EPO Patent Grants –
     The Case of Biotechnology and Pharmaceuticals.” Muenchen: Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitaet.
     Photocopied.
Heller, Michael A., and Rebecca S. Eisenberg. 1998. “Can Patents Deter Innovation? The Anticommons
      in Biomedical Research,” Science 698, May 1.
Hunt, Robert M. 2001. “You Can Patent That? Are Patents on Computer Programs and Business Methods
      Good for the New Economy?” Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Business Review, Spring.
James, Barry. 2001. “Agreeing on Little, EU Leaders Muddle Ahead,” International Herald Tribune,
     March 26.
Kortum, S. and J. Lerner, "Stronger Patent Protection or Technological Revolution: What is behind the
     Recend Surge in Patenting?" NBER Working paper 6204.
Lanjouw, J. and J. Lerner, 1996. "Preliminary Injunctive Relief: Theory and Evidence from Patent
     Litigation," NBER working paper 5689, July.
Lanjouw, J. and J. Lerner, 1997. "The Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights," NBER working
     paper 6296, December.
Lanjouw, J. and M. Schankerman, 2000. "Characteristics of Patent Litigation: A Window on
     Competition," working paper, March.




                                                                                                    25
Levin, R., A. Klevorick, R. Nelson, and S. Winter, 1987. “Appropriating the Returns from Industrial
      Research and Development” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: 783-820.
Magrab, E. Brendan, 1993. “Patent Validity Determinations of the ITC: Should U.S. District Grant Them
     Preclusive Effect?,” 75 Journal of the Patent & Trademark Office Society 125, 127-35.
Merges, R. P., 1997. Patent Law and Policy. Charlottesville: Michie.
Merges, R., P. Menell, M. Lemley, and T. Jorde, 1997. Intellectual Property in the New Technological
     Age. New York: Aspen.
Merges, Robert P. 1999. “As Many as Six Impossible Patents Before Breakfast: Property Rights for
     Business Concepts and Patent System Reform,” Berkeley High Technology Law Journal 14: 577-
     615.
Meyer, M. (1999). "Does science push technology? Patents citing scientific literature," Research Policy,
      Vol. 29, No. 3, March 2000, pp. 409-434.
Michel, J. and B. Bettels, 2001. “Patent citation analysis – a closer look at the basic input data from patent
     research reports,” Scientometrics 51, 181-201.
Michel, J. und B. Bettels (2001). "Patent citation analysis - A closer look at the basic input data from
     patent search reports", Scientometrics, Vol. 51, No. 1 (2001) 185–201.
Mowery, D., 1999. “The Computer Software Industry,” in D. Mowery and R. Nelson, eds., The Sources
    of Industrial Leadership. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mowery, D.C., R.R. Nelson, B.N. Sampat, and A.A. Ziedonis, 2001. “The Growth of Patenting and
    Licensing by U.S. Universities: An Assessment of the Effects of the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980,”
    Research Policy 30: 99-119.
Nickerson, J., 1996. "Strategic Objectives Supported by Licensing." Technology Licensing: Corporate
      Strategies for Maximizing Value. New York: Wiley.
Nordhaus, W., 1969. Invention, Growth, and Welfare: A Theoretical Treatment of Technological Change.
     Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
P'ng, I., 1983. "Strategic Behaviour in Suit, Settlement, and Trial," 14 Bell Journal of Economics 539.
Priest G. and B. Klein, 1984. "The Selection of Disputes for Litigation," 8 Journal of Legal Studies 1.
Quillen, Cecil D., Jr. 2001. “The Patent System: Is it Broke? And Who Can Fix It, If It Is?,” Presentation
      to the Spring Meeting of the U. S. Association of General Counsels,” May 12.
Reitzig, Markus. 2002. “Die Bewertung von Patentrechten – eine Analyse aus betriebswirtschaftlicher
      Sicht,” Muenchen: Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitaet. Doctoral Thesis.
Scherer, F.M, 1965. “Corporate Inventive Output, Profits, and Growth,” 73(3) The Journal of Political
      Economy 290.
Schmoch, U. (1993). "Tracing the knowledge transfer from science to technology as reflected in patent
     indicators," Scientometrics, Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 193-211.
Somaya, D., 2000. "My Strategy Says: 'See you in Court!' Strategic Determinants of Patent Litigation
     Settlement Decisions in Computers and Research Medicines," working paper, March.
Speranza, R. & J. Goldman, 1987. "Reexamination--the Patent Challenger's View." 15 American
      Intellectual Property Law Association Quarterly Journal 85.
Stauder, D. (1989). Patent- und Gebrauchsmusterverletzungsklagen in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland,
      Großbritannien, Frankreich und Italien. Schriftenreihe zum Gewerblichen Rechtsschutz (Vol. 89),



                                                                                                           26
      Max-Planck-Institut für ausländisches und internationales Patent-, Urheber- und Wettbewerbsrecht.
      Köln.
Stauder, Dieter (1996). “Aspekte der Durchsetzung gewerblicher Schutzrechte: Fachkundiger Richter,
      schnelles Verfahren und europaweites Verletzungsgebot,” in: Beier, A. (Ed.): Aktuelle
      Herausforderungen des geistigen Eigentums.”
Stauder, Dieter, P. von Rospatt, M. von Rospatt (1999). “Protection transfrontalière des brevets
      europeéns,” Revue Internationals de Droit Economique, 1, pp. 119-133.
Teece, D., 1986. “Profiting from Technological Innovation: Implications for Integration, Collaboration,
      Licensing, and Public Policy.” 15 Research Policy 285.




                                                                                                    27
                                               APPENDIX

            Liposome Corporation – Patent No. 4,880,635 (EPO Publ. No. 190,315)

In July 1985, the Liposome Corporation (LC) submitted an application in the US Patent and Trademark
office for a patent on their "Dehydrated liposome" innovation, enabling the use of liposomes--fatty
bubbles--that can carry drugs and cause the medication to concentrate at the site of an infection. Within a
month, the firm had submitted an application at the European Patent Office to secure patent rights in
Europe. The European application was published in August 1986, based upon Liposome’s claimed
international priority date of August 1984.

After pending in the Patent Office for 4 years and 4 months, the US patent issued on November 14, 1989
(patent number 4,880,635), with 9 claims. During the next several years, LC began distributing its drug
Abelcet, an anti-fungal treatment used for AIDS-related infections and based on its '635 patent. Rival
Nexstar, Incorporated (formerly known as Vestar) developed a competing liposomal drug AmBisome,
prompting LC to notify Nexstar that it believed the anti-fungal AmBisome infringed its patent. On May
17, 1993, Nexstar sued LC in the Federal District Court in Delaware, seeking a declaration that the '635
patent was invalid, and LC counterclaimed, charging AmBisome with infringement.

Presented with new prior art that created some likelihood that Nexstar would prevail in court, LC decided
on July 13, 1993 to request an "owner-initiated" reexamination on its '635 patent, thus gaining for itself an
ex parte proceeding with the US Patent Office to determine the impact of the new prior art. This
reexamination enabled LC to re-enter negotiations with the Patent Office over the patent’s claims. If the
USPTO upheld the suspect claims, the presumption of validity of the '635 before the court would be
strengthened.

LC was awarded its equivalent European Patent, EP 190315, on October 17, 1993. LC designated
Austria, Belgium, Switzerland, Germany, France, Great Britain, Italy, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, and
Sweden as states in which it intended to patent. Nexstar opposed the LC's EPO patent on April 6, 1994,
and was joined in opposition by Daiichi Pharmaceutical Company on September 21. On December 21,
1994, the Delaware District Court found that LC's patent was invalid and that Nexstar's product was not
infringing. As of this date, no decision has been delivered in the Nextar / Daiichi opposition proceedings,
thus suggesting the cases are essentially closed.

Legal maneuvers kept the US litigation alive through 1995 and, on June 7, 1996 LC announced that it had
been "upheld" by the US Patent Office in its reexamination. Company officials declared that the patent’s
"presumption of validity [was] enhanced" and threatened Nexstar with an injunction to prevent it from
selling AmBisome. LC shares were up 3.4% on the news that day, while Nexstar's dropped 21.5%. (Marc
Monseau, "Patent Office upholds Liposome patent," Denver Rocky Mountain News, June 7, 1996).

The news also appears to have scuttled Nexstar’s plans for a $60 million new share offering in June 1996
that would finance the firm’s acquisition of new drugs, marketing its newest product, and research &
development. (David Algeo, "Nexstar may kill offering," The Denver Post, D:1, June 8, 1996). Nexstar
officer said that LC’s announcement of the outcome of its patent re-examation had harmed the firm (Jesse
Eisinger, "Patent ruling may hamper Nexstar offering," Denver Rocky Mountain News, 5B, June 11,
1996).

The USPTO certificate on the reexamination of the ‘635 patent finally issued on July 2, 1996, and the
facts did not entirely support LC's press releases of a month earlier. In reality, B1 Certification 2,937
stated that 3 claims had been cancelled, 6 claims had been amended, and 19 new claims were added.



                                                                                                          28
Nexstar returned to federal court in May of 1997, claiming that LC had purposefully misrepresented the
reexamination results to gain advantage and injure Nexstar, and argued that the '635 patent was invalid.

EP190315 was opposed at the EPO on Feb. 1, 1994 by Nexstar and Daiichi Pharmaceutical. The case is
still pending on appeal, and we do not know the preliminary outcome. It is probable, based on the events
discussed immediately below, that they are not waiting for the final outcome and the case is essentially
closed.

The two competitors ultimately reached a settlement in their U.S. court case on August 11, 1997, jointly
stipulating to a dismissal. In the settlement, LC granted Nexstar immunity from future suits in connection
with its worldwide manufacture and marketing of AmBisome. The firms agreed to grant reciprocal
options to take licenses to the other's patented technologies, while Nexstar agreed to unspecified
payments to LC. The following day, Nexstar's AmBisome was approved by the Food and Drug
Administration for marketing in the United States.

            Ortho Pharmaceuticals – U. S. Patent 4,363,799 (EPO Publ. No. 17381)

By the early 1980s, monoclonal antibodies had been recognized as a remarkable advance in medical
science. The discovery, which allows the identification of so-called T cell subsets of lymphocytes, a type
of white blood cell, showed promise for enabling advancements in the treatment of infectious disease,
cancer, infertility, autoimmune disorders, heart disease, and other maladies. In 1984, sales of diagnostics
and therapies using the technique grossed US $500 million, with projections of annual sales of US $2
billion by 1990 (Lawrence Altman, "A Discovery and its Impact: Nine Years of Excitement," NYT, C:3,
Oct. 16, 1984). The founders of the technique were awarded the 1984 Nobel Prize in Medicine, signaling
its path breaking nature.

On March 20, 1979, the Ortho Pharmaceutical Corporation applied for a United States patent on its
invention entitled "Monoclonal antibody to human T cells, and methods for preparing same." On March
19, 1980, presumably taking advantage of the 1-year application window allowed in the EPO, Ortho
applied for its equivalent European patent, application number EP1980030082, using the US application
date as its priority date. Based on the application’s March 1979 international priority date, the EPO
published the application on October 15 1980, signaling the existence of the pending patent. Ortho
designated its European states of interest on that date as Austria, Belgium, Switzerland, Germany, France,
Great Britain, Holland, Italy, and Sweden.

On December 14, 1982, after some 2 years and 9 months pending in the US Patent Office, the US patent
issued (number 4,363,799), with 11 claims. Approximately two years later, on September 20, 1984, Ortho
filed a complaint alleging patent infringement against Becton Dickinson Monoclonal Center, Inc. in the
Federal District Court in Wilmington, Delaware. The complaint also covered 12 other patents owned by
Ortho. Within 10 months, the European equivalent patent (No. 17381) issued, on July 10, 1985.

During 1986, legal maneuvering on both sides of the Atlantic tested the validity of the Ortho patent. On
June 4, 1986, an EPO opposition was filed by Behringwerke AG and Sandoz AG. Within a week, on June
11, a second opposition was filed by Becton, Dickinson & Company and by Boehringer Mannheim
GMBH. On July 24, 1986, Ortho's US infringement action against Becton Dickinson, an opponent to
Ortho’s EPO patent, was transferred to the Federal District Court in Northern California. On September
26, Ortho again asserted its patent in an infringement action against Coulter Corporation and Coulter
Electronics Corporation in the Southern District of Florida.

By October 3, 1986, Ortho and Becton Dickinson had settled their California litigation. Each party
stipulated to a voluntary dismissal of the case and the Court announcing that the parties had "resolved


                                                                                                        29
their differences." But the EPO opposition proceedings continued, and after the two pending oppositions
were consolidated, the EPO patent was revoked on October 17, 1986. Ortho immediately appealed the
adverse decision to the EPO, but the appeal was finally rejected on January 8, 1991, five years after
settlement of the firm’s infringement suit against one of the EPO patent opponents.

Ortho's suit against Coulter Corporation and Coulter Electronics Corporation in the Southern District of
Florida was finally settled in November, 1993, with a consent judgment and a dismissal. Ortho's US
patent remains in force but has not been asserted in court since. The patent number is not withdrawn,
although the patent is close to expiration.




                                                                                                     30
                               Table 1
    Lags between Application, Grant, Challenge, and Final Outcome

                                               EPO*                                  USPTO**
                                 # Obs.       Median        IQ Range # Obs.          Median IQ Range
Lag btwn application &
grant                             2022          4.78          2.15        3208         1.72     0.90
Lag btwn grant & first
challenge                         2027          0.75          0.01        3208         2.82     4.92
Lag btwn first challenge
& final outcome                   1526          2.73          2.34        3208         1.28     0.91

Total lag                         1519          8.35          3.24        3208         6.36     5.50

                                     Pre-1991 Applications Only
Lag btwn application &
grant                              839          4.31          1.93        2188         1.79     0.92
Lag btwn grant & first
challenge                          836          0.75          0.02        2188         4.19     5.89
Lag btwn first challenge
& final outcome                    797          2.85          2.50        2188         1.28     0.96

Total lag                          795          8.09          3.31        2188         7.90     6.46

*These numbers are for our sample of opposed patents only; only the first opposition is used.
**These numbers are for all re-examined patents (requests 1974-2000; duplicates removed).
Neither set have not been adjusted for truncation.




                                                       31
                                                                                 Table 2
                                                                Probability of a Re-examination Request
                                                      Binary probit estimation (23,444 observations; 3,078 re-exams)

                                          All Observations (23,444; 3,078 re-exams)                                  Patents granted before 1991 (12,160; 2,058 re-exams)
                                  No. of re-
                                   exams#     Dprob/dx+ Std. Error Dprob/dx+ Std. Error                                           Dprob/dx+ Std. Error Dprob/dx+ Std. Error

Bio/pharma                            26             -0.0175         0.0169          -0.0216         0.0171            14            -0.0229   0.0367   -0.0335    0.0337
Semiconductor/hardware                183            -0.0271         0.0070          -0.0215         0.0070            126           -0.0032   0.0143    0.0030    0.0146
Software                               56            -0.0667         0.0069          -0.0645         0.0063            31            -0.0759   0.0160   -0.0782    0.0152

#cites (10yr) = 1 or 2                481            0.0550          0.0086          0.0418          0.0082            295           0.0927    0.0161    0.0846    0.0158
#cites (10yr) = 3 to 10               1240           0.1417          0.0091          0.1180          0.0086            842           0.1913    0.0143    0.1735    0.0142
#cites (10yr) = 10 to 20               668           0.3468          0.0168          0.2935          0.0165            511           0.4488    0.0228    0.4089    0.0240
#cites (10yr) > 20                    469            0.5745          0.0197          0.5005          0.0216            333           0.6563    0.0218    0.6017    0.0250

#claims = 6 to 9                      613                                             0.0167         0.0064            439                               0.0278    0.0102
#claims = 10                          166                                             0.0215         0.0105            120                               0.0384    0.0171
#claims = 11 to 15                    602                                             0.0385         0.0074            403                               0.0565    0.0117
#claims >15                           1228                                            0.0593         0.0069            774                               0.1009    0.0116
#claims missing                        10                                            -0.0672         0.0104             2                                0.1172    0.1607

Individual assignee                    522            0.0031         0.0053          -0.0063         0.0490            351            0.0052   0.0085   -0.0042    0.0083
Government assignee                    14            -0.0798         0.0080          -0.0756         0.0071            11            -0.1100   0.0127   -0.1080    0.0121
U.S. inventor                         2337                                            0.0540         0.0040           1566                               0.0616    0.0068
Non-European developed
country patent*                       102                                            0.0815          0.0172            56                                0.0607    0.0259
Chi-squared and p-val for
regional dummies (df=6)                                                               49.48          0.0000                                              26.07     0.0004

Pseudo R-squared                                           0.131                            0.152                                          0.117               0.136
Log likelihood                                           -7920.01                         -7735.02                                       -4881.43            -4778.81
Chi-squared (df)++                                  1595.98       9                  1965.96       16                               1228.77       9     1434.03       16

The left-out category is a corporate-owned patent granted in 1975/76 with fewer than 6 claims and no citations within 10 years after grant.
#The number of re-exams that have the characteristic described.
+This is the increase in probability for a unit change to the dummy (all variables are dummy variables).
++Grant year dummies are included in all estimations; the null hypothesis is these dummies only.
*Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Israel
**Japan, Germany, Other Asia, Other W. Europe, E. Europe, Other

                                                                                               32
                                     Table 3
           Reexamination outcomes, 1981-2000 (Patents granted 1975-1999)

                                                   All technologies**
                                                         with                                                  Share
Claims                   NOA*        Added         Cancelled Add&Cancel                 Totals        Share   with any
Claims added              145          --               --            --                  145          4.6%    33.9%
Claims cancelled          181         146               --            --                  327         10.5%    35.9%
Claims amended            466         371             397           399                  1633         52.2%    52.2%
No change                 734          --               --            --                  734         23.5%    30.7%
Patent cancelled          288          --               --            --                  288          9.2%     9.2%
Total                    1814         517             397           399                  3127        100.0%

            Biotech/pharma and Semiconductors/computer hardware & software***
                                        with                                                                   Share
Claims            NOA*     Added   Cancelled Add&Cancel Totals         Share                                  with any
Claims added        11        --       --          --          11       4.2%                                   28.5%
Claims cancelled    19        4        --          --          23       8.7%                                   31.6%
Claims amended      53       30       30           30         143      54.4%                                   54.4%
No change           56       --        --          --          56      21.3%                                   23.8%
Patent cancelled    30       --        --          --          30      11.4%                                   11.4%
Total              169       34       30           30         263     100.0%

*NOA=no other action noted
**Of 3208 records, 3127 (97.5%) have outcome notations
***Of 268 records, 263 (98.1%) have outcome notations.
Each re-exam appears only once.
Numbers in the last column do not add to 100% because some re-exams yield multiple outcomes.
In the cases where there is more than one re-examination request, only the final outcome is shown.
There are 306 multiple requests; only the final outcome is included in this table.




                                                             33
                                                    Table 4 (part 1)
                                               Probability of an Opposition
                               Binary probit estimation (4868 observations; 2021 opposed)

                                                No. of obs           (1)                                        (2)
                                                equal to 1 Dprob/dx+ Std. Error                       Dprob/dx+ Std. Error

EPO characteristics
Biotech/pharma technology                           2,157               0.159           0.020   ***     Full 14 tech dummies++
No. of forward EPO cites = 1                         974                0.060           0.022   ***      0.064        0.023  ***
No. of forward EPO cites = 2/5                      1,311               0.163           0.021   ***      0.173        0.021  ***
No. of forward EPO cites = 6/10                      258                0.229           0.035   ***      0.224        0.036  ***
No. of forward EPO cites >10                          80                0.400           0.051   ***      0.418        0.050  ***
No. of designated states 6-10                       1,082               0.137           0.022   ***      0.128        0.023  ***
No. of designated states >10                        1,733               0.175           0.024   ***      0.169        0.025  ***
No. of EPO claims 6-9                               1,192               0.015           0.024            0.010        0.025
No. of EPO claims = 10                               580                0.044           0.030            0.022        0.030
No. of EPO claims 11-15                             1,068               0.051           0.026   **       0.033        0.026
No. of EPO claims >15                               1,244               0.118           0.026   ***      0.105        0.026  ***
Independent inventor (EPO ass.)                      220                0.028           0.036            0.016        0.036
Accelerated search requested                          86               -0.136           0.054   **      -0.140        0.054   **
Accelerated exam requested                           140                0.243           0.045   ***      0.240        0.046  ***
PCT application                                      937                0.122           0.023   ***      0.131        0.024  ***

Nationality of patentholder
U. S.                                               1,642              -0.012           0.049            0.000           0.049
Germany                                              713                0.101           0.053    *       0.096           0.053        *
Other West European                                 1,240               0.075           0.050            0.072           0.050
Japan                                               1,154               0.042           0.051            0.045           0.051
Chi-squared (4) for region dummies                                              29.50           ***              20.30               ***
Chi-squared (2) for US,JP                                                       5.96             *               3.85

US Twin characteristics
US Twin exists                                      2,893              -0.089           0.016   ***      -0.094          0.016       ***
More than one US twin                                 95
No. of US forward cites = 1 or 2                     571
No. of US forward cites = 3/10                      1,327
No. of US forward cites = 10/20                      512
No. of US forward cites >20                          271
No. of US claims 6-9                                 751
No. of US claims = 10                                157
No. of US claims 11-15                               555
No. of US claims >15                                 846
US app. date prior to EPO                           1,495
Independent inventor (USPTO ass.)                    124

Log likelihood                                                             -2864.89                             -2810.72
Pseudo R-squared                                                             0.133                                0.148
Chi-squared (df)                                                          877.9 (37)                           977.4 (49)

+This is the increase in probability for a unit change to the dummy.
++One of the dummies predicts opposition perfectly, so the increase in degrees of freedom is only 12 = 13-1.
All equations include a complete set of 18 grant year dummies.
The left-out category is a corporate patent in semiconductor/software with number of states <6, number of claims <6, zero forward cites,
  and with holder from a country other than the "triad."


                                                                   34
                                               Table 4 (part 2)
                                          Probability of an Opposition
                              Binary probit estimation (4868 observations; 2021 opposed)

                                                      (3)                           (4)
                                            Dprob/dx+ Std. Error          Dprob/dx+ Std. Error

EPO characteristics
Biotech/pharma technology                      0.165        0.020   ***     0.181         0.020   ***
No. of forward EPO cites = 1                   0.063        0.022   ***     0.053         0.023   **
No. of forward EPO cites = 2/5                 0.168        0.021   ***     0.144         0.021   ***
No. of forward EPO cites = 6/10                0.236        0.035   ***     0.194         0.037   ***
No. of forward EPO cites >10                   0.397        0.051   ***     0.365         0.056   ***
No. of designated states 6-10                  0.129        0.022   ***     0.130         0.022   ***
No. of designated states >10                   0.165        0.024   ***     0.164         0.024   ***



No. of EPO claims >15                          0.084        0.018   ***     0.074         0.019   ***

Accelerated search requested                   -0.132       0.055   **      -0.132        0.055   **
Accelerated exam requested                      0.242       0.045   ***      0.239        0.046   ***
PCT application                                 0.119       0.023   ***      0.100        0.023   ***

Nationality of patentholder

Germany                                        0.091        0.023   ***     0.091         0.024   ***
Other West European                            0.068        0.018   ***     0.069         0.020   ***




US Twin characteristics
US Twin exists                                 -0.088       0.016   ***     -0.141        0.038   ***
More than one US twin                                                        0.007        0.055
No. of US forward cites = 1 or 2                                             0.008        0.040
No. of US forward cites = 3/10                                               0.090        0.036   **
No. of US forward cites = 10/20                                              0.171        0.042   ***
No. of US forward cites >20                                                  0.180        0.048   ***
No. of US claims 6-9                                                        -0.025        0.028
No. of US claims = 10                                                        0.000        0.027
No. of US claims 11-15                                                      -0.071        0.045
No. of US claims >15                                                        -0.037        0.029
US app. date prior to EPO                                                   -0.041        0.021    *
Independent inventor (USPTO ass.)                                            0.077        0.049

Log likelihood                                       -2870.21                        -2848.92
Pseudo R-squared                                       0.131                           0.138
Chi-squared (df)                                    867.2 (31)                      909.8 (42)

   Chi-squared for US patent vars.                                           42.6          11     ***




                                               35
                                         Table 5
                              Final Outcome of Oppositions

                                             With US   Percent with     Share of    With US
                                   Total      Twin       US Twin       outcomes      Twin


Opposition rejected                 266       173        65.0%
Opposition rejected on appeal        85        47        55.3%
Opposition rejected - total         351       220        62.7%          17.4%       21.4%

Patent amended                      355       207        58.3%
Patent amended on appeal            163        81        49.7%
Patent amended - total              518       288        55.6%          25.6%       28.0%

Patent revoked                      366       181        49.5%
Patent revoked on appeal            184        92        50.0%
Patent revoked - total              550       273        49.6%          27.2%       26.6%

Opposition closed                   150           81     54.0%          7.4%         7.9%

Opposition case pending             190        72        37.9%
Appeals case pending                262        94        35.9%
Case pending - total                452       166        36.7%          22.4%       16.1%

Total                              2021       1028       50.9%         100.0%       100.0%


                                           Summary

                                                       Share of Outcomes
                                                                       Computer
                                                         Biotech/     hardware/so   With US
Outcome                            Total      Total      pharma          ftware      Twin


Opposition rejected - total         351       22.4%      19.1%          26.8%        25.5%
Patent amended - total              518       33.0%      38.1%          26.1%        33.4%
Patent revoked - total              550       35.1%      31.5%          40.0%        31.7%
Opposition closed                   150       9.6%       11.3%          7.1%         9.4%
Total with an outcome              1569      100.0%     100.0%         100.0%       100.0%
Opposition pending                  452       22.4%      27.7%          13.6%        16.1%
Total                              2021




                                             36
                                                                                             Table 6
                                                                           Multinomial Logit for Opposition Outcomes
                                                                                                   2,021 Observations

                                                      Change in Probability Going from Dummy=0 to Dummy=1 (#obs.)                             Change in Probability Going from Dummy=0 to Dummy=1 (#obs.)
                                                  Opposition         Pending          Patent               Opposition    Patent revoked   Opposition     Pending        Patent       Opposition    Patent revoked
                                                rejected (351)        (452)        amended(518)           closed (150)       (550)      rejected (351)    (452)      amended(518)   closed (150)       (550)
Biotech/pharma                                      -2.9%            1.7%              10.3%                 1.4%          -10.5%           -3.9%         2.8%          11.7%         0.6%           -11.2%
EPO Citations 6/10                                  -3.2%             3.0%              5.5%                -0.6%           -4.6%
EPO Citations >10                                  -15.5%            14.1%             11.3%                 4.7%          -14.6%          -14.6%         12.6%         11.1%         3.9%           -13.0%
Designated states 6/10                              -1.1%             3.9%              1.1%                -1.0%           -2.9%
Designated states >10                               -0.2%             8.2%             -3.9%                -0.5%           -3.7%           0.6%          5.7%          -5.0%         0.4%            -1.7%
No. of EPO claims 6-9                               -1.7%            -3.9%              7.4%                -2.4%            0.6%
No. of EPO claims = 10                              -5.1%            -2.4%              8.2%                -5.5%            4.8%
No. of EPO claims 11-15                             -2.3%            -5.4%             13.2%                -4.4%           -1.0%           -0.2%         -2.7%         8.1%          -2.2%            -3.0%
No. of EPO claims >15                               -2.5%            -1.0%             13.5%                -0.8%           -9.2%           -0.4%          2.1%         8.4%           1.4%           -11.5%
Accelerated search requested                        4.5%             0.8%               3.7%                 1.8%          -10.8%
Accelerated exam requested                          -5.4%            5.2%               7.3%                -1.0%           -6.2%           -5.3%         5.3%          7.3%          -0.7%           -6.6%
PCT filing                                          -2.6%            2.4%              -0.2%                 1.3%           -0.9%
US patentholder                                      2.4%            -0.2%              2.0%                -3.1%           -1.1%
German patentholder                                  7.0%            -2.5%             -1.3%                -4.1%           0.9%             6.5%         -2.3%         -2.6%         -2.7%            1.1%
Japanese patentholder                               -0.3%            -1.4%             10.5%                -5.1%           -3.7%           -0.6%         -2.3%          9.1%         -3.5%           -2.7%
Same patent & opposer country                       -2.2%            -3.2%              4.1%                 5.0%           -3.8%           -2.1%         -3.1%          4.4%          4.9%           -4.1%
Multiple oppositions                               -10.7%             9.6%             -6.4%               -10.3%           17.9%          -10.9%         10.1%         -5.8%        -10.6%           17.3%
US twin exists                                       4.2%            -1.6%              3.2%                 1.8%           -7.6%            4.8%         -1.7%          3.2%          1.5%           -7.8%
Multiple US twins                                    1.1%             5.5%              2.8%                -1.0%           -8.4%            0.6%          5.4%          2.8%         -0.3%           -8.5%
USPTO - Indep. Inventor                              7.2%             0.2%             -3.8%                -0.6%           -3.1%

Entries in bold are significantly different from the rejection effects at the 5 percent level.
Entries in bold italics are significantly different from the rejection effects at the 10 percent level.
Bi-annual year dummies are included.
Only one (final) outcome per EPO patent included.




                                                                                                                 37
                                                   Figure 1

           EPO System                                          USPTO System
                                              Invention
                                                                                                      1 year
First to file                                                                    First to invent     (US only)

           Patent Application                                      Patent Application

                          18 mos
                          Secrecy
                                                                                          Rejected
                                Disclosure
                 Publication                                    Secrecy


                                      2-3 years

    Rejected

                                                      Disclosure
                Patent Issues                                       Patent Issues


                                Opposition
                                 9 mos




                                                                                        Re-examination
                                                 20 years
                                                                                                   Re- issue
                                 Litigation
                                   in all
                                  relevant
                                   states                                                  Litigation


                                                                     Possibly
                                                                     longer
                                                                     under 17-
                                                                     year term
                                                                     available
                                                                     pre-1995




                                                          38
                                                   Figure 2
                                      USPTO Re-exams and EPO Oppositions
                                             by year of patent grant
                   12.00%                                                                                       0.30%



                   10.00%                                                                                       0.25%



                   8.00%                                                                                        0.20%
Share in percent




                   6.00%                                                                                        0.15%



                   4.00%                                                                                        0.10%



                   2.00%                                                                                        0.05%



                   0.00%                                                                                        0.00%
                            1980   1982   1984     1986     1988      1990       1992    1994     1996   1998
                                                          Year of Patent Grant

                                          EPO oppositions (left hand scale)
                                          USPTO re-exams adjusted for truncation (right hand scale)
                                                                        Figure 3
                                                      USPTO Re-examinations by Grant Year 1980-1996
                                                              Selected Technology Classes
                                       1.0%
    Number of Cases per Patent Grant




                                       0.9%
                                       0.8%
                                       0.7%
                                       0.6%
                                       0.5%
                                       0.4%
                                       0.3%
                                       0.2%
                                       0.1%
                                       0.0%
                                              1980   1982       1984      1986        1988     1990       1992      1994        1996
                                                                             Year of Patent Grant




                                                            EPO Oppositions by Grant Year 1980-1996
                                                                 Selected Technology Classes

                                16.0%

                                14.0%

                                12.0%
Percent Opposed




                                10.0%

                                       8.0%

                                       6.0%

                                       4.0%

                                       2.0%

                                       0.0%
                                              1980   1982        1984      1986       1988      1990      1992       1994       1996
                                                                              Year of Patent Grant

                                                            Semiconductors/Software      Pharma/biotech     All other sectors




                                                                                        40
                                                            Figure 4
                                      Lag between Application and Re-examination (adjusted)
                                                       USPTO 1981-2000
                    450

                    400

                    350

                    300
Number of cases




                    250

                    200

                    150

                    100

                     50

                      0
                          0   1   2     3   4     5   6   7   8    9    10   11    12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20
                                                              Years since application


                                                Lag between Application and Opposition
                                                           EPO 1978-1999

                    600



                    500



                    400
Number of Patents




                    300



                    200



                    100



                     0
                          0   1   2    3    4     5   6   7   8    9    10   11    12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20
                                                              Years since application




                                                                        41
                                                          Figure 5
                                 Lag between Application and Final Re-examination Outcome
                                       USPTO 1981-2000 (Patents granted 1975-1999)
                   500

                   450

                   400

                   350
Number of cases




                   300

                   250

                   200

                   150

                   100

                    50

                     0
                         1   2   3        4       5       6       7       8       9       10        11        12    13    14    15    16    17    18   19   20   21
                                                                                  Years since application


                                     Lag between Application and Final Opposition Outcome
                                      Biotech/pharma/semiconductor/software classes only
                                           EPO 1978-1999 (Patents granted 1980-1997)
                   300



                   250



                   200
 Number of Cases




                   150



                   100



                    50



                     0
                         0   1   2    3       4       5       6       7       8       9        10        11    12    13    14    15    16    17   18   19   20   21
                                                                                  Years since application




                                                                                      42
                      Figure 6
                EPO-USPTO Twin Study
                  Sampling Strategy

    EPO Opposed                       EPO Control
      Patents                           Patents

      BP - 1,262                       BP - 903
      SS – 765                        SS - 1,958
     Total – 2,027                   Total – 2,861




 USPTO Equivalents                USPTO Equivalents
    to Opposed                       to Control
      Patents                         Patents

  BP – 519 (41.1%)                BP – 459 (50.8%)
  SS - 513 (67.1%)                SS-1,486 (75.9%)
Total – 1,032 (50.9%)           Total – 1,945 (68.0%)



  BP = biotechnology/pharmaceuticals
  SS = semiconductors/software/computers




                          43
                                                              Figure 7
                                                  Sample of 2021 Opposed Patents
                    60.0%




                    50.0%




                    40.0%
Share of outcomes




                    30.0%




                    20.0%




                    10.0%




                    0.0%
                            Opposition rejected         Patent amended                  Patent revoked                  Opposition closed
                                                                    Opposition outcomes

                                  All opposed patents   Opposed patents with US twins       Opposed patents litigated in US
