                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            LONGEVITY AND LIFE CYCLE SAVINGS


                                            David E. Bloom
                                            David Canning
                                            Bryan Graham


                                          Working Paper 8808
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8808


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2002




The authors would like to thank Angus Deaton, Allen Kelley, Andrew Mason, and Larry Rosenberg for
helpful discussions and comments. An early version of this paper was presented at meetings of the World
Health Organization’s Commission on Macroeconomics and Health (Working Group One) and at a
conference on demography and economic performance held at the Harvard University Center for Population
and Development Studies. Financial support was provided from the Economic Advisory Service of the World
Health Organization. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by David E. Bloom, David Canning and Bryan Graham. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Longevity and Life Cycle Savings
David E. Bloom, David Canning and Bryan Graham
NBER Working Paper No. 8808
March 2002
JEL No. E21, I12



                                              ABSTRACT

        We add health and longevity to a standard model of life cycle saving and show that, under
plausible assumptions, increases in longevity lead to higher savings rates at every age, even when
retirement is endogenous. In a stable population these higher savings rates are offset by increased old age
dependency, but during the disequilibrium phase, when longevity is rising, the effect on aggregate savings
rates can be substantial. Our results explain the boom in savings in East Asia during 1950-90 as a
combination of rising life expectancy and falling youth dependency, though they predict that savings in
the region will return to more normal levels as populations age. We also find that falling life expectancies
in Africa are associated with declining savings rates.




David E. Bloom                       David Canning                         Bryan Graham
School of Public Health              Department of Economics               Department of Economics
Harvard University                   Queen's University of Belfast         Harvard University
and NBER                             d.canning@qub.ac.uk                   bgraham@fas.harvard.edu
dbloom@hsph.harvard.edu              44-2890-273281                        617-496-4665
617-432-0654
                                      1. Introduction



       The savings rate is among the most studied macroeconomic aggregates, reflecting

its importance for understanding a wide range of economic phenomena. How much

society chooses to save today for consumption tomorrow has important implications for

the welfare of the elderly, economic growth, and consumption levels. Savings rates differ

across countries and across time within countries, often dramatically. The benchmark

model for explaining these differences has been the life cycle model of savings.

       According to the life cycle model of savings people save when young to finance

consumption during retirement. In theory (in the absence of a bequest motive), the

dissaving of the old should offset the saving of the young, so that in a stable population

there is no aggregate saving. However, if the age structure of the population is

unbalanced, as occurs during a demographic transition, the saving behaviors of different

cohorts may not cancel out, and aggregate savings, or dissavings, may occur. In addition,

Fry and Mason (1982) and Mason (1981, 1987, 1988) point out that in economies

undergoing rapid economic growth the wage incomes of the young are high relative to

the retirement incomes of the old (which were saved out of past, lower wages), and this

relative concentration of income among the high savings rate group should generate

positive aggregate savings. Investigators have studied these age structure and growth

effects extensively (see, for example, Higgins 1998; Higgins and Williamson 1997;

Kelley and Schmidt 1996; Leff 1969; Masson, Bayoumi, and Samiei 1998), and have

found that, in general, national savings rates are higher when dependency rates are low

and economic growth is rapid.




                                             1
        While the empirical evidence tends to support the main predictions of the life

cycle theory, a number of puzzles remain, in particular the extraordinary increase in

national savings rates observed in East Asia between 1950 and 1990. Such large swings

in savings are difficult to explain in the context of the standard life cycle model. Changes

in the age structure of the population and in the distribution of income between cohorts

account for only a small part of this upswing in saving. Household data from East Asia

indicate that the major factor driving the surge was an increase in the rate of saving at

every age (see Deaton 1992 for Thailand and Deaton and Paxson 1993, 1997, 1998 for

Taiwan). Such across the board savings surges cannot be reconciled with standard life

cycle theory.

        Recently Lee, Mason, and Miller (1998, 2000) have suggested that the reason for

this surge in savings was the rapidly improving life expectancy in the region. By

calibrating a simulation model with a fixed retirement age, they argue that the need to

finance a longer period of retirement can account for the surge in savings.

        The aim of this paper is to investigate empirically whether changes in longevity

play an important role in determining national savings. While the paper focuses on

savings, it is part of a larger literature that is re-evaluating the role of health and life

expectancy on economic behavior (Bils and Klenow 2000; Bloom and Canning 2000,

Bloom and Canning 2001; Kalemli-Ozcan, Ryder, and Weil 1998; Meltzer 1995; Strauss

and Thomas 1998).

        We begin by investigating the role of longevity in a dynamic optimization model

of life cycle savings. We take decisions to participate in the labor market to be

endogenous, allowing agents to choose their retirement age. Under the assumption that




                                                2
consumption and leisure are normal goods, so that the demand for both rises when wealth

increases, we show that a rise in life expectancy increases the optimal fraction of life

spent working, but not by enough to offset the increased need for retirement income.

Therefore savings rates rise at every age as longevity rises in order to meet the increased

need for assets to finance consumption during retirement. However, increased longevity

is likely to go hand in hand with general health improvements that may increase the

productivity and wages of the elderly, giving an incentive to postpone retirement. For

example, Fogel (1994, 1997) argues that not only has life expectancy increased, but

disability among the aged has also declined dramatically in the United States over the last

100 years. Health improvements that both increase longevity and reduce morbidity may

allow a sufficient increase in the length of working life to allow savings rates to fall.

       Ideally, we would like to separate out the effects of increased longevity from

those of reduced morbidity. However, in the absence of comprehensive data on ill health

we use life expectancy as a measure of health in general that proxies for both longevity

and lack of disability. It follows that while the pure effect of improved longevity on

savings is positive, in practice it will be a proxy for general improvements in health, and

its overall effect on optimal savings is ambiguous.

       We construct an empirical model of aggregate savings that includes longevity as a

determinant and estimate it using cross-country panel data. While the inclusion of life

expectancy in models of aggregate savings is rare, it has been used on occasion and found

to have a positive effect (see, for example, Asian Development Bank 1997; Doshi 1994).

       We aim to improve upon these empirical studies in a number of ways. First, we

tackle the issue of how to incorporate age structure effects. While Kelley and Schmidt




                                               3
(1996) and Leff (1969) use young and old age dependency rates to model age structure,

Higgins (1998) allows the size of each five-year age cohort to have an effect, although he

constrains these effects to lie on a cubic function for estimation purposes. We employ an

encompassing model, but find that using dependency rates fits the data better than a cubic

in age and has the advantage of being much easier to interpret.

        Second, while we might expect savings rates to rise with longevity, important

nonlinearities may be present in the relationship. We investigate these by allowing for a

nonlinear functional form and by separating life expectancy into discreet (five-year)

bands and estimating the effect on savings of moving between bands. We find some

evidence that savings increase sharply with life expectancy up to about age 65, but that

the effect then levels off.

        Third, in addition to the need to smooth consumption over the life cycle, a number

of other factors also affect the savings decision. Credit constraints may mean that

borrowing and aggregate savings rates depend on the level of income. Habit formation in

relation to consumption may boost savings during periods of rapid income growth.

Mandatory pay-as-you-go pension schemes mean that consumption during retirement

may be financed by transfers from the young, thereby reducing the need for life cycle

savings. In developing countries where people tend to have large families the elderly may

rely more on intra-household transfers and less on savings as a method of old age

support. Savings rates may also depend on the availability of financial markets and may

be influenced by the likelihood of inflation, which could erode the value of financial

assets. To account for these factors we include a range of additional variables and use

fixed effects to control for institutional and cultural differences across countries.




                                               4
       Our results agree with the ideas put forward by Lee, Mason, and Miller (2000),

namely, that increases in life expectancy play a large role in savings behavior, and in

particular explain the observed surge in savings in East Asia. They also complement the

results of Hurd, McFadden and Gan (1998) who find evidence using US household data

that people with higher subjective survival probabilities save more.

       While increases in longevity may increase the savings rate at every age, the effect

on aggregate savings is transitory. Increases in longevity imply that the stable age

structure has a higher proportion of elderly, and that in the long run higher age-specific

saving rates are offset by greater numbers of elderly who are dissaving (note that this

balancing effect may take 50 years or more to come about). The effects of increases in

life expectancy in East Asia on saving may be great, but our theory suggests that they

will dissipate as the population ages.

       The life cycle theory of saving predicts that in a stable population with no

economic growth, net savings will be zero. This suggests that models that include age

structure effects but not longevity are misspecified. High rates of old age dependency

need not reduce overall savings if they are associated with high levels of life expectancy

and the dis-savings of the old are matched by the savings of the young for their

retirement. According to our theory, only age structures that are in dis-equilibrium, given

current life expectancy, will affect aggregate savings, but standard models of age

structure effects do not distinguish between stable populations and dis-equilibrium age

structures. The fact that many countries have close to stable populations tends to drive the

age structure effects in these models toward zero. Adding longevity to the relationship

allows us to uncover the large effects on savings rates that occur when the age structures




                                              5
change at a given life expectancy (for example, because of changes in fertility) and when

health improves and life expectancy rises within a given population age structure.



                                            2. Theory



We assume that agents maximize their utility over their lifetimes, choosing how much to

work and how much to consume, and investigate how changing life expectancy affects

their choice. We follow Bils and Klenow (2000) and Meltzer (1995), who study

investments in education, and assume that agents have a known lifetime, T.

       For simplicity we assume that longevity is fixed exogenously, ignoring the

possibility that it is linked to consumption and to spending on health care (see, for

instance, Philipson and Becker 1998 for an analysis that allows health status and

longevity to be endogenous). We also ignore any effects of uncertainty about the timing

of death, effects that may be important (see, for example, Leung 1994, Kalemli-Ozcan

and Weil 2002).

       We assume that agents seek to maximize lifetime utility given by

                                     T

                                     ∫e
                                          −δ t
                                                 U (c t , l t , ht )dt                  (2.1)
                                     0


where c is consumption, l is leisure, h is health, and δ is their discount rate and the index

t is age. We assume that the time path of health is exogenously fixed. Agents choose their

leisure and consumption paths subject to the constraints

                                ct ≥ 0, 1 ≥ lt ≥ 0, WT ≥ 0                              (2.2)

where the stock of wealth, Wt, evolves according to




                                                       6
                                  dWt
                                      = rWt + (1 − lt ) wt − ct                             (2.3)
                                   dt

We assume that the time path of wages, wt, the interest rate, r, and the initial stock of

wealth, W0, are fixed exogenously. Equation (2.3) gives the savings (the addition to

wealth) of the agent.

       Assuming that the instantaneous utility function U is increasing and strictly

concave in each argument, it is straightforward to show (by forming the Hamiltonian and

applying the maximum principle - see, for example, Berck and Sydaeter 1992), that the

optimal path of consumption and leisure satisfies

                                             dU d 2U dl d 2U dh
                                  (r − δ )     +       +
                           dc                dc dcdl dt dcdh dt
                              =                                                             (2.4)
                           dt                    d 2U
                                                − 2
                                                  dc

and

         dU       dU                   dU       dU                dU       dU
             = wt     if 1 < l < 0,        ≥ wt     if l = 1,         ≤ wt     if l = 0     (2.5)
         dlt      dct                  dlt      dct               dlt      dct

       Agents work up to the point where their marginal utility of extra leisure equals the

marginal utility of the consumption goods they could purchase if they worked.

Retirement occurs ( l = 1 ) when the marginal utility of leisure, even with no work,

exceeds the marginal utility of consumption times the wage rate. Let us denote the

optimal plan by (ct* , lt* ) , which produces the time path of net wealth holdings Wt* .

       The declining marginal utility of consumption means that the bottom line of

equation (2.4) is positive. The time path of consumption depends on the rate of time

preference and the complementarity of consumption with leisure and health.




                                                 7
Consumption will tend to rise over time if the interest rate exceeds the rate of time

preference.

        As it stands, the model does not imply that people ever retire. For retirement to

take place we need the wage rate to decline or the utility of leisure to rise as people age.

For example, if people’s health declines over time, this may lower their productivity and

wages. In addition, if health and leisure are complements (so that lowering health raises

the disutility of working), this may increase the marginal utility of leisure. It seems

reasonable to make assumptions about preferences and wage rates such that people plan

to retire at some point and that they save for this retirement – making our model

compatible with the life cycle model of saving.

        We make two assumptions. The first assumption (assumption 1) is that, given

initial wealth holdings of zero at the start of life, the optimal path (for any T) has Wt * ≥ 0

for all 0 ≤ t ≤ T . This implies that people never go into debt to finance consumption.

Sufficient conditions to ensure this are quite easy to find. For example, if the wage rate

falls over time while the marginal utility of leisure increases, work and earnings will be

concentrated in the early part of life. Provided r is large enough, so that consumption is

level or skewed toward the end of life, the concentration of earnings when young and the

need for consumption when old will ensure positive wealth holdings at all times. Rather

than impose conditions on the utility function and wage profile that ensure people save

for retirement, it seems easier to assume 1 directly.

        We also assume (assumption 2) that both consumption and leisure are normal

goods, that is,




                                               8
                             dct*      dl *
                                  ≥ 0, t ≥ 0 , for all 0 ≤ t ≤ T .
                             dW0      dW0

       We assume that an increase in initial wealth increases consumption and leisure at

all times. The alternative would be that an increase in wealth causes people to decrease

their hours of work to such an extent that their optimal consumption falls or to increase

consumption to such an extent that their leisure time falls. While these outcomes are

possible, they seem unlikely. Now consider what happens to the agents’ optimal plan

when we increase longevity, keeping everything else the same. We are particularly

interested in the savings rate defined as

                            y t − ct
                     st =            , where yt = rWt + (1 − lt ) wt        (2.7)
                                yt

       Our proposition is: let W0 = 0 . Under assumptions 1 and 2 an increase in

longevity increases the savings rate at every age.




       Our proof goes as follows. Let (ct* , lt* ) be the original optimal plan for life

expectancy T, and let (ct** , lt** ) be the new optimal plan when life expectancy rises. By

assumption 1, wealth at time T in the new optimal plan is non-negative, that is, WT** ≥ 0 .

Now let us keep behavior after T fixed and restrict our attention to the time interval

[0, T]. As the new optimal plan cannot be improved upon, it maximizes

                                        T

                                        ∫e
                                             −δ t
                                                    U (c t , l t , ht )dt
                                        0


subject to

                                ct ≥ 0, 1 ≥ lt ≥ 0, WT ≥ WT**


                                                          9
However, this is the same problem, and has the same solution, as maximizing over [0, T]

subject to

                                  ct ≥ 0, 1 ≥ lt ≥ 0, WT ≥ 0

but with W0 = −WT**e − rT . This is the original problem of maximizing over [0, T], but

with lower initial wealth. By assumption 2, it follows that on [0, T] we have

ct** ≤ ct* , lt** ≤ lt* . Using equation (2.7) it is easy to show that the savings rate is

increasing in y and decreasing in c, and it follows immediately that s0** ≥ s0* . At each

point in time, wage income under the new plan is higher than before and consumption is

lower. By equation (2.3), wealth accumulates more quickly under the new plan, and as

time passes, interest payments on the rising stock of wealth compound this effect. It

follows that at every point in time income under the new plan is higher, and consumption

is lower, giving a higher savings rate.

        The rise in savings rates at every age is consistent with the evidence on household

consumption in Taiwan and Thailand, where the boom in savings was caused by an

upward shift of the entire age-specific savings rate schedule.

        The proposition deals with a pure increase in longevity, with no improvement in

health status as people age. In practice, increases in longevity will be associated with

better overall health, and empirical regressions will pick up both effects if we do not

control for morbidity separately.

        Suppose that longevity increases from T to T ′ = λT , but at the same time health

status improves by delaying the onset of the effects of aging proportionately. This implies




                                                 10
that productivity and health status stay higher longer, and we have wλ′ t = wt , hλ′ t = ht .

With these proportional health and longevity improvements agents maximize

                                     T′
                                           − δt
                                      ∫e          U (ct , lt , ht′ )dt                            (2.8)
                                      0

subject to

                                                            dWt
                ct ≥ 0, 1 ≥ lt ≥ 0, WT ′ ≥ 0,                   = rWt + (1 − lt ) wt′ − ct        (2.9)
                                                             dt

        By a simple change of variable ( z = t / λ , K z = Wt / λ ) we can show that this is

equivalent to choosing the time paths c and l so as to maximize

                                     T
                                   λ ∫ e − λδzU (c z , l z , hz )dz                              (2.10)
                                     0

subject to

                                                           dK z
               c z ≥ 0, 1 ≥ l z ≥ 0, K T ≥ 0,                   = λrK z + (1 − l z ) w z − c z   (2.11)
                                                            dz

It is easy to see that if r = δ = 0 the new maximization problem is identical to the original

problem, except that the objective function is multiplied by λ . This has the same solution

as the original problem, and means that the optimal decisions at time λt in the new

problem are the same as those at time t originally. For example, if agents save at a

constant rate until retirement, the effect of increasing longevity and improving health

together is that agents extend their working lives proportionately and save at exactly the

same rate as before. Note, however, that in equations (2.10) and (2.11) this

proportionality result depends on the interest rate and the rate of time preference being

zero. If these are positive, the longer time horizon in itself can have real effects on

saving. The longer horizon gives a greater time for the benefits of compound interest to


                                                      11
become apparent, and is formally equivalent to an equal increase in the rate of interest

and rate of time preference in the original model. This will tend to increase the planned

growth rate of consumption (and increase the savings of the young) if the interest rate

exceeds the rate of time preference.

        More generally, an improvement in longevity may be associated with a greater or

less than proportional improvement in health status at each age. Our simple theory

suggests that the pure effect of greater longevity is to increase savings rates, but that if

the increased longevity is associated with better health when old, and in particular with

higher productivity and lower disutility of work than before, the effect is ambiguous.

        In practice, our simple life cycle theory faces many challenges. Institutional

arrangements in many countries mandate retirement between the ages of 60 and 65.

These may mean that increases in longevity lead to increases in savings rates even if

health also improves (Lee and Tulijapurkar 1997). The need for savings may, however,

be reduced in countries with social security systems that provide transfer payments to the

old. Likewise, transfers within families may support people in their old age, reducing the

need for savings.

        We try to take account of these institutional and cultural differences across

countries by allowing for country fixed effects in our estimation. In addition we allow

the magnitude of life cycle savings to depend on a county’s income level to allow for the

possibility that the importance of life cycle saving varies with the level of development.




                                               12
                                          3. Data


There are several conceptually different measures of aggregate savings. We start with the

following identity:

                                 Y = C + I + G + (X - M)                               (3.1)

where Y is gross domestic product (GDP), C is private consumption, I is gross

investment (private plus public), G is government consumption, and (X - M) is net

exports (the trade balance). Gross domestic savings (GDS) is the sum of public and

private savings. Letting T be tax revenues, T - G is public savings and Y - C - T is private

savings. Thus,

                             GDS = Y – C – G = I + (X - M)                             (3.2)

so that GDS equals gross income that is not consumed, or in terms of the accumulation of

wealth, gross investment plus net acquisition of foreign assets. The gross domestic

savings rate is GDS/Y.

       Our source for GDS is the World Development Indicators 1999 (World Bank

1999), which includes annual data from 1960 to 1997. Gross domestic income only

measures the value of income generated by economic activity within a country. People

living within a country will also receive income from their ownership of foreign assets

and may receive transfer payments from abroad. Gross national product (GNP) is given

by GNP = Y + NFI, where NFI is net factor income from abroad plus international

transfers (for instance, net foreign aid inflows and net remittance inflows from overseas

workers). This yields gross national savings (GNS) as follows:

                          GNS = Y + NFI – C – G = GDS + NFI                            (3.3)




                                             13
       The gross national savings rate is GNS/GNP. Conceptually, gross national savings

is a superior measure than gross domestic savings, because it reflects total income,

independent of its source. Data on gross national savings are available from World

Development Indicators 1999, but only from 1970 onwards. In addition to the reported

gross national savings rates, we can calculate an alternative measure of gross national

savings from 1960 to 1997 using income, savings, and data on net factor income from

abroad contained in the World Development Indicators 1999. This has the advantage of

wider data coverage but has the drawback that it excludes international transfer

payments.

       This gives us three measures of the savings rate: GDS, GNS properly measured

from 1970, and a GNS measure that excludes international transfer payments from 1960.

Savings are quite volatile from year to year, and we follow Higgins (1998) and average

over successive five-year intervals to smooth out business cycle effects.

       These measures fall far short of theoretically correct measures of savings for a

number of reasons. First, GDS and GNP are gross measures. Conceptually, a net measure

that subtracts an allowance for the depreciation of capital from both income and gross

investment would be superior. Second, income from the depletion of natural resources

actually involves a running down of capital stocks and represents dissaving. Finally,

income should include capital gains on a country’s stock of physical capital, overseas

assets, and natural resources. However, the lack of suitable data means that we are

limited to our imperfect gross savings measures. When we measure aggregate savings we

have not only household savings, but also government savings and profit retention by the

corporate sector. However, these additional forms of saving will not affect total savings if




                                             14
households, who are their ultimate owners, count these forms of saving as part of their

own savings.

        In our analysis we exclude socialist countries because in these cases savings and

investment are controlled almost entirely by the public sector; we have no reason to

expect their savings behavior to fit the optimizing life cycle model. We also exclude

countries with populations of less than 1 million, and major oil producers (with a value of

oil production in excess of 2.5% of GDP) because we do not take account of the

extremely large capital gains and losses caused by changes in oil prices that dominate the

economies of these countries.

        Table 1 presents the definitions, sources, and coverage of the savings rate data

used in this study. Table 2 provides simple descriptive statistics on the different savings

rate variables, and shows that the means, standard deviations, and maximums are

reasonably comparable across measures. In table 3 we report the correlations between the

different savings rate measures. While the GDS and GNSII data are highly correlated,

GNSI has a correlation significantly less than one, indicating that taking account of

international transfer payments significantly affects our measure of savings.

        Table 4 provides some simple descriptive statistics on the explanatory variables

we use. Demographic data on life expectancy and age structure come from the United

Nations (1998). Real income per capita and the GDP deflator are from Penn World

Tables (5.6), (See Summers and Heston (1991) for a description of this data set.) The

ratio of liquid liabilities to GDP is from International Economic Data Base (1997).



[insert tables 1, 2, 3, and 4 about here]




                                             15
                              4. Explaining Aggregate Savings



The average savings rate can be written as the sum of the savings rate of the different age

groups in a population weighted by their income shares. That is, the average savings rate

is

                                        T
                                               Yi T    P y
                                   s = ∑ si      =∑ s i i i                                 (4.1)
                                        i =0   Y i =0 P y

where si is the savings rate of age group i and Yi/Y is its share of total income. A group’s

share of income can be further decomposed into its share of total population , Pi/P, and

the average income of its members as a proportion of the average income of the

population, y i / y . This implies that the age structure of the population matters. In

addition, to the extent that growth changes the distribution of income between cohorts it

will affect the savings rate. This effect is likely to go in different directions for different

cohorts, implying that the growth rate effect enters interactively with the age structure.

However, based on the proposition stated above, the effect of increased longevity is to

raise the savings rate of every age group, which suggests that we can simply add some

function of life expectancy to the relationship.

        Table 5 reports simple regressions where we explain the gross domestic savings

rate averaged over a 5-year period, using economic growth for the previous 10 years, and

life expectancy and some age structure variables measured at the beginning of the period.

That is, we measure the age structure effects in equation (4.1) directly, while the

distribution of average income between cohorts depends on the growth rate and the age-




                                                16
specific savings rate depends on life expectancy (which proxies for both longevity and

overall health status). Our theoretical model in section 2 also suggests that the real

interest rate should play a role. However, in common with most empirical work we find

little effect of interest rates on savings (see, for example, Higgins 1998), and for the sake

of simplicity we exclude it.



[insert table 5 about here]



        Column (1) of table 5 reports a regression that includes life expectancy, the

growth rate of income, and 17 population age groups (by 5-year intervals from zero to

84). Note that in column (1) we do not report the individual cohort effects. Both life

expectancy and economic growth appear to have positive and statistically significant

effects on the average savings rate. While we do not report the individual cohort effects,

we can reject the hypothesis that they are all zero (the F test at the bottom of column (1)).

While the age structure matters, for tractability we want to compress the age structure

effects into a smaller number of parameters. In column (2) we estimate a restricted

model, where the coefficients on age structure are constrained to lie on a cubic equation

(that is, the coefficient on the population share of cohort i, φ i say, can be written as

φ i = α 0 + α 1i + α 2 i 2 + α 3i 3 ) with the addition of a step function, with steps at ages 20 and

60. This encompasses the dependency approach used, for example, by Kelley and

Schmidt (1996) and the flexible function approach used by Higgins (1998).

Experimentation showed that splits at 20 and 60 performed better than the conventional




                                                 17
dependency rate taken as 0-14 and 65+. In addition, adding a further step at 40 did not

significantly improve the fit of the step function approach.

        A test of the restrictions implied on the age structure effects when using the cubic

functional form plus the dependency rate approach does not reject these restrictions (the

F test at the bottom of column (2)). It follows that the data accept these restrictions and

we can reduce the number of age effect parameters to be estimated.

        We can go further and test whether both the cubic functional form and the

dependency rate step function are required. Column (3) reports a model where the age

structure effects are modeled as lying on a cubic function alone. Now both the linear and

squared terms become statistically significant. The age effects are close to an inverse U,

with young and old cohorts depressing savings and the middle age groups increasing the

savings rate. However, an F test of the hypothesis that the dependency rate parameters are

jointly zero (bottom of column (3) is rejected. Thus the combined model appears to fit the

data better than the cubic function alone.

        In column (4) we estimate the relationship allowing only the dependency rate

effects of age structure. We find that the presence of large proportions of elderly or young

people in the population depresses the savings rate, with the effect of the old being

particularly large. Now, however, we cannot reject the exclusion of the cubic age effects

(F test at the bottom of column (4)). Thus the age structure effects can be modeled

adequately by the effects of the dependency rates, and we do not require polynomial age

structure effects.

        Table 6 repeats the analysis carried out in table 5, but adds fixed effects to capture

any country-specific effects that may affect savings rates. Despite the addition of fixed




                                              18
effects, the results in table 6 are remarkably similar to those in table 5. Life expectancy

again has a positive and significant effect, with a 10-year increase in longevity being

associated with a rise in savings rates of about 4.5 percentage points. In addition, our tests

on how to model the age structure effects follow a similar pattern to those in table 5. The

data accept the simplification of the age structure effects to the encompassing model and

then to the dependency rate model, but not to the cubic functional form. We take the

model with dependency rate effects as our base model and our starting point for further

investigations.



[insert table 6 about here]



       So far we have assumed that the age structure effect is linear, but there is no

reason for this to be so. For example, if retirement at age 65 is mandatory or

conventional, we might expect life expectancy in excess of 65 to have a greater impact on

savings than life expectancy increases before 65. In column (1) of table 7 we add two life

expectancy variables: life expectancy itself and life expectancy when it is greater or equal

to 65. We find that the coefficient on life expectancy in excess of 65 is negative, though

not significant. This suggests that increasing life expectancy past 65 has less impact on

the savings rate than increases below 65.



[insert table 7 about here]




                                              19
        In column (2) of table 7 we repeat the estimation with fixed effects. In this case

the post-65 variable has a coefficient close to zero. We also tried using a life expectancy

squared term and found a similar pattern of falling impact of increasing life expectancy as

life expectancy rises.

        In column (3) of table 7 we report the results of grouping life expectancy into

five-year intervals and estimating separately the impact of each life expectancy grouping

on the savings rate. The estimated coefficients are graphed as a function of life

expectancy in figure 1. We can see a pattern of savings rising rapidly with life expectancy

up to about age 65, but then being fairly flat. The result remains similar when we add

fixed effects in regression (4).



[insert figure 1 about here]



        These results suggest that the response of savings to life expectancy may be quite

complex. Life expectancy may be having an effect on the savings rate, in addition to the

longevity effect, through changes in uncertainty or associated changes in morbidity. In

addition, life expectancy data is very sensitive to infant mortality rates, while in practice

it is the future survival prospects of the agent (conditional on their current age) that

matters for saving decisions. The results, however, suggest that the largest impact of

increases in longevity on savings rates may occur early in the development process when

life expectancy is low.

        In table 8 we test the model’s robustness by adding a number of additional control

variables. One possible complication is that the effect of economic growth and age




                                              20
structure on savings behavior may be interactive. Economic growth increases the relative

incomes of the young and so not only increases average savings but increases the effect

of a large young cohort. This leads to “growth tilting” (a tilt in the relationship between

population age shares and overall savings rates) so that the impact of a large young

cohort on savings is larger in a fast-growing economy. In regression (1) we add the

interactive terms between economic growth and the dependency rates that are implied by

growth tilting. Both interactive terms are negative and significant, implying that, as

predicted, the impact of economic growth on the savings rate is highest when a large

share of the population is of working age. In column (2) of table 8 we add the log of

income per capita (in purchasing power parity terms). Countries with high income per

capita will usually have high wage rates. High wages have both an income and a

substitution effect on labor supply decisions and the retirement age. For example, if the

income effect dominates, people will want more leisure and will retire earlier and have to

save more for retirement. By contrast, if the substitution effect dominates, higher wages

may induce people to work for longer, thereby reducing the need for retirement income

and savings. We find that savings rise with the level of income per capita, and the

estimate of the effect of life expectancy on savings, though still statistically significant, is

somewhat reduced.



[insert table 8 about here]



        In column (3) we add liquid liabilities as a percentage of GDP and the rate of

inflation as explanatory variables. The ratio of liquid liabilities to GDP is a measure of




                                               21
the relative size of the financial system and may indicate opportunities for saving. While

we have not included the real interest rate, periods of high inflation tend to be associated

with a highly negative real rate of interest and a flight from financial. However, in

practice neither of these variables seems to play a significant role in determining savings

behavior.

       In column (2) of table 8 we added log income per capita. In column (4) we add

income per capita interactively with the life cycle model. This allows for the idea that the

importance of life cycle savings depends on the level of development, proxied by a

country’s income level. Life cycle saving is multiplied by

                                                     y
                                       1 + β log
                                                   y max
                                                                                         (4.2)

where y is income per capita and y max is the highest income per capita in the sample.

The positive estimate of β suggests that life cycle saving is more important in richer

countries, likely because in poorer countries people rely more heavily on family support

structures.

       A serious problem with the results in table 8 is the potential for reverse causation

from the savings rate to the level of income and the growth rate of income. For example,

in many growth studies the savings rate is the key variable that affects the pace of

economic growth and the steady-state level of income. Even though we measure income

at the start of the 5-year period over which we average the savings rate and measure

income growth over the previous 10 years, there is still the problem that the savings rate

may be correlated over time so that it can be correlated with lagged income and lagged

growth purely though a feedback effect. In addition, as well as a feedback from savings




                                             22
to income, there is potentially a feedback from income to health, implying that higher

savings may be giving rise to higher life expectancy.

       To deal with this issue we use an instrumental variable approach, treating income

levels and growth rates, and life expectancy, as potentially endogenous. The results are

reported in table 9. The instruments we use are latitude, percentage of land area within

100 kilometers of the coast or a major waterway, and percentage of land area in the

tropics. Gallup, Sachs, and Mellinger (1999) argue that these geographical factors are

major forces in determining both the level of income and the rate of growth. In addition,

Bloom and Sachs (1998) argue that tropical location is a major contributory factor in ill

health and premature death. These variables are good instruments in the sense that they

predict both income level and life expectancy quite well, and it is difficult to see how

they could affect savings directly, rather than through their effects on income and health.2



[insert table 9 about here]



       In column (1) of table 9 we report our simple regression, but instrument the

growth rate of income per capita. When we instrument the growth rate of income it

changes sign from a positive effect to a negative effect. In column (2) we instrument both

the growth rate of income and the level of life expectancy. While the coefficient on

growth is still negative, the coefficient on life expectancy stays positive and significant.

In column (3) we again instrument income growth, but allow for interactive effects and

growth tilting. The results are now more in line with theory: economic growth increases




                                              23
the savings rate, particularly when a large share of the population is of working age. In

column (4) we add the level of income per capita to the regression, but instrument it (and

the growth rate of income). Income per capita no longer has a significant impact on the

savings rate when we instrument it. The same holds true in column (5) of table 9 where

we interact the level of income with the life cycle savings model, using the formula given

in equation (4.2). Once again the effect of the level of income on the savings rate is not

significant when it is instrumented. These results suggest that while the effects of life

expectancy on the savings rate and the “growth tilting” effect are robust to using

instruments, the effects of the level of income on saving are not robust.3

         Throughout the analysis we have used gross domestic savings as our savings

measure. In table 10 we report the coefficients on life expectancy we obtain by

replicating our analysis using different measures of the savings rate. In each case the

regressions include income growth and the youth and old age dependency rates, as well

as a set of time dummies. Column (1) of table 10 reports ordinary least squares (OLS)

results, while column (2) includes fixed effects and column (3) instruments the growth

rate of income. For all for savings measures both the OLS and instrumental variable

regressions give coefficients on life expectancy that are positive and statistically

significant. However, the fixed effects regressions only find statistically significant

results for life expectancy when we use the gross domestic savings rate at local prices and

our constructed measure of gross national savings. Using the World Bank’s measure of


2
  Geography might affect the marginal product of capital and the equilibrium interest rate, and so have an
effect on the savings rate. However, a much more likely scenario is that the stock of capital will adjust to
equalize its marginal productivity across geographical zones.
3
  The coefficient on the income variable is estimated with very little precision when we use instrumental
variables. Thus while it is not significantly different from zero, it is also not significantly different from the
coefficient in the un-instrumented estimates. Our data lack the required exogenous variation to precisely
determine the magnitude of this coefficient.


                                                        24
gross national savings (limited to the period 1970 onwards), life expectancy loses its

significance with fixed effects. This anomalous result could be due to the shorter time

span for which the World Bank data are available (i.e., 1970 to 1997).4



[insert table 10 about here]



        Our model predicts a boost to savings when life expectancy increases, but this

boost is temporary and is subsequently offset by a rising old age dependency rate as

people age. The life-cycle model predicts that when the age structure reaches equilibrium,

net savings should be zero. Figure 2 shows the empirical relationship between life

expectancy and the youth and old age dependency rates in 1990. As we would expect,

higher life expectancy is associated with higher old age dependency; however, it is also

associated with a much lower youth dependency rate. To some extent this is the result of

greater survival into older age groups, but it also reflects the low fertility rates that are

common in countries with low mortality rates. Thus the model predicts a boom in savings

during demographic transitions when life expectancy rises but old age dependency is still

low.



[insert figure 2 about here]



        In figure 3 we plot actual and predicted savings rates for our cross-section of

countries in 1990 based on the results in regression (3) of table 9. This allows for life


4
 The fixed effects approach removes the effect of cross-country differences in life expectancy and depends
only on the impact of changes in life expectancy over time.


                                                    25
expectancy, age structure, and growth tilting effects, as well as worldwide time dummies.

It does not include fixed effects, so the model has to predict the average level of the

savings rate as well as how it changes over time. The model seems to perform fairly well,

even without fixed effects.



[insert figure 3 about here]



       We now investigate how good the model is at picking up the time path of savings.

In figure 4 we plot the actual and predicted savings rates for a number of countries, again

based on regression (3) of table 9. The model seems to perform fairly well in picking up

both the level and time trends of the savings rate in the East Asian economies with high

savings rates: Hong Kong, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Singapore, and Thailand. Rising

life expectancy and falling youth dependency rates combine to give a rising predicted

savings rate in Korea and Singapore, and to a lesser extent in Thailand. By contrast, both

Hong Kong and Japan saw substantial increases in the old age dependency rate after

1980, which stabilized predicted savings in Hong Kong and actually leads to a fall in

predicted savings in Japan.



[insert figure 4 about here]



       We also look at Uganda, which provides an interesting contrast because after

rising slowly, life expectancy fell sharply after 1980, and by 1990 was only 41. During

the same period Uganda’s youth dependency rate was stable at around 50 percent, while




                                             26
the number of old age dependents was negligible. As we can see in figure 4, our predicted

savings rate also falls sharply after 1980. While actual savings follow the predicted

pattern, they fall somewhat before we predict the decline to take place. For the United

States, as for many industrial countries, a slow rise in life expectancy and decline in

youth dependency over the period is offset by rising old age dependency, giving a fairly

stable level of predicted savings. While the actual savings rate in the United States was

stable over the period, it was about 5 percentage points lower than our prediction.



                                       5. Conclusion



Improvements in health and longevity are likely to have large impacts on life cycle

behavior as people look forward to longer, healthier lives. In relation to savings behavior,

a key issue is how improvements in health and longevity affect the length of the working

life. Increases in longevity alone tend to increase the relative length of retirement, thereby

increasing the need for retirement income and generating higher savings rates among the

young. Improvements in health, however, lead to a more ambiguous effect on savings,

because they can lead to longer working lives and postponed retirement.

       Empirically the dominant effect of increased life expectancy appears to be higher

savings rates. The inclusion of life expectancy into savings regressions not only improves

the fit, but also allows us to explain the remarkable savings boom in East Asia, which is

difficult to explain using a pure age structure effect model. In terms of our model, the

savings effect occurs because the effect of increased longevity for retirement income

outweighs the effect of improved health on the length of the desired working life, thereby




                                              27
increasing the need for retirement income. In practice, this effect is likely to be strongly

influenced by institutional arrangements, such as legislation on retirement age and social

security provisions. A more complete model would study how these institutional factors

affect savings behavior.




                                              28
                                          References



Asian Development Bank. 1997. Emerging Asia. Manila.

Berck, P., and K. Sydaeter. 1992. Economists’ Mathematical Manual, 2nd ed. Berlin:

       Springer-Verlag.

Bils, M., and P. Klenow. 2000. “Does Schooling Cause Growth?” American Economic

       Review 90: 1160-83.

Bloom, D., and D. Canning. 2000. “The Health and Wealth of Nations.” Science 287:

       1207–09.

_____. 2001. “Demographic Change and Economic Growth: The Role of Cumulative

       Causality.” In Nancy Birdsall, Allen C. Kelley, and Steven Sinding, eds.,

       Population Matters: Demographic Change, Economic Growth, and Poverty in the

       Developing World. New York: Oxford University Press.

Bloom, D., and J. Sachs. 1998. “Geography, Demography, and Economic Growth in

       Africa.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 207–73.

Deaton, Angus. 1992. Understanding Consumption. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University

       Press.

Deaton, Angus, and Christina H. Paxson. 1993. “Savings, Growth, and Aging in

       Taiwan.” Working Paper no. 4330. National Bureau of Economic Research,

       Cambridge, Massachusetts.

_____. 1997. “The Effects of Economic and Population Growth on National Savings and

       Inequality.” Demography 34: 97–114.


                                           29
_____. 1998. “Growth, Demographic Structure, and National Savings in Taiwan.”

       Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey. Processed.

Doshi, K. 1994. “Determinants of the Saving Rate—An International Comparison.”

       Contemporary Economic Policy 12: 37-45.

Fogel, Robert W. 1994. “Economic Growth, Population Theory, and Physiology: The

       Bearing of Long-Term Processes on the Making of Economic Policy.” American

       Economic Review 84: 369-95.

_____. 1997. “New Findings on Secular Trends in Nutrition and Mortality: Some

       Implications for Population Theory.” In Mark Rosenzweig and Oded Stark, eds.,

       Handbook of Population and Family Economics, vol 1A. Elsevier.

Fry, M., and A. Mason. 1982. “The Variable Rate of Growth Effect in the Life-Cycle

       Model.” Economic Inquiry 20: 426-42.

Gallup, J. L., J. D. Sachs, and A. Mellinger. 1999. “Geography and Economic

       Development.” International Regional Science Review 22(2):179-232.

Higgins, M. 1998. “Demography, National Savings, and International Capital Flows.”

       International Economic Review 39: 343-69.

Higgins M. and Williamson J. 1997. "Age Structure Dynamics in Asia and Dependence

       on Foreign Capital." Population and Development Review 23: 261-93.

Hurd, M., McFadden D. and Gan L. 1998. “Subjective Survival Curves and Life-Cycle

       Behavior,” in David Wise (ed.): Inquiries in the Economics of Aging, University

       of Chicago Press, 259-305.




                                          30
International Economic Data Base (1997), available online at the Australian National

       University (http://iedb.anu.edu.au/).

Kalemli-Ozcan S., H. Ryder, and D. Weil. 1998. “Mortality Decline, Human Capital

       Investment, and Economic Growth.” Working Paper no. 98-18. Brown

       University, Department of Economics. Providence, Rhode Island.

Kalemli-Ozcan, S. and Weil D.N. 2002. "Mortality Change, the Uncertainty Effect, and

       Retirement," NBER Working Paper No.W8742.

Kelley, A. C., and R. M. Schmidt. 1996. “Saving, Dependency, and Development.”

       Journal of Population Economics 9: 365-86.

Lee R. D., A. Mason, and T. Miller. 1998. “Saving, Wealth, and Population.” University

       of California at Berkeley. Processed.

_____. 2000. “Life Cycle Saving and the Demographic Transition in East Asia.”

       Population and Development Review 26(Supplement): 194-222.

Lee R. and Tulijapurkar S. (1997), “Death and Taxes: Longer Life, Consumption, and

       Social Security,” Demography, Vol. 34, pp 67-81.

Leff, Nathaniel H. 1969. “Dependency Rates and Savings Rates.” American Economic

       Review 59: 886-96.

Leung, S. F. 1994. “Uncertain Lifetime, the Theory of the Consumer, and the Life Cycle

       Hypothesis.” Econometrica 62: 1233-39.

Mason, A. 1981. “An Extension of the Life-Cycle Model and its Application to

       Population Growth and Aggregate Saving.” Working Paper no. 4. East-West

       Institute, Honolulu, Hawaii.


                                               31
_____. 1987. “National Saving Rates and Population Growth: A New Model and New

       Evidence.” In D. G. Johnson and R. Lee, eds., Population Growth and Economic

       Development: Issues and Evidence. Madison, Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin

       Press.

_____. 1988. “Saving, Economic Growth, and Demographic Change.” Population and

       Development Review 14: 113-44.

_____. 1997. “Will Population Change Sustain the ‘Asian Economic Miracle’?” Working

       Paper no. 33. East-West Institute, Honolulu, Hawaii.

Masson, P. R., T. Bayoumi, and H. Samiei. 1998. “International Evidence on the

       Determinants of Private Saving.” World Bank Economic Review 12: 483-501.

Meltzer, D. 1995. “Mortality Decline, the Demographic Transition, and Economic

       Growth.” Processed. University of Chicago.

Philipson, T. J., and G. S. Becker. 1998. “Old-Age Longevity and Mortality Contingent

       Claims.” Journal of Political Economy 106: 551-73.

Strauss, J., and D. Thomas. 1998. “Health, Nutrition, and Economic Development.”

       Journal of Economic Literature 36: 766-817.

Summers, R., and A. Heston. 1991. “The Penn World Tables (Mark 5): An Expanded Set

       of International Comparisons, 1950-1988.” Quarterly Journal of Economics

       106(2): 327-68.

Summers, R., and A. Heston. 1994. Penn World Tables, Mark 5.6 (website version).

       Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania.

United Nations. 1998. Demographic Indicators 1950-2050. New York.


                                           32
World Bank. 1999. World Development Indicators 1999. Washington, D.C.



“Processed” refers to informally reproduced works that may not be available through

libraries.




                                           33
                                         Table 1

                     Definitions and Sources of Savings Rate Data


Savings Rate                                           Years
Variable                    Definition                Covered              Source

GDSN           Gross domestic savings rate (in        1960-97   World Development Indicators
               constant local currency units)         annual    1999


GNSI           Gross national savings rate (in        1970-97   World Development Indicators
               constant local currency units)         annual    1999


GNSII          Gross national savings rate            1960-97   World Development Indicators
               excluding international transfer       annual    1999
               payments (in constant local currency
               units)




                                            34
                                       Table 2

                      Descriptive Statistics on Savings Rate Data


Savings Rate
Variables and
Number of Countries                            Standard
and Observations            Mean               Deviation        Maximum    Minimum

GDSN                        17.6                 9.45               46.8    -14.4
68 countries
410 observations

GNSI                        18.7                  8.3               60.3    -18.7
68 countries
300 observations


GNSII                       15.9                 10.1               47.1    -15.8
69 countries
413 observations




                                          35
                              Table 3

                Correlation Matrix of Savings Rates


        GDSN           GNSI             GNSII
GDSN     1.0
GNSI     0.74           1.0
GNSII    0.97          0.79              1.0




                                36
                                         Table 4

                       Descriptive Statistics on Selected Regressors


                                                         Standard
Variable                                   Mean          Deviation     Maximum   Minimum

Life expectancy                            62.7            11.1          79.5     22.6
(in years)

Youth share (population aged 0-19
as share of total population)              0.46            0.11          0.61     0.23

Elderly share (population aged 60+
as share of total population)              0.09            0.05          0.24     0.04

Log income per capita (PPP)                7.90            1.01          9.78     5.96

Liquid liabilities as a percentage of
GDP                                        39.9            24.1         171.4     9.35

Rate of inflation, five-year average
based on GDP deflator (percent)            15.7            26.2         215.1     -2.79

Annual average growth rate of
income per capita (PPP) over
previous decade (percent)                  1.97            2.30          9.45     -4.16

                               PPP Purchasing power parity.




                                            37
                                        Table 5

                    Effects of Longevity on Savings, OLS Estimates
                    (dependent variable: gross domestic savings rate)

                                                             Specification

Variable                             (1)               (2)                (3)           (4)
                                 Dummies for       Polynomial         Polynomial    Dependency
                                  each age           age and          age effects   rate effects
                                   group           dependency
                                                   rate effects
Life expectancy                     0.339*           0.348*             0.282*        0.365*
                                    (0.081)          (0.076)            (0.073)       (0.057)

Growth rate of income per
capita during preceding             0.913*            0.932*            0.928*         0.948*
decade                              (0.198)          (0.197)            (0.199)       (0.202)
Youth share of population                            -159.6*                          -80.40*
                                                     (53.63)                          (11.22)

Elderly share of population                          -129.1                           -155.1*
                                                     (124.2)                          (18.66)

Age effect: linear term                               13.61             62.22*
                                                     (27.56)            (21.35)

Age effect: square term                              -4.637             -6.489*
                                                     (3.363)            (3.168)

Age effect: cubic term                                0.228              0.173
                                                     (0.148)            (0.129)

Intercept                            -14.09           58.86             -13.60*       42.63*
                                    (7.452)          (39.37)            (6.758)       (8.743)

Country fixed effects                 No               No                    No         No

Time dummies                          Yes              Yes                   Yes        Yes

Age dummies                           Yes              No                    No         No

R-squared                            0.539            0.534              0.521         0.526




                                             38
Null hypothesis                 Age effects      Age effects      Dependency       Polynomial
                                jointly zero     captured by      variables can    can be
                                                 polynomial       be excluded      excluded from
                                                 and              from (2)         (2)
                                                 dependency
                                                 variables

F statistic (df)                     4.37*            0.34            5.66*                2.17
                                   F(17,385)        F(12,385)        F(2,396)            F(3,396)



* Denotes significance at the 5 percent level for a two-tail test.
Note: All the estimates in this table are based on an unbalanced panel of quinquennial
data for 68 countries during 1960-94 (410 observations). Heteroskedasticity-consistent
standard errors are reported in parentheses below coefficient estimates.




                                           39
                                      Table 6

      Effects of Longevity on Savings, OLS Estimates with Country Fixed Effects
                   (dependent variable: gross domestic savings rate)

                                                           Specification

Variable                            (1)              (2)                   (3)      (4)

Life expectancy                   0.462*           0.455*             0.410*      0.459*
                                  (0.088)         (0.087)             (0.093)     (0.094)

Growth rate of income per
capita during preceding           0.713*           0.717*             0.716*       0.735*
decade                            (0.130)         (0.126)             (0.125)     (0.141)
Youth share of population                         -80.41*                         -89.48*
                                                  (28.38)                         (11.07)

Elderly share of population                        -48.58                         -153.0*
                                                   (59.16)                        (22.44)

Age effect: linear term                             13.28             33.72*
                                                   (16.45)            (14.25)

Age effect: square term                            -1.234              -1.409
                                                   (2.223)            (2.260)

Age effect: cubic term                              0.006              -0.049
                                                   (0.096)            (0.097)

Country fixed effects               Yes             Yes                    Yes     Yes

Time dummies                        Yes             Yes                    Yes     Yes

Age dummies                         Yes              No                    No       No

R-squared                          0.886           0.883               0.880      0.882




                                           40
Null hypothesis                 Age effects      Age effects      Dependency       Polynomial
                                jointly zero     captured by      variables can    can be
                                                 polynomial       be excluded      excluded from
                                                 and              from (2)         (2)
                                                 dependency
                                                 variables

F statistic (df)                     5.39*            0.70            3.34*                0.80
                                   F(17,316)        F(12,316)        F(2,327)            F(3,327)




* Denotes significance at the 5 percent level for a two-tail test.
Note: All the estimates in this table are based on an unbalanced panel of quinquennial
data for 68 countries during 1960-94 (410 observations). Heteroskedasticity-consistent
standard errors are reported in parentheses below coefficient estimates.




                                           41
                                          Table 7

              OLS Estimates of Longevity on Savings: Nonlinear Specifications
                     (dependent variable: gross domestic savings rate)
                                                                Specification

                                        (1)             (2)                       (3)            (4)
Variable
Life expectancy                       0.437*           0.447*
                                      (0.073)        (0.092)

Life expectancy if greater than or     -0.035          0.007
equal to 65                           (0.020)         (0.016)

Life expectancy 35-40                                                            3.732          4.180
                                                                                (2.579)        (4.204)

Life expectancy 40-45                                                           10.06*         8.217*
                                                                                (1.582)        (2.023)

Life expectancy 45-50                                                           16.44*         11.72*
                                                                                (1.552)        (1.274)

Life expectancy 50-55                                                           19.38*         11.59*
                                                                                (1.211)        (1.632)

Life expectancy 55-60                                                           20.84*         13.76*
                                                                                (1.176)        (1.764)

Life expectancy 60-65                                                           19.77*         14.17*
                                                                                (1.308)        (1.994)

Life expectancy 65-70                                                           21.58*         15.98*
                                                                                (1.313)        (2.317)

Life expectancy 70-75                                                           21.52*         16.66*
                                                                                (1.772)        (2.590)

Life expectancy 75-80                                                           21.74*         15.92*
                                                                                (1.958)        (2.919)

Growth rate of income per capita      0.942*           0.733*                   0.946*         0.651*
during preceding decade               (0.204)         (0.140)                   (0.204)        (0.148)

Youth share of population             -84.76*         -87.58*               -95.08*            -97.66*
                                      (11.59)         (12.52)               (11.51)            (13.38)

Elderly share of population           -156.6*         -149.6*               -155.1*            -148.5*
                                      (18.68)         (12.52)               (19.08)            (27.20)

Intercept                             41.62*             --                     52.97*    --
                                      (8.776)                                   (7.362)




                                                42
Country fixed effects                          No                  Yes                   No                    Yes

Time dummies                                   Yes                 Yes                  Yes                    Yes

R-squared                                     0.530                0.882               0.554                   0.884



* Denotes significance at the 5 percent level for a two-tail test.
Intercept not reported in fixed effect models (columns (2) and (4).
Note: All the estimates in this table are based on an unbalanced panel of quinquennial data for 68 countries
during 1960-94 (410 observations). Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in
parentheses below coefficient estimates.




                                                      43
                                                 Table 8

                     Growth Tilting, Income Effects, and Robustness Checks
                        (dependent variable: gross domestic savings rate)
                                                                            Specification

Variable                                       (1)                  (2)                       (3)               (4)

Life expectancy                              0.369*               0.192*                    0.183*         0.349*
                                             (0.059)              (0.083)                   (0.188)        (0.075)

Growth rate of income per capita             6.735*               0.889*                0.879*              1.091*
during preceding decade                      (2.027)             (0.201)                (0.229)            (0.249)
Youth share of population                    -52.08*             -71.32*                -69.85*            -84.47*
                                             (14.19)             (11.73)                (13.88)            (12.71)

Elderly share of population                  -90.14*             -159.5*                -159.9*            -178.3*
                                             (25.99)             (18.69)                (21.74)            (21.11)

Youth share x income growth                  -8.768*
                                             (3.320)

Elderly share x income growth                -20.79*
                                             (7.050)
Log GDP per capita (PPP)                                          3.158*                    3.354*
                                                                  (0.955)                   (1.025)

Liquid liabilities as a percentage of                                                        0.008
GDP                                                                                         (0.030)

Rate of inflation                                                                            0.971
                                                                                            (1.183)

Beta (effect of income on the                                                                              0.085*
strength of the life cycle model)                                                                          (0.034)
Intercept                                    23.49*               24.98*                    22.97*         50.03*
                                             (10.69)              (10.13)                   (11.29)        (10.51)

R-squared                                     0.534                0.541                    0.527              0.530



* Denotes significance at the 5 percent level for a two-tail test.
PPP Purchasing power parity.
Note: All the estimates in this table are based on an unbalanced panel of quinquennial data for 68 countries
during 1960-94 (410 observations) except for column (3), which is based on 66 countries during 1965-94
(365 observations). Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses below
coefficient estimates. Beta is the coefficient in the interaction term (1 + Beta log(GDP/max(GDP))) that is
multiplied by the rest of the reported model.




                                                       44
                                                    Table 9

               Effect of Longevity on Savings: Instrumental Variables Estimates
                       (dependent variable: gross domestic savings rate)
                                                               Specification (Variables Instrumented)
                                              (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)                  (5)

                                                             (Income                            (Income           (Income
                                           (Income         growth, life       (Income           growth,           growth,
                                           growth)         expectancy)        growth)        income level)     income level)
Variable
Life expectancy                            0.598*             0.460*           0.637*           1.058*            0.631*
                                           (0.076)            (0.126)          (0.091)          (0.426)           (0.175)

Growth rate of income per capita           -1.405*            -1.283*          12.49*           -1.594*           -1.458*
during preceding decade                    (0.563)            (0.544)          (3.752)          (0.692)           (0.630)
Youth share of population                  -111.6*            -119.5*           -38.43          -138.5*           -114.8*
                                           (15.83)            (16.43)          (23.97)          (32.74)           (20.91)

Elderly share of population                -223.9*            -219.5*           -82.89          -222.8*           -237.7*
                                           (29.03)            (28.51)          (44.99)          (33.57)           (73.15)

Youth share x income growth                                                    -22.32*
                                                                                (6.57)

Elderly share x income growth                                                  -42.75*
                                                                               (13.34)
Log GDP per capita (PPP)                                                                         -7.804
                                                                                                (7.065)

Beta (effect of income on the                                                                                      0.039
strength of the life cycle model)                                                                                 (0.194)
Intercept                                  49.26*             61.23*            -0.106          93.80*            50.76*
                                           (10.76)            (13.80)          (18.18)          (44.04)           (13.43)


R-squared                                   0.349             0.349        0.338             0.229             0.360


* Denotes significance at the 5 percent level for a two-tail test.
PPP Purchasing power parity.
Note: All the estimates in this table are based on an unbalanced panel of quinquennial data for 68 countries
during 1960-94 (410 observations) except for column (3), which is based on 66 countries during 1965-94
(365 observations). Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses below
coefficient estimates. Beta is the coefficient in the interaction term (1 + Beta log(GDP/max(GDP))) that is
multiplied by the rest of the reported model.
Instrumental variables: Latitude, land area within 100km of the coast or major waterway, percent of land
area in the tropics.




                                                      45
                                          Table 10

             Effects of Longevity on Alternative Savings Rate Measures,
        OLS Estimates With and Without Country Fixed Effects, and IV Estimates

                                                     Coefficient of Life Expectancy

                                                                                        IV
Savings Rate                                                                     (income growth
                                          OLS                Fixed Effects        instrumented)

GDSN                                     0.365*                 0.459*                0.631*
(68 countries,                           (0.057)                (0.094)               (0.175)
410 observations)

GNSI                                     0.176*                  0.077                0.159*
(68 countries,                           (0.065)                (0.111)               (0.070)
300 observations)

GNSII                                    0.354*                 0.441*                0.554*
(68 countries,                           (0.056)                (0.106)               (0.077)
408 observations)


* Denotes significance at the 5 percent level for a two-tail test.

Note: All the estimates are based on unbalanced panels of quinquennial data. The
specifications include income growth, youth and elderly age shares, and time dummies.
Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses below
coefficient estimates.




                                              46
                                          Figure 1
                                Longevity and Savings Rates
                      25


                      20
(percentage points)
  Savings Effect




                      15


                      10
                                                                        OLS


                                                                        Fixed
                                                                        Effects



                       5


                       0
                           20          40                     60   80
                                            Life Expectancy
                                                                      Figure 2
                                     0.90            Longevity and age structure worldwide, 1990
                                     0.80


                                     0.70
Age structure (% total population)




                                     0.60


                                     0.50
                                                                                                               0-19
                                                                                                               60+
                                     0.40


                                     0.30


                                     0.20


                                     0.10


                                     0.00
                                            0   10       20    30      40         50       60   70   80   90
                                                                    Life expectancy 1990
                         Figure 3
                 Savings Rates 1990-1994
          50
          40
          30
Actual




          20
          10
           0
         -10
         -20
               -20 -10   0      10 20 30    40   50
                             Fitted Value
                                Thailand
               50
               45
               40
Savings Rate




               35
               30
               25
                                                          Actual
               20
                                                          Fitted
               15
               10
                5
                0
                1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000
