                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              INTERNATIONAL RENT SHARING IN MULTINATIONAL FIRMS


                                           John W. Budd
                                           Jozef Konings
                                         Matthew J. Slaughter


                                         Working Paper 8809
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w8809


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2002




For helpful discussion we thank Jonathan Haskel. For financial support Konings thanks the Flemish Science
Foundation, and Slaughter thanks the National Science Foundation and the National Bureau of Economic
Research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by John W. Budd, Jozef Konings and Matthew J. Slaughter. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
International Rent Sharing in Multinational Firms
John W. Budd, Jozef Konings and Matthew J. Slaughter
NBER Working Paper No. 8809
March 2002
JEL No. F23, J30



                                             ABSTRACT

        We use a unique firm-level panel data set of multinational parents and their foreign affiliates to
analyze whether profits are shared across borders within multinational firms. Using both fixed-effects
and generalized method-of-moments estimators, affiliate wage levels are estimated to respond to both
affiliate and parent profitability. The elasticity of affiliate wages to parent profits per worker is
approximately 0.03, which can explain over 20 percent of the observed variation in affiliate wages. These
results reveal a previously ignored aspect of labor-market rent sharing. They also reveal an important
micro-level linkage with potential macro-level implications. International rent sharing can transmit
economic conditions across national borders, and can thereby provide an implicit cross-country
risk-sharing mechanism.




John W. Budd                                                     Josef Konings
Industrial Relations Center                                      LICOS, Center for Transition Economics
3-300 Carlson School of Management                               Economics Department
University of Minnesota                                          Catholic University of Leuven
Minneapolis, MN 55455-0438                                       Debériotstraat 34
jbudd@csom.umn.edu                                               3000 Leuven, Belgium
                                                                 and CEPR
                                                                 josef.konings@econ.kuleuven.ac.be

Matthew J. Slaughter
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755-3514
and NBER
slaughter@dartmouth.edu
                                                                                                                               1

1. Introduction

    The economic implications of increased globalization have been widely conjectured and

researched. One prominent concern has been how foreign competition, trade protection, and

foreign ownership affect the level and distribution of wages.1 Largely overlooked, however, has

been the issue of whether international linkages condition how firms share profits with their

workers.

    A large literature has found that economic rents are often shared with workers: profits and

wages move together.2 With the exception of Budd and Slaughter (2000), however, this rent-

sharing literature has an explicitly domestic focus: industry, firm, or establishment wages in a

specific country are regressed on profit measures for operations in that same country. Yet with

increased globalization, this implicitly closed-economy perspective may miss important

international aspects of wage setting.

    Consider, for example, the United Auto Workers. This U.S. labor union agreed to major

concessions in the early 1980s to help save the then-U.S.-owned Chrysler. More recently,

however, the UAW has reportedly been unwilling to grant concessions because while the U.S.

operation is struggling financially, its German parent Daimler-Chrysler is profitable.3 As an


1 Foreign ownership has been studied by Aitken, Harrison, and Lipsey (1996) and Feliciano and Lipsey (1999) trade protection
by Gaston and Trefler (1995), and Haskel and Slaughter (2001); and foreign competition by Borjas and Ramey (1995), and
Freeman and Katz (1991). These are representative examples, as the trade-and-wages literature has grown very large. Many
representative studies can be found in the volumes of Abowd and Freeman (1991) and Feenstra (2000).
2 Analyses of inter-industry wage differentials (e.g., Katz and Summers, 1989) revealed positive correlation between these
differentials and industry profitability. A number of subsequent studies, whether using industry wages and profits (Blanchflower,
Oswald, and Sanfey, 1996), union contract wages with company profits (Abowd and Lemieux, 1993; Currie and McConnell,
1992; Svejnar, 1986), union contract wages with industry profits (Christofides and Oswald, 1992; Budd and Slaughter, 2000), or
company wages with company profits (Hildreth and Oswald, 1997), all find that wages depend on ability to pay.
3 The December 18, 2000 issue of Business Week reported, “He's [Chrysler Group President Dieter Zetsche] not likely to get
much of a hearing from UAW President Stephen P. Yokich. After winning the richest contract terms in years in 1999, union
members have little reason to start giving money back. That's in part because, despite Chrysler's deepening problems--it's
expected to lose some $1 billion in the fourth quarter--the German parent remains exceedingly profitable.” More recently, a
similar cross-border wage dispute has arisen in multinational steel producer Corus. The February 12, 2002 edition of The Times
reported, “Corus, the Anglo-Dutch steel maker, could face industrial action in a clash with unions for imposing a pay freeze in
the U.K. while increasing salaries of Dutch workers … A spokesman for the [British] union said, ‘We all work for the same
company, and we should all get the same deal.’”
                                                                                                                           2

example of international rent sharing as an explicit compensation strategy of multinational firms,

in 1989 PepsiCo implemented a global employee stock ownership plan in which all employees

worldwide were granted shares of stock equivalent to 10 percent of their pay. Numerous other

companies have implemented similar strategies (Irwin, 1998). Lastly, Mexican law mandates

cross-border profit-sharing: Mexican employees must receive 10 percent of the worldwide

profits of their employer, not just of the employer’s profits earned in Mexico (Meyers, 2000).

    These examples all demonstrate how cross-border flows of capital, labor, goods, and

information may exert strong influences on the nature of profit sharing between firms and

workers. Budd and Slaughter (2000) consider whether wages in one country may depend on

profit conditions outside of that country. Empirically, they found that union wage contracts in

Canadian manufacturing industries depend not just on Canadian industry profits but also on U.S.

industry profits—and also that the nature of this profit sharing depends on the nationality of the

firm and union.

    This paper builds on this theme of international rent sharing by examining whether profits are

shared across borders within multinational firms. We do this using a rich firm-level panel data

set on multinationals with parents and affiliates operating in Europe. This panel we assembled

from the Amadeus Database, which reports detailed financial and operational data for both

parents and affiliates in multinationals.4 The panel spans 1993 through 1998, with a total of 865

parents and 1919 foreign affiliates. With this panel we can ask whether affiliate wages vary not

just with affiliate profits but also with parent profits, and similarly whether parent wages vary not

just with parent profits but also with affiliate profits.




4 In other contexts, Budina, Garretsen, and de Jong (2000) and Konings, Van Cayseele, and Warzynski (2001) use this same data
source. It is available from Bureau van Dijck Electronic Publishing.
                                                                                                                               3

    Our main empirical finding is that parents share profits with majority-owned foreign

affiliates. For affiliates owned at least 50 percent by the controlling parent, foreign-affiliate

wages are correlated with parent profits per worker. This correlation is both statistically and

economically significant, and appears across a range of specification and estimation choices

addressing various measurement and endogeneity issues. The degree of multinational ownership

appears to condition the degree of intra-firm profit sharing, with many specifications indicating

parents share profits only with majority-owned affiliates, and even more strongly with fully-

owned affiliates. Our central estimates indicate that a doubling of parent profitability raises

affiliate wages by somewhere between 1 and 5 percent. Affiliate wages are also positively

correlated with affiliate profits per worker, consistent with the closed-economy perspective of

previous rent-sharing studies. The same is true of parent wages and parent profits per worker;

however, we find no evidence that parent wages are correlated with affiliate profits per worker.

    For a number of reasons, we consider this explicitly international focus on profit sharing to

be an important innovation on earlier research.                       First, within the rent-sharing literature it

broadens the understanding of how firms relate to workers. Budd and Slaughter’s (2000) cross-

border focus was limited to unionized wage negotiations in manufacturing for a single country

using industry-level profit measures.                 Our panel extends their focus along many important

dimensions—many parent and affiliate countries, firms in all industries, wages for all

employees—and therefore takes a much broader look at the relevance of international profit

sharing. The need to examine profit sharing in an international context is underscored by rising

foreign direct investment, which has been a central aspect of globalization in recent years.5


5 UNCTAD (2000) reports that from 1979 to 1999, the ratio of world FDI stock to world gross domestic product rose from 5% to
16% and the ratio of world FDI inflows to global gross domestic capital formation rose from 2% to 14%. One consequence is
that an increasing share of country’s output is accounted for by foreign affiliates of multinational firms. The foreign-affiliate
share of world production is now 15% in manufacturing and other tradables (Lipsey, Blomstrom, and Ramstetter, 1998).
                                                                                                                                4

    Second, our paper extends the research on globalization and labor markets. Many studies

have found that establishments owned by multinational firms pay higher wages than do

domestically owned establishments, even controlling for a wide range of worker and/or plant

characteristics such as worker occupation and plant capital intensity.6 This “multinational” wage

premium is sometimes seen to be a puzzle. But if multinationals are, on average, more profitable

than domestic firms, then international rent sharing with multinationals could explain this wage

premium. Within the globalization-and-wages literature, other studies have examined whether

multinationals alter the mix of activities within parent and host countries.7 One point of contrast

is that much of the empirical work in this literature has followed from the perfectly competitive

Heckscher-Ohlin trade model in which all sectors earn zero profits and all workers earn their

marginal revenue products. Our focus on profit sharing extends this literature to consider

important non-competitive wage issues.8

    Finally, our findings on international rent sharing carry implications for the international-

macro literature on cross-country movements in macro aggregates. In international macro and

real business cycle models, the standard mechanism by which national income shocks are

transmitted and smoothed across countries is by trading risk in international capital markets (e.g.,

Stockman and Tesar, 1995). However, many researchers have documented that the extent of

international asset diversification is less than the standard models predict (Lewis, 1999; Obstfeld

and Rogoff, 2000). Our finding of international rent sharing in multinational firms provides a




6 For example, Howenstine and Zeile (1994) and Doms and Jensen (1998) document these wage differentials among U.S.
manufacturing plants. Globerman, Ries, and Vertinsky (1994) present similar evidence for Canada; Aitken et al. (1996) for
Mexico and Venezuela.
7 Examples here include Konings and Murphy (2001) and Slaughter (2000).
8 Our non-competitive approach is closer to studies such as Borjas and Ramey (1995), who investigate whether import
competition squeezes rents paid to U.S. less-skilled workers in imperfectly competitive industries, and Gaston and Trefler (1995),
who examine the effect of U.S. tariffs on industry wage premia.
                                                                                                         5

micro-level linkage, very different from risk sharing in international financial markets, which is

an implicit risk-sharing mechanism that can also transmit economic conditions across countries.

   The paper is organized as follows.                  Section 2 motivates the empirical analysis with a

discussion of the underlying theory of profit sharing, with an extension to the multinational

context. It then discusses our empirical framework. Section 3 presents a description of the data

and Section 4 the empirical results. Section 5 concludes.

2. Theoretical Background and Empirical Framework

Theoretical Background

   Baily (1974) and Azariadis (1975) developed implicit-contract models in which wages

provide insurance against demand shocks for risk-averse workers (see Rosen, 1985 for a survey).

Blanchflower et al. (1996) showed that if these models are generalized to allow firms to be risk

averse, then wages will be positively correlated with profits.                       We extend this idea to

multinational firms that, by definition, operate in multiple countries.

   Consider a multinational firm that operates in a parent country p and an affiliate country a.

Without loss of generality, assume that demand shocks τ have a distribution function g(τ) that

affect both countries equally so that profits π are defined as

                                        π = πp + πa = τf(np) + τf(na) - wpnp - wana

where w denotes the wage, n is employment, f(·) is the production function, and superscripts

indicate parent or affiliate. The firm maximizes over wages and employment utility function v(·):

       (1)                            maximize ∫ v(π ) g (τ )∂τ

subject to satisfying the minimum-utility constraints of its employees:

                                                                                 p
                        ∫ [n       u ( w p ) + (1 − n p )u (b p )]g (τ )∂τ ≥ u
                               p
       (2)
                                                                                                                                  6

                                                                                      a
                               ∫ [n u ( w       ) + (1 − n a )u (b a )]g (τ )∂τ ≥ u
                                   a        a
          (3)

where u(·) is the workers’ utility function, b is some exogenous alternative (such as an

unemployment benefit), and u is a minimum utility level.

     To see cross-border profit sharing within this multinational firm, consider affiliate wages.

The first-order condition derived from differentiating equation (1) with respect to wa is:

          (4)                 − v ′(π p + π a ) + λ a u ′( w a ) = 0

where λa is the Lagrange multiplier for equation (3) in the constrained maximization problem.

Ignoring corner solutions, equation (4) implies that λa > 0 and defines an implicit wage function

for the affiliate wage.9

     Differentiating (4) with respect to πp yields:

                               ∂w a v ′′(π p + π a )
          (5)                       =                 .
                               ∂π p   λ a u ′′( w a )

If the firm is risk neutral, then this derivative equals zero and wages do not respond to firm

profitability. But if both firms and workers are risk averse, then both v(·) and u(·) are concave

and the derivative in equation (5) is positive: affiliate wages respond to parent profits as a form

of risk sharing.10 By similar logic, it can be shown that parent wages can vary with affiliate

profitability. Thus, within multinational firms cross-border rent sharing can stem from implicit

contracts between risk-averse firms and workers.11


9 In this simple form, the model does not prevent a corner solution in which the firm chooses to conduct all of its production in
the country with the lower minimum utility level. We believe it is reasonable to consider the interior-solution cases with
production in both countries. These cases can result from plausible reasons including sunk fixed capital investment in each
country, a desire to maintain entry to multiple markets, or access to materials and other primary factors. These cases also accord
with the data set for our empirical analysis.
10 Greenwald and Stiglitz (1993) support the plausibility of risk averse firms; see also Dufey and Srinivasulu (1983). Examples
of models with risk averse firms include Hart (1983) for implicit contracts and Goldberg and Kolstad (1995) for multinational
production decisions.
11 This result, of course, depends on the firm’s utility function v(πp, πa) being a non-separable function of both πp and πa. If the
firm is risk averse but v(πp, πa) is separable, then the model predicts domestic but not international rent sharing. Also, the
                                                                                                                             7

    Profit sharing is also predicted by other models. One is union bargaining over the firm’s

economic rents.         Bargaining over parent as well as affiliate profits by unions representing

affiliate employees is a straightforward extension in a Nash bargaining framework (Budd and

Slaughter, 2000). Alternatively, employee bargaining power need not stem from unionization:

in Lindbeck and Snower’s (1988) insider-outsider model, current employees (insiders) derive the

power to extract economic rents from the employer via their ability to not cooperate with new

employees if they are hired at a lower wage. This framework can yield international rent sharing

if insiders at an affiliate use their power to extract parent as well as affiliate profits. Finally,

international rent sharing can also result from models of fairness in which not sharing parent

profits is perceived to be somehow unjust, or from models of corporate strategy in which

multinationals share parent profits with affiliate workers to generate positive goodwill, or even

prevent government seizure, in the affiliate country.

Empirical Framework

    Equation (5), or similar predictions from these other models, suggests the following

regression equation for empirical analysis using panel data on affiliate wages:


                                                            πat      π
                                     (6)        w at = β1        + β2 pt + β3 Zat + εat
                                                            n at     n pt


where subscripts a, p, and t index affiliates, parents, and time t; w is wages; π is profits; n is

employment; Z is a set of other regressors that vary by affiliate and/or time; ε is an error term we

discuss below; and βs are parameters to be estimated. Our innovation is to consider the role of

profitability outside the country where wages are paid; that is, we are interested in estimating not


assumption that the demand shock τ equally affects domestic and foreign production is simply to keep the model straightforward.
The key prediction of interest in equation (5) stems from v(πp, πa), not the functional form of τ.
                                                                                                    8


just β1 but in particular β2 as well. Equation (6) forms the basis of our empirical analysis, with

an analogous equation for parent wages.             We next address some important specification,

measurement, and endogeneity issues.

   Important specification issues include how to indicate profitability and what controls to

include in the Zat regressor. It is standard in the rent-sharing literature to normalize profitability

in per-worker terms, a method which we follow here. In Z we include a full set of unobservable

affiliate fixed effects, αa. These account for unobserved time-invariant affiliate heterogeneity

that influences wages: worker quality, firm technology, or outside wage options. We also

include a full set of time effects, ηt. These account for unobserved heterogeneity over time

common to all affiliates, such as skill-biased technological change. Finally, in Zat we also

include affiliate-time varying measures of capital stock per worker and R&D expenditures per

worker, as well as country-year fixed effects. The former are directly observed wage controls,

while the latter account for national influences such as unemployment rates and benefits. Our

baseline estimates will be for equation (6) using a standard fixed-effects estimator.

   There may be issues of endogeneity and measurement that stem from the use of

contemporaneous profits in equation (6). If wage outcomes affect profitability, then the use of

current-period wages and profits can bias estimates in the fixed-effects regression. In terms of

measurement, as discussed below, wages and profits are constructed using some of the same

quantities such as total wage bill and employment. Measurement error in these quantities can

introduce spurious correlation between the dependent and independent variables in equation (6).

   To address these issues, consider a first-differenced version of equation (6):

                                            πaat          πpt     
                       (7)     ∆w at = β1∆        + β2 ∆          + β3 ∆Zat + ∆ε at
                                            n at           n pt    
                                                                                                    9


First-differencing controls for affiliate fixed effects αa, and if there is no serial correlation then

lagged profits are not correlated with the differenced error term and are therefore valid

instruments for current profits. Lack of serial correlation provides a moment restriction, so that

equation (7) can be estimated using generalized method of moments (GMM) (Arellano and

Bond, 1991). Relative to conventional instrumental variables estimators, this moment restriction

provides additional instruments so this GMM estimator is more efficient (Arellano and Bond,

1991). For example, for 1998 profits in equation (7), valid instruments are the level of profits in

1996 and earlier years, since lagged profit levels are not correlated with the differenced error

term between 1997 and 1998. As the panel progresses an increasing number of instruments can

be used, which increases the efficiency of the estimates.

   To test the validity of these instruments we use a Sargan test of overidentifying restrictions,

which asymptotically has a χ 2 distribution. Because the model is estimated in first differences,

the equation will be characterized by the presence of first-order serial correlation. But the

validity of the GMM estimator relies on the moment restriction stemming from the absence of

second-order serial correlation.     It is therefore important to test for second-order serial

correlation, and we report Arellano and Bond’s (1991) test which asymptotically has a N(0,1)

distribution. Since the model is estimated in first differences and since lagged values (dated at

least t-2 and before) of the endogenous variables are used, we need to observe affiliates for at

least 3 consecutive time periods. In the empirical results, then, our sample sizes are smaller

when we estimate equation (7) via GMM than when we estimate equation (6) as a standard

fixed-effects regression.
                                                                                                   10

3. Data Description and Sample Statistics

   Our data are derived from a commercial database collected by Bureau van Dijck, a software

and consulting company, marketed under the name of Amadeus. The database consists of

company accounts reported to national statistical offices for European companies for which at

least one of the following criteria is satisfied: total turnover or assets of at least $12 million, or

total employment of at least 150. The database is organized by country with records for firms

within each country. The company records include information on whether the company has an

ownership stake in a foreign affiliate, and identify affiliates by name and a unique identification

number. It is therefore possible to determine if a firm operates as part of a multinational group

and to link parent firms to foreign affiliates anywhere in Europe via the unique identifiers.

   Financial and operational information is available for 1993 through 1998, and we retrieve all

companies for which unconsolidated accounts were available separately for the parent and its

affiliates. Due to variation in national reporting requirements, all companies in some countries—

in particular Great Britain, Greece, and Finland—lack basic information (e.g., wage bills) that

are essential for our analysis. Otherwise, we include companies in the data set simply on the

basis of data availability and the ability to link parents with foreign affiliates. Companies in all

industries are included.

   The available ownership information refers to the year 1998, and we assume that the parent-

affiliate ownership structure for 1998 applies to the earlier years. While we cannot follow

ownership changes during the sample period, we do not believe that this is a serious problem.

To the extent that we are potentially including a few affiliates who were not affiliated in earlier

years, we are introducing measurement error that likely biases our results towards zero.
                                                                                                 11

   Matching parent companies to foreign affiliates yields an unbalanced panel of 865 parents

and 1,919 affiliates over six years. Table 1 shows the country distribution of parents and

affiliates in our panel, where each parent has an average of 2.2 affiliates. The parents are

concentrated in Western Europe with significant numbers in France, Germany, Italy, and

Belgium. Smaller numbers of parent firms locate in Austria, Luxembourg, the Netherlands,

Portugal, and Spain. Affiliates are found in these countries as well as the Eastern and Central

European countries of Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, and Romania. The

pattern of location of parents and affiliates looks broadly consistent with multinational

investment patterns that respond to labor costs. For example, high-wage Germany has relatively

few affiliates whereas low-wage Spain has a significant number of affiliates.

   Summary statistics for the data are presented in Table 2. There are 5,758 affiliate-year

observations, which represents the 1,919 affiliates appearing in the panel an average of about

three times each.    The key variables in Table 2 are wages and profits.          Again, with the

unconsolidated accounts in Amadeus we can calculate wages and profits separately for parents

and affiliates. Wages are constructed as the reported wage bill divided by total number of

employees, which is standard for corporate data in the profit-sharing literature (e.g., Hildreth and

Oswald, 1997). The wage bill includes wage and salary payments to employees as well as

mandated employer contributions to government social-insurance funds. As discussed below,

we also try log-level wages. Profits are constructed in the standard way: value added (i.e., sales

minus materials costs) minus the wage bill, all divided by total employment (e.g., Blanchflower

et al., 1996). We constructed the capital-to-labor ratio as reported capital stock divided by

employment, and constructed R&D intensity as reported R&D expenditures divided by
                                                                                                                            12

employment. All monetary measures are reported in Amadeus in home currencies; we converted

these to U.S. dollars using International Monetary Fund annual exchange rates.

    The average wage for affiliates is $46,367 and for parents is $55,868.                                  Unfortunately,

Amadeus reports no skill indicators (e.g., occupation or educational attainment).                                   But this

average-wage difference accords with standard trade models of multinational firms in which

parents concentrate on skill-intensive production of firm-wide knowledge assets (e.g., Carr,

Markusen, and Maskus, 2001). Per-employee profits are higher, on average, in the affiliates than

in their parents. Note that wages exhibit significantly less variability than profits. The standard

deviations for wages are only 30 to 40 percent of the mean, whereas the standard deviations for

profits are 2.8 to 4.4 times greater than the mean. Moreover, both wages and profits are more

variable in the affiliates than in their parents. The correlation between parent and affiliate wages

is 0.25 while the correlation between parent and affiliate profits is 0.05. The higher wage

correlation than profit correlation is suggestive of cross-border rent sharing.

    Over 90 percent of the observations involve affiliates that are majority-owned by the parents,

and 32 percent are fully-owned.12 The last four rows of Table 2 reveal that the parents are,

unsurprisingly, much larger than their affiliates both in terms of sales and employment. Also,

recall that the Amadeus data are limited to medium and large firms, so the average affiliate

employment is 382.

4. Estimation Results for Fixed-Effects and GMM Estimates

    Table 3 reports our initial fixed-effects estimates of equation (6), where in this table Zat

includes a full set of affiliate and year fixed effects, αa and ηt. As discussed earlier, these control


12 There are a large number of missing values for the ownership shares in Amadeus. For U.S.-headquartered multinationals in
recent years, approximately 80 percent of affiliates are majority-owned, so in our data we assume that an affiliate is majority-
owned if its ownership share is missing. The results are robust to excluding these observations from the majority-owned
                                                                                                                       13

for many time-constant determinants of wages (e.g., worker quality) and for time effects (e.g.,

technological change), respectively.             In all estimation tables, each column reports for each

regressor a coefficient estimate and its robust standard error that accounts for cases where

multiple affiliates share the same parent. For the profits regressors, we also report the implied

wage-profits elasticity.

    Column 1 reports results for the full sample. The standard closed-economy rent-sharing

result is evident: affiliate profits are positively correlated with affiliate wages, significantly so

with a very low p-value. The implied elasticity is 0.0087. The coefficient on parent profits is

positive, but is imprecisely estimated and so offers little support for international rent sharing.

    The specification in column 1, however, pools both minority and majority-owned affiliates.

It seems reasonable to expect international rent sharing to be stronger for majority and fully-

owned affiliates. In our Section 2 discussion of within-firm cross-border risk sharing, parents

with only a minority ownership stake may play a negligible role in the multinational firm being

considered. Alternatively, it may be that only the majority-owning parent engages in bargaining

with affiliate workers.          In this case the profitability of minority-owning parents may be

irrelevant. Or in situations of fairness, in firms with multiple minority owners the identity of

these minority parents may simply be unknown to affiliate workers during wage discussions.

For all these reasons, it seems plausible to expect any profit sharing from parents to affiliates to

be stronger the higher is the ownership stake in the affiliate.

    Column 2 reports fixed-effects results of restricting the sample to only majority-owned

affiliates (which includes those fully owned).                    The affiliate-profit coefficient is virtually

unchanged, but there is now strong statistical support for international rent sharing within


analysis. We define fully-owned affiliates as those owned at least 99 percent owned by the parent; this definition does not
include affiliates with missing ownership-share information.
                                                                                                     14

multinational firms. The parent-profit coefficient is 0.0033, with a t-statistic of 2.71 and a p-

value of 0.007. The implied elasticity is 0.0073.

   Evidence of both standard within-country rent sharing and international rent sharing is even

stronger in column 3, in which the sample is further restricted to only fully-owned affiliates.

Despite a 65 percent reduction in the sample size relative to column 1, both the affiliate and

parent profits estimates are now larger and more precisely estimated. The elasticities in columns

2 and 3 are also within the range generally found in the literature on domestic rent-sharing,

between 0.006 (Christofides and Oswald, 1992) to about 0.05 (Blanchflower et al., 1996).

   Table 3 shows evidence that parent profits are shared across borders with majority-owned

affiliates, and that this profit sharing may be even stronger among fully-owned affiliates. Two

concerns about these results, however, may be the lack of additional controls and any

endogeneity or measurement issues stemming from the use of contemporaneous profits. These

two important issues are addressed in Tables 4 and 5.

   Table 4 reports results of repeating the analyses of Table 3 adding to equation (6) the

following Zat controls in addition to affiliate and time effects: affiliate capital intensity, affiliate

R&D intensity, and a full set of country-year effects. The qualitative pattern of profit sharing is

the same, although the statistical significance of the international rent sharing effect becomes

more marginal.

   Of greater concern than the specific set of controls may be issues of endogeneity and

measurement related to the use of contemporaneous profits. These econometric issues may be

more severe in the domestic rent-sharing literature, but it is nevertheless important to address
                                                                                                                            15


them here.13 As discussed in Section 2, to account for endogeneity and measurement error, we

use a generalized method of moments (GMM) estimator that instruments for current-period

profits using lagged values of profits, all on time-differenced data to capture affiliate effects αa.

    Columns 1 and 2 of Table 5 report GMM results estimating equation (7) on for majority-

owned and fully-owned affiliates, respectively. These GMM estimates provide strong support

for our international rent-sharing hypothesis. In both columns, parent rent sharing is evident and

statistically significant at the five-percent level. The implied elasticities are also larger than in

the previous fixed-effects estimates, with the fully-owned elasticity slightly larger than the

majority-owned elasticity. The Sargan test of overidentification indicates that the instruments

are valid, while the serial-correlation test fails to reject the hypothesis of no second order serial

correlation. These tests indicate that GMM estimation is appropriate.

    Columns 3 and 4 of Table 5 add to equation (7) our additional Zat regressors of affiliate

capital intensity, affiliate R&D intensity, and country-year effects. Because this specification

includes the largest set of controls and also instruments for profits, it is our preferred

specification. The international rent sharing result is again evident at standard significance

levels.    The elasticities indicate that a ten-percent increase in parent profitability increases

affiliate wages by 0.5 percent.

    The results in Tables 3 through 5 use as the dependent variable wages in levels. But much of

the domestic rent-sharing literature uses log wages. We use wage levels because the theoretical

motivation in Section 2 does not necessarily imply that log wages are related to profits, and also

because the wage distribution in our data appears more normal than log-normal (unlike the

distribution of wages across people in individual-level data sets).                            Nevertheless, given the


13 An important measurement difference between the domestic rent-sharing literature and our estimation is that although the
same quantities are used to construct affiliate wages and affiliate profits, the same is not true for affiliate wages and parent
                                                                                                           16

prevalence of log-wage analyses in the previous literature, Appendix Table 1 reports fixed-

effects and GMM estimates in which the dependent variable is the log wage. The pattern of

results are unchanged, with statistically significant estimates (marginally so in column 1) and

with implied elasticities in the same range as in Tables 3 through 5. Because of the distribution

of wages in our data, we prefer our wage-levels specifications but note that results are consistent

in log-wage specifications.

     We checked the robustness of our findings to a number of other measurement and

specification issues (these results not reported, for brevity). One was how we measured profits.

As discussed earlier, our profit measure follows that of several other studies, and corresponds to

the economic concept of rents available for sharing with workers. In the underlying Amadeus

data, firms in some countries report accounting measures of gross profits. These may vary

across countries with differences in national accounting standards or with any transfer-pricing

considerations for firms. The sample correlation between our profit measure and this accounting

measure was over 0.9; accordingly, our results were robust to alternative profit measures.

     A second check we tried was to use lagged rather than contemporaneous profit measures in

our fixed-effects estimates. Many rent-sharing studies use lagged profit measures to control at

least partially for endogeneity concerns. We prefer our GMM estimation to address endogeneity,

but we still tried fixed-effects estimates using profit measures lagged one year. We obtained

results qualitatively identical to those reported here.

     A third check was to interact profit measures with geographic distance between the parent

and affiliate countries, and also with a dummy variable indicating adjacency of parent and

affiliate countries. It might be the case that the extent to which multinationals share profits



profits. There is less reason to expect spurious correlation between affiliate wages and parent profits.
                                                                                                    17

internally depends on information flows, for which physical location might be a proxy. We

found no substantial variation in profit sharing from distance and/or adjacency.

   Having established parent-to-affiliate rent sharing, we next reverse focus to look for evidence

of affiliate-to-parent rent sharing. As discussed in Section 2, in principle the international

aspects of wage setting could be symmetrical. Just as affiliate workers might risk-share over

parent profitability, so, too, might parent workers risk-share over affiliate profitability.

   To look for covariation in parent wages and affiliate profits, we reconfigure our panel from

affiliate-year observations to parent-year observations. In this reconfigured panel, each parent in

each year can have any number of foreign affiliates. One way to treat this multi-affiliate aspect

of our data would be to treat each parent-affiliate-year combination as a separate observation.

An alternative would be to average the profitability of all affiliates for each parent-year

observation. We tried both methods and obtained qualitatively similar results either way. For

brevity, we report results for just the latter approach, where profits per worker across all affiliates

are averaged using affiliate sales as weights. Given the suggestive evidence in earlier tables that

parents share profits more strongly with affiliates the larger the ownership stake, we also tried

averaging affiliate profitability using only majority-owned and then only fully owned affiliates.

   Table 6 reports some baseline fixed-effects estimates of equation (6) for parent wages on

both parent and affiliate profits per worker. As indicated, each column uses a different set of

affiliates for each parent-year observation for constructing affiliate profitability. The standard

domestic rent-sharing result is evident in the significantly positive correlation between parent

profitability and parent wages, with the implied wage-profits elasticity of about 0.01 or 0.02.

However, Table 6 shows no evidence of international rent sharing: the coefficient estimates on

affiliate profitability are all close to zero with low t-statistics. We obtained very similar results
                                                                                                   18

for specifications (not reported for brevity) that added additional regressors, as in Table 4, or that

treated all parent-affiliate-year observations separately, as described above.

   Issues of endogeneity may be obscuring some link between affiliate profits and parent wages.

To test this we re-estimated the specifications of Table 6 using GMM estimation techniques as in

equation (7). As with our earlier GMM estimates, we instrument for parent and affiliate profits

using their lagged values and other regressors.        Table 7 reports these GMM estimates for

calculations of affiliate profits using all affiliates and just majority-owned affiliates (similar

calculations using just fully owned affiliates yielded less-reliable GMM estimates due to the

reduced number of observations, and thus are not reported). The diagnostics of the Sargan and

serial-correlation tests indicate these GMM equations are well specified. But as in Table 6, here

there is no significant correlation between parent wages and affiliate profitability.

   Based on the results in Tables 6 and 7, we find no evidence that affiliate profits are shared

with parent workers. This lack of profit sharing from affiliates to parent workers may reflect a

number of issues. For example, if affiliates are quite small relative to parents, and/or are

minority owned and thus perhaps not known, then wage setting in parents may simply ignore

affiliate activity. We consider this to be an area for future research.

5. Conclusions

   The large literature on profit sharing is almost exclusively focused within single countries.

Against a backdrop of increased globalization, in this paper we extend Budd and Slaughter’s

(2000) international rent sharing idea to multinational firms. Budd and Slaughter’s (2000)

relatively limited data can examine only international rent sharing between the United States and

Canada in unionized manufacturing firms using industry-level profits. In the present paper, we
                                                                                                                            19

construct and examine a unique firm-level panel to examine whether profits are shared across

borders within multinational firms for a much wider array of industries and countries.

    Our central finding is a positive, statistically significant relationship between parent profits

per worker and foreign wages in majority and fully-owned affiliates. This relationship is robust

to a number of specification and estimation choices, including using GMM estimation to address

possible endogeneity and measurement issues. Our estimates of the profit elasticity of wages

vary between about 0.01 and 0.05, which falls in the range estimated by the domestic profit

sharing literature. If we take our average elasticity to be 0.03, then Lester’s (1952) range of

wages calculation implies that the cross-section variability of parent profits explains about one-

fifth of the cross-section variability in affiliate wages.14

    Our results are an important addition to the literature on rent sharing.                                   But equally

importantly, our results document important effects of globalization on local economic

outcomes. This carries important implications for both policy and theory, and underscores the

increasingly global nature of labor markets. For example, international rent sharing can help

explain why multinational affiliates tend to pay higher wages than do purely domestic firms.

    Finally, we believe our findings are relevant for the international macro literature on real

business cycles and correlated international movements in macro aggregates. This literature has

focused on the transmission of national income shocks through explicit risk sharing in

international capital markets. Our findings suggest an additional linkage – international profit

sharing between parents and affiliates in multinational firms – that can transmit economic

conditions across national borders. In the labor literature, one standard explanation for rent


14 For Lester’s (1952) range-of-wages calculation, we follow Blanchflower et al. (1996) and Hildreth and Oswald (1997).
Assuming a distribution of profits that is four standard deviations wide, then the range of parent profits is roughly 1200 (four
times 307.223 from Table 2), or, relative to the mean of 108.203, a factor of 12 times the mean. Multiplying 12 times the
elasticity of 0.03 yields a range of 36 percent of the mean wage stemming from international rent sharing. The mean and
                                                                                                                         20

sharing in a domestic context is implicit risk sharing between firms and workers. Our findings

suggest that risk sharing across countries can also occur implicitly through multinational firms.

    In our data, the average within-firm standard deviation of parent profits is 34.5. Within-firm

profits therefore vary year to year by an average of 30 percent. Our central wage-parent profits

elasticity of 0.03 then implies that average year-to-year variation in parent profits causes affiliate

wages to vary by nearly one percent each year. Considering that average annual wage growth is

often less than five percent, a one-percent change that stems solely from variability in parent

profitability in a foreign country is striking. This back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that

international rent sharing is sufficiently strong for its implications to extend beyond

understanding individual wage outcomes.                     Future work in labor economics, international

economics, and macroeconomics might benefit from incorporating this phenomenon to further

our understanding of economic behavior and outcomes in a global economy.




standard deviation of affiliate wages implies that the range of wages is approximately 1.6 times the mean, which implies that
profit variability can explain (0.36/1.6), or about 20 percent, of the variability in wages.
                                                                                           21


                                            References
Abowd, John M., and Richard B. Freeman (eds.). 1991. Immigration, Trade, and the Labor
Market. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Abowd, John M., and Thomas Lemieux. 1993. “The Effects of Product Market Competition on
Collective Bargaining Agreements: The Case of Foreign Competition in Canada.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 108 (4), November, pp. 983-1014.

Aitken, Brian, Ann Harrison, and Robert E. Lipsey. 1996. “Wages and Foreign Ownership: A
Comparative Study of Mexico, Venezuela, and the United States.” Journal of International
Economics, Vol. 40 (3-4), May, pp. 345-371.

Arellano, Manuel, and Stephen Bond. 1991. “Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data: Monte
Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations,” Review of Economic Studies,
Vol. 58 (2), April, pp. 277-297.

Azariadis, Costas. 1975. “Implicit Contracts and Underemployment Equilibria.” Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 83 (6), December, pp. 1183-1202.

Baily, Martin N. 1974. “Wages and Employment under Uncertain Demand.” Review of
Economic Studies, Vol. 41 (1), January, pp. 37-50.

Blanchflower, David G., Andrew J. Oswald, and Peter Sanfey. 1996. “Wages, Profits, and Rent-
Sharing.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 111 (1), February, pp. 227-251.

Borjas, George J., and Valerie A. Ramey. 1995. “Foreign Competition, Market Power, and Wage
Inequality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 110 (4), November, pp. 1075-1110.

Budd, John W., and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2000. “Are Profits Shared Across Borders? Evidence
on International Rent Sharing.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #8014.

Budina, Nina, Harry Garretsen, and Eelke de Jong. 2000. “Liquidity Constraints and Investment
in Transition Economies: The Case of Bulgaria.” Economics of Transition, Vol. 8 (2), July, pp.
453-475

Carr, David L., James R. Markusen, and Keith E. Maskus. 2001. “Estimating the Knowledge-
Capital Model of the Multinational Enterprise.” American Economic Review, Vol. 91 (3), June,
pp. 693-708.

Christofides, Louis N., and Andrew J. Oswald. 1992. “Real Wage Determination and Rent-
Sharing in Collective Bargaining Agreements.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 107 (3),
August, pp. 985-1002.

Currie, Janet, and Sheena McConnell. 1992. “Firm-Specific Determinants of the Real Wage.”
The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 74 (2), May, pp. 297-304.
                                                                                          22

Doms, Mark E., and J. Bradford Jensen. 1998. “Comparing Wages, Skills, and Productivity
Between Domestically and Foreign-Owned Manufacturing Establishments in the United States.”
In Robert Baldwin, Robert Lipsey, and J. David Richardson (eds.), Geography and Ownership as
Bases for Economic Accounting. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 235-255.

Dufey, Gunter, and S.L. Srinivasulu. 1983. “The Case for Corporate Management of Foreign
Exchange Risk.” Financial Management, Vol. 12 (4), Winter, pp. 54-62.

Feenstra, Robert C. (ed). 2000. The Impact of International Trade On Wages. Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press.

Feliciano, Zadia, and Robert E. Lipsey. 1999. “Foreign Ownership and Wages in the United
States, 1987-1992.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #6923.

Freeman, Richard B., and Lawrence F. Katz. 1991. “Industrial Wage and Employment
Determination in an Open Economy.” In John M. Abowd and Richard B. Freeman (eds.),
Immigration, Trade, and the Labor Market. (Chicago: University of Chicago), pp. 235-259.

Gaston, Noel, and Daniel Trefler. 1995. “Union Wage Sensitivity To Trade and Protection:
Theory and Evidence.” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 39 (1-2), August, pp. 1-25.

Globerman, Steven, John C. Ries, and Ilan Vertinsky. 1994. “The Economic Performance of
Foreign Affiliates in Canada,” Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 27 (1), pp. 143-156.

Goldberg, Linda S., and Charles D. Kolstad. 1995. “Foreign Direct Investment, Exchange Rate
Variability and Demand Uncertainty.” International Economic Review, Vol. 36 (4), pp. 855-873.

Greenwald, Bruce C., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1993. “Financial Market Imperfections and
Business Cycles.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 108 (1), February, pp. 77-114.

Hart, Oliver D. 1983. “Optimal Labour Contracts under Asymmetric Information: An
Introduction.” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 50 (1), January, pp. 3-35.

Haskel, Jonathan E., and Matthew J. Slaughter. Forthcoming. “Have Falling Tariffs and
Transportation Costs Raised U.S. Wage Inequality?” Review of International Economics.

Hildreth, Andrew K.G., and Andrew J. Oswald. 1997. “Rent-Sharing and Wages: Evidence from
Company and Establishment Panels.” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 15 (2), pp. 318-337.

Howenstine, Ned G., and William J. Zeile. 1994. “Characteristics of Foreign-owned U.S.
Manufacturing Establishments.” Survey of Current Business, Vol. 74 (1), January, pp. 34-59.

Irwin, Jane. 1998. “The Rise of Broad-Based Global Stock Option Plans.” Journal of Employee
Ownership Law and Finance, Vol. 10 (2), Spring, pp. 53-72.
                                                                                          23

Katz, Lawrence F., and Lawrence H. Summers. 1989. “Industry Rents: Evidence and
Implications.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Microeconomics), pp. 209-275.

Konings, Jozef, Patrick Van Cayseele, and Frederic Warzynski. 2001. “The Dynamics of
Industrial Mark-Ups in Two Small Open Economies: Does Competition Policy Matter?”
International Journal of Industrial Organization, Vol. 19 (5), April, pp. 841-859.

Konings, Jozef, and Alan Murphy. 2001. “Do Multinational Enterprises Substitute Parent Jobs
for Foreign Ones? Evidence from Firm Level Panel Data.” LICOS Center for Transition
Economics Discussion Paper 100, Department of Economics, Catholic University of Leuven.

Lester, Richard A. 1952. “A Range Theory of Wage Differentials.” Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, Vol. 5 (4), July, pp. 483-500.

Lewis, Karen K. 1999. “Trying to Explain Home Bias in Equities and Consumption.” Journal of
Economic Literature, Vol. 37 (2), June, pp. 571-608.

Lindbeck, Assar, and Dennis J. Snower. 1988. “Cooperation, Harassment, and Involuntary
Unemployment: An Insider-Outsider Approach.” American Economic Review, Vol. 78 (1),
March, pp. 167-188.

Lipsey, Robert E., Magnus Blomstrom, and Eric Ramstetter. 1998. “Internationalized Production
in World Output.” In Robert Baldwin, Robert Lipsey, and J. David Richardson (eds.),
Geography and Ownership as Bases for Economic Accounting. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, pp. 83-135.

Meyers, Mike. 2000. “Legal Differences Make Business Abroad Tricky,” Minneapolis Star
Tribune, December 6, p. D1.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2000. “The Six Major Puzzles in International
Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000.

Rosen, Sherwin. 1985. “Implicit Contracts: A Survey.” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 23
(3), September, pp. 1144-1175.

Slaughter, Matthew J. 2000. “Production Transfer Within Multinational Enterprises and
American Wages.” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 50 (2), April, pp. 449-472.

Stockman, Alan C., and Linda L. Tesar. 1995. “Tastes and Technology in a Two-Country Model
of the Business Cycle: Explaining International Comovements.” American Economic Review,
Vol. 85 (1), March, pp. 168-185.

Svejnar, Jan. 1986. “Bargaining Power, Fear of Disagreement, and Wage Settlements: Theory
and Evidence From U.S. Industry.” Econometrica, Vol. 54 (5), September, pp. 1055-1078.

United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. 2000. World Investment Report: Cross-
Border Mergers and Acquisitions and Development. New York: United Nations.
                                                                                     24



                             Table 1
          Country Distribution of Parents and Affiliates
                                           Affiliates              Parents
                                              (1)                    (2)
Austria                                       60                     16
Belgium                                       208                    148
Bulgaria                                        5                     0
Czech Republic                                  4                     0
France                                        592                    271
Germany                                        64                    215
Hungary                                        17                     0
Italy                                         284                    155
Luxembourg                                     24                     3
Netherlands                                    21                     5
Poland                                         33                     0
Portugal                                       64                     2
Romania                                        33                     0
Spain                                         510                     50


Total                                        1,919                   865
Notes: Sample of European multinational parents and affiliates, 1993 through 1998,
taken from Amadeus Database. See text for details.
                                                                                            25



                           Table 2
   Multinational Parents and Affiliates: Summary Statistics
                                                                           Standard
Variable                                                  Mean             Deviation
                                                            (1)               (2)
 Average Wage, Affiliates                                 46.367            18.439
 [= wage bill ÷ employment]

 Average Wage, Parents                                    55.868            16.710
 [= wage bill ÷ employment]

 Profits per Employee, Affiliates                        126.471           553.324
 [= (sales – materials cost - wage bill) ÷
 employment]

 Profits per Employee, Parents                           108.203           307.223
 [= (sales – materials cost - wage bill) ÷
 employment]

 Indicator of Majority-Owned Affiliate                     0.919             0.272

 Indicator of Fully-Owned Affiliate                        0.322             0.467

 Capital-Labor Ratio, Affiliates                          64.113           450.507
 [= capital stock bill ÷ employment]

 R&D Intensity, Affiliates                                 8.067            50.622
 [= R&D expenditures ÷ employment]

 Sales, Affiliates                                      110,826.2         432,223.5

 Sales, Parents                                         1,376,961         3,379,460

 Employment, Affiliates                                  382.868           1701.407

 Employment, Parents                                    4,411.355          8,323.11

Notes: Summary statistics are calculated for the sample of 5758 affiliates used in the
first regression of Table 3. These cover all affiliates with sufficient data for the full
six years of the sample, 1993 through 1998. All monetary variables are denominated
in thousands of U.S. dollars. Employment is number of bodies. The two indicator
variables are categorical variables coded 1 if the ownership criterion is met and 0
otherwise. See text for details.
                                                                                                                  26



                                            Table 3
                              Profit Sharing With Affiliate Wages
                                     Fixed-Effects Estimates
Sample of                                        All             Majority-Owned            Fully-Owned
Affiliates                                    Affiliates           Affiliates               Affiliates
                                                 (1)                   (2)                      (3)
Affiliate Profits                              0.0032                0.0031                   0.0138
                                              (0.0008)              (0.0008)                 (0.0023)
Implied Wage-Profit Elasticity                [0.0087]              [0.0085]                 [0.0310]

Parent Profits                                  0.0011                 0.0033                  0.0060
                                               (0.0010)               (0.0012)                (0.0020)
Implied Wage-Profit Elasticity                 [0.0027]               [0.0073]                [0.0124]

Year Effects                                      Yes                    Yes                     Yes

No. Observations                                 5758                   5296                    1852

No. Affiliates                                   1919                   1760                     582

R-Squared Within                                 0.15                    0.15                   0.20

R-Squared Between                                0.01                    0.01                   0.05

Notes: These are estimation results for equation (6) in the text. Dependent variable is affiliate average wage.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses under coefficient estimates.
                                                                                                                  27



                                            Table 4
                              Profit Sharing With Affiliate Wages
                                     Fixed-Effects Estimates
Sample of                                        All             Majority-Owned            Fully-Owned
Affiliates                                    Affiliates           Affiliates               Affiliates
                                                 (1)                   (2)                      (3)
Affiliate Profits                              0.0031                0.0030                   0.0127
                                              (0.0008)              (0.0008)                 (0.0024)
Implied Wage-Profit Elasticity                [0.0083]              [0.0082]                 [0.0291]

Parent Profits                                  0.0003                 0.0023                  0.0032
                                               (0.0011)               (0.0013)                (0.0020)
Implied Wage-Profit Elasticity                 [0.0007]               [0.0048]                [0.0066]

Affiliate Capital Intensity                    -0.0005                -0.0005                  0.0379
                                               (0.0003)               (0.0003)                (0.0067)

Affiliate R&D Intensity                         0.0039                 0.0037                  0.0231
                                               (0.0060)               (0.0063)                (0.0118)

Year-Country Effects                              Yes                    Yes                     Yes

No. Observations                                 5243                   4828                    1774

No. Affiliates                                   1703                   1561                     545

R-Squared Within                                 0.19                    0.18                   0.26

R-Squared Between                                0.02                    0.02                   0.03

Notes: These are estimation results for equation (6) in the text. Dependent variable is affiliate average wage.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses under coefficient estimates.
                                                                                                                        28



                                                       Table 5
                                         Profit Sharing With Affiliate Wages
                                                   GMM Estimates
Sample of                                 Majority-Owned           Fully-Owned         Majority-Owned           Fully-Owned
Affiliates                                  Affiliates              Affiliates           Affiliates              Affiliates
                                                (1)                     (2)                  (3)                     (4)
Affiliate Profits                             0.0173                  0.0202               0.0164                  0.0246
                                             (0.0086)                (0.0093)             (0.0089)                (0.0100)
Implied Wage-Profit Elasticity               [0.0404]                [0.0464]             [0.0382]                [0.0565]

Parent Profits                                 0.0168                 0.0187                 0.0238                 0.0228
                                              (0.0085)               (0.0048)               (0.0107)               (0.0048)
Implied Wage-Profit Elasticity                [0.0352]               [0.0407]               [0.0498]               [0.0497]

Affiliate Capital Intensity                                                                  0.0006                 0.0546
                                                                                            (0.0006)               (0.0153)

Affiliate R&D Intensity                                                                     -0.0151                 0.0084
                                                                                            (0.0163)               (0.0098)

Year Effects                                     Yes                    Yes                    No                     No

Year-Country Effects                              No                     No                    Yes                    Yes

No. Observations                                2971                   1134                   2971                   1134

No. Affiliates                                  1007                    379                   1007                    379

Sargan Test Statistic (dof = 10)                12.44                  18.42                  12.99                  16.72

Serial-Correlation Test Statistic               -1.156                 -1.668                -1.395                 -1.378

Notes: These are estimation results for equation (7) in the text. Dependent variable is affiliate average wage. Standard errors are
reported in parentheses under coefficient estimates.
                                                                                                               29



                                           Table 6
                              Profit Sharing With Parent Wages
                                   Fixed-Effects Estimates
Sample of                                       All             Majority-Owned          Fully-Owned
Affiliates                                   Affiliates           Affiliates             Affiliates
                                                (1)                   (2)                    (3)
Affiliate Profits                             0.0002                0.0002                -0.0019
                                             (0.0006)              (0.0006)               (0.0034)
Implied Wage-Profit Elasticity               [0.0006]              [0.0006]              [-0.0041]

Parent Profits                                 0.0091                0.0107                 0.0044
                                              (0.0015)              (0.0018)               (0.0022)
Implied Wage-Profit Elasticity                [0.0189]              [0.0206]               [0.0083]

Year Effects                                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes

No. Observations                                2618                  2340                   1233

No. Parents                                     825                    736                    389

R-Squared Within                                0.17                   0.17                   0.17

R-Squared Between                               0.02                   0.02                   0.01

Notes: These are estimation results for equation (6) in the text. Dependent variable is parent average wage.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses under coefficient estimates.
                                                                                          30



                                 Table 7
                    Profit Sharing With Parent Wages
                             GMM Estimates
Sample of                                         All            Majority-Owned
Affiliates                                    Affiliates           Affiliates
                                                  (1)                  (2)
Affiliate Profits                              -0.0004              -0.0014
                                               (0.0003)             (0.0016)
Implied Wage-Profit Elasticity                [-0.0006]            [-0.0010]

Parent Profits                                  0.0084                 0.0113
                                               (0.0041)               (0.0073)
Implied Wage-Profit Elasticity                 [0.0168]               [0.0214]

Year Effects                                     Yes                     Yes

No. Observations                                 1822                   1641

No. Parents                                      593                     534

Sargan Test Statistic (dof = 10/7)               8.30                    6.24

Serial-Correlation Test Statistic               -1.171                 -0.969

Notes: These are estimation results for equation (7) in the text. Dependent variable is
parent average wage. Standard errors are reported in parentheses under coefficient
estimates.
                                                                                                                          31



                                                 Appendix Table 1
                                    Profit Sharing With Affiliate Wages in Logs
                                         Fixed Effects and GMM Estimates
Sample of                                 Majority-Owned            Fully-Owned          Majority-Owned           Fully-Owned
Affiliates                                  Affiliates               Affiliates            Affiliates              Affiliates
                                                (1)                      (2)                   (3)                     (4)
Affiliate Profits                            0.00007                  0.00031               0.00051                 0.00038
                                            (0.00002)                (0.00005)             (0.00019)               (0.00018)
Implied Wage-Profit Elasticity               [0.0095]                 [0.0347]              [0.0511]                [0.0414]

Parent Profits                                 0.00006                 0.00010                0.00037                0.00033
                                              (0.00004)               (0.00005)              (0.00019)              (0.00010)
Implied Wage-Profit Elasticity                 [0.0060]                [0.0103]               [0.0373]               [0.0360]

Year Effects                                      Yes                    Yes                    Yes                     Yes

No. Observations                                 5296                   1852                    2971                   1134

No. Affiliates                                   1760                    582                    1007                    379

R-Squared Within                                  0.07                   0.16

R-Squared Between                                 0.01                   0.03

Sargan Test Statistic (dof = 10)                                                               11.70                   16.88

Serial-Correlation Test Statistic                                                              0.791                  -1.204

Notes: These are estimation results for equations (6) and (7) in the text. Dependent variable is log affiliate average wage. Standard
errors are reported in parentheses under coefficient estimates.
