                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              MONITORING, MOTIVATION AND MANAGEMENT:
   THE DETERMINANTS OF OPPORTUNISTIC BEHAVIOR IN A FIELD EXPERIMENT


                                               Daniel Nagin
                                              James Rebitzer
                                               Seth Sanders
                                              Lowell Taylor


                                          Working Paper 8811
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8811


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2002




We would like to thank the following people for helpful advice and criticism: Dan Black; John Bound,
Robert Frank, Dan Hammermesh, Ed Lazear, and Yoram Weiss. We also benefited from comments received
during presentations at: the Society for Labor Economists meetings, the NBER Summer Institute, Case
Western Reserve University's Markets, Organizations and Public Policy seminar , and Princeton University's
Industrial Relations seminar. Laura Leete graciously provided the census extracts we use in our analysis. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.


© 2002 by Daniel Nagin, James Rebitzer, Seth Sanders and Lowell Taylor. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Monitoring, Motivation and Management: The Determinants of
Opportunistic Behavior in a Field Experiment
Daniel Nagin, James Rebitzer, Seth Sanders and Lowell Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 8811
March 2002
JEL No. D2, J2, L2, L8, M12



                                             ABSTRACT

         Economic models of incentives in employment relationships are based on a specific theory of
motivation. Employees are “rational cheaters,” who anticipate the consequences of their actions and shirk
when the perceived marginal benefit exceeds the marginal cost. Managers respond to this decision
calculus by implementing monitoring and incentive pay practices that lessen the attraction of shirking.
This “rational cheater model” is not the only model of opportunistic behavior, and indeed is viewed
skeptically by human resource practitioners and by many non-economists who study employment
relationships.
         We investigate the “rational cheater model” using data from a double-blind field experiment that
allows us to observe the effect of experimentally-induced variations in monitoring on employee
opportunism. The experiment is unique in that it occurs in the context of an ongoing employment
relationship, i.e., with the firm’s employees producing output as usual under the supervision of their
front-line managers. The results indicate that a significant fraction of employees behave roughly in
ccordance with the “rational cheater model.” We also find, however, that a substantial proportion of
employees do not respond to manipulations in the monitoring rate. This heterogeneity is related to
employee assessments about their general treatment by the emp loyer.



Daniel Nagin                                            James Rebitzer
H. John Heinz III School of Public Policy               Weatherhead School of Management
and Management                                          Case Western Reserve University
Carnegie Mellon University                              10900 Euclid Ave.
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890                               Cleveland, OH 44106
                                                        and NBER

Seth Sanders                                            Lowell Taylor
Department of Economics                                 H. John Heinz III School of Public Policy
University of Maryland                                  and Management
College Park, MD 20742                                  Carnegie Mellon University
                                                        Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890
                                            Introduction
       Economic models of incentives in employment relationships are based on a very specific

theory of motivation. Employees are “rational cheaters.” They anticipate the consequences of

their actions and shirk when the perceived marginal benefit of doing so exceeds the marginal

cost. Firms respond to this decision calculus by implementing monitoring and incentive pay

policies that make shirking unprofitable.

       Although the “rational cheater” model is ubiquitous in economics, it is often viewed

skeptically by human resource practitioners and the other social science disciplines that study

employment relationships (see Baron and Kreps, 1999, Kreps, 1997, March, 1994, and Pfeffer,

1996). The validity of the rational cheater model is an empirical question that is, in principle,

easy to investigate. If employees are rational cheats then, conditional on a given incentive pay

arrangement, a reduction in monitoring will lead to an increase in shirking. The most powerful

sanction available to employers is typically dismissal. Thus, an increase in shirking resulting

from reduced monitoring should be greatest among individuals for whom the ongoing

employment relationship is least valuable.

       Empirical investigation of the rational cheater model is hindered by two almost

insurmountable problems. First, truly rational cheaters are most likely to engage in shirking

behavior when it is hard or expensive to detect. Second, should any association between

monitoring and employee actions be found, it will be very difficult to disentangle the effects of

monitoring strategies from responses to other, unobserved features of the firm’s employees or its

human resource system. Resolving these problems requires an experimental setting in which

monitoring levels are exogenously varied across similar sites and substantial resources are

devoted to tracking the behaviors of employees (Rebitzer 1995).

       This paper presents the results of just such an experiment. The data were collected by a

large telephone solicitation company. The employees in this company work at 16 geographically

dispersed sites. At each call center, telephone solicitors were paid according to the same
modified piece rate incentive scheme, one in which salary increased with the number of

successful solicitations.1 This piece rate, together with imperfect information on the outcome of

pledges, created incentives for employees to falsely claim that they had solicited a donation.2 To

curb opportunistic behavior, the employer monitored for false donations by calling back a

fraction of those who had responded positively to a solicitation. “Bad calls” were calls in which

donations previously reported by employees were repudiated by donors.

       Employees at the company were informed when hired that their activities would be

checked by “call backs” made by management at the company’s central headquarters. The

results of each week’s call backs were communicated to both employees and their immediate

supervisors, and the bad calls were deducted from each individual’s weekly incentive pay.

Stronger sanctions for bad calls were not generally imposed on employees because the number of

bad calls was a noisy indicator of cheating. The noise resulted from the fact that donors

sometimes changed their mind after agreeing to pledge money.

       The costs of call backs are substantial; each audit costs as much as the original

solicitation call. To reduce these monitoring costs, the CEO of the firm wanted to operate with

as small an audit rate as necessary. In an attempt to study the effects of reducing oversight, the

company conducted a controlled field experiment. This experiment was “double blind” in the

sense that neither the employees nor their immediate supervisors were aware of departures from

“business as usual.” In the experiment, the employer varied the fraction of bad calls that were

reported back to employees and supervisors at each of its 16 calling units (what we call the



1      During the period of the study, all solicitations were requests for donations to not-for-profit
       organizations.

2      At the time of this study, the company’s computer system could not generate reports linking the
       outcome of a pledge to an individual caller. In addition, the CEO of the company did not think it
       right for employees to bear the risk associated with unfulfilled donations. It typically took weeks
       (and sometimes months) to collect the money promised in a donation. The CEO believed that
       asking employees to postpone bonuses until the donated money arrived would undermine the
       effectiveness of the incentive pay. For all these reasons, the company paid employees their
       incentive pay prior to receipt of the money promised.

                                                                                                         2
observable monitoring rate), while at the same time increasing the true call back rate from 10%

to 25% of pledges for the purpose of increasing the precision of the estimate of the true rate of

fictitious pledges. By analyzing the effect of varying the “observable monitoring rate,” the

employer hoped to learn the consequences of reduced monitoring on employee behavior.

       The employer made available to us the results of the experiment. In addition, the

employer allowed us to collect survey data on employee attitudes towards the job, their expected

job tenure, and the perceived difficulty of finding another, comparable job. Other information

collected in the survey (age, gender, work hours, educational attainment, whether an employee is

also a student, locati`on of the call center) allow us to estimate outside earnings opportunities for

each individual. By matching estimates of outside options and employee perceptions with

employee behaviors under different monitoring regimes, we can evaluate whether the employees

for whom the job was most valuable were also the employees least likely to engage in

opportunistic behavior.

       The experiment we analyze in this paper spans two lines of empirical research on

incentives. The first line of research consists of empirical studies of how work hours, effort,

productivity, or firm performance respond to monetary rewards.3 Our research differs from

these studies in a number of important ways. The first and most obvious difference is that the

variation in incentives is exogenously induced in this study and not in most others. A second

difference is that our study makes use of direct measures of opportunistic behavior, whereas

most field studies rely on indirect measures. A third and more subtle difference concerns the

nature of the variation in incentives. Rather than manipulating monetary payoffs, this




3      Examples of this literature include Berman (2000), Bewley (2000), Cammerer, et al. (1997),
       Cappelli and Chauvin (1992), Encinosa, Gaynor and Rebitzer (2000), Gaynor, Rebitzer and
       Taylor (2001), Hall and Liebman (1998), Landers, Rebitzer and Taylor (1996), and Lazear
       (2000). Some of these studies find that employees respond to incentives in ways that are roughly
       consistent with the economic model of opportunistic behavior, while others emphasize findings
       that are anomalous from the perspective of conventional economic explanations. Prendergast
       (1999) provides a review of the literature.

                                                                                                      3
experiment varied monitoring rates. While every employee of the company knew that their

reported “sales” could be checked, they did not know the actual intensity of monitoring but

rather had to infer monitoring rates from their own experience. Because the employee

systematically varied both monitoring rates and the reporting of the results of the monitoring to

employees, this experiment can shed some light on the degree to which employees actively seek

out opportunities for shirking.

       The second body of literature relevant to our study concerns laboratory studies of

cooperative and opportunistic behavior. These studies find that in some laboratory settings

individuals act in accordance with the rational cheater model, but that in other settings

individuals engage in less opportunism than the economic model predicts (e.g., Bazerman,

Gibbons, Thompson and Valley, 1998, and Camerer and Thaler, 1995). The singular short-

coming of most laboratory studies is that they do not take place in the context of a persistent

economic relationship.4 In contrast, this experiment involves manipulating incentives within an

ongoing, real world, employment relationship.

       The results of the experiment suggest that a significant fraction of employees behave

according to the predictions of the rational cheater model. Specifically, we find that these

employees respond to a reduction in the perceived cost of opportunistic behavior by increasing

the rate at which they shirk. On the other hand, we did not find that individuals with good

outside options increased shirking by more than other workers when the rate of monitoring

declined. Furthermore, we find that a substantial proportion of employees do not appear to

respond at all to manipulations in the monitoring rate. This heterogeneity has important

implications for the design of reward systems. On the one hand, monitoring and incentives

strategies need to regulate the margin of employees who are opportunistic. On the other hand,




4      Roth and Slonim (1998) demonstrate that it is possible to run laboratory experiments with
       monetary payoffs as substantial as those found in actual economic relationships. It is far more
       difficult, however, to reproduce in a lab, relationships lasting weeks, months or years.

                                                                                                         4
management strategies need to sustain the motivation of the substantial fraction of employees

who are generally disinclined to shirk.

       The paper proceeds in three sections. In the first two sections we outline a simple

economic model of opportunistic behavior in order to clarify the relationship between the

rational cheater model and alternative explanations of opportunism. In the third section, we

present our empirical findings. The paper concludes by considering the implications of the

behaviors we observe for economic analysis and managerial practice.

                            1. Theories of Opportunistic Behavior
       The “rational cheater” model of motivation posits that employees are self-interested

actors who continuously probe their environment in search of ways to increase their welfare.

Opportunistic behaviors, i.e., shirking or cheating, offer the possibility of increasing employee

utility at the expense of the employer or customer. According to the rational cheater model,

employees will be opportunistic whenever they perceive that the marginal benefits of shirking

exceed the marginal costs. Effective management strategies manipulate the perceived costs and

benefits of opportunism in order to reduce the attractiveness of shirking.

       The rational cheater model provides a powerful and parsimonious framework for the

analysis of diverse employment relationships, but it is not the only theory of opportunistic

behavior. Two alternative approaches, associated with sociology and psychology, also have

wide appeal outside the economics profession. For simplicity we refer to these as the

“conscience” and the “impulse control” models.

       Though the rational cheater, conscience, and impulse control theories of opportunistic

behavior have distinctive empirical predictions, they need not be presented as competing,

mutually exclusive, explanations of behavior. We see these explanations as conceivably

emerging from an overarching economic model of opportunistic actions in which the distinctive

predictions of the rational cheater, conscience, and impulse control models emerge from different

assumptions one makes about the parameter values in an individual’s utility function.


                                                                                                    5
   1.1.      The Conscience Model

          In the rational cheater model, individuals evaluate behaviors in terms of their perceived

consequences. In the conscience model, in contrast, individuals derive utility directly from

behaving appropriately. The importance of appropriate behavior is often stressed by stating that

opportunistic actions are inconsistent with an individual’s “identity.” In his Primer on Decision

Making, decision scientist James March describes the ways in which the logic of appropriate

behavior is distinct from the logic of rational cheating.

          When individuals and organizations fulfill identities, they follow rules or
          procedures that they see as appropriate to the situation in which they find
          themselves. Neither preferences as they are normally conceived nor expectations
          of future consequences enter directly into the calculus…. Rule following is
          grounded in a logic of appropriateness…. The process is not random, arbitrary or
          trivial. It is systematic reasoning, and often quite complicated. In those respects,
          the logic of appropriateness is quite comparable to the logic of consequences. But
          rule-based decision making proceeds in a way different from rational decision-
          making. The reasoning process is one of establishing identities and matching
          rules to recognized situations. (March, 1994, p.57-58)

Thus a physician may treat all her patients equally regardless of their ability to pay, because this

is the behavior consistent with her identity as a “good doctor.” In the rational cheater model, in

contrast, a physician derives no utility directly from the appropriateness of a behavior. Rather,

the physician might engage in this behavior because of the uncomfortable consequences (the

threat of suits, professional sanctions, etc.) of discriminating among patients.

          In terms of conventional microeconomic models, the passage quoted from March

describes the psychological processes that determine the subjective cost of opportunism to an

individual. When people say that honesty is core to their personal identity, they are saying that

the psychological cost of inappropriate or unethical behavior is very high—so high that they will

not actively investigate opportunities for shirking. This same idea is echoed in the sociological

and criminological literature on the role of shame and embarrassment as mechanism of social

control separate from systems of formal sanctions (Grasmick and Bursik, 1990; Nagin and

Paternoster, 1993).



                                                                                                       6
       In the context of employment relationships, the “conscience” model suggests a very

different way of managing employment relationships than the rational cheater model. Instead of

manipulating the expected consequences of opportunistic actions, managers need to structure the

employment relationship so that employees adopt identities inconsistent with opportunism.

       Some economic theorists incorporate models of appropriate behavior into models of

employment relationships. Akerlof (1982), for example, argues that paying high wages

encourages employees to behave according to the rules relating to “gift exchange.” The resulting

sense of reciprocity and mutual obligation reduces opportunism. Kreps (1997) discusses the

possibility that introducing monetary incentives and/or close supervision undermines social

identities that result in “intrinsic motivation” to do a good job. Encinosa, Gaynor, and Rebitzer

(2000), and Kandel and Lazear (1992), analyze the role peer pressure plays in determining

equilibrium levels of work effort.5

       Some human resource managers emphasize the importance of supervisor expectations in

shaping employee behavior (Livingston, 1969). Supervisors that expect high levels of

performance alter the goals and self-perception of employees in performance enhancing ways.

These self-fulfilling expectations can make the job of managing opportunism particularly

complex. If heavy handed monitoring sends the message that managers expect employees to be

shirkers, it may undermine the intrinsic motivations that limit opportunism. It is possible then,

under the conscience model, that increases in monitoring may actually increase employee

malfeasance (see also Drago, 1989).

    1.2 Impulse Control

       Impulse control theories of opportunistic behavior derive from psychology. A central

feature is the observation that the attractiveness of a reward is inversely proportional to the delay

in receiving it. The desirability of near-term rewards is not the sort one would expect on the



5      Bowles and Gintis (1986) rely on the inconsistencies in the logic of appropriate action in different
       social settings to construct a general microeconomic theory of social stability and change.

                                                                                                         7
basis of rational discounting. Rather, individuals put inordinately high value on immediate

payoffs—preferring the gratification of a near-term reward at the cost of payoffs with

substantially higher present value that are only slightly delayed.

       Frank (1988) argues that opportunism in economic relationships stems from the way

human brains have evolved to react to near-term rewards.

       The addict’s problem, apparently, differs in degree, not in kind, from one we all
       face—namely, how to accord distant penalties and rewards a more prominent role
       in our behavior. We are all addicts of a sort, battling food, cigarettes, alcohol,
       television sportscasts, detective novels, and a host of other seductive activities.
       That our psychological reward mechanism tempts us with pleasures of the
       moment is simply part of what it means to be a person. In the face of the
       behavioral evidence, it seems hardly far-fetched to suppose that rational
       assessments, by themselves, might often fail to assure behaviors whose rewards
       come mostly in the future (Frank, 1988, p. 88).

Thus, in spite of the best efforts of families, schools and religious institutions, human societies

produce a substantial number of individuals who engage in opportunistic behavior because they

do not have sufficient impulse control to pass up the immediate rewards from cheating. Indeed,

prominent theories of antisocial behavior in criminology and psychology emphasize the central

role of poor impulse control in criminal behavior.6

       The impulse control model has distinctive implications for shirking in employment

relationships. Firms will try to screen out employees with impulse control problems, but none of

the usual methods (psychological tests, interviewing and checking references) will be completely

reliable. Firms will therefore have a proportion of employees who will find the short-term gains

from shirking quite irresistible. Regulating these impulses requires the imposition of costs that

are as immediate and near at hand as the gains from shirking. Frank (1988) argues that the key

psychological role of a conscience is to impose immediate costs to offset the immediate gains

from shirking. Thus, in contrast to the prediction of the conscience model, a reduction in the

short-term costs of shirking should result in an increase in shirking behavior. The longer-term



6      See Gottfredson and Hirschi (1990), Moffit (1993), and Wilson and Herrnstein (1985).

                                                                                                      8
costs of shirking (i.e., the threat of job loss in the future) will have little effect on behavior. In

contrast to the rational cheater model, we would not expect shirking behavior to be strongly

related to the value of the employment relationship to the employee.

                               2. A Model of Opportunistic Behavior
        In this section we present a simple model of the firm’s incentive design problem that

incorporates the rational cheater, impulse control and conscience models.

        Consider the employer to be a profit maximizing firm where profits are:
(1)     p = q [r (e) + e ] - [ w + b[r (e) + e + (1 - m)c]] - a (c) - m (m) .

The firm’s revenues are determined by: r(e), the legitimate pledges earned by a worker who puts

in effort e; e, a mean-zero random term; and q, a constant ranging between 0 and 1. Parameter q

is determined by both the fraction of donations the firm keeps (as a commission from the client

organization) and the fraction of pledges that are honored. We assume r’> 0 and r’’< 0.

Compensation to employees is determined by w, the fixed component, and b, a linear bonus

based on legitimate pledges as well as undetected “cheats.” We use c to represent the number of

such bad calls in a period and m to represent the rate at which calls are monitored by the

employer. Bad calls, i.e. donations reported by employees but subsequently repudiated by

donors, are costly to the firm’s reputation and annoying to the firm’s clients because they cause

the firm to try to collect money from people who deny they ever intended to contribute money.7

We represent these costs by a(c), where a’>0. Monitoring is also expensive and we represent
these costs by m(m), where m’(m) >0 .

        We write the current period utility, U, of a risk neutral worker as:
(2)     U = w + b[r (e) + e + (1 - m)c] - e - c (c)




7       The company we study had as clients large non-profits who were very eager to protect their good
        reputations. In order to retain the trust of these clients, the phone company discouraged its
        employees from engaging in high-pressure or questionable sales practices that often result in bad
        calls.

                                                                                                         9
where e is the monetized disutility of effort and c (c) is the subjective psychological cost of

cheating.8

        The flow of utility from the current job in period t is
(3)     Vt = w + b[r (e) + e + (1 - m)c] - e - c (c) + b [ pqVt +1 + (1 - pq )V A ]

where b is the gross discount rate, VA is the lifetime utility of the “alternative” to the current job,

p is the probability a worker is not detected cheating enough times to warrant dismissal and q is

the exogenous probability that a worker stays on the job next period, given that she is not

dismissed. We make p = p(m,c) and assume that: pm< 0 for c >0; pm=0 for c = 0; pc < 0 for
           ¶2 p
m>0;and   ¶c¶m    £ 0 . This last condition says that as the firm increases monitoring, the effect of a

cheat on dismissal probabilities becomes more pronounced. Conversely, at monitoring rates of 0

the marginal effect of c on p is 0.

        In our set-up, as in the experiment we examine below, the firm has two incentive

instruments—pay (determined by w and b) and monitoring (m)—to regulate two employee

activities—effort expended in soliciting pledges (e) and the number of bad calls (c).

        We consider first the case in which the direct marginal disutility from making bad calls,

c’(c), is high enough that none are made. This frees the firm to adopt a first-best compensation

strategy, i.e., m=0 and b is set to ensure optimal effort, b* =q . In other words, the worker is

paid as if she were a residual claimant to the enterprise.9 The fixed component of compensation,

w, is set to meet a participation constraint and is otherwise irrelevant to our problem.




8       The function c(c) treats the dissatisfaction from shirking as a purely private affair. Many
        sociologists would prefer a set-up that treats the disutility of opportunism as an endogenous
        function of the social setting—especially the degree of opportunism prevailing among other
        employees. In such an expanded model, social comparisons influence the equilibrium level of
        shirking without altering the intrinsic disutility associated with c. When these social comparisons
        are important, the equilibrium level of cheating will be greater than would prevail in the absence
        of social norms (Encinosa, Gaynor, and Rebitzer, 2000, and Kandel and Lazear, 1992) .

9       To see this differentiate (1) with respect to b.

                                                                                                        10
       The “rational cheater” perspective refers to settings where the firm cannot depend on

intrinsic motivation to limit cheating. In this setting the worker chooses c, and e in order to

maximize:
(4)     w + b[r (e) + e + (1 - m)c] - e - c (c) + b [ pqVt +1 + (1 - pq )V A ] .

The first-order conditions for a worker’s choice of optimal effort (e*) and cheating (c*) are,

respectively,10
(5a)    br ' (e* ) - 1 = 0 , and
                                      ¶p
(5b)    b(1 - m) + bq[Vt +1 - V A ]      - c ' (c*) £ 0 .
                                      ¶c
The firm maximizes profits (1) given these response functions—choosing an optimal b and m. It

is easy to demonstrate that in contrast to the case in which “conscience” is the sole constraint on

opportunism, the firm will operate with a positive level of monitoring and relatively lower-

powered incentives (b<q). The need for a positive level of monitoring is obvious, and the

intuition behind the firm’s use of lower-powered incentives is also clear. When a worker is

already inclined to cheat, this inclination will be stronger the higher is the bonus b. While a

high-powered incentive (high b) is helpful in motivating effort, the use of this incentive must be

muted because it provides a strong incentive to cheat.11

       Rewriting (5b), we notice that the “cheating condition” can be written
                                   ¶p
(6)    b(1 - m) £ -bq[Vt +1 - V A ] + c' (c) .
                                   ¶c
The left hand side of the inequality is the marginal material benefit of cheating while the right

hand side is the marginal cost. The second component on the right hand side is the effect of



10                                          ¶2 p
       Second order conditions hold if       ¶c 2
                                                    < 0.

11     The logic is the same as in multi-tasking models such as Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991) and
       Baker (1992). The concern in such models is that when a firm places an incentive on a metered
       task, it risks reducing the effort an employee will undertake on a second valuable (but unmetered)
       task. In our setting the two tasks—both valuable from the firm’s perspective—are making sales
       and preserving the integrity of the firm. A high-powered bonus encourages more of the first task
       but at the potential expense of the second.

                                                                                                      11
“conscience” which could for some individuals be large enough to dissuade cheating altogether.
For workers with an insufficiently strong conscience, the first component on the right hand
side—involving the cost of potential job loss—is crucial. All else equal, a worker is disinclined
to cheat when the job is valuable (q and [Vt+1-VA] are large) and when b is large. Monitoring
provides the key link between the incentive and desired behavior; the worker limits cheating
thanks to fear of detection and dismissal from a valued job. For a worker with an extreme
impulse control problems, though, who deeply discounts future events (b®0), the monitoring
rate is largely irrelevant because the threat of job loss is not of immediate concern.12
        If individuals are neither extremely myopic nor completely bound by conscience, i.e., if
they are rational cheaters, the relationship between monitoring and cheating is clear: the lower
the rate of monitoring in a period the higher will be the incidence of cheating.13 A reduction in
monitoring increases the payoff to the marginal cheat while reducing its expected cost.
        It is worth considering a case in which initially the firm has set the monitoring rate high
enough that there is virtually no cheating among a group of workers for whom there is
heterogeneity in the value placed on the ongoing employment relationship. If the monitoring
rate is then reduced, observed increases in cheating would likely be most pronounced among
workers who place a low value on the job. It is for these workers that the inequality (6) first
becomes binding (and thus c becomes positive) as m declines.

                         3. Experimental Design and Empirical Analysis.

     3.1.   The Setting and Design of the Experiment

        The telephone marketing firm we study had 16 geographically dispersed sites. The job of
the employees working at these sites was to call potential donors and request contributions.



12      In the economics literature, impulse control is often modeled using something other than
        conventional discounting (Rabin, 1998). Introducing hyperbolic (or other non-standard)
        discounting would complicate the exposition without changing the basic point we wish to make.

13      If the reduction in monitoring persists for a long time into the future the net effect is more
        complex because the value of the current job, and hence Vt+1 , increases as m falls.

                                                                                                         12
Employees were paid a base salary and also earned a bonus for exceeding pledge targets. As
employees approached the target, the marginal benefit of cheating approached the value of the
bonus.
         Employees were hired with the understanding that some number of their pledges would
be checked by a call back or audit. The practice at the firm was to inform employees and
supervisors at the end of the week about the number of bad calls detected during the week. Bad
calls were deducted from an employee’s pay. Some bad calls were likely to be the result of bad
luck. Other bad calls more likely reflected employee malfeasance. We refer to calls of this latter
type as suspicious bad calls. The incidence of suspicious bad calls (SBCs) is a noisy indicator of
shirking.14 An employee with a few SBCs was not subject to heavy discipline, but those with an
unusually large number of suspicious bad calls could ultimately be dismissed. The rate or
frequency of call-backs was not revealed to employees, but could be inferred from the number of
bad calls deducted from paychecks at the end of each week.
         The design of the experiment was quite simple. For the sixty weeks prior to the
experiment, the company had reduced call back rates at all sites from 25% to 15% to 10% (see
Table 1 for a description). On June 1st 1994, the call-back rate for 12 sites was reduced from
10% to 5%. This reduction in audit rates freed up the resources needed to increase monitoring to
25% at the four remaining sites. At these four sites, the audit rate “observed” by employees and
supervisors was manipulated by reporting back the results taken from a randomly drawn sub-
sample of the actual call-backs made. The manipulation of the observable audit rate at the four




14       Call-backs happened within hours of the recorded pledge. Suspicious bad calls were defined as
         call-backs where the phone number was disconnected or where the individual reached claimed
         that she did not pledge, or only wanted information.

                                                                                                     13
experimental sites is presented in Table 1. The experimental design allowed for both inter- and
intra-site comparisons.15
        The verification data from call-backs was made available to us in two forms: aggregate,
weekly data for all 16 sites, and individual level data for employees working in the four
experimental sites. The aggregate data extends 60 weeks prior to the experimental manipulation
of audit rates and the experiment took place over 14 weeks. We therefore describe the
experiment as beginning in week 60, although strictly speaking, individuals will have no
knowledge of the manipulation of the monitoring rates until the end of week 61.

     3.2.   Results Using Aggregate, Site Level Data

        Weekly data on the ratio of suspicious bad calls to good calls (i.e., pledges that were
verified by a call-back) was collected for all 16 sites for 60 weeks prior to the June 1st
experiment and for the duration of the experiment.
        We investigate the effect of audit rates on suspicious bad calls in a regression framework.
The left hand side of Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for the variables of interest.
Columns (1) through (4) of Table 2 analyze the ratio of suspicious bad calls to the number of
verified calls; columns (1) and (2) are linear probability models and (3) and (4) are grouped
logits. The right hand side variables in these estimates were the observable audit rate from the
previous week, hours worked at the site during week t, the fraction of work hours attributed to
employees with eventual tenure less than 2-3 weeks, and the fraction of hours spent on
“outreach.” Outreach refers to calls made to previous donors as opposed to “cold calls.” In
addition to these variables, the estimates in Table 2 include site dummy variables.
        The key results from Table 2 are that observable audit rates in the previous week have a
substantial effect on bad calls in the current week. This relationship, however, is strongest when




15      The four experimental sites were chosen because the number of donations and bad calls at these
        sites appeared to move relatively closely together. The observable monitoring rates listed in
        Table 1 were then randomly assigned to each site.

                                                                                                     14
the audit rate is set to zero. Thus, from columns (1) and (2), we see that sites having observable
audit rates of zero in week t experience a 0.03 point increase in the ratio of suspicious bad calls
to verified good calls in week t+1. This point estimate is substantial considering that the mean
value of the dependent variable is 0.02.16 The logit models in (3) and (4) yield results of similar
magnitude. While the sharpest changes in behavior occurred at a 0 observable audit rate, the
effects of monitoring are statistically significant (and with the expected sign) at higher audit rates
as well.

     3.3.   Monitoring and the Suspicious Bad Calls Made by Individuals

        The analysis presented in Table 2 relies on aggregate, site level data to investigate the
determinants of SBCs. The company also made available to us data on the number of audited
bad calls made by individual employees for each of the 14 weeks of the experiment.
Unfortunately, we were not given any information about employees who did not make bad calls.
Thus in order to estimate the response of individuals to variations in the observable audit rates,
we need to find a sample of employees at work during the experiment and match these with the
data on individual bad calls provided by the company.
        One sample of employees is derived from a survey we administered to employees
working at the four experimental sites on two days in week 60.17 Assuming that those who
answered the survey in week 60 were still employed in week 62, we can use these data to
estimate how the experimental manipulation of the observable audit rate in week 61 influenced
the bad call rates of individuals in week 62. A second benefit of this employee survey is that it




16      In the first stage of the study, when 25% of successful calls were audited, call centers reported 1
        verified “good” call per hour worked. This suggests that employees were making roughly 4
        “sales” per hour or 160 for a 40 hour week.

17      The survey was conducted at the company work sites by researchers from Carnegie Mellon. All
        respondents were assured that their responses would be completely confidential and that no one
        from the company would know how they answered the questions. The response rate was nearly
        100%, in part because the survey could be filled out very quickly during work hours and
        individuals who completed the survey were allowed to participate in a raffle of $100.

                                                                                                         15
collected information about the perceived value of the job to employees. We use this
information in subsequent sections to investigate more directly the role that the value of the job
plays in shaping employee behavior.
       Table 3 Panel A presents the data on suspicious bad calls from our sample of employees
working at the four experimental sites in week 60. Column (1) reports the number of
respondents, while columns (2) and (3) report the total number of suspicious bad calls in weeks
61 and 62. These increased substantially at the site with an observable audit rate of 0%, Site D.
There is no clear pattern of change for the other three call centers.
       Employees learn about audit rates at the end of the week, when the bad calls are
subtracted from their incentive pay. Thus by comparing the behaviors of those who “got away”
with a SBC in week 61 with those who did not, we can learn about the response of employees to
monitoring. Column (4) in Panel 3A lists the number of employees at each site who “got away”
with an SBC, i.e., who had at least one suspicious bad call that was not reported back to them in
week 61. Column (5) reports the rate of suspicious bad calls for these employees in the week
after they had a non-reported SBC (week 62). Column (5) is best interpreted in comparison to
column (6), the rate of SBCs for those who did not have on unreported SBC. The comparison
suggests that the SBC rate in week 62 is higher for those with unreported SBCs in week 61. This
difference is especially pronounced in Sites D and B.
       If the results in Panel A of Table 3 reflect opportunistic behavior, we should observe
different patterns when we investigate non-suspicious bad calls, i.e., bad calls that are purely the
result of an employee’s bad luck. Panel B presents data on the number of non-suspicious bad
calls (NSBCs) made by our sample of employees at the four experimental sites. NSBCs were
defined by the employer as pledges where the donor subsequently wanted to cancel their pledge,




                                                                                                  16
or otherwise changed their mind about contributing.18 Since NSBCs are due to bad luck and
SBCs are due to an unobserved combination of bad luck and employee malfeasance, comparing
the results in panels A and B should give us some insight into the role that luck and malfeasance
play in the experiment.
       In Panel B we observe that the number of NSBCs fell for three of the four sites during the
experiment and, unlike the pattern for suspicious bad calls, the site with an observable audit rate
of zero (Site D) did not experience an upsurge in NSBCs. Columns (4) through (6) track the
behavior of those who “got away” with a non-suspicious bad call in week 61. Contrary to the
results for suspicious bad calls in Panel A, we do not find a dramatic difference between
respondents who had at least one NSBC in week 61 and those who did not. In stark contrast to
the results in Panel A, we find that in Site D those with non-reported NSBCs in week 61 actually
had fewer NSBCs per respondent in week 62 than other respondents. The conclusion we draw is
that the results in Panel A of Table 3 reflects some degree of employee malfeasance.
       Table 4 analyzes the data in Table 3 in a regression framework. The estimates in column
(1) regress the number of SBCs in Week 62 against the number of audited, but not reported,
SBCs in Week 61. The relationship between not-reported SBCs and SBCs in the following week
is positive and strongly statistically significant. The behavioral significance of the coefficients is
also large. For every not-reported SBC in Week 61 we observe 1.27 SBCs in Week 62.
       Columns (2) through (5) of Table 4 investigate the robustness of these results. Column
(2) introduces as a covariate the reported SBCs in the previous week. This variable proves to be
behaviorally and statistically insignificant. Column (3) substitutes not-reported NSBCs for
reported SBCs, and column (4) reports estimates when both variables are included in the




18     The distinction between SBCs and NSBCs is consistent with the beliefs of company managers.
       One of the benefits of call-backs for the company is that they provided an opportunity to “save”
       bad calls by convincing donors to follow through on their earlier pledge.

                                                                                                      17
regression. Findings in these columns suggests that it is unreported “suspicious bad calls” rather
than bad calls per se that are influencing employee behavior.
       In the experiment, observable audit rates were varied exogenously across sites, but
individual employees were not randomly assigned to call centers. Thus the possibility remains
that opportunistic behavior is due to cross-site differences in employees rather than observable
audit rates. Column (5) partially addresses this issue by introducing covariates measuring
employee characteristics taken from the employee survey. The variables measure job tenure,
weekly hours usually worked at this job, monthly income from the job, educational attainment,
number of dependents and marital status. We find that the coefficient on Not-reported SBC’s in
Week 61 is very similar to that in column (1).

       The coefficients in Table 4 suggest that employees do engage in opportunistic behavior
when suspicious bad calls are not reported. The aggregate data in Table 2 suggests that
opportunistic behaviors are most visible when monitoring rates are set close to 0. The individual
data summarized in Table 3 suggests that much of the action occurs when observable monitoring
rates were set to 0 at Site D. This raises the possibility that what we are calling opportunistic
behavior is, instead, the result of some feature of Site D other than the observable audit rate. In
principle it should be possible to investigate this interpretation of the results because later on in
the experiment, the observable audit-rate at Site D is increased and other sites are given an
observable audit rate of 0. Thus by extending our analysis of individual data beyond week 62,
we can conduct both intra and inter-site comparisons
       In order to extend our analysis, though, we need to observe employee behavior beyond
week 62. The turnover rate at the company was sufficiently high and weekly hours were
sufficiently irregular that we cannot safely assume that all of the employees who filled out our
survey in week 60 would be at work in each week of the experiment. We therefore needed to
construct a sample of employees who were employed at the company at points in time after week
62. Unfortunately, as we noted above, the company only supplied us information on the
employees who made bad calls in weeks 60-74.
                                                                                                    18
       We can circumvent this data limitation by examining employees who made non-
suspicious bad calls. An employee with at least one non-suspicious bad call in a week must have

been at work during that week. Non-suspicious bad calls, as we discussed above, are believed by
the employer to be the result of bad luck rather than bad actions. We can, therefore, treat the
employees with any NSBCs in a week as a sample of employees at work during week t.
Assuming, as we did in Tables 3 and 4, that an employee at work in week t will be at work in
weeks t+1 and t+2, we can use the information on NSBC’s to construct a rolling, short-term,
longitudinal data set that allows us to estimate the determinants of SBC’s from weeks 62-74 of
the experiment. Specifically, we can estimate the following equation for an individual i at site s
in week t+2 who had at least one NSBC in weeks t and /or t+1.
(7)    SBCist+2 = ao + a1(Not-Reported SBC)ist+1 + eist+1

where eist+1 is a mean zero error term assumed to be uncorrelated with Not-Reported SBCist+1. In
order for this last condition to hold, NSBC in week t+1 must be uncorrelated with SBCs in week
t+2.19 Estimates in Table 4 indicate that NSBCs in week 61 are not correlated with SBCs in

week 62 of the experiment. We assume that it this also the case in subsequent weeks.
        Table 5 presents estimates of the relationship between not-reported suspicious bad calls
in week t-1 and SBCs in week t. The list of employees generated by each week’s list of NSBCs
yields an unbalanced time-series cross sectional sample that includes 461 individuals who appear
on average 3.5 times in the panel. Some individuals appear more than 10 times in the sample
and others only twice.
       For purposes of comparison (to Table 4), column (1) of Table 5 estimates the effect of
not-reported suspicious bad calls in week 61 on SBCs in week 62. The results here are very
close to the results we obtained using the sample of employees who responded to our survey in



19     To see this, remember that individuals are included in our rolling sample if NSBC >0 in week t+1
       and/or t. If NSBCt+1 was positively correlated with SBCt+2, this selection rule would, in effect, be
       selecting our sample on the basis of the dependant variable. Thus individuals in our sample with
       few Not-Reported SBC’s would be more likely to have high values for e .

                                                                                                        19
week 62. A non-reported SBC in week 61 results in 1.3 additional SBCs in week 62. Column
(2) repeats the regression for the sample of employees from all the weeks of the experiment. The
estimated coefficient on Not Reported SBCs in Week t-1 falls substantially but remains positive
and both statistically and behaviorally significant; a non-reported suspicious bad call in week t-1
leads to 0.5 additional SBC’s in week t.20 Column (3) shows that the inclusion of site and week
dummies does little to alter this estimate.
       What explains the fall in the coefficient on Not Reported SBC’s in Week t-1 in estimates
that extend beyond week 62? We find clues to a plausible answer by noting previously discussed
patterns in the data. From Table 2, we observe that much of the response to changes in audit
rates occurred in sites where the observable call-back rate was set close to zero. We also know,
from Tables 3 and 4, that much of the response to “getting away” with a bad call happens within
the first week of the incident and that there is a great deal of individual heterogeneity in
response. Thus, in the most responsive call center, Site D, we find 16 out of 39 respondents
increased SBCs between week 61 and week 62. Analogous numbers for sites A, B and C are,
respectively, 4 out of 40, 11 out of 50, and 9 out of 27.21
       Based on these findings, it seems that a substantial fraction of the employees (especially
at site D and especially in week 62) responded quickly and aggressively to a regime of 0
monitoring. If these highly responsive employees figure out early that “no one is watching,” it
is reasonable to suppose that “getting away” with further bad call in later weeks will have
relatively little additional effect on the behavior of the employee. In short, the estimates in




20     If we re-estimate the equation in column (2) of Table 5 for weeks 63 and beyond the coefficient
       on Not Reported SBC’s in Week t-1 is 0.38 with a t-statistic of 8.14.

21     In an appendix to this paper, we present additional evidence for heterogeneity from the rolling
       sample of employees constructed for weeks 62 to74. For each week's sample, we calculated the
       number of SBC's for the median employee and for the employee at the 80th, 90th, and 95th
       percentile. Averaging these across weeks, we find that the average employee at the median of the
       distribution made virtually no SBC's. In contrast, the “average” employee at the 95th percentile of
       the weekly SBC distribution made as many as 9.7 and as few as 2.58 SBC's in a week.

                                                                                                       20
columns (2) and (3) of Table 5 are “averaging” the large early reaction by some workers with
more muted subsequent responses.
       If the heterogeneity/rapid response explanation in the previous paragraph is correct, the
rapid response of employees requires an explanation. How it is that some employees change
behavior dramatically in response to one or two weeks’ experience with 0 monitoring? We can
illustrate the nature of this problem with some simple “back of the envelope” calculations. If
10% of calls were monitored, and an employee made an average of 120 good calls per week and
4 deliberate SBCs per week, and 8% of “good” calls are falsely classified as suspicious, the
probability of having zero reported SBCs in a week is 0.25. Such a worker would thus not think
it too unusual to have zero reported SBCs in a given week or even for two consecutive weeks.
However, when the monitoring rate is 0, even a minimal amount of communication between
workers would allow workers to infer that the monitoring rate declined. For example, if three
workers talking at the water cooler each confirmed having 0 SBCs, they would correctly notice
that this is unusual (an event with probability 0.016 given our “back of the envelope”
assumptions). If these workers then compared notes with additional workers or noticed the
absence of SBCs for a second week, they would very quickly ascertain that the monitoring rate
had declined.22
       The regressions in Table 5 estimate the effect of “getting away” with a bad call on
subsequent behavior. In interpreting these results, we note that our key variable, not-reported
suspicious bad calls, is a rather noisy measure of getting away with bad calls in a week. There




22     Most of the action in the experiment occurred at the zero-monitoring site. Clearly the inference
       problem is easier for workers at this site. In addition, the psychology literature shows that
       individuals often fail to correctly assess the odds of “getting caught” in circumstances such as the
       one we study. Kahenman and Tversky (1979) suggest that individuals overstate the likelihood of
       small probability bad events (such as getting caught fabricating a sale), but perceive zero
       probabilities accurately. These psychological biases concerning risky decisions would cause
       employees to respond much more strongly to a monitoring rate of 0 percent than say 2 percent
       even though the difference between those monitoring rates would not otherwise be particularly
       important to a rational cheater.

                                                                                                         21
are at least two sources of “measurement error:” error due to the fact that only a random sample
of calls were audited, and error due to fact that some SBCs are the result of bad luck rather than
bad actions. As a consequence we likely have attenuation bias in our OLS estimators.
Fortunately, we have a natural set of instruments, the exogenously-set monitoring rate prevailing
at the site in week t-1.
            Instrumental variables estimates are presented in columns (4) and (5) of Table 5. In (4),
the estimated coefficient on Not Reported SBC’s in Week t-1 is considerably larger than the
comparable OLS estimate (3). In (5) we also include both week and individual fixed effects.23
We continue to find that when workers get away with bad calls, thanks to reduced monitoring,
they respond with a subsequent increase in cheating. The fact that these results show up in the
IV estimation procedure gives increased confidence that the experimental manipulation of
monitoring is causing the changed observed behavioral responses in cheating.

     3.4.       Employee Heterogeneity

            Patterns observed in Table 3 suggest considerable heterogeneity in employee responses to
the experiment. In this section we examine employee heterogeneity more directly. A central
prediction of the model of opportunism presented in Section 2 is that the employee’s tendency to
engage in opportunistic behavior should be related to the value of the current job relative to
outside options. We therefore begin our analysis of employee heterogeneity by examining
differences in how employees value their job.
            To assess the value of the call center job, we made use of employee survey data as well
as data on local labor market conditions taken from the US Census. The employee survey
(which was distributed in week 60) asked questions about employee perceptions concerning their
job and their relationship with the employer. Summary statistics from the employee survey are
presented in Table 6. The first question asks, “If you were to look for a new job in your county,




23          We do not have both site and individual fixed effects because no workers transferred across sites.

                                                                                                            22
how easy would it be for you to find a job with about the same level of pay and benefits as this
company?” Nearly 60% of respondents said that it would be quite difficult or very difficult to
find an equivalent job. The second question asks how likely it is the employee will be at the
current employer in one year. More than 70% of respondents thought it almost or somewhat
certain that they will still be employed in the next year.
       The remaining statistics in Table 6 concerns employee assessments of their treatment by
the employer. Employees were asked to respond on a 1 to 5 scale to the following statements:
“[the company] cares about my personal well-being;” “[the company] takes advantage of me;”
and “[the company] is a good place to work.” One striking feature of these tabulations is how
many employees have positive feelings toward the employer. Roughly 70% of employees agree
or strongly agree that the company cares about their well-being and more than 90% agree or
strongly agree that the company is a good place to work. Similarly, 71% disagree or strongly
disagree with that the company takes advantage of them.
       To ascertain the value of outside job opportunities, we use extracts from the 1990 Census
to estimate wage equations for the MSA or county where the call center was located. We then
used these estimates, together with demographic information about employees collected in the
employee survey, to “predict” the wage that a person with similar characteristics would, on
average, receive in the local labor market.24 The telephone solicitation company used the same
compensation formula at all of its call centers. Thus variations in the predicted wage in the local
labor market is a reasonably exogenous determinant of the value of outside alternatives relative
to working for the company.
       We use the Table 6 data on employee perceptions of their current employment
relationship to check the plausibility of the predicted “outside” wage as a measure of the relative



24     The four “experimental” call centers were located in 4 different cities. Each city was in a
       different county and the counties were in three different states. Thus it is reasonable to suppose
       that the four call centers were situated in distinct labor markets. Details on the wage equations
       and the data we used are presented in an appendix.

                                                                                                        23
value of the current job. Employees with stronger outside options should, ceteris paribus, value
the employment relationship less and should be less likely to anticipate staying with the
company.
       Table 7 presents ordered probit estimates of the relationship between a worker’s current
earnings, her expected outside earning opportunities (as estimated using Census data), and her
perception about outside opportunities, as presented in Table 6. In column (1) we estimate the
effect of outside options on the perceived difficulty of finding an equivalent job. Results are as
expected: The better an individual’s outside options, as measured by our variable Estimated
Outside Monthly Earnings, the greater the perceived ease of finding an equivalent job.25

Monthly Income At This Job has the opposite effect; the higher one’s current income the lower

the perceived ease of an equivalent job.
       Column (2) in Table 7 concerns the effect of outside options on expected job tenure.
Here we observe that neither Estimated Outside Monthly Earnings nor Monthly Income at This
Job have a statistically significant relationship with expectations about staying at the job the next

year. Students, however, are less likely to stay an additional year and employees with more
current job tenure are more likely to expect to stay an additional year.
       Columns (3) though (5) examine the relationship between outside job offers and workers’
assessments of treatment by the employer. We find that the higher the Estimated Outside
Monthly Earnings, the less likely an employee is to agree with the statement that the employer

“cares about me” and the more likely they are to agree with the statement that the company




25     Point estimates indicate that the effect of Estimated Outside Monthly Earnings is substantial. An
       increase of one standard deviation in Estimated Outside Monthly Earnings ($258), reduces the
       probability that the respondent believes an equivalent job will be “very difficult” to find by 0.129
       points. (This point estimate was calculated in two steps. First, we used the ordered probit
       estimates in Table 7 to estimate the probability that each individual will choose one of the four
       answers. We then regressed the predicted probabilities of choosing “very difficult” against the
       same right hand side variables used in the ordered probit. The resulting regression coefficients
       indicate how the mean predicted probabilities vary with the right hand side variables.)

                                                                                                         24
“takes advantage of me,” but Estimated Outside Monthly Earnings has no statistically significant
effect on perceptions about whether the company is a “good place to work.”
       By adding together employee responses to Company Cares About Me and Company Is
Good Place to Work and subtracting responses to Company Takes Advantage of Me we can

construct a general “attitude scale” that increases as employees’ attitudes towards the employer
improves. We present this scale in the variable ATTITUDE and examine it’s determinants in
column (6) of Table 7.26 We find that employee attitudes towards the employer become more
negative as their outside earnings options improve. We also find that students are more likely to
have negative attitudes towards the employer than other employees. Taken together, the results
in Table 7 indicate that measured employee perceptions of the job and the employer move in
plausible ways with an objective and independently derived measure of outside earning
opportunities.
       In Table 8 we investigate how employee perceptions about the value of the job and their
attitude towards the employer shape their response to “getting away” with an SBC. Column (1)
of Table 8 examines how the perceived difficulty in finding an equivalent job and employee
attitudes towards the employer influence the number of SBCs in week 62. We find that the
coefficient on Not Reported SBCs Week 61 in Table 8 is virtually identical to those reported in
Table 4. We also observe that the coefficient on ATTITUDE is negative and statistically
significant; people with positive attitudes toward the firm cheat less. The coefficient on Difficult
to Find Job is small in magnitude and not statistically significant.27      The rest of Table 8
explores these results in more detail.




26     More specifically, the variable ATTITUDE = Company Cares About Me + Company Is Good
       Place to Work - Company Takes Advantage of Me where the attitude variables are standardized
       (mean 0, variance 1) versions of the employee attitude variables in Tables 6 and 7. ATTITUDE
       has a Cronbach’s a = 0.80

27     We also experimented with using Estimated Outside Monthly Earnings to assess the value of the
       job relative to outside options. We find that this variable also had no effect on SBC’s in week 62.

                                                                                                       25
       One can view the ATTITUDE variable as entering our model of opportunism in two
ways. First, a positive attitude towards the employer presumably reflects feelings that, ceterus
paribus, increase the value of the job. Alternatively, it may be that employees with positive
feelings towards the employer experience heightened disutility when engaging in opportunistic
behavior that damages the employer. This heightened disutility may be due to feelings of
reciprocity for receiving fair treatment from the employer or may reflect a set of innate
psychological traits (such as empathy) that make it easier to feel good about the employer and
also raise the psychological costs of bad behavior.28
       Our model of opportunism suggests that both mechanisms should have a similar
influence on the magnitude of any behavioral response to “getting away” with bad calls. As we
noted at the end of Section 2, workers who place high value on their job will likely be less
responsive to a reduction in monitoring than workers who place a low value on the job. It
follows that if ATTITUDE reflects increased value of the job, we should observe that employees
with a strongly positive ATTITUDE will be less responsive than other employees to a reduction
in monitoring rates. Similarly, if ATTITUDE reflects the heightened direct disutility of shirking,
equation (6) predicts that employees with strongly positive ATTITUDE will respond less strongly
to a fall in monitoring and many won’t respond at all.
       Columns (2) and (3) of Table 8 examine the effect of ATTITUDE on the response of
employees to “getting away” with a bad call in week 61. Column (2) is estimated for employees
whose score on ATTIUDE is greater than or equal to the sample median and column (3) is
estimated for employees with scores below the median. Comparing the estimated coefficients on
Not Reported SBCs Week 61 in columns (2) and (3) we find that employees with positive

attitudes towards employers do indeed respond less strongly to “getting away” with an SBC than


       Similarly in regressions containing both Estimated Outside Monthly Earnings and Difficult to
       Find Job, the two variables were neither individually nor jointly significant.

28     The relationship between the psychic costs of malfeasance and feelings of reciprocity towards the
       employer have been discussed in models of “gift exchange” (Akerlof 1982).

                                                                                                      26
do employees with negative attitudes. For employees with positive attitudes, having a not
reported SBC in week 61 increases the number of SBCs in week 62 by 0.89. For employees
with negative attitudes, one would expect an increase of 1.60 SBCs. This 79% difference is both
behaviorally and statistically significant.29
       Taken together, the results in columns (1), (2) and (3) indicate that employees with
positive attitudes towards the employer engage in less opportunism and respond less to “getting
away” with an SBC. These findings do not, however, allow us to distinguish between the two
mechanisms by which ATTITUDE may shape opportunistic behavior—increased value of the job
or increased direct disutility from taking advantage of the employer. We can shed some
additional light on this question, however, by examining an alternative indicator of the value of
the current job. Specifically, if ATTITUDE reflects variations in the value of the job, we might
expect our other direct measures of the value of the job to influence opportunistic behavior in
similar fashion.
       Columns (4) and (5) of Table 8 look in more detail at the Difficult to Find Job variable.
We again divide the sample of employees into two groups: those who believe it would not “be
difficult” or “very difficult” to find another equivalent job (column (4)) and those who do believe
that finding an equivalent job would be “difficult” or “very difficult” (column (5)). Our model
predicts that the coefficient on Not Reported SBCs Week 61 should be smaller for those who
value the job, in column (5), than for those who place lower relative value on the job, in column
(4). We find, however, exactly the opposite pattern. “Getting away” with an SBC in week 61 is
associated with 0.73 additional bad calls in week 62 for employees who think it would be easy to
find an equivalent alternative job. In contrast, an undetected SBC in week 61 is associated with




29     A test for equality of the coefficients gives a t-statistic of 4.20.

                                                                                                  27
1.31 SBCs in week 62 for the employees in column (5). The estimated 78% difference in
response across the two groups of employees is behaviorally and statistically significant.30
       In short, evidence from the experiment indicates that employees with positive attitudes
towards employers were less responsive to “getting away” with a bad call than were employees
with negative attitudes. If this impact of ATTITUDE were due to the variation in the value
employees place on the job (due to the positive feelings toward the employer), we would expect
direct measures of the value of the job to have similar effect. Instead we observe that employees
who believe they would have a hard time finding an equivalent job are more responsive to
“getting away” with an SBC.
       In our experiment, employees were not randomly assigned to call centers. Rather they
chose to work at the call centers after considering their other opportunities in the labor market.
From this perspective, it would not perhaps be surprising that variations in the perceived value of
the job within the company (as reflected in Difficult to Find Job) may be too small to have a
meaningful effect on opportunism. Our finding that employees who place a high value on the
job are significantly more responsive to “getting away” with an SBC is, however, harder to
reconcile with our model of opportunism. One possible explanation for this anomaly may rest on
a kind of employee heterogeneity that we do not consider in our theoretical analysis. It may be
that employees who responded in the survey (in week 60) that their job market prospects are
poor believed this because they understood that they had impulse control or other related
psychological problems (such as drug or alcohol dependence) that were likely to get them in
trouble with employers. These impulse control problems were then revealed as the experiment
proceeded (in weeks 61 and 62). Similarly, it may be that employees believed that their job




30     The t-statistic for a test of differences in the estimated values is 2.12. If we re-estimated
       equations (4) and (5) but divided the sample into employees with high (above the mean) and low
       (below the mean) values of predicted outside earnings, we get similar results. Employees with
       low expected outside earnings are 37% more responsive to getting away with an SBC than other
       employees. These differences are both behaviorally and statistically significant.

                                                                                                     28
prospects were poor because they understood that their skills or cognitive abilities where sub-par.
There is strong evidence from the psychological literature that cognitive skills and impulse
control problems are correlated.31
            The explanations offered in the preceding paragraph are of course highly speculative.
The point we wish to emphasize is that the anomalous results reported in columns (4) and (5) of
Table 8 may be consistent with our model of opportunism if there is important and unobserved
employee heterogeneity in “impulse control,” in worker “conscience,” or both. Even with this
type of employee heterogeneity, however, the fundamental mechanism of the rational cheater
model still plays the key role: workers who have a propensity to cheat—owing to a weak
attachment to the firm (or an underdeveloped conscience generally) or to poor impulse control—
do in fact increase their cheating when the reward to cheating increases.

     3.5.      The Economic Return to Opportunistic Behavior

            The logic of the incentive problem we have studied assumes that individual employees
benefit financially from engaging in opportunistic behaviors. We can use the data collected in
this experiment to estimate the economic return from shirking.
            The equations in Table 9 regress the employee’s reported monthly income from the
phone company against the number of suspicious bad calls (SBCs) observed in week 60. In
columns (1) and (3) we regress income measures against SBCs. In columns (2) and (4) we
include additional control variables. The coefficient in column (2) indicates that the number of
SBCs made in week 60 are positively associated with earnings. Employees at the 75th percentile
of SBCs (i.e., those with 1 SBC in week 60) earned on average $41.00 per month more than
employees at the median (0 SBCs in week 60). This 5% increase above mean earnings is
consistent with the point estimates in column (4).




31          See, for example, Seguin, et al. (1999), Wallace and Newman (1997), and Wilson and Herrnstein
            (1985).

                                                                                                       29
                                           4. Conclusion
        Much of the economics literature on incentives and employment relationships focuses on
a model of opportunism that we dub the “rational cheater model.” In contrast, the psychological
and sociological literature often emphasize alternative models (that we name the “conscience
model” and the “impulse control model”). We argue that the “rational cheater model” and its
alternatives can be viewed as variants of an overarching model of opportunistic behavior. We
use this model to interpret the results of a unique field experiment that is unusually well suited
for examining the economics of opportunistic behavior in employment relationships.
        The results indicate that a sizeable fraction of employees behave roughly in accordance
with the “rational cheater model:” employees respond to a reduction in monitoring by quickly
and sharply increasing the rate at which they engage in malfeasance. We also find, however, that
many other employees do not exploit reductions in monitoring to their own advantage. Survey
evidence indicates that the employees who responded quickly to reductions in monitoring tended
to be those who perceived the employer as being unfair and uncaring. We find suggestive but
indirect evidence that this relationship between employee attitudes and malfeasance is more
likely due to variations in the disutility of opportunism (as emphasized in the “conscience”
model) than to variations in the value of the job (as emphasized in the “rational cheater” model).
Having said this, we note that “conscience” alone is not guiding the actions of the workers we
observe in the experiment. Workers who are inclined toward opportunism (including,
apparently, a number of the workers who view the employer as unfair and uncaring) take
advantage of opportunities to cheat when the material advantage of doing so increases.
        Any general conclusions drawn from this experiment must be qualified by two key
limitations of the experiment. First, while monitoring was manipulated experimentally across
sites, individual employees were not randomly assigned to call centers. Rather they chose to
work at the call center after comparing it to their alternatives in the local labor market. One
implication of this set-up is that intra-organizational variation in the value of the job (relative to
alternatives) may not be large enough to have a measurable effect on employee behavior. In

                                                                                                     30
addition, the absence of random employee assignment makes it is difficult to pin down precisely
the role that unobserved employee characteristics play in the patterns of opportunistic behavior
that we observe. Second, the experiment occurred under conditions prevailing at one specific
company. Although the telephone solicitation company was generally viewed favorably by its
employees, the firm also set wages close to the level that many of its employees could find
elsewhere, and it functioned with high rates of turnover. Employees also had only a one-time
interaction with potential donors and little connection to the organizations on whose behalf they
solicited funds. Small employment rents, short expected tenures and brief one-time interactions
with customers are probably not the best conditions in which to observe the high levels of
intrinsic motivation that form the behavioral cornerstone of the “conscience” model.
       The behavioral heterogeneity we observe has important implications for the design and
management of reward systems. On the one hand, monitoring and incentives strategies are
needed to regulate the margin of employees who are opportunistic. On the other hand,
management strategies need to sustain the motivation of the substantial fraction of employees
disinclined to shirk. Balancing this tension is tricky, but our findings suggest that management’s
perceived empathy and fairness in dealing with employees may play an important role in
reducing workplace opportunism.




                                                                                                   31
                                          References

Akerlof, G. A. (1982). “Labor Contracts as Partial Gift Exchanges,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 97(4): 543-69.

Baker, G. (1992). “Incentive Contracts and Performance Measurement,” Journal of Political
Economy 100(3) : 598-614.

Bazerman, M. H., R. Gibbons, L. Thompson and K. L. Valley (1998). “When and Why Do
Negotiators Outperform Game Theory?” Debating Rationality: Nonrational Elements of
Organizational Decision Making. R. N. Stern and J. Halpern. Ithaca and London, Cornell
University Press and ILR Press.

Baron, J. and Kreps D. (1999). Strategic Human Resources: Frameworks for General Managers,
John Wilely and Sons.

Berman, Eli (2000). “Sect Subsidy and Sacrifice,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(3): 905-
954

Bewley, Truman F. (2000). Why Don't Wages Fall in a Recession? Cambridge, MA, Harvard
University Press.

Bowles, Samuel and Gintis, Herbert (1986) Democracy and Capitalism. New York: Basic Books

Camerer, Colin, Linda Babcock, George Loewenstein and Richard Thaler (1997). “Labor Supply
of New York City Cabdrivers: One Day at a Time,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(2):
407-442.

Camerer, C. and R. Thaler (1995). “Ultimatums, Dictators and Manners,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 9(2): 209-219.

Cappelli, Peter and Kevin Chauvin (1992). “An Interplant Test of the Efficiency Wage
Hypothesis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(3): 769-780.

Drago, Robert (1989). “Supervision and High Wages as Competing Incentives: A Basis for
Labour Segmentation Theory,” Microeconomic Issues in Labour Economics: New Approaches.
Robert Drago and Richard Perlman. New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf.

Encinosa, W., Gaynor, M. and Rebitzer, J. (2000). “The Sociology of Groups and the Economics
of Incentives: Theory and Evidence On Incentives in Medical Groups,” (Case Western Reserve
University Working Paper) .

Frank, R. H. (1988). Passions Within Reason: The Strategic Role of the Emotions. New York,
W. W. Norton and Company.

Gaynor, Martin., Rebitzer, James., and Taylor, Lowell (2001). “Incentives in HMOs,” NBER
Working Paper # W8522.



                                                                                             32
Gottfredson, M. R., & Hirschi, T. (1990). A General Theory of Crime. Stanford, C.A.: Stanford
University Press.

Grasmick, Harold G. and Robert J. Bursik, Jr. (1990) “Conscience, Significant Others, and
Rational Choice: Extending the Deterrence Model,” Law and Society Review 24: 837.

Hall, Brian and Liebman, Jeffery B. “Are CEO's Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 113(3): 653-692.

Holmstrom, B. and P. Milgrom (1991). “Multi-task Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive
Contracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 7:
24-52.

Kahneman, Daniel and Tversky, Amos (1979). “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under
Risk, Econometrica 47(2): 263-91.

Kandel, E. and E. Lazear (1992). “Peer Pressure and Partnerships,” Journal of Political
Economy 100(4): 801-817.

Kreps, D. M. (1997). “Intrinsic Motivation and Extrinsic Incentives,” American Economic
Review 87(2): 359-364.

Landers, R., Rebitzer J., and Taylor, L. (1996). “Rat Race Redux: Adverse Selection in The
Determination of Work Hours in Law Firms,” American Economic Review 86(2): 329-48.

Lazear, E. P. (1996). “Performance Pay and Productivity,” American Eonomic Review 90(5),
1346-61.

Livingston, Sterling J. (1969). “Pygmalion in Management,” Harvard Business Review 47(4) :
81-89.

March, J. G. (1994). A Primer on Decision Making: How Decisions Happen. New York, The
Free Press.

Moffitt, T. E. (1993). “Adolescence-limited and life-course persistent antisocial behavior: A
developmental taxonomy,” Psychological Review 100(4): 674-701

Nagin, Daniel S. and Raymond Paternoster (1993) “Enduring Individual Differences and
Rational Choice Theories of Crime,” Law and Society Review 27: 467-496.

Pfeffer, J. (1996). Competitive Advantage Through People: Unleashing the Power of the Work
Force. Cambridge, MA, Harvard Business School Press.

Prendergast, Canice (1999) “Provision of Incentives In Firms,” Journal of Economic Literature,
37(1): 7-63.

Rebitzer, J. (1995). “Is There a Trade-Off Between Supervision and Wages? An Empirical Test
of Efficiency Wage Theory,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 28(1): 107-29.


                                                                                                33
Rabin, Matthew (1998). “Psychology and Economics,” Journal of Economic Literature 36(1):
11-46.

Roth, A. E. and R. L. Slonim (1998). “Learning in High Stakes Ultimatum Games: An
Experiment in the Slovak Republic,” Econometrica 66(3): 569-96.

Seguin, Jean, Bernard Boulerice, Philip Harden, Richard Tremblay, and Robert Pihl (1999).
“Executive Functions and Physical Aggression After Controlling for Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder,” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 40: 1197-1208.

Wallace, John F. and Joseph P. Newman (1997). “Neuroticism and the Attentional Mediation of
Dysregulatory Psychopathology,” Cognitive Therapy and Research 21: 135-56.

Wilson, James Q. and Richard J. Herrnstein. (1985). Crime and Human Nature. New York:
Simon & Shuster.




                                                                                            34
                                                  Table 1
                          Observable and Actual Audit Rates During the Experiment
                                          actual audit rate is in ()

                                     Pre-Experiment                            Experiment

                         Week 1-25     Week 26-44      Week 45-59      Week 60-67     Week 68-74

“Experimental” sites
      Site A             25% (25%)     15% (15%)       10% (10%)        2% (25%)        0% (25%)
      Site B             25% (25%)     15% (15%)       10% (10%)        5% (25%)        2% (25%)
      Site C             25% (25%)     15% (15%)       10% (10%)       10% (25%)       10% (25%)
      Site D             25% (25%)     15% (15%)       10% (10%)        0% (25%)       10% (25%)

Twelve “control” sites   25% (25%)     15% (15%)       10% (10%)        5% (5%)         5% (5%)
                                                                                   Table 2
                                                                 Audits and the Rate of Suspicious Bad Calls

                                                             Sample Means       Sample Means             (1)          (2)              (3)         (4)
                                                               All Sites       Experimental Sites     All Sites    Exp. Sites       All Sites   Exp. Sites

SBC Rate = SBC's/Good Calls Week t                                0.021               0.019          SBC Rate      SBC Rate       (see notes)   (see notes)
                                                                                                       OLS           OLS         Grouped Logit Grouped Logit
Observable Audit Rates
 dummy variables = 1 when
   Audit Rate in Week t-1 is 0%                                                                         0.031         0.031            0.966        1.089
                                                                                                      (2.692)        (2.783)         (6.969)      (5.357)
   Audit Rate in Week t-1 is 2%                                                                         0.006         0.006            0.359        0.394
                                                                                                      (2.807)        (1.477)         (2.148)      (1.704)
   Audit Rate in Week t-1 is 5%                                                                         0.019         0.008            0.949        0.702
                                                                                                      (6.291)        (1.865)        (10.688)      (2.945)
   Audit Rate in Week t-1 is 10%                                                                        0.002         0.007            0.383        0.651
                                                                                                      (1.358)       (16.924)         (5.032)      (4.170)
   Audit Rate in Week t-1 is 15%                                                                        0.002         0.002            0.405        0.463
                                                                                                      (1.203)        (3.572)         (5.595)      (2.969)
Hours Worked at Site Per Week                                  1,240.388           1,315.439            0.000         0.000            0.000        0.000
                                                                                                      (1.419)        (1.052)         (2.276)      (1.566)
Fraction Of Workers With Eventual Tenure < 2 Wks                  0.232               0.241            -0.012         0.001            0.072       -0.258
                                                                                                      (1.417)        (0.026)         (0.199)      (0.351)
Fraction of Hours Spent in Outreach                               0.605               0.612             0.006         0.009            0.145        0.328
                                                                                                      (3.248)        (2.218)         (2.100)      (2.318)
Constant                                                                                                0.002         0.006           -4.872       -4.657
                                                                                                      (0.436)        (0.434)        (29.917)     (15.344)
Call Center Fixed Effects

Observations                                                                                            779           196             768          196
Adjusted R2                                                                                           0.33827       0.43271         0.43832       0.5025

SBC refers to suspicious bad calls in a week. SBC's are pledges where donor's number is disconnected or where donors claims:
 they only wanted information; they did not pledge. Good Calls are call-backs that verified donors pledge. Employees made an average of 4 good calls / hour.
 The omitted observable audit rate was 25%.
Estimates in columns (1) and (2) are linear probability models. All t statistics are calculated using "White" standard errors.
Estimates in columns (3) and (4) are grouped logit models. The dependent variable is log(SBC Rate/ (1-SBC Rate))

All data in this table are taken from the 60 weeks prior to the start of the experimental manipulation of percieved monitoring rates.
                                                                Table 3
                                 Analysis of Bad Calls Made by Survey Respondents in Weeks 61 and 62

                                                  Panel 3A: Suspicious Bad Calls
                                 (1)          (2)
                                                (3)             (4)              (5)        (6)
                                                            Number of
                                                          Respondents      SBC Rate in  SBC Rate
                         Number of Number of Number of     With a Non-     Week 62 for Week 62 for
Experimental Observable Respondents SBC's in  SBC's in   reported SBC in Respondents Respondents
    Site     Audit Rate  in Survey  Week 61  Week 62         Week 61        In Col (4) Not In Col (4)
     A          2%           40       32        11              19            0.473        0.095
     B          5%           50       41        54              15            2.733        0.371
     C         10%           27       17        28               3            1.333          1
     D          0%           39       81        124             21            5.286        0.722


                                                          Panel 3B: Non-suspicious Bad Calls
                                 (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)

                                                                     Number of
                                                                    Respondents    NSBC Rate in     NSBC's rate
                         Number of                                   With a Non-    Week 62 for     Week 62 for
Experimental Observable Respondents        NSBC in     NSBC in     Reported NSBC's Respondents      Respondent
    Site     Audit Rate  in Survey         Week 61     Week 62       in Week 61      in Col. 4      not in Col. 4
     A          2%           40              39          14               22           0.455           0.222
     B          5%           50              24          28               16             1            0.3529
     C         10%           27              18          18               7              1              0.55
     D          0%           39              40          27               17          0.4118           0.909

SBC refers to suspicious bad calls in a week. SBC's are pledges where donor's number is disconnected or where donors claims:
 they only wanted information; they did not pledge.

NSBC refers to non-suspicious bad calls in a week. NSBC's are pledges for which the donor
 claims they have changed their minds about their pledge or want to cancel the pledge.
                                                                        Table 4
                                                Determinants of Suspicious Bad Calls (SBC's) in Week 62
                                                (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)
                                               OLS         OLS        OLS         OLS         OLS
                                              SBC in      SBC in     SBC in      SBC in      SBC in
               Dep. Variable                  Week 62     Week 62    Week 62     Week 62     Week 62


Not Reported SBCs in Wk 61                      1.272       1.270                   1.277      1.131
                                              (15.269)    (15.163)                (15.157)   (10.972)
Reported SBCs in Wk 61                                      0.068
                                                           (0.201)
Not Reported NSBC                                                      0.239       -0.075
                                                                      (1.005)     -(0.495)
Tenure (in years)                                                                               0.140
  (1.376; 1.805)                                                                              (1.143)
Usual Hrs/ Wk.= 20-30                                                                          -0.090
  (0.541; 0.500)                                                                             -(0.109)
Usual Hrs/ Wk. =30                                                                             -0.377
   (0.391; 0.490)                                                                            -(0.407)
Currently a Student                                                                             0.636
   (0.308; 0.464)                                                                             (1.263)
Monthly Income This Job                                                                         0.001
   (727.93; 268.702)                                                                          (1.456)
High School or GED                                                                              0.254
   (0.383; 0.488)                                                                             (0.355)
Some College or 2 Yr. College                                                                   0.007
   (0.429; 0.497)                                                                             (0.010)
Degree from 4 yr. College or Grad School                                                        0.103
   (0.098; 0.298)                                                                             (0.112)
# Dependents Who You Support                                                                    0.064
   (0.812; 1.238)                                                                             (0.347)
Married                                                                                        -0.453
  (0.421; 0.496)                                                                             -(1.017)
Constant                                         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
Number of Observations                           156         156        156         156          156
Adjusted R 2                                    0.600       0.597      0.000       0.597        0.494

SBC are suspicious bad calls. NSBC are not suspicious bad calls
The company called back 25% of calls at experimental site, and reported a random sample of these back to employee and supervisor
Not Reported SBC are the number of suspicious bad calls not reported to employee at end of week.
Numbers in ( ) are t-statistics. Numbers in ( ; ) under variable names are the mean and standard deviation of right hand side variables in [5]

In column [4] can reject hypothesis that coefficient on Not Reported SBC in Wk 61 is the same as Reported in Wk 61, F(1,153)=11.67
                                                                   Table 5
                                                 Determinants of Suspicious Bad Calls (SBC's)



                                           (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)


                                         OLS           OLS         OLS         OLS         2SLS        2SLS
                                        SBC in        SBC in      SBC in      SBC in      SBC in      SBC in
                                        Week 62       Week t      Week t      Week t      Week t      Week t


Not Reported SBC in Week t-1              1.293         0.484      0.468       0.151       0.792       0.683
                                         (5.414)       (6.320)    (6.205)     (4.760)    (11.280)     (3.820)
Other's Not Reported SBC's in
   Week t-1
Dummy Variables for Site                                            yes                     yes
Dummy Variables for Week                                            yes         yes         yes         yes
Dummy Variables for Individual                                                  yes                     yes
R2                                        0.613        0.230       0.274       0.123       0.179       0.261
Observations                               132         1256        1256        1256        1256        1256
Number of Individuals                      132          341         341         341         341         341



Column 1 is restricted to those with NSBC's in week 60, the rest of the columns are for the entire sample.
The instrumental variables used in columns (5) and (6) are dummy variables for the observed audit rates at a site in week t-1

The t-statistics in columns (1)-(4) are calculated using robust standard errors allowing for clustering of observations by employee.
The t-statistics in columns (5) and (6) are calculated using robust standard errors allowing for clustering of observations by site.
The mean value of Others' Not Rep. SBC's in Week t-1 is 29.6 with a standard deviation of 27
                                                                   Table 6
                                        Heterogeneity in Employee Attitudes About the Job and Employer

Attitudes Towards The Job

                                        How Easy to Find An Equivalent job? (152 respondents)

                            very easy       quite easy        quite difficult   very difficult     Total
                             13.82%          26.32%             51.32%            8.55%          100.00%

                     How Likely Is it That You Will Be Working for [this company] in 1 year? (153 respondents)

                       Almost Certain   Somewhat Certain         Unlikely       Very Unlikely      Total
                          39.87%            33.33%               11.11%           15.69%         100.00%

Attitudes Towards the Employer
                                        Company Cares About Me? (155 Respondents)
                            Strongly                        Neither Agree nor                    Strongly
                            Disagree         Disagree           Disagree           Agree          Agree       Total
                             4.52%            9.68%              24.52%           44.52%         16.77%     100.00%

                                        Company Takes Advangage of Me? (155 respondents)
                            Strongly                        Neither Agree nor                    Strongly
                            Disagree         Disagree           Disagree           Agree          Agree       Total
                            27.74%           34.19%              26.45%            5.16%          6.45%     100.00%

                                        Company Is a Good Place To Work? (155 respondents)

                            Strongly                        Neither Agree nor                    Strongly
                            Disagree         Disagree           Disagree           Agree          Agree       Total
                             3.23%            3.23%              12.26%           56.13%         25.16%     100.00%
                                                                           Table 7
                                                 Determinants of Employee Attitudes Towards Job and Employer

                                            ordered probit     ordered probit     ordered probit   ordered probit   ordered probit    OLS
                                                  (1)                (2)                (3)              (4)              (5)          (6)
                                                               How Likely Is it
                                                              That You Will Be                       Company
                                             How Easy to      Working for [this                       Takes         Company Is a ATTITUDE
                                               Find An         company] in 1      Company Cares    Advangage of      Good Place   (towards
                                            Equivalent job?        year?            About Me           Me             To Work    employer)

Estimated Outside Monthly Earnings             -0.0020             0.0002            -0.0009           0.0010          -0.0002       -0.0007
 (z-statistic or, in col. 6, t-statistic)      -(4.159)            (0.360)           -(2.043)          (2.290)         -(0.555)      -(1.930)
Monthly Income This Job                         0.0015            -0.0004             0.0008          -0.0004           0.0001        0.0004
 (z-statistic or, in col. 6, t-statistic)       (3.178)           -(0.889)            (1.805)         -(0.933)          (0.161)       (1.180)
Currently A Student                             0.0410             0.8043            -0.3288           0.6524          -0.6127       -0.4489
 (z-statistic or, in col. 6, t-statistic)       (0.158)            (3.143)           -(1.342)          (2.595)         -(2.384)      -(2.200)
Current Job Tenure                              0.0238            -0.1386            -0.0413           0.1494          -0.0315       -0.0730
 (z-statistic or, in col. 6, t-statistic)       (0.366)           -(1.942)           -(0.672)          (2.408)         -(0.496)      -(1.440)

Observations                                     119               121                121               121             121                121
Log-Likelihood of ordered probit              -133.10518        -141.51234         -166.84824        -166.8609       -139.52455
R2 of ordinary least squares regression                                                                                                0.0614

Estimates in columns 1-5 are ordered probits, but OLS regression produces similar results.
Monthly Income This Job was collected from survey of employees.
Estimated Outside Monthly Earnings is predicted monthly earnings estimated from an earnings equation estimated for local labor
 market using 5% PUMS Census Sample. Earnings equations are presented in an appendix

In column 1, an increase in the dependent variable means an equivalent job is more difficult to find.
In column 2 an increase in the dependent variable means the employee is less likely to stay a year
In columns 3-5 , an increase in the dependent variable means employee more strongly agrees with the statement
The mean of Estimated Outside Monthly Earnings is $599 with a standard deviation of $257
The average of Estimated Outside Monthly Earnings / Monthly Income This Job = 0.89

The variable ATTITUDE is a scale constructed from the dependent variables in columns (3)-(6). It increases as impression of employer improves.
ATTITUDE = Company Cares About Me + Company Is Good Place to Work - Company Takes Advantage of Me.
  This scale is constructed by summing across standardized (mean 0, variance 1) variables. Cronbach's a = 0.8
                                                               Table 8
                                             Employee Heterogeneity and Suspicious Bad Calls


                                       Entire  ATTITUDE ATTITUDE Difficult to               Difficult to
                                     Sample     > median < Median Find Job = 0             Find Job= 1
                                         (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)                    (5)
                                    SBC in Wk SBC in Wk SBC in Wk SBC in Wk                SBC in Wk
                 Dependent Variable      62         62         62        62                     62
Not Reported SBCs Week 61               1.271     0.893       1.602     0.732                  1.309
                                    (14.644)**  (8.699)** (11.999)** (4.070)**              (12.052)**
ATTITUDE (towards employer)            -0.411     -0.34      -0.391    -0.034                 -1.136
                                      (1.907)    (0.641)    (0.958)   (0.173)                (2.721)**
Difficulty to Find Job                  0.257      0.18      -0.073
                                      (0.646)    (0.419)    (0.102)
Unlikely to be Working For
Employer in a year                      0.164     0.092      -0.266     -0.02                   0.683
                                      (0.382)    (0.173)    (0.390)   (0.041)                 (1.005)
Currently A Student                     0.269     0.211       0.305     0.973                  -0.198
                                      (0.665)    (0.421)    (0.505)   (1.972)                 (0.339)
Dummy Variables For Site                 yes       yes         yes       yes                     yes
Constant                                0.265     0.317       0.584     0.391                   0.627
                                      (0.547)    (0.440)    (0.716)   (0.780)                 (1.028)

Observations                                 155         81         74            64            91
R-squared                                   0.642      0.562       0.733         0.333         0.706

(absolute value of t statistics)
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

Difficult to Find Job = 1 if employee claims it would be difficult or very difficult to find an equivalent job and 0 otherwise
Column 2 includes employees who indicate it would be difficult or very difficult to find an equivalent job.
Column 3 includes employees for whom it would ot be difficult (or very difficult) to find an equivalent job.
Column 4 includes employees with ATTITUDE > the median. Column 5 includes those with ATTITUDE < the median.
                                                        Table 9

                           Estimates of The Effect of Shirking On Employee Earnings
                                                (1)         (2)       (3)       (4)
                                                                     Log       Log
                                             Monthly Monthly Monthly Monthly
                                             Income      Income    Income    Income
                                            This Job This Job This Job This Job

SBC in Week 60                                 54.758        41.311    0.078      0.056
                                               (2.970)       (2.383)  (2.812)   (2.063)
Tenure (in years)                                           123.033               0.183
                                                             (2.908)            (2.732)
          2
Tenure                                                      -14.101              -0.021
                                                            -(2.182)           -(2.069)
Age                                                          15.230               0.024
                                                             (1.875)            (1.862)
Age 2                                                         -0.216              0.000
                                                            -(2.156)           -(2.184)
Usual Hrs/ Wk.= 20-30                                       355.742               0.577
                                                             (4.713)            (4.838)
Usual Hrs/ Wk. =30                                          572.571               0.844
                                                             (7.298)            (6.816)
Married                                                      49.338               0.081
                                                             (1.288)            (1.333)
Currently a Student                                         -79.140              -0.125
                                                            -(1.596)           -(1.599)
High School or GED                                         -119.463              -0.147
                                                            -(1.800)           -(1.399)
Some College or 2 Yr. College                              -119.744              -0.162
                                                            -(1.831)           -(1.569)
Degree from 4 yr. College or Grad School                    -62.651              -0.129
                                                            -(0.722)           -(0.940)
Constant                                      709.833        94.975    6.502      5.541
                                              (29.801)       (0.560) (180.263) (20.688)

Adj. R2                                         0.056       0.424     0.050       0.369
Observations                                     133         128       133         128

All estimates are ordinary least squares. Numbers in ( ) are t-statistics
Dependent variable is monthly income at this company as reported by employees in employee surveys
Similar estimates result if we include dummy variables for each site, and the site variables have no
 statistically significant effect on earnings. This is consistent with the company policy of using single
 compensation scheme for all sites.
                                                Appendix
                            Earnings Equations for Each Call Center




       In order to calculate outside options for employees at different call centers, we estimated
earnings equations for the local labor market in which the call centers were located. The data
we used were from the 1990 Census. Our sample included 5% of all persons aged 16-90 who
reported having worked in 1989. The variables and the earnings equations we estimated are
reported in Table A1.
                                                    Table A1
                           Wage Equations Used To Preduct Outside Earnings for Each Site


                                                     (1)              (2)       (3)         (4)
                                                                               Log         Log
                                                Log Monthly    Log Monthly   Monthly     Monthly
                                                 Earnings       Earnings     Earnings    Earnings
        Mean Dependent Variable                   7.1431         7.0117       7.2630      7.2080

Male                                             0.3423121         0.417        0.273       0.311
                                                   (15.767)      (19.614)     (44.792)    (45.845)
Usual Hrs/ Wk.= 20-29                            0.5939548         0.5319       0.5020      0.4967
                                                   (12.016)      (12.019)     (30.980)    (32.737)
Usual Hrs/ Wk. =30                               0.7583104         0.7260       0.6947      0.6859
                                                   (11.969)      (11.864)     (36.004)    (33.839)
Usual Hrs/Wk. = 31=40                            1.371219          1.2455       1.2096      1.2940
                                                   (32.207)      (32.207)     (32.207)    (32.207)
Usual Hrs./Wk = 40+                              1.575951          1.3767       1.4463      1.5206
                                                   (33.930)      (32.972)     (96.225)   (104.763)
Married                                          0.1107979         0.1255       0.1210      0.1417
                                                    (4.450)       (5.097)     (18.483)    (18.946)
Currently a Student                                 -0.0736       -0.0867      -0.0849     -0.0730
                                                   -(2.046)      -(2.366)     -(9.308)    -(6.609)
High School or GED                                   0.0566        0.1450       0.1606      0.1197
                                                    (1.544)       (4.605)     (16.622)    (10.722)
Some College or 2 Yr. College                        0.2007        0.2316       0.3144      0.2853
                                                    (5.596)       (6.859)     (34.937)    (24.513)
Degree from 4 yr. College or Grad School             0.4447        0.5732       0.6532      0.6428
                                                   (11.018)      (15.084)     (64.995)    (53.245)
Age                                                  0.0695        0.0508       0.0573      0.0529
                                                   (14.466)      (11.772)     (43.420)    (35.619)
Age 2                                               -0.0007       -0.0005      -0.0006     -0.0005
                                                  -(13.032)     -(10.709)    -(36.589)   -(29.077)
Constant                                             4.0457        4.3712       4.3688      4.3334
                                                   (42.036)      (50.390)    (162.280)   (144.243)

Adj. R2                                           0.5796          0.502       0.4748      0.5326
Observations                                       3511           4632        50215       40951

All estimates are ordinary least squares. Numbers in ( ) are t-statistics.
The dependent variable is the log of monthly wage or salary income in 1989.
 Monthly income is calculated by dividing wage or salary income in 1989 by usual hours worked per week
 in 1989, and multiplying by 4.3

Columns (1)-(4) are estimates for sites A, B, C and D respectively.

Data is from the 1990 Census. Observations are 5% of all persons who reported having worked in 1989.
 The sample for sites A and B were drawn from the county in which the sites are located. The sample for sites
 C and D were taken from the MSA in which the sites are located.
                                    Appendix Table A2
                                 The Distribution of SBC's
                            Across Employees and Within Sites




                                       Avgerage Number of SBC's For Employee at
Site      Obs. Audit Rate   Weeks      50th Centile 80th Centile 90th Centile 95th Centile
   A            2%          62-67           0.00         0.67        1.77          2.58
                0%          68-73           0.17         0.97        2.00          3.10
   B            5%          62-67           0.17         1.00        2.45          4.34
                2%          68-73           0.17         1.27        2.70          5.20
   C           10%          62-67           0.33         1.37        2.37          3.30
               10%          68-73           0.00         0.57        1.25          1.33
   D            0%          62-67           0.33         3.00        5.60          9.79
               10%          68-73           0.33         2.23        3.63          5.48


This table presents information on the distribution of SBC's taken from the rolling sample
 of employees at the four experimental sites. The true audit rate was 25% at these sites.

 For each week's sample, we calculated the number of SBC's for the median employee
and for the employee at the 80th, 90th, and 95th centile. The results in columns 4-7
are averages calculated using each week's distribution of SBC's.
