NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE HEALTH OF NATIONS:
THE CONTRIBUTION OF IMPROVED HEALTH TO LIVING STANDARDS

William D. Nordhaus

Working Paper 8818
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8818

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2002

The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2002 by William D. Nordhaus. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

The Health of Nations: The Contribution of Improved Health to Living Standards
William D. Nordhaus
NBER Working Paper No. 8818
March 2002
JEL No. I1, N1, C82

ABSTRACT
Nations generally measure their economic performance using the yardstick of national output and
income. It is not widely recognized, however, that conventional measures of national income and output
exclude the value of improvements in the health status of the population. The present study develops a
methodology and presents preliminary estimates of how standard economic measures would change if
they adequately reflected improvements in health status. The study first discusses the theory of the
measurement of national income, examines some of the shortcomings of traditional concepts, and
proposes a new concept called "health income" that can be used to incorporate improvements in health
status. The study next discusses how the proposed measure fits into existing theories for measuring and
valuing consumption and health status. The study applies the new concepts to data for the United States
over the twentieth century and concludes that accounting for improvements in the health status would
substantially increase the estimated improvement in economic welfare for the U.S. over the twentieth
century.

William D. Nordhaus
Department of Economics
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
william.nordhaus@yale.edu

The Health of Nations:
The Contribution of Improved Health to Living Standards

William D. Nordhaus, Yale University1
January 25, 2002

I. Introduction

Nations generally measure their economic performance using the
yardstick of national output and income. It is not widely recognized, however,
that conventional approaches do a poor job of capturing improvements in the
health of the population in our gross domestic product or incomes per capita.
How would standard economic measures change if they adequately reflected
improvements in the health status of the population as well as other goods and
services? This is the question addressed in the present study.

The first section discusses the theory of the measurement of national
income, examines some of the shortcomings of traditional concepts, and
proposes a new concept that can be used to incorporate improvements in

1

The present research was supported in part by the National Science Foundation. I am
grateful for comments from David Cutler, Angus Deaton, Robert Gordon,
and T. N. Srinivasan.
-1-

health status. In the second section, we discuss how the proposed measure fits
into existing theories of consumption and valuation. The third section applies
the concepts to the United States over the twentieth century.

At the end, we conclude that accounting for improvements in the health
status of the population would make a substantial difference to our measures
of economic welfare over the twentieth century in the United States.

II. Including Health Status in Measures National Income

Current Approaches to Measuring the Contribution of Health in the
National Accounts

While the GDP and the rest of the National Income and Product
Accounts (NIPA) may seem to be arcane concepts, they are truly among the
great inventions of the twentieth century. Much as a satellite in space can
survey the weather across an entire continent, so can the GDP give an overall
picture of the state of the economy. Since their first construction by Simon
Kuznets, who won the Nobel prize in Economics for his contributions to
national income accounting, enormous strides have been taken in developing
and improving indexes of economic welfare. Starting with rudimentary
-2-

measures of national income and output, nations now have a wide range of
indexes that not only include conventional concepts but also disaggregate
these for industries and regions, use improved techniques for aggregation, and
display a wealth of detail.

Nevertheless, since the beginning, there have been concerns that the
accounts are incomplete and misleading because they omit most nonmarket
activity. To meet this criticism, private scholars as well as official statistical
agencies have begun extending the national accounts to include several nonmarket sectors, including national resources, the environment, transportation,
leisure time, and unpaid work.2

One question that has been virtually ignored in attempts to extend the
national accounts is the need to account adequately for improvements in
human health. It is little understood outside the priesthood of national
accountants that there is no serious attempt to measure the “real output” of the
health-care industry. The techniques used to measure the price and quantity of

2

See Eisner [1989]. A recent review of environmental and other aspects of nonmarket
accounting is contained in National Research Council [1999].
-3-

health care are highly defective, and there are no attempts to account for
improvements in the length of life into current measures of living standards.

It might be argued that including health status is some radical, far-out,
and woolly-headed attempt to incorporate intangible, non-economic, and
sociological measures into our social accounts. This argument is wrong, for
health-care expenditures are already included in measures of national income
and output. Indeed they are a growing fraction of GDP – the fraction of
personal consumption expenditures devoted to medical care rose from 5.1
percent in 1959 to 15.3 percent in 1998. What is radical is not the inclusion of
health care but the notion advanced here that we should make a serious
attempt to measure the output of the health care sector and to value this output
correctly.

Both common sense and recent economic studies suggest that there is
little connection between medical spending and the measured economic value
of health-status improvements. At a common-sense level, the lack of
connection comes because “real” medical-care spending in fact measures
spending on inputs rather than the results in health outcomes. The current
approach is to measure health output primarily by the number of physician-

-4-

visits, the number of hospital-days, and similar measures rather than the actual
delivery of services or changes in health status. It will come as a surprise to
most non-economists that improvements that come from new products, such
as the discovery of antibiotics or the substitution of drugs for invasive surgery,
are completely omitted in current measures of real output.

Attempts to measure improvements in the health status of the
population — including everything from vaccinations, microsurgery, and new
drugs to airbags, exercise, and anti-cigarettes advertizing — pose a new and
difficult challenge to measuring national income. Recently, economists have
begun providing better outcome-oriented estimates of the prices and outputs
in this sector. One of the most striking findings comes from a study by Cutler
et al., who estimated that a true price index for the treatment of heart attacks
would rise about 5.5 percent per year more slowly than the corresponding
component of the CPI.3 Similar results were found in studies of treatment for
glaucoma by Shapiro and Wilcox and for cataract surgery by Shapiro, Shapiro,
and Wilcox.4

3

Cutler, McClellan, Newhouse, and Remler [1998].

-5-

Given the likelihood that we are dramatically mismeasuring, and almost
certainly underestimating, the contribution of improvements in health care to
economic welfare, this raises the question of how to proceed to obtain better
estimates. One approach would be to continue the approach just described of
constructing better measures of output and prices to reflect the (literal) decline
in the cost of living. This approach was adopted by the Boskin Commission
and is the thrust of much current research on health economics.5

Another quite different approach, which is used in the present study, is
to obtain direct measures of health status, weight them with appropriate
prices, and then estimate the value of improvements in health status. This
approach treats medical care as an instrumental input and subtracts it from
consumption expenditures. We would instead adjust real income to reflect the
value of the improvement of health status. This approach is actually much
simpler than “fixing” price and output indexes because measures of health
status are generally much better than data on the impacts of particular
technologies on health status. We will see that following this path has radical
impacts on our measures of real income and output.

4

See Shapiro and Wilcox [1997, 1999].

-6-

Alternative Measures of National Income

Before proposing alternative concepts, it will be useful to describe
different approaches to measuring national income. The concepts of social
income and national income go back centuries. They are largely based on the
analogous definitions of individual income with appropriate adjustments for
aggregation and national boundaries. We can distinguish two fundamentally
different approaches to measuring income – one based on production and one
based on utility. (Utility in this context means preferences, not usefulness.) The
former is the basis of modern national-income accounting while the latter is
more appropriate when considering sustainable income and the contribution
of improvement in health status.

Production-based measures (Hicksian Income)

5

See Advisory Commission [1996] and Murray and Lopez [1996].
-7-

The modern treatment of social income dates from the writings of J. R.
Hicks. When economists and accountants measure national income, they have
almost universally rely upon the Hicksian definition. The discussion of social
income in Value and Capital states, “The purpose of income calculations in
practical affairs is to give people an indication of the amount which they can
consume without impoverishing themselves.”6 Hicks then goes on to provide
his first definition of social income:

Income No. 1 is thus the maximum amount which can be spent during a
period if there is to be an expectation of maintaining intact the capital
value of prospective returns...; it equals Consumption plus Capital
accumulation.7

This definition is what is called “Hicksian income” – the maximum amount
that can be consumed while leaving capital intact. In practice, this means that
income equals consumption plus a generalized measure of capital
accumulation.

6

Hicks [1939], p. 172.

-8-

The Hicksian concept is the standard definition of net national or
domestic product used in the national-income accounts of virtually all nations
today, where consumption and investment are limited to those legal goods and
services that pass through the market place. It is production-based in the sense
that it attempts to measure the rate of production at a given time. Such
measures are not concerned with the health status of the population or
whether people are enjoying that production for a longer period of time.

Utility-based measures (Fisherian income)

While standard concepts of income are useful tools for measuring
current production, it is difficult to extract any welfare significance from them.
The shortcoming of the traditional approach is clear when we consider
situations where technologies are improving or where people are living longer.
An economy in which people have a per capita income of $20,000 with lives
that are nasty, brutish, and short would be ranked as equivalent to one with
the same per capita income and lives that are healthy, civilized, and long. In

7

Hicks [1939], p. 173, 178, emphasis added. This discussion ignores the subtlety of Hicks'
discussion of price changes, interest rate effects, the difference between ex ante and ex
-9-

the context of health, the key point is that the same annual income with a long
and healthy live should be ranked as a higher living standard than that income
with a short and diseased live. Including health status in income is particularly
important when a large and growing fraction of our economy is devoted to
health care.

An alternative approach is to define income as utility-equivalent
consumption.8 I have called this “Fisherian income” after Irving Fisher, who
defined income as the flow of consumption that could be harvested from the
nation’s capital stock.9 Under this approach, income is defined as the level of
consumption that would give the equivalent level of utility from consumption
and other determinants of utility in different situations. This definition has
been used to define the level of “sustainable income” in situations where there
is a tug-of-war between resource exhaustion and technological change.10 In
cases where lifetimes are fixed, this is equivalent to defining income as the
consumption equivalent of current assets and current and future technologies.
post capital, and a number of other factors.
8 This approach is used in an analogous manner in the theory of measuring the cost of
living.
9 See Nordhaus [1994, 1995] for a discussion.
10 See Nordhaus [1994].
- 10 -

For concreteness, call this “utility national income” and define it as
follows:

Definition. Utility national income is the maximum amount that a nation
can consume while ensuring that members of all future generations can
have lifetime utility that is at least as high as that of the current
generation.

If life expectancy in unchanging, income is the maximum real
consumption annuity that a nation can spend out of its resource endowment.
The major difference in analyzing living standards with variable lifetimes is to
recognize that people are better off when they live longer, and that this fact
should be reflected in measures of their incomes and living standards. This
approach measures the increased income from longer life expectancies by the
consumption-equivalent of the utility or value of the health or longevity
improvements.

- 11 -

III. Integrating Health Status into Income Measures

Consumption and income are traditionally measured as flows of goods
and services (or utilities) during a given period of time. Changes in an
individual’s health status (while alive) pose no terribly deep issues of
measurement, for we can treat these as new or improved “goods and services”
which can be appropriately priced and included in the consumption basket.

Treatment of shortening or lengthening life, by contrast, poses
qualitatively different problems of measurement. I begin this section by
considering a simple life-cycle model of consumption in which there are
tradeoffs between life and consumption. I then show how this approach might
be used to construct a framework for measuring income.

A. A Life-Cycle Model with Variable Lifetime

We want to examine the gain in “real income” from improved health and
life expectancy. We do this in the context of the life-cycle model of

- 12 -

consumption. An individual is assumed to value consumption and health
according to a lifetime utility function:11

(1)

4
V[ct ; 2, D, :t] = I u(ct) e -D(t-2) S[:t] dt
2

Where V[ct ; 2, D, :t] is the value at time t of the consumption stream now and
in the future faced by an individual of age 2; u(ct) is the stream of
instantaneous utility or felicity of consumption; D is the pure rate of individual
time preference; S[:t] is the set of survival probabilities; and :t is the set of
mortality rates. The key assumption here is that utility is a function of the
expected value of consumption weighted by the probability of survival. As we
will see, the utility function has a natural semi-cardinal interpretation as the
value of life extension.

11 An early treatment of this issue is contained in Shepard and Zeckhauser [1984]. A
detailed treatment of the value of life with extensions is contained in Rosen in Tolley et al.
[1994].
- 13 -

We begin with a simple and tractable assumption about mortality to
show the basic relationships; when developing the empirical estimates in later
sections we will use more realistic life tables. Consider the simple case where
the survival function is exponential. Equation (1) then becomes:

(2)

4
V[ct ; 2, D, :t] = I u(ct) e -(D+:)( t-2) dt
2

We assume that each individual has a given endowment of expected
labor income and can buy zero-cost real annuities that have any desired
trajectory. We can further simplify for computational purposes (to be relaxed
later) by assuming that the real interest rate faced by the individual is equal to
the mortality adjusted rate of time preference, (D+:). Given these assumptions,
the individual will choose a consumption annuity that yields constant
consumption during the individual's lifetime, c t = c*. Integrating (2) yields a
particularly simple outcome:

(3)

V[ct ; 2, D, :] = u(c*) / (D+:).

- 14 -

Equation (3) shows that the total utility value of consumption is the utility of
the flow of constant consumption discounted by a discount rate that equals the
sum of the force of impatience and the force of mortality.

An individual will often face a tradeoff between “health and wealth.”
What would be the tradeoff given by (3)? At age 2, changes in consumption
and health yield:

dV/dc* = u'(c*)/(D+:)
(4)

{

dV/d: = - u(c*)/(D+:)2

Hence the relative value of consumption and mortality is:

(5)

dc*/d: = -u(c*)/[u'(c*)(D+:)]

We make two normalizations that will simplify the discussion without
loss of generality. First, we simplify by selected a goods-metric utility function.
This gives us a metric in which utility is measured in terms of goods at the

- 15 -

equilibrium, which implies that u'(c*) = 1. In other words, utility is defined so
that one unit of utility is one extra unit of the good. Second, we chose the units
so that zero is the “death-indifference level of existence.” That is, when the
utility of consumption is u(c) = 0, the individual is indifferent between life and
death. This implies that there is zero utility after death.
Given these assumption, (5) reduces to:

(6)

dc*/d: = -u(c*)/(D+:)

or without discounting

(7)

dc*/d: = -Tu(c*)

where T is life expectancy (T = 1/:).

The interpretation here is that a

uniform change in mortality rates at every age will produce a welfare change
equal to the number of years of life (T) times the goods value of life, given by
u(c*) – recall that the utility of years after death is normalized at u = 0.

The major difficulty in applying this approach is determining the goods
value of life. There have been many studies of this, which are reviewed below.

- 16 -

An example is as follows: Most studies of life value examine the tradeoff
between current risk and current income, say at age K = 40. Consider a decline
in the mortality rate of Î:(2) for one period. Then the survival rate is higher by
eÎ:(2) at the end of the period, K+1. Discounted utility evaluated at age 2 > K
is then

(8)

V(2) = eÎ:(2) u(c*)/(D+:)
Hence, using this simple mortality assumption, the tradeoff between

current risk and current consumption is approximately:

(9)

dc/d:(2) = u(c*).

Now the decline of Î:(2) leads to a change in life expectancy of approximately
ÎT=Î:/:. The value of this change is

dV/dT = dV/d:(2) d:(2) /dT - u(c*):/(D+:)

So the tradeoff between life expectancy and consumption is approximately:

(10) dc/dT = u(c*) :

- 17 -

Note that this approach indicates that it is not generally correct to adjust
for changes in health status by calculating lifetime consumption, which would
be c*T in the present example. This approach is only correct when u(c) = 1. Our
numerical estimates below indicate that this approach will generally
undervalue improvements in life expectancy.

B. Valuation of Life

Measuring utility income with health improvement requires finding
appropriate “prices” to use to value health status. There is a voluminous
literature on the value of fatalities prevented.12 It is generally accepted that the
“willingness to pay” to reduce risk is the appropriate approach for valuing risk
reductions. Studies of this fall into three general categories: labor market
studies, which examine the risk-wage tradeoff; consumer purchase decisions
(such as for smoke detectors), which examine the price-risk tradeoff; and

- 18 -

contingent valuation studies, which attempt to determine preferences from a
systematic examination of individual’s stated preferences.

The most weight is generally put on labor market studies because these
reflect actual behavior, because labor force decisions are repeated, and because
there are dozens of studies from different periods, countries, occupations, and
samples. It is important to note that the tradeoff examined is a current riskcurrent income (dc/d:) choice between current occupational hazards and
current wages. From these tradeoffs (which involve comparing income per
year against mortality risk per year) we derive an implicit dollar cost per unit
mortality risk. Because the risks are relatively small (around between
1/100,000 per year to 50/100,000 per year), the interpretation is the marginal
valuation of risk reduction or increase.

Not surprisingly, there is great variation in the implicit price of risk (or
price of a statistical life). The serious estimates from a recent survey range from
$0.6 million to $13.5 million per fatality prevented. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency use the relatively high figure of $4.8 million per fatality

12 See Viscusi [1993] for a comprehensive review of the economics literature. The
monumental study edited by Murray and Lopez [1996] is a particularly useful analysis of

- 19 -

prevented in its cost-benefit study of the value of clear air.13 Tolley et al.
recommend a value of $2.0 million per fatality prevented for use in health-care
decisions.14 In this study, I settle on $3.0 million per fatality prevented as a
reasonable choice, but the figures are easily modified to reflect different
assumptions.

In our analysis above, we calculated the increment to sustainable
consumption of an additional life-year, LY [see equation (10)]. There is some
confusion but little solid evidence on how to measure the value of an added
life-year. Most studies derive LY values from the studies of the value of
reduced mortality described above.
We can sketch the methodology as follows. In terms of the model used
above, almost all estimates concern the value of reductions in current mortality
[dc(2)/d:(2)]. For concreteness, we assume the following:

(11) dV/d:(2) = $3 H 10 6

(in 1990 incomes and prices)

the issue in the context of health care.
13 This was based on the survey by Unsworth, Neumann, and Browne [1992].
14 See Tolley et al. [1994].
- 20 -

To convert this to the value of a life-year requires further assumptions. Many
of the studies underlying the estimate in (11) concern labor market decisions of
working men, for which we can use :(40) - 0.025 yr -1 for those age 40. To
convert these into value per life-year requires assuming a discount rate, which
we alternatively take to be 0 and 3 percent per year. Using these values, we
obtain

$1,828 per LY @ D = 0
(12) dc*/dI *d:(40) = {

$6,757 per LY @ D = 0.03

These are the annuity or flow equivalents of the present value of an increase in
a LY. That is, they reflect the increase in the constant consumption necessary to
compensate for a current loss of a life-year. Taking the present value of the
consumption annuity yields a capital value [dV/dLY] of $75,000 per LY at a
discount rate of 0 and $162,000 per LY at a discount rate of 3 percent per year.
Tolley et al. [1994] recommend a central present value of $100,000 per LY from
their studies, which is broadly consistent with these numbers and analysis.

- 21 -

In the estimates presented below, we use actual survival functions rather
than the theoretical ones analyzed above. Using 1990 life tables, we obtain the
following estimates:
$2,600 per LY at D = 0
(12') dc*/dI *d:= {

$7,600 per LY at D = 0.03

These estimates using actual life tables in (12') are quire close to the values for
the simplified model given in (12), which motivates using that model. (The
capital values associated with these numbers are given at the bottom of Table
2.)

C. Measuring Income with Variable Lifetimes

Next turn to the issue of measuring income or consumption. For this
purpose, we take the utility-based measure of income. It will be helpful to start
with the case of utility-based income with fixed and certain lifetime. In this
approach income is the maximum sustainable consumption consistent with a

- 22 -

given expected value of labor earnings and an exogenously given interest rate.
Under the assumption of no bequests, note that income is also equal to
sustainable consumption, where the latter is defined as the maximum constant
real consumption annuity.

More precisely, assume that the consumption discount rate is a constant,
r. Once we know the entire path of consumption, given by C(s) for s > t, we can
easily calculate utility income at time t, denoted by C (t), as follows:

(13)

4
4
I C (t)exp[-r(s-t)]ds = I C(s)exp[-r(s-t)]ds
t
t

or equivalently

(14)

4
C (t) = r [ I C(s)exp[-r(s-t)]ds ]
t

- 23 -

Note that C (t) measures the constant consumption annuity available at time t.
Equation (14) shows that measures of utility income or sustainable income are
inherently a wealth-like measure as was emphasized by Irving Fisher and Paul
Samuelson.15

The utility definition of income is a natural springboard for considering
the measurement of income with varying lifetimes. Begin by extending the
definition of income and consumption to uncertain, variable, and endogenous
lifetimes. To begin with, consider the traditional definition of income. For
example, say that in lifetime situation “Short” individuals consume 100 units
per year each and live for 50 years while in situation “Long” individuals
consume 100 units per year and live for 60 years. Under the standard flow
definition of consumption, there would be no difference in economic welfare
or living standards between Short and Long. This is clearly defective to the
extent that people prefer to live longer.

15 Irving Fisher's discussion dates from 1910 -14 and is contained in Fisher [1997]. Paul
Samuelson's approach is contained in Samuelson [1961].
- 24 -

An alternative and preferable approach is to convert the combination of
consumption and the survival function into the equivalent utility with a
benchmark survival function and consumption. Take the Short lifetime
situation as the benchmark. Using the example of the last paragraph, we ask
what consumption annuity using the life expectancy of situation Short would
give individuals the same utility as the consumption and life expectancy of
situation Long. An individual might consider situation Long (with a constant
consumption of 100 and a lifetime of 60 years) to be equivalent to, or have
equivalent utility with, a constant consumption annuity of 110 units per year
with the life expectancy of situation Short. We would then say that (using
situation Short as the benchmark) the income in situation Long was 110
compared to that of 100 in situation Short.

Using the notation of the last section, define S = Short and L = Long.
Then let V[ctS ; 2, D, :tS] be the utility of consumption stream ctS and agespecific mortality rate :tS while V[ctL ; 2, D, :tL] is the utility of consumption
stream ctL and age-specific mortality rate :tL. We define income c*(L, :S) as the
constant consumption stream that would go with mortality rates in Short
which yields the equivalent utility as the consumption stream and mortality
rates in situation Long. That is, V[c*(L, :S); 2, D,:tS] = V[ctL ; 2, D, :tL].

- 25 -

We then compare incomes in different situations by estimating the
constant equivalent consumption annuity with a benchmark mortality
function. Say we use mortality rates from situation S as the benchmark. We can
then compare situations S and L by comparing c*(S, :S) and c*(L, :S), such that
V[c*(S, :S); 2, D, :tS] = V[ctS ; 2, D, :tS] and c*(L, :S) such that V[c*(L, :S); 2, D,
:tS] = V[ctL ; 2, D, :tL]. There will be the usual index-number problems involved
in these comparisons because the definitions will differ whether we use the
mortality rates of situation S or L. It is to my knowledge an open question
whether the usual index-number theorems apply here, but I see no reason why
they should not.

Because this tangle of algebra is somewhat forbidding, it will be useful to
summarize the major points. Traditional income accounting looks at the flows
of consumption and income in measuring living standards – consumption of
food, purchases of electricity and apparel, airline travel, and so forth. These
measures do not consider the length of life or the quality of the population’s
health. The alternative proposed here corrects for mortality and morbidity by
asking in effect how much consumption the individual would be willing to
pay to trade off consumption for health. If, for example, an individual would

- 26 -

pay two percent of consumption each year to gain an additional life-year, then
we use that number to say that an additional life-year is equivalent to a two
percent increase in annual income. In the estimates below, we use this
technique only to adjust for changes in life expectancy, although they could
also be used to adjust for changes in morbidity.

IV. The Impact of Improved Life Expectancy on Economic Welfare
in the U.S., 1900- 1995
A. Previous Studies

The literature on estimating the economic value of improved health is
surprisingly sparse. Dan Usher considered the issue as part of a more general
study of the adequacy of conventional national output measures, but his
approach was highly stylized and was written before the surge of detailed
estimates of the value of life.16 A number of indexes incorporate life
expectancy, particularly the United Nations Development Program’s Human
Development Index (HDI).17 The technique for incorporating health in the HDI
is, however, completely arbitrary. Economic historians have begun to compile

16 See Usher [1973] and 1980].
17 See UNDP [1997] for a discussion and the numbers.
- 27 -

systematic indicators on various health-related measures, such as height and
the body-mass index, and these tend to move with other measures of health
status, but it is difficult to put a price tag on these indexes.18 Important
additions to the literature are studies by David Cutler and Elizabeth
Richardson, which is discussed below, and the contribution of Kevin Murphy
and Robert Topel, presented at this conference.19

B. Methods

We now implement the ideas in earlier sections for the United States. The
calculations here estimate the value of the health component of utility income,
or the value of improvements in health status, which we call “health income.”
Table 1 shows illustrative data on major health risk in different regions from
the study of the global burden of disease by Murray and Lopez [1996]. This
table gives a rough idea of what economic development means in terms of
health status.

18 A useful review of the economic-history literature is contained in Costa and Steckel
[1995].
19 See Cutler and Richardson [1997] and Murphy and Topel [1999].
- 28 -

The fundamental data for the United States are shown in Figures 1
through 4. Figure 1 shows per capita consumption for the U.S. from 1900 to
1995. The data are from the Commerce Department for the period 1929-95 and
from various private scholars for 1900-29. The Commerce Department figures
are in chained indexes converted to 1990 price levels. Earlier estimates are in
constant prices.

Figure 2 shows the survival rates for three years, 1900 1950, and 1995.
The most dramatic change came in the early part of this century — the
probability of surviving the first year rose from 87 percent in 1900 to 96 percent
in 1950. Figure 3 shows life expectancy at different ages. Gains in life
expectancy have been substantial throughout the entire century. Figure 4
shows the change in life expectancy at different ages over the last four decades.

One preliminary question concerns a parallel between health
improvements and the slowdown in conventionally measured productivity. Is
the famous “productivity slowdown” found in conventional economic
measures mirrored in the health statistics? Figure 5 shows gains in life
expectancy at birth along with conventionally measured growth in labor
productivity for the decade ending in the year indicated by the point. “Health

- 29 -

productivity growth” (measured as the change in life expectancy) rose until
1975 and then declined gradually since then. The trends in health and nonhealth productivity appear to move quite differently.

To calculate the value of improved health status, we use the approach
outlined above. We use two different approaches — the mortality approach and
the life-years approach. Under the mortality approach, shown for the simple
model in equation (7), the value of improved health status is calculated by
taking the change in the population weighted mortality rate times the
estimated value of lower mortality. Under the life-years approach, shown in
the simple model in equation (10), the economic value of improved health is
equal to the increase in life expectancy times the value of an additional lifeyear. In both cases, the estimates are weighted by the share of the population
that is experiencing the lower mortality or greater life expectancy.

C. Simple calculations

It may be helpful to work through a simple example to illustrate the
methodology. For the period 1975 through 1995, the population-weighted
average decline in the mortality rate was 2249 per year per million persons.

- 30 -

Taking the hedonic estimate of the value of fatalities prevented of $2.66 million
(which adjusts the $3 million in 1990 for movements in average consumption),
this decline in mortality would have a value of $5,980 per person over this
period. The average per capita consumption over this period was $14,700.
Hence the economic value of improvements of living standards due to reduced
mortality is estimated as 40 percent of consumption over this period, or about
2 percent per year. Table 2 shows this calculation using actual 1950 population
weights, and the growth is 1.8 percent per year.

The estimate using the life-years method is somewhat more complicated.
Because improvements in mortality extend life expectancy in the future
(particularly in the case of reduced infant mortality), we must consider the
impact of discounting on valuation. The approach taken for this simple
example is to calculate the value of a life-year on the assumption that the
increase in the life-year takes place through a uniform reduction in mortality.
This allows us to use the valuation of mortality discussed above to estimate the
value of an additional life year. For example, in 1990, a uniform reduction in
mortality of 0.001 per year would lead to an increase in population-weighted
life expectancy of 1.16 years. Over the period 1975-1995, the increase in
population-weighted life expectancy was 2.1 years. The value of an additional

- 31 -

undiscounted life-year is, according to the calculations presented above, equal
to $2,600 [see equation (12')]. Therefore the gain in health income over these
two decades was $2,600 H 2.1 life-years = $5,400. This is the equivalent of 1.6
percent per year in conventional consumption units. This is the close to the
estimate shown by the actual calculations in Table 2.

D. Actual calculations

The central results of this paper, showing calculations on the economic
contribution of health and non-health consumption, are shown in Table 2 and
in Figure 6. For these estimates, we use only changes in life expectancy and
omit any changes in morbidity (we discuss this question below). These
estimates differ from the simple calculations in the last section because they
use actual survival rates and population distributions rather than the
simplified ones assumed above.

The major result that comes through using all techniques is that the value
of improvements in life expectancy improvements is about as large as the
value of all other consumption goods and services put together. For example,
over the two decades from 1975 to 1995, conventionally measured per capita

- 32 -

consumption grew at an average rate of 2.0 percent per year. Over this period,
the annual average improvements in life expectancy had an economic value
between 1.6 and 2.0 percent of consumption.20 Over the entire period from
1900 to 1995, the value of improved health or health income grew at between
2.2 and 3.0 percent of consumption whereas consumption grew at a rate of
about 2.1 percent of consumption. Health income grew somewhat more slowly
than other consumption during the second half of this century while it
exceeded the value of the growth in consumption during the first half of the
20th century.

The two techniques (the life-year approach and the mortality approach)
give approximately the same results. This is not surprising, for they are
calibrated to yield the same value of life lengthening for uniform mortality rate
changes. The mortality approach gives slightly larger numbers because of the
distribution of mortality changes.

20 Because there is no natural denominator for measuring improvements in health care, we
use the same denominator for calculating growth as we do for consumption. That is, the
growth in the value of health is calculated as )YHt/ct-1 whereas the growth in consumption
is calculated as )ct /ct-1 , where )YHt is the change in the per capita value of health income
and ct is the flow of consumption of goods and services during the previous period. This
allows us to compare the relative importance of consumption and improvements in health
status, whereas there is no obvious way to measure the value of the level of health status
(YHt).
- 33 -

How do expenditures on health improvements compare with
improvements in health income? This is a difficult question because spending
to improve health status pervades our market and non-market activities. Table
3 provides illustrative estimates of the magnitudes. To begin with, the bottom
three rows of Table 3 show the increase in non-health consumption and in
health income over the 1980-90 period. This shows again that the size of the
gains from health and non-health consumption are approximately the same.

Market expenditures on conventional health care are reasonably well
tabulated. They were in 1990 about one-quarter of non-health personal
consumption expenditures. Many important items are excluded from these
figures. Two exclusions, shown in Table 3, are pollution abatement and
expenditures on sewage and sanitation. In addition, there may be substantial
non-market costs, primarily in time use. Our time-use studies are particularly
inadequate, but existing estimates indicate that the value non-market time
devoted to health is but a small fraction of market costs.

The last column of Table 3 compares the increases in expenditures with
the increases in health income and non-health consumption for the period

- 34 -

1980-90. These show that the increase in health income (from mortality alone)
is approximately the same size as the increase in non-health consumption. The
increase in expenditure on health care was approximately one-half the increase
in mortality-based health income. It seems likely, however, that a substantial
part of the expenditures (such as that on dental, psychiatric, vision-related, and
nursing home) was life-quality-enhancing rather than life-year-extending.
Suppose that half of the per capita of increased expenditures, or $600, was lifeextending; this would be a good investment for the increase in health income
of between $2,300 and $3,100 per capita over the 1980-90 period.

E. Qualifications

How robust are the estimates provided here? The underlying mortality
data are among the most reliable of our social statistics. The most fragile part
of the estimates concerns life and mortality valuation, as discussed above. One
assumption on which there is little evidence is that the premium on reduced
mortality is a constant fraction of per capita consumption over the entire
period. More precisely, we assume that the value of a reduction in the
mortality rate of 0.001 per year is $3 thousand in 1990 prices and we scale that
value over time to the ratio of the given year's per capita consumption to 1990

- 35 -

per capita consumption. There are no comprehensive studies of the mortality
premium over time, although movements in the wage of risky occupations
(such as coal mining) are consistent with this assumption. I suspect, however,
that the premium has risen over time. This would be consistent with the rising
share of health care expenditures in total consumption. If the premium were
indeed increasing over time, then the contribution of health to economic
welfare would be relatively smaller in the earlier period and relatively larger in
the later period.

A few other assumptions are of some significance but will not affect the
major results. One important issue is whether people should be weighted the
same at every age. Many health-care professionals and some survey evidence
suggest that the value of a life-year is higher in the middle of the life span
(between 20 and 40 years) than at either end.21 Most surveys indicate, for
example, that infant mortality would receive a lower weight than adult
mortality. Figure 7 shows an alternative set of weights proposed by Murray
which differ by age. Figures 8 and 9 show the trend and changes in weighted
and unweighted life expectancy for different discount rates. The weighted
series show virtually identical growth as the equally weighted series over the

- 36 -

period 1900-50 but have slower growth in income in the 1950-95 period. In the
latter period, the growth in health income is between 10 and 20 percent slower
with differential age weights, primarily because the Murray weights put a
lower value on the increases in life expectancy of older people. Under this
alternative valuation approach, the contribution of improved longevity would
be slightly less than that shown in Table 2.

Another major omission from this study is the value of reduced
morbidity. The data on morbidity is both more difficult to obtain and more
difficult to value. Recent studies indicate that including morbidity might add
another 5 percent or so to the value of health improvements estimates here.22

V. Discussion and Conclusion

This paper contributes to a new view of the economics of health. This
new view is that improvements in health status have been a major contributor
to economic welfare over the twentieth century. To a first approximation, the
economic value of increases in longevity in the last hundred years is about as

21 A particularly interesting discussion is contained in Murray and Lopez [1996].
22 See Cutler and Richardson [1997], discussed below.
- 37 -

large as the value of measured growth in non-health goods and services. A
closer look shows that “health income” probably contributed somewhat more
than non-health goods and services in the first half of the 20th century and
marginally less than non-health goods and services since 1950. The medical
revolution over the last century appears to qualify, at least from an economic
point of view, for Samuel Johnson’s accolade as “the greatest benefit to
mankind.”

The first question one should ask is whether this finding is plausible.
One way of considering the question is to consider the health equivalent of the
Sears-catalogue question:

Consider the improvements to both health and non-health
technologies over the last half century (say from 1948 to 1998). Health
technologies include a variety of changes such as the Salk polio vaccine,
new pharmaceuticals, joint replacement, improved sanitation, improved
automobile safety, smoke-free workplaces, etc. Over this period, life
expectancy at birth increased from a little above 68 year to a little less
than 76 years. Non-health technologies were also wide-ranging and
include the jet plane, television, superhighways, VCRs, and computers

- 38 -

(although the economic benefits of these are probably understated in
measured consumption growth).
Now consider the following choice. You must forgo either the
health improvements over the last half-century or the non-health
improvements. That is, you must choose either (a) 1948 health conditions
and 1998 non-health living standards or (b) 1998 health conditions and
1948 non-health living standards. Which would you choose?
If you would either choose (b) or find it a difficult choice, then you would
basically agree with the results of this paper. An informal poll finds most
people who either choose (b) or have great difficulty choosing, with older
people almost always opting for (b).

A recent study by Cutler and Richardson, which examines the
improvements in “health capital” in the U.S., are consistent with the new view
put forth above.23 Health capital is the present value of the utility of health
status. Cutler and Richardson use both a years of life (YOL) approach and a
quality adjusted years of life (QALY) approach. Their estimates are only for the
years 1970, 1980, and 1990 and they present results only for persons of age 0
and 65. We can make a crude conversion of the Cutler-Richardson estimates to

- 39 -

conform to our income estimates by annuitizing their health capital over the
expected lifetimes and then taking the changes in the income from health
capital as the increase in health income. Table 4 shows the comparison. Two
points should be drawn from this table. First, the overall estimates are
reasonably comparable. The estimates from Cutler and Richardson bracket the
estimates from the present study. One of the most surprising results of CutlerRichardson, not explained in the paper, is that moving from life-years to
QALYs does not change the results significantly. One possible reason for this
result is that improvements in the quality of life from lower morbidity are
offset by a higher average age (and therefore higher average morbidity) of the
population.

There are many questions left open by the present findings. One
important point is that we cannot at this stage attribute the growth in health
income to particular investments or expenditures. Such a task, which would
apply the techniques of growth accounting to health improvements, is
especially challenging.24 It is also necessary if we are to understand not only

23 See Cutler and Richardson [1997].
24One of the most comprehensive studies of growth accounting is Denison [1961].
- 40 -

the historical sources of improved health but also those investments that may
best contribute to future improvements.

Another particularly important question is the extent to which
improvements arise from improved basic knowledge (such as the germ theory
of disease, the discovery of antibiotics, or the DNA revolution ) or investments
in improved health capital and infrastructure (such as larger investments in
health education or improvements in emergency response services). A second
issue, particularly relevant for the contribution of basic knowledge, is the
extent to which improvements in knowledge were domestically generated or
imported. It seems likely, for example, that most of the major medical
discoveries in the first part of the period covered here arose in Europe, while
America was increasingly the source of increases in medical knowledge in the
last few decades.25 To the extent that improvements in health income are due
to imported technologies, this emphasizes one of the gains from trade that is
largely overlooked in traditional measures of the economic impacts of
international trade.

25A non-technical history is contained in Porter [1997].
- 41 -

The new view of health economics should shape the way we think about
health policy. In the early 1990s, the general hysteria about rising health costs
led many to believe that the health-care system was wasteful, out of control,
and should be reined in. This view was particularly prevalent in the business
community, which saw rising health costs as a threat to national
competitiveness. The general atmosphere was colored by the substantial rise in
(measured) relative medical-care prices. Over the period from 1975 to 1995, the
CPI for medical care rose 64 percent faster than CPI for all goods and services.
In the face of rising prices and growing budgets, a natural response was to try
to control spending and limit services.

If the results of this and other related papers are confirmed, then the role
of the health-care system should be rethought. Over the last half century,
economic welfare from health care expenditures appears to have contributed
as much to economic welfare as the rest of consumption expenditures. It is an
intriguing thought to contemplate that the social productivity of health-care
spending might be many times that of other spending. If this is anywhere near
the case, it would suggest that the image of a stupendously wasteful healthcare system is far off the mark.

- 42 -

Of course, as Table 3 suggests, health is more than doctors and hospitals.
It encompasses other parts of national output, such as pollution control and
highway safety spending, and reflects individual lifestyles, such as decisions
about smoking, drinking, driving, drugs, and exercise. Moreover, medical
knowledge is a global public good which is increased by efforts in many
countries. Because we cannot tally the totality of costs on health care, we
cannot say for sure whether we are getting 2 or 4 or 10 times the return on
health dollars that we are on non-health dollars. And it is surely the case that
health-care expenditures are often misallocated and wasteful. However,
notwithstanding the complexity and bureaucracy, improvements in health
status in the U.S. have yielded prodigious increases in economic welfare. It is
sobering to reflect that, were the author of this paper to have experienced the
1900 life table, the odds are long that this paper would have been written from
beyond the grave.

- 43 -

References
Advisory Commission [1996]. Boskin, Michael, et al., “Toward a More Accurate
Measure of the Cost of Living: The Final Report of the Advisory Commission to Study
the Consumer Price Index,” December 4, (updated version).
Costa, Dora L. and Richard H. Steckel [1995]. “Long-term Health Trends in Health,
Welfare, and Economic Growth in the United States,” NBER Historical Working Paper
76, Cambridge, Massachusetts, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cutler, David and Elizabeth Richardson [1997]. “Measuring the Health of the U.S.
Population,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, pp. 217-271.
Cutler, David, Mark B. McClellan, Joseph Newhouse, and Dahlia Remler [1996]. “Are
Medical Care Prices Declining?” NBER Working Paper 5750, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, National Bureau of Economic Research, September.
Denison, Edward [1961]. The Sources of Economic Growth in the United States, Committee
for Economic Development, New York.
Eisner, Robert [1989]. The Total Incomes System of Accounts, Chicago, University of
Chicago Press.
Hicks, J.R. ]1939]. Value and Capital, Second Edition, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Murray, Christopher J. L. Murray and Alan D. Lopez, editors [1996]. The Global Burden of
Disease, Harvard School of Public Health, distributed by Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, Mass.
National Research Council [1999]. Nature's Numbers : Expanding the National
Economic Accounts to Include the Environment, William D. Nordhaus and Edward
Kokkelenberg, Eds., National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Nordhaus, William D. [1994]. “Reflections on the Concept of Sustainable Economic
Growth,” in Economic Growth and the Structure of Long-Term Development, Luigi L.
Pasinetti and Robert M. Solow, eds., Oxford University Press, 1994, pp. 309-325.

- 44 -

Nordhaus, William D. [1995]. “How Can We Measure Sustainable Income?” Cowles
Foundation Discussion Paper, May.
Porter, Roy [1997]. The Greatest Benefit to Mankind: A Medical History of Humanity, W.W.
Norton, New York.
Robinson, John P. and Geoffrey Godbey [1997]. Time for Life: The Surprising Ways
Americans Use Their Time, Pennsylvania State University Press, University Park,
Pennsylvania.
Samuelson, Paul A. [1961]. “The Evaluation of ‘Social Income,’” in F. A. Lutz and D. C.
Haig, eds., The Theory of Capital, London, Macmillan.
Shapiro, Matthew and David Wilcox [1997]. “Mismeasurement in Consumer Price
Index: An Evaluation,” Macroeconomics Annual, vol. 11, pp. 93-142.
Shapiro, Irving, Matthew Shapiro, and David Wilcox [1998]. “Measuring the Value of
Cataract Surgery,” in E. Berndt and D. Cutler, eds., Medical Care, Output, and
Productivity, NBER/CRIW conference, 1998.
Shepard, Donald S. and Richard J. Zeckhauser [1984]. “Survival versus Consumption,”
Management Science, vol. 30, no. 4, April, pp. 423-439.
Tolley, George S., Donald Scott Kenkel, and Robert Fabian, eds. [1994]. Valuing Health for
Policy, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois.
Viscusi, W. Kip [1993]. “The Value of Risks to Health and Life,” Journal of Economic
Literature, vol. 31, pp. 1912-46.
Works of Irving Fisher [1997]. William J. Barber, ed., The Works of Irving Fisher, Pickering
and Chatto, London.
UNDP [1997]. United Nations Development Programme, Human Development Report,
1997, Oxford University Press, New York.
Unsworth, Robert, James Neumann, and W. Eric Browne [1992]. “Review of Existing
Value of Life Estimates: Valuation Document,” Background Document Prepared for
Section 812 Analysis, Industrial Economics Incorporated, Cambridge, Mass., November
6.

- 45 -

Usher, Dan [1973]. “An Imputation to the Measurement of Economic Growth for
Changes in Life Expectancy,” in Milton Moss, ed., The Measurement of Economic and
Social Performance, Columbia University Press, New York, pp. 193-226.
Usher, Dan [1980]. The Measurement of Economic Growth, Columbia University Press,
New York.

- 46 -

Table 1. Major Health Risk Factors in Different Regions, 1990
Global Totals

Risk Factor

Years of
Life Lost
(000)

Established Market Economies

Percent
of Total
(percent)

Years of
Life Lost
(000)

Percent
of Total
(percent)

Sub-sahran Africa
Years of Percent
Life Lost of Total
(000) (percent)

199,486

22.0

0

0.0

89,305

39.4

Poor water supply, santiation, and
personal and domestic hygiene

85,520

9.4

8

0.0

28,781

12.7

Unsafe sex

27,602

3.0

1,271

2.6

12,226

5.4

Tobacco

26,217

2.9

7,967

16.0

927

0.4

Alcohol

19,287

2.1

2,537

5.1

3,319

5.9

Occupation

22,493

2.5

2,826

5.7

1,973

3.5

Hypertension

17,665

1.9

3,471

7.0

1,674

3.0

Physical inactivity

11,353

1.3

3,860

7.8

796

1.4

Illicit drugs

2,634

0.3

717

1.4

449

0.8

Air pollution

5,625

0.6

310

0.6

377

0.7

417,882

46.0

22,967

46.2

139,827

73.2

Malnutriton

TOTAL

Source: Murray and Lopez [1996], vol 1, pp. 311-315.

- 47 -

Table 2

Growth in Living Standards from Health Improvements
and Consumption
[Increase as percent of per capita consumption; in annualized percentage growth rates]
1900-1925

1925-1950

1950-1975

1975-1995

Consumption

2.0

1.8

2.4

2.0

Health Value: Life-years approach
Discount rate
0 percent p. a.
3 percent p. a.

2.3
2.3

3.3
3.2

1.9
1.8

1.7
1.6

3.2
2.9

4.0
4.2

2.6
2.3

2.0
1.8

Health Value: Mortality Approach
Current pop. weights
1950 weights

otes on valuation:
Value of Life: (1990)
Value of Life year (1990)
rho = 0.00
rho = 0.03

Consumption (1990)

3000.0 thousand 1990 dollars
14.5 thousand 1990 dollars
95.3 thousand 1990 dollars
16.5 thousand 1990 dollars

- 48 -

Table 3

National Health Expenditures and Income, 1980-90
[Per capita in 1990 prices and incomes]

Value per capita [1990 prices]
Time, 1985
Increase,
1980
1990
1980-90
[minutes
per day]

Total Expenditures

2,477

3,690

1,213

1,856

3,004

1,148

378
99

404
123

26
24

1.0

32

32

0

2.0
1.5

64
48

80
48

16
0

Market [a]
Conventional Health Care
Other
Pollution abatement
Sanitation and sewage

Nonmarket
Time spent on medical care [b,c]
Child care: medical
Obtaining Goods and services:
medical appointments
Personal needs: medical care

Income and Consumption
Health income, life-year method
Life-year method [d]
Mortality method [e]

na
na

Non-health personal consumption

12,261

na
na
15,198

2,292
3,120

1.7%
2.3%

2,937

2.2%

[a] Current dollar figures are converted into 1990 prices using the price index for personal consumption.
[b] Time is converted into current prices using average hourly earnings in 1990 less a tax rate of 30 %.
[c] From Robinson and Godbey [1997], Appendix A.
[d] Uses the life-year method with a discount rate of 3 percent.
[e] Current population weights

- 49 -

Table 4

Comparison of This Study with Cutler-Richardson
[Increase in health income per person, 1970-1990, 1990 prices and incomes]
Discount rate
0 percent per year

3 percent per yea

This study
Health Value: Life-years approach

6,166

5,769

Health Value: Mortality Approach

7,701

7,701

Years of Life
Age 0
Age 65

5,514
15,000

2,526
12,289

Quality Adjusted Life Years
Age 0
Age 65

5,230
15,438

3,117
13,062

Cutler-Richardson

Note: "Health income" is defined as the annuitized value of the increase in health capital for
Cutler-Richardson study and as the increase in the value of population-weighted mortality
or life expectancy in this study.

Source: This study from Table 1. Cutler and Richardson [1997] is from their Table 11.
The estimates have been annuitized over the life expectancy at the given age
and at the given discount rate.

- 50 -

Figure 1.

Per capita consumption
[1990 chained dollars]
18000
16000
14000
12000
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
1900

1920

1940

1960

- 51 -

1980

2000

Figure 2

Survival Probabilities

1.00

Probability of survival from birth

1995

0.80

1950

0.60

1900

0.40

0.20

0.00

0

20

40

Age

- 52 -

60

80

100

Figure 3

Life Expectancy

80
70

Age 0

50

Age 20

Life expectancy (years)

60

40

Age 40

30

Age 60

20
10
0

1900

1920

1940

1960

- 53 -

1980

2000

Figure 4

Gains in Life Expectancy
2

Change in life expectancy (years)

Age 0
1.5

Age 20

Age 40
1

Age 60

Age 80
0.5

0

1960

1970

1980

1990

- 54 -

2000

Figure 5

Productivity and LE Growth

Change in LE; productivity growth

4
Productivity Growth
3

Change in LE

2

1

0

1960

1970

1980

- 55 -

1990

2000

Figure 6

Economic Contribution:
Consumption and Health Status

Growth of health and consumption

4

Consumption
3

Mortality
Life years

2

1

0

1900-1925

1925-1950

1950-1975

1975-1995

Note: Bars show the increase in either conventionally measured per capita
consumption and in per capita “health income” for the period. In each case, the
denominator used in calculating the growth rate is the level of conventionally
measured per capita consumption. The figures are averages of for five-year periods.
The two right bars use the mortality approach and the life-years approach to valuing
increases in longevity.

- 56 -

Figure 7

Alternative value of life-year by age

1.6
1.4
Age weights (sum = 1)

1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0

20

40

Age

- 57 -

60

80

100

Figure 8

Weighted Life Expectancy
for Different Discount Rates and Weighting Factors

Weighted Life Expectancy (1900 = 1)

1.4

1.3

Equal wts; r = 0

Diff wts; r = 0

Equal wts; r = .03

1.2
Diff wts; r = .03

1.1

1.0
1900

1920

1940

1960

- 58 -

1980

2000

Figure 9

Change in Weighted Life Expectancy
for Different Discount Rates and Weighting Factors

Change Wtd Life Expectancy (1900 = 1)

0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.00
1900
Equal wts; r = 0

1920

1940
Diff wts; r = 0

1960
Equal wts; r = .03

- 59 -

1980
Diff wts; r = .03

2000

