                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              CAN EQUITY AND EFFICIENCY COMPLEMENT EACH OTHER?


                                           Rebecca M. Blank


                                          Working Paper 8820
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8820


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2002




This paper was prepared as the Adam Smith Lecture, European Association of Labour Economists,
September 15, 2001, Jyvasklyla, Finland. Thanks are due to Jordan Matsudaira for research assistance. I also
thank Alison Booth, Stephen Nickell, John DiNardo and participants in the Michigan labor seminar for useful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Rebecca M. Blank. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Can Equity and Efficiency Complement Each Other?
Rebecca M. Blank
NBER Working Paper No. 8820
March 2002
JEL No. D3, I3, H3



                                              ABSTRACT

         Economists tend to assume that redistributive transfers increase equity but cause a loss in
efficiency, the so-called “leaky bucket” effect. This paper explores situations where efficiency losses are
small or where equity and efficiency might even complement each other. A simple model identifies key
parameters that cause leaky buckets and which policy can affect. Three situations are discussed where
the equity/efficiency tradeoff may be low: When transfers go to populations with no capacity to change
their behavior; when transfers go to programs that limit efficiency losses through behavioral requirements;
and when commodities are subsidized that function as long-term investments and create future income
gains.




Rebecca M. Blank
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
440 Lorch Hall
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
Tel: 734-763-2258
Fax: 734-763-9181
blank@umich.edu
                                                                                                3


        A concern for equity has long been an important aspect of economic analysis. Adam

Smith himself speaks harshly of the costs of poverty, claiming “No society can surely be

flourishing and happy, of which the greater part of the members are poor and miserable. It is

but equity, besides, that they who feed, cloath and lodge the whole body of the people, should

have such a share of the produce of their own labour as to be themselves tolerably well fed,

cloathed, and lodged” (Smith, 1976 reprint, Book I, chapter 8, page 88). Most policy

analysis done by economists, however, has focused on efficiency rather than equity, dealing

with such issues as the cost of government regulations, the deadweight loss of taxation, or the

labor supply effects of government transfers.

        Most economists take for granted the idea that equity and efficiency cannot be

achieved together – that greater equity must come at the inevitable cost of a loss of efficiency.

In this lecture I explore this efficiency/equity tradeoff. I am particularly interested in

identifying those circumstances under which equity and efficiency may not trade off against

each other. I want to identify policy situations that promote greater equity but have little

effect on efficiency or – even better – policy situations where equity and efficiency

complement each other and where government transfers from richer to poorer individuals may

perhaps even produce an more efficient society than would occur in the absence of those

transfers.



                                  I. The Case for a Trade-off

        The best-known discussion of the tradeoffs between equity and efficiency is in the

much-read book by economist Arthur Okun, Equity and Efficiency: The Big Tradeoff,

published in the late 1970s. This book has been highly influential. It is the Brookings
                                                                                                                    4


Institution’s best-selling volume ever, and continues to be used in undergraduate economics

classes throughout the U.S. Okun declares “…the conflict between equality and economic

efficiency is inescapable” (Okun, 1975, p120). He describes his famous “leaky bucket

experiment” in which he asserts that any dollar transferred from a richer individual to a poorer

individual, will result in less than a dollar increase in income for the recipient.

          Okun identifies four reasons for leaky buckets: Administrative costs of redistribution,

changes in work effort induced by redistribution, changes in savings and investment behavior

induced by redistribution, and changes in attitudes (for instance, motivation to acquire human

capital) induced by redistribution. The result is that government efforts to achieve equity

inevitably result in a smaller level of total income and less efficient use of resources. The

policy question becomes how much leakage a society is willing to accept in order to achieve a

certain level of equity. Surprisingly, Okun spends no time discussing how one might

minimize the leaks in the bucket, the topic of this lecture.

          There is substantial empirical evidence that suggests government transfers, designed to

create greater equity, can lead to inefficiencies. For instance, in the 1970s the U.S. funded a

series of experiments to test the effects of welfare program design on labor supply and well-

being of recipients, known as the negative income tax experiments.1 Summarizing the results,

Burtless (1986) notes that in general the government had to spend almost $2 in order to

increase family incomes by $1 – a leaky bucket that lost half of its contents in the process of

transfers. Most of this was due to the fact that higher transfers induced reductions in labor

supply.



1
  The two parameters most of these experiments focused on were cash guarantee levels to nonworkers and the
benefit reduction rate, that is, the rate at which benefits were reduced as a recipient went to work and received
earnings.
                                                                                                 5


       In another well-known example, economists have attempted to measure the

inefficiency costs of unemployment insurance (UI). Designed to raise incomes among the

unemployed, UI also increases the length of unemployment spells and hence reduces

earnings. Katz and Meyer (1990) estimate that each additional week of benefit availability

increases the duration of unemployment spells among UI recipients by 0.16 to 0.20 weeks. A

wide variety of other examples can be cited, from the research that suggests social security

transfers reduce savings and investment, to the research that argues disability insurance

induces early retirement and a higher share of reported injuries.

       No economist will deny the presence of many leaky buckets and inefficiencies in the

operation of government tax and transfer programs. My question for today is whether

government efforts to produce greater equity must inevitably produce greater inefficiency, or

whether there are policies and circumstances in which equity-increasing transfers can occur

without seriously reducing efficiency. I suggest that there are three general circumstances in

which this can occur. Before turning to a discussion of these three situations, however,

thinking about this question in the context of a simple conceptual framework is useful.



                                II. A Conceptual Framework

       My main goal in this section is to identify some of the key parameters that are likely to

cause leaky buckets and which policy can affect. To do this, I must make a substantial

number of simplifying assumptions to clarify exactly what issues I am focusing on.

       To provide a starting definition: I take efficiency to be related to the total economic

resources available to a society. A more efficient society can produce more with the same
                                                                                                               6


amount of resources.2 This leads me to focus this simple model solely on aggregate income,

rather than on some larger measure of social utility or social welfare. (At several points

below I note where one could monetize certain non-income benefits or losses to extend this

definition, if desired.) Most policy discussions focus primarily on income losses or gains; to

the extent that I am deeply interested in policy implications, looking only at income is

reasonable.

         Let there be two groups in the population: Taxpayers and benefit recipients. The

recipients are the “poor” to whom society wants to provide income supplements of some sort.

Initially, let us assume a simple one period model, so there are no investment-related issues.

In this one period, the rich and poor are fixed groups with no switching between them.3 For

simplicity, I am going to focus only on means-tested transfers, which go from the rich to the

poor.4

         One-period framework. Table 1 provides an outline of the framework that I propose

to think about equity and efficiency tradeoffs. In the absence of any redistributive transfers,

assume taxpayers have an aggregate income equal to Yt, while recipients have an aggregate

income equal to Yr. Each of these is dependent upon level of effort among taxpayers and

recipients, et and er. Hence, total income, Y, can be defined as

         (1)     Y(et, er) = Yt(et) + Yr(er).

         In the presence of redistributive transfers, total income (Y*) is equal to the post-

transfer income of both taxpayers (Y*t) and recipients (Y*r). Level of effort in the presence


2
  Okun uses a similar definition.
3
  This is an important assumption and ignores the possibility of people positioning themselves in advance to be
transfer recipients.
4
  This sets aside social insurance programs, which are broadly available throughout the population, but may have
some redistributive aspects. At least in the U.S., means tested programs generate more political controversy (in
part because their benefits are not broadly shared) and are the programs where “leakage” and perverse behavioral
responses raise the most public concern.
                                                                                                  7


of redistributive transfers is denoted as e*t and e*r among taxpayers and recipients

respectively. Hence, in a world with redistributive transfers

       (2)     Y*(e*t,e*r) = Y*t(e*t) + Y*r(e*r).

       Assume that the government seeks a total tax payment, T, from the taxpayers, in order

to provide redistributive transfers. I assume T is fixed, that is, the government taxes at a level

necessary to produce total tax revenues of T. If there is a behavioral response to these

additional taxes (say, lower labor supply) there may be a further loss of income Lt(e*t-et)

among taxpayers, where I assume this loss is a function of the difference in effort with and

without redistributive taxation.5

       I also allow for the possibility that taxpayers might gain from these transfers, denoted

by G. Since I am focusing on income changes, this gain must be some monetized measure of

taxpayer gains. For instance, this could be income gains due to reduced crime brought about

by redistributive transfers (I give further examples below). G could be fixed for a given level

of T, or it could be a function of the income received by recipients, Y*r. In this case, the

gains to taxpayers are affected by inefficiencies caused by the transfer.

       Assume that the income received by taxpayers in the presence of redistributive

transfers is a simple function of these variables, so

       (3)     Y*t(e*t) = Yt(et) – T – Lt(e*t – et) + G.

       Recipients of transfers are also likely to experience gains and losses relative to a world

with no transfers. Recipients receive benefits B in transfers, where I assume that B = T – C,

where C is the administrative cost associated with making transfers. Note that if a society has

a tax system in place in order to support (non-redistributive) social needs, the marginal
                                                                                                                 8


administrative costs of redistributive taxation are likely to be small. Assuming B = T – C is

equivalent to assuming that tax money is spent on either transfer benefits among the poor or

tax administration, hence no taxpayers receive any direct benefits.6

        These transfers may induce behavioral changes among recipients that cause an income

loss of Lr(e*r–er). As with taxpayers, this loss is a function of the difference in effort with and

without transfers. Hence,

        (4)      Y*r(e*r) = Yr(er) + B – Lr(e*r–er).

        A comparison of the efficiency costs of redistributive taxation is a comparison

between Y and Y*. Y is greater than Y* (and transfers cause an efficiency loss) when

        (5)      Yt + Yr > Y*t + Y*r

Substituting terms, this is a question of whether

        (6)      T + Lt + Lr > B + G

Substituting for B, this can also be written

        (6’)     Lt + Lr + C > G

        First, assume G is small or zero. It should be immediately obvious that if there are any

induced income losses (Lt or Lr) as a result of redistributive transfers, there will be an

efficiency loss. Only if the induced income losses (Lt and Lr) are zero and if administrative

costs C are minimal is there no leaky bucket. In this world, a dollar from the rich is directly

transferred as a dollar received by the poor (T = B) and transfers are costless. The transfer

scheme simply rearranges who holds the income.




5
  Because I am focusing only on income as an outcome, I do not allow for any offsetting gains to taxpayers due
to the change in their leisure time. One could monetize this so that the induced income losses included in the
model are net of any leisure gains.
6
  Questions about leakages in the targeting of transfers are interesting, but not the focus of this paper.
                                                                                                                       9


         Because I want to assume that costless income redistribution is desirable, I will

assume that G > 0. That is to say, in the absence of efficiency losses and with small

administrative costs, I will assume that equity-enhancing transfers should be undertaken. I

make this assumption, without specifying exactly what the nature of these gains might be.7

This could occur because taxpayers are altruistic and value the income gains of the poor, so

that better housing, education, and health among the poor add to the well-being of taxpayers.

They may value equity or prefer a society in which nobody is poor or hungry. As evidence

for this effect, Alesina, et. al. (2001) indicate that there is a large, negative, and significant

effect of social inquality on the level of happiness expressed by citizens of Europe. Perhaps

not surprisingly, this effect is not present in U. S. data. There also may be externalities related

to less poverty (such as lower crime) that directly benefit taxpayers.

         The framework laid out above makes clear what the factors are that determine the

level of inefficiency loss induced by redistributive transfers. There will be a lower efficiency

cost to redistributive taxation the greater are the gains to taxpayers (G), the smaller are the

administrative costs (C), and the smaller are induced losses to taxpayers and recipients (Lt and

Lr). As noted above, I assume G is positive but say nothing more about this variable. I also

largely ignore issues relating to administrative costs (C); if a tax system is necessary for other

purposes, the marginal administrative cost of redistributive transfers is likely to be small.

         With perhaps less justification, I am also going to ignore induced income losses

among taxpayers, largely because this is not my focus in this paper. There is a substantial

literature documenting the deadweight loss of taxation. For instance, Ballard, et. al. (1985)

7
  I also make no claims about the size of G. Clearly, if G is large, even quite inefficient transfer policies will
become worthwhile. An alternative paper could explore how to make redistributive taxation more attractive by
selecting policies that maximize the gains to taxpayers as a result of that taxation. For instance, certain types of
                                                                                                                 10


suggest that losses induced by the U.S. system were approximately $0.13 to $0.24 for every

dollar raised. In my framework, Lt is the additional deadweight loss due to redistributive

transfers, that is, the marginal income loss associated with the additional taxes necessary to

make redistributive transfers. One might argue that Lt is small for two reasons: First, if the

number of taxpayers is large and the number of recipients is relatively small then the

additional tax payment per taxpayer for redistributive taxation is small and hence the

behavioral response of taxpayers to redistributive taxation is likely to be small.8 In this

situation, the behavioral response of recipients may dominate the loss calculation. Second,

we are discussing only the behavioral response of taxpayers induced by the marginal taxation

focused on redistribution. If the majority of government budgets go for non-redistributive

purposes (defense, infrastructure, foreign aid, etc), then the additional behavioral response due

to the marginal taxes that go to redistribution is likely to be a relatively small component of

the overall deadweight loss caused by the taxation. Not everyone will be convinced by these

arguments9, however, and in some nations levels of redistributive taxation may be quite high.

Hence I recognize that Lt is almost surely greater than zero, but I take it as a fixed cost

associated with redistribution and focus on other variables.10

         This leaves the induced income losses among the recipients (Lr). In sections III and

IV, below, I suggest policy situations in which Lr is likely to be small and argue that these

situations are likely to produce greater equity without major efficiency tradeoffs.




transfers may produce greater taxpayer satisfaction. This may be one reason for in-kind transfers programs
focused on food, housing or medical care, rather than cash transfers.
8
  Of course, small per-person losses among a large population can add up to large total losses.
9
  For instance, see the recent article by Feldstein (1999), where he argues that the deadweight loss of increasing
tax rates within the U.S. system is extremely high.
10
   One could, of course, discuss ways to design tax systems to minimize deadweight loss. See the discussion of
tax structure and efficiency in Auerbach and Hines (2001).
                                                                                                                    11


         Two-period framework. Limiting the discussion to one period prevents any discussion

of the longer-term effects that might result from redistributive transfers. In particular, many

people argue that certain types of transfers should be considered investments, because they

produce positive future effects. This argument is most frequently made regarding transfers to

poor children, where better health care, better nutrition or better schooling might result in

lower future government costs and greater future employment and earnings among transfer

recipients.

         To see how such investment effects might occur, let me think about what might

happen if the one-period framework is expanded in the simplest possible way to allow for

long-term effects. Assume redistributive transfers occur only in the first period, but may have

future effects. Thus there may be a second period that is a substantial time into the future,

perhaps as long as 5 to 15 years later. I assume that one-period tax payments affect taxpayers

only in the period in which they are paid, so that the calculation among taxpayers does not

change. (One could easily allow for two periods of losses to taxpayers, if higher current taxes

reduce labor supply or savings in future periods. Similarly, one could easily allow for two

periods of gains to taxpayers, if they value the income gains in the second period among

recipients. But since taxpayers are not at the center of my concern, I ignore these issues.) 11

         Among recipients, assume that there is a change in behavior in the second period that

is induced by first-period transfers. Denote the second period income effect of this change in

behavior I2(B1), where superscripts index period and I2 is dependent upon the magnitude and

the type of the first-period transfer, B1. I2 will be positive if the transfer functions as an


11
   I deal with multi-period models in which the transfer occurs only once. A multi-period model in which
transfers recur would open up a variety of other interesting issues. For instance, people who are among the
taxpayers in the starting period might be “at risk” of being a recipient in some future period. This could create
political support for a transfer program in a way not allowed in my model.
                                                                                                     12


investment. For instance, there may be a change in effort due to learned behavior induced by

the transfer program (such as better money management or better job-search skills). Or there

may be a change in ability induced by the transfer program (perhaps due to greater education

or training received in the first period.)

        The benefits that result from the transfer may now substantially exceed the direct cost

of the transfers, that is, if B1 = T1 – C1 then B1 + δI2 > T1 – C1 (where δ is a discount factor).

The calculation in equation (6), which determines whether redistributive transfers create an

efficiency loss, is amended to

        (7) T1 + L1t + L1r > B1 + G1 + δI2

The additional positive term on the right-hand side of the inequality makes it less likely to

hold. If the behavioral changes induced by the transfer are large and positive, redistributive

taxation could actually raise total income. In this case, the transfers can produce both greater

equity and greater efficiency.

        It is important to note that I2, the second period income changes among recipients

induced by first period transfers, need not be positive. There has been a substantial U.S.

policy discussion around the possibility that cash welfare transfers induce less work effort and

greater fertility over time.12 Both of these could lead to reduced future earnings and work

effort. So-called “welfare dependency” arguments claim that the long-term effects of

redistributive transfers on behavior are negative. While recognizing this possibility, my

interest is in identifying policies where the long-term income effects of transfers are likely to

be positive, that is, policies that function as investments. In Section V, I discuss policy

situations where transfers are likely to have long-term positive benefits.
                                                                                                                13


                               III. Case 1: A Lack of Recipient Agency

         I am focusing on the costs associated with redistribution that occur because of

behavioral responses to transfers on the part of recipients. For instance, policymakers are

concerned about reductions in labor supply caused by cash support for the poor, increases in

non-marital childbearing caused by assistance to single mothers, or changes in the timing of

retirement caused by public pension plans. All of these examples reflect a concern about the

size of Lr – the induced income losses among recipients that are generated by the transfer.

         If there is no individual agency, however, there can be little induced income loss. If

individuals have no control over their life outcomes or no capacity to respond, then the

behavior changes among recipients that create leaky buckets for government transfers will not

occur (i.e., Lr = 0).

         The most common lack of agency occurs in situations where an individual has no

capacity for response. This may be true of disabled individuals, of the elderly who can no

longer work, or of children. If these groups are not working and not expected to work,

additional income will not cause an offsetting change in labor supply. If these groups are not

now saving, then additional income cannot cause a reduction in saving. That is to say,

because these individuals cannot act effectively, they would not behave in any less acceptable

manner if provided with additional transfers. They are poor because of circumstances outside

their control and they have no ability to affect that poverty by their own behavior.13

         An alternative reason for lack of agency may be institutional constraints that prevent

individual effort from affecting outcomes. For example, this might occur in a highly stratified


12
   For instance, see Murray (1994).
13
   Blank (2000) indicates that a lack of agency may also affect the way in which government assistance can best
be delivered. Of course, if lack of agency is foreseeable in some earlier period, the presence of future expected
transfers could cause behavioral changes.
                                                                                                  14


society where one’s position is entirely determined by family background or race or ethnicity.

If jobs, wages, and housing opportunities are limited by the color of one’s skin, one’s gender,

or one’s ethnic background, then the level of effort exerted by these groups will not matter

and income will be largely predetermined.

       In a paper focusing on the role of income mobility, Picketty (1995) develops a model

that makes this point. He has a simple scheme in which the expected income of an agent is

equal to πk + θe, where e is effort and πk is the expectation of one’s future income based on

family background k (for instance, k may signify parental race or parental income.) If θ = 0,

then one’s future income is entirely determined by one’s family background and there is no

return to effort. When effort no longer matters, then induced losses among transfer recipients

are zero, since there is no incentive to behave differently when transfers are received (in the

framework laid out in Section II, e*r = er and hence Lr equals zero.) This suggests that

transfers to individuals without agency are likely to generate few efficiency tradeoffs.

       What does this mean from a policy standpoint? It suggests that transfers to those

without agency may produce few leaky bucket effects. This may explain why certain types of

transfers are politically more acceptable than others. Within the U.S., the distinction between

the “deserving” and the “undeserving” poor is often based on whether poor individuals are

viewed as behaving in ways that contribute to their poverty. Those without agency are

typically considered the more deserving. Hence, U.S. transfer programs for the elderly or the

disabled are more generous than for able-bodied.

       More perversely, this argument also suggests that if a society maintains strong limits

on economic opportunity for a particular group, then it can better afford to transfer some

assistance to this group. Hence, those who are culpable in maintaining the institutional
                                                                                                   15


structures that promote racial or ethnic exclusion can feel “good” about helping the poor, at a

relatively low cost.

       But the neo-Okuns in the audience will immediately find an objection to this

discussion about agency. Even transfers to individuals who have no personal agency may still

have offsetting efficiency costs if they affect the behavior of other family members. For

instance, if supporting the poor elderly with public money induces fewer children to feel they

must support their parents, there may be efficiency costs. Or if guaranteeing college

scholarships for children leads parents to work less and save less then there may be efficiency

costs. Although the empirical evidence on these effects is limited, Cox and Jakubson (1995)

estimate that cash welfare payments have a small but measurable effect on interfamily private

transfers. Schoeni (1996) finds somewhat larger effects and also finds that public welfare

transfers reduce the time given to help other family members.

       In short, an individual must be both without agency and socially isolated in order for

transfers to truly involve no efficiency losses. What does this mean for policy? This is an

argument for providing orphans with higher degrees of government support than one provides

other children. Or for distinguishing in program generosity between elderly and disabled

individuals who have no family versus those who do.

       Transfer policy tends not to make this distinction relating to social isolation very

frequently. I suspect this is because of the difficulty in determining who might have private

family assistance available. Not all families provide interfamily transfers and a policy that

helped only childless widows would create difficulties for the elderly widow whose children

refused to help. If the policy was designed to help only childless widows or widows not

helped by their families, this would create strong incentives for families to refuse assistance.
                                                                                                          16


        In short, among all poor individuals, society should be more willing to redistribute to

those without agency of their own, who can neither escape their poverty nor behave

differently if given additional income. Society should be even more willing to redistribute to

those without agency and without family. In these circumstances, the efficiency costs of

redistribution are limited to the pure administrative costs or the costs imposed on taxpayers

and the efficiency arguments against redistribution are relatively weak.



                  IV. Case 2: Policies that Impose Behavioral Requirements

        In Case 1, it is a lack of responsiveness on the part of recipients that limits the

inefficiency of transfers. In this example, I discuss a situation where it is the nature of the

transfer program that limits inefficiency.

        In more recent years, a variety of government programs have begun to combine

income transfers with behavioral requirements. The most discussed example of this may be

welfare-to-work programs, which provide assistance to poor families but demand that they

participate in job search and job placement programs. Other examples include services to

teens that are conditional upon staying in school; enforcement of job search requirements in

unemployment insurance programs; or work assistance programs for unemployed males that

are conditional upon staying off drugs and out of trouble with the law. These programs have

the potential to substantially reduce the inefficiencies that may be associated with a transfer,

because they condition the transfer upon a behavioral response that reduces the costs.14

        An excellent example of this type of transfer can be observed in some of the welfare-

to-work programs that have been run experimentally in the United States and Canada. Known


14
  In a somewhat different context, this point was made by Nichols and Zeckhauser (1982), who argue that
constraining transfers can help target them on the neediest population.
                                                                                                            17


as “financial incentive programs” these policies provide significant cash support to families,

but condition the cash payments on work behavior. Hence, these programs subsidize family

income but also encourage labor supply.15 Because of their particularly strong results, let me

describe two of these programs in a bit more detail.

        The Minnesota Family Investment Program (MFIP) was implemented in Minnesota in

1994 and aimed at moving women on welfare into employment. MFIP provided a high

earnings disregard that allowed women to continue to receive some cash assistance as they

went to work, until their earnings were about 140 percent of the poverty line.16 At the same

time, participants were also required to take part in mandatory job search and job placement

programs. Participants were randomly assigned to the MFIP program, so that a control group

of women continued to take part in more traditional welfare programs. The random

assignment methodology resulted in an evaluation of MFIP that is considered highly credible.

        The Self-Sufficiency Project (SSP) was implemented in 1992 in two provinces in

Canada (New Brunswick and British Columbia.)17 It offered a randomly chosen group of

women on welfare (known as Income Assistance in Canada) an alternative: If they agreed to

leave welfare, they could receive an earnings supplement in every month when they worked

30 hours per week or more. The supplement was large and roughly doubled the earnings of

most participants. It was calculated as half the difference between a participant’s earnings

and an “earnings benchmark” set at $30,000 in New Brunswick and $37,000 in British

Columbia (Canadian dollars). The supplement was reduced by 50 cents for every dollar of

earnings. In this program, the 30-hour rule provided the work mandate; women working less

15
  For a more detailed discussion of these programs, see Blank, et. al. (2000) or Michalopoulos and Berlin
(2001).
                                                                                                                 18


than this could not collect a supplement. As in MFIP, participants were randomly assigned to

the SSP program or the traditional welfare program in the province, and the results of the

evaluation are considered highly credible.18

         The impact of these two programs is shown in Table 2, which shows the gains among

program recipients versus the treatment group for both of these experimental programs.

Employment increased by 7.2 percent among SSP recipients and by 11.5 percent among

MFIP recipients, relative to the treatment group. Earnings increases were significant, as were

increases in annual income. In both experiments, poverty declined as well by a substantial

amount. Because these programs continued to provide generous earnings supplements to

workers, they also cost the government more money. But the increased costs were more than

offset by the income gains.

         In SSP, for every dollar spent by the government in transfers, recipients gained $1.95

in income. In MFIP, for every dollar in transfer income, recipients gained $2.48.19 These are

markedly different results than the negative income tax results cited above (Burtless, 1986),

where a dollar in government expenditures resulted in only a $0.53 gain in recipient incomes.

         It is worth noting that the generous working family tax credits enacted in the U.S. and

in Great Britain in recent years can be considered variants on this type of program. The


16
   For more information on MFIP, see Miller, et. al. (2000). In contrast, in the Aid to Families with Dependent
Children (AFDC) program that was available to women who did not participate in MFIP, an additional dollar of
earnings resulted in a dollar of benefit loss for most women.
17
   For more information on SSP, see Michalopoulos, et. al. (2000).
18
   A key difference between MFIP and SSP is that those assigned to the MFIP “treatment” had to participate in
that program and were subject to sanctions if they did not participate in mandatory job search. Being assigned to
the SSP “treatment” meant having the choice between accepting SSP or staying in the traditional welfare
program. (If they voluntarily entered SPP they were not eligible for traditional welfare for the next three years.)
Hence, the SPP results test the incentive effects of a large subsidy to work and whether women will voluntarily
accept a 30-hour-per-week mandate in exchange for greater benefits. The treatment results in SSP include all
women given this choice, that is, both those who entered SSP and those who did not respond to the incentive.
19
   For both SSP and MFIP these are the numbers for long-term welfare recipients who entered the experimental
program. The results are somewhat lower for more recent applicants, and there are no gains for two-parent
families in MFIP. See Blank (forthcoming) for more information on these benefit/cost numbers.
                                                                                                               19


Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) in the U.S. pays nothing to non-workers, but provides

substantial supplements to the earnings of low-wage workers in low-income families. The

result, documented in a growing number of studies, is greater labor supply among single

mothers.20

         In short, generous transfers need not mean labor supply reductions. When combined

with strong work requirements, it is possible that transfer programs can provide additional

income to low-income families at the same time as they increase labor supply and earnings.

This is a very different result than occurs in traditional cash welfare programs, which pay the

largest amount to nonworkers and hence encourage reductions in labor supply. I find these

results from the MFIP and SSP programs to be among the most interesting findings coming

out of the U.S. welfare reform research. They suggest how to design future policies to reduce

efficiency costs.21

         An alternative example of experimental policies that combine subsidies with

behavioral incentives comes from the unemployment insurance experiments run in a variety

of states in the U.S. in the 1980s.22 These experiments tried to reduce the effect of

unemployment insurance on the length of unemployment spells by providing financial

bonuses to individuals who found a job quickly. While the exact nature of these experiments

varied across states, they sought to move people into jobs more quickly and even reduce

government spending if the bonus paid was less than the unemployment insurance that would

have been collected in a longer unemployment spell. While some experiments were less

successful, the results in one state – Illinois -- were particularly strong. The bonus payments


20
   See Eissa and Liebman (1996), Meyer and Rosenbaum (1999), or Ellwood (2000).
21
   Programs with behavioral requirements may have higher administrative costs (i.e., high C), since they require
more services and monitoring on the part of the government agency overseeing the program.
22
   The information in this paragraph is taken from Meyer (1995).
                                                                                                  20


resulted in shorter unemployment spells, earnings increases, a reduction in UI payments and

only a moderate level of bonus payments. Other experiments have sought to enforce job

search among UI recipients, and in several locations also produced significant improvements

in earnings and a reduction in UI payments.

       What does this mean for policy? I believe these policy examples suggest that we need

to explore additional opportunities to link redistributive subsidies with behavioral mandates or

behavioral incentives. Such programs may take a greater degree of management skill and

design attention than simple transfer programs, but they may also significantly reduce the

induced income losses that are imbedded in more traditional transfer programs and thereby

limit the leaky bucket effect produced by these programs.



                             V. Case 3: Transfers as Investments

       Both cases 1 and 2 involve transfer situations in which efficiency costs are minimized.

The transfers themselves do not increase aggregate income in the society, but they occur

relatively costlessly and hence they involve little loss of efficiency.

       An alternative situation can occur if transfers subsidize the provision of services that

function as investments; that is, if they not only increase resources in the period in which they

occur, but they also change behavior or opportunities in such a way that they increase income

in future periods as well. The appeal to transfers as an “investment in the future” is

frequently made, especially for programs aimed at poor children.

       In fact, the possibility of investment returns may be one reason to publicly subsidize a

particular commodity. Traditionally, economists would argue that utility is maximized with

greater choice, hence, cash transfers produce more benefits than in-kind transfers. But if
                                                                                                                     21


certain types of in-kind transfers have long-term investment properties, that is a reason to

prefer them to more general cash transfers. This may be particularly true of school-related

transfers or health-related transfers.23 Let me indicate three policy areas where current

transfers seem to produce future gains.

         First, transfers that provide health assistance may be viewed as an investment if they

reduce future health problems. Public campaigns to immunize children, for instance, appear

to have substantial long-term benefits in terms of lower future health expenditures. (These

could be public or private gains; in either case, they increase total income available for other

purposes.) For instance, the Centers for Disease Control (1999) note that “…every dollar

spent to administer oral poliovirus vaccine saved $3.40 in direct medical costs and $2.74 in

indirect societal costs” and “…every dollar spent to purchase measles-containing vaccine

saved $10.30 in direct medical costs and $3.20 in indirect societal costs.”

         Prenatal and infant health care also appears to produce long-term benefits. The

General Accounting Office (1992) reviewed 17 evaluation studies of the Special

Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants and Children (WIC), a program that

provides health and nutritional assistance to low-income mothers and their children. On

average, these studies suggest that every dollar invested in WIC returns an estimated $3.50

over 18 years (discounted present value) to government and to private insurers. Clearly,

public expenditure programs focused on poor children’s health appear to produce substantial

future returns.



23
   A classic economist’s question is “if these expenditures have such large returns, why didn’t people undertake
them on their own?” One answer may be income or information constraints. In some cases the decision-maker
(the parent or caretaker) is not the same as the individual who will reap the gains (the child). In both the health
and education area, there are also significant positive externalities to these transfers and a substantial part of the
gain may be received by others than those who directly receive the transfer.
                                                                                                  22


       Second, human capital expenditures may have similar investment-type properties.

Indeed, many transfer programs to subsidize child care or education are supported because

they are considered investments in the future. The evidence on the long-term gains from

many of these programs is not as extensive as the evidence from health-related programs. But

in many cases, it is difficult to credibly evaluate the gains from education programs. For

instance, when all children are in mandatory public schooling it is hard to measure the effects

relative to a world with no public schooling, to determine the long-term returns on public

school dollars.

       One preschool program in the U.S. has attracted a particularly large amount of

research attention. Head Start is a program designed to provide enriched pre-school training

to low-income children in poor neighborhoods. A cohort of head-start children from the

1960s shows continued benefits 20 years later relative to a randomly selected control group

(Schweinert, et. al., 1993). A recent study by Garces, et. al. (2000) investigates Head Start’s

effects using data from a national longitudinal sample of children. They estimate that Head

Start enrollment between the ages of 3 and 5 results in long-term benefits, including increased

high school graduation and college enrollment rates. These studies do not do actual cost-

benefit calculations, so one cannot conclude that the gains from Head Start actually exceeded

the dollars spent. But the magnitude and long-term nature of the measured effects suggests

that benefit-cost ratios for the program are likely to be quite high.

       While many job training programs aimed at disadvantaged adults or teens appear to

not have significant long-term effects on work behavior or earnings, there are exceptions. For

instance, the Job Corps program in the United States, which provides special educational and

career services for disadvantaged teens, is estimated to generate over $2 in future benefits for
                                                                                                            23


every $1 of program expenditures (Burghardt, et. al., 2001, Table 3). Some U.S. welfare-to-

work programs appear to create long-term earnings increases as well. Indeed, if one believes

that wages should grow with labor market experience, programs that mandate work should

lead to earnings growth as a result of their additional work experience. Gladden and Taber

(2000) indicate that wages among less-skilled women do increase with experience. Hotz, et.

al. (2000) indicate that a California welfare-to-work program resulted in gains up to nine

years later.24

        As discussed in Section II, welfare-to-work programs with strong financial incentives

have also resulted in high benefit/cost ratios. In fact, these programs may be an example of

more efficient transfer policies that combine elements of both cases 2 and 3. On the one hand,

because of their behavioral mandates, they lessen the induced income losses of recipients at

the time of the transfer. On the other hand, because of the increase in employment that they

generate, they may produce long-term gains in earnings if current labor market experience

induces greater future labor force participation and higher future earnings.

        In addition to health and human capital investments, a final (but less documented)

example of how transfer programs might induce long-term efficiency gains could be in the

area of attitudinal change. It is often argued that anti-discrimination programs – in the

workplace or the housing market – produce substantial gains to minority populations. Some

of this may occur through human capital avenues, if such programs open up new training and

job opportunities. But some of this may occur if such programs reduce discriminatory

behavior by the majority population over time. That is, if enforcing anti-discrimination laws

today reduces the taste for discrimination throughout society in the future, then there could be


24
  Both the Job Corps and the California welfare-to-work results are based on evaluation studies involving
randomly selected treatment and control groups and are considered highly credible.
                                                                                               24


beneficial income and productivity gains in the minority population that more than outweigh

the costs of the program. This is an area where quantitative research is more limited.

       It is not obvious how many opportunities there are to make investment-based transfers

which lead to larger future incomes among the poor. While I have tried to cite a few

examples where I think there is evidence that such an effect might be occurring, it is worth

emphasizing that many programs are not likely to produce such long-term gains. Going back

to the simple conceptual framework discussed above, increases in income among the poor

over multiple time periods must be substantial in order to actually enhance efficiency. There

may be induced income losses in the first period generated by behavioral changes among the

poor (increased subsidies for children’s schooling or health may reduce parental labor supply

or savings); in addition it is not enough that a program simply have positive benefits in order

to argue that efficiency is enhanced. Its benefits must outweigh all of the costs associated

with its required level of transfers. My guess is that fewer programs actually enhance

efficiency than many advocates would like to claim. The “investment” argument is used

broadly for a wide range of child and school-related transfers; only long-term and serious

program evaluation studies can prove which policies actually do function as investments.

       What does this mean for policy? Even if large positive gains from transfer programs

are not frequently available, they do appear more likely to occur in certain program areas,

most notably those related to children’s health and education. This argues for focusing more

public subsidies on those services that provide ongoing future income gains and less on

policies that simply provide one-period benefits. It would also be useful to do more

comparative evaluations of policies intended to generate investment returns, so that
                                                                                                  25


policymakers can more effectively determine what specific policy design attributes are most

likely to produce the largest long-term income gains.



                                         VI. Conclusion

        Despite extensive attention in the economics literature to the efficiency costs of

transfer programs, there has been little attention focused on ways to minimize such costs. This

paper has tried to investigate policy situations in which equity and efficiency need not trade

off against each other. My review of the evidence suggests that the equity/efficiency tradeoff

may be low in at least three situations: when public assistance goes to particular populations

that have no capacity to change their behavior; when it goes to particular programs that

combine behavioral mandates along with transfer payments; and when it subsidizes access to

particular commodities that function as long-term investments.

        This review also suggests that economists should potentially pay more attention to

populations that have been less studied in the economics literature. While many existing

articles focus on the effects of transfer programs on able-bodied adults, a larger share of the

poor – at least in the U.S. -- are children, elderly, or disabled. We would benefit from a

richer research literature that analyzes the effects of alternative transfer schemes on these

groups. It is possible that the general distaste for redistributive transfers that characterizes the

opinion of many economists may be the result of a highly selected set of research studies,

which have focused on populations where the costs of redistributive transfers are likely to be

highest.

        While Okun’s leaky bucket is a reality for many transfers programs, the level of

leakage can vary substantially across programs. Average estimates of the inefficiencies
                                                                                              26


induced by redistributive social policies do not adequately characterize the diversity of

efficiency costs across individual policies. In a number of real-world policy situations, equity

and efficiency are not inevitably in conflict with each other.
                                                                                          27


                                       References


Alesina, Alberto, Rafael Di Tella, and Robert MacCulloch. 2001. “Inequality and Happiness:
Are Europeans and Americans Different?” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper No. 8198. Cambridge, MA: NBER. April.

Auerbach, Alan J. and James R. Hines, Jr. 2001. “Taxation and Economic Efficiency.”
University of Michigan Business School Working Paper No. 2001-7. Februrary.

Ballard, Charles L., John B. Shoven, and John Whalley. 1985. “The Total Welfare Cost of
the United States Tax System: A General Equilibrium Approach.” National Tax Journal.
Vol 38(2):125-40.

Blank, Rebecca M. 2000. “When Can Public Policy Makers Rely on Private Markets? The
Effective Provision of Social Services.” Economic Journal. Vol 110(462): C34-C49. March.

Blank, Rebecca M. Forthcoming. “Evaluating Welfare Reform.” Journal of Economic
Literature.

Blank, Rebecca M., David Card and Philip K. Robins. 2000. “Financial Incentives for
Increasing Work and Income Among Low-Income Families.” In Finding Jobs: Work and
Welfare Reform, Rebecca M. Blank and David Card, eds. New York, NY: Russell Sage
Foundation.

Bloom, Dan and Charles Michalopoulos. 2001. How Welfare and Work Policies Affect
Employment and Income: A Synthesis of Research. New York: MDRC.

Burghardt, John, Peter Z. Schochet, Sheena McConnell, Terry Johnson, R. Mark Gritz, Steven
Glazerman, John Homrighausen, and Russell Jackson. 2001. Does Job Corps Work?
Princeton, NJ: Mathematica Policy Research, Inc. June.

Burtless, Gary. 1986. “The Work Response to a Guaranteed Income: A Survey of
Experimental Evidence,” in Lessons from the Income Maintenance Experiments, Alicia H.
Munnell, ed. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.

Centers for Disease Control. 1999. “Achievements in Public Health, 1900-1999: Impact of
Vaccines Universally Recommended for Children, United States, 1990-1998.” Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report, Vol 48(12): 243-8.

Cox, Donald and George Jakubson. 1995. “The Connection Between Public Transfers and
Private Interfamily Transfers.” Journal of Public Economics. Vol 57: 129-67.

Eissa, Nada and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 1996. “Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income
Tax Credit.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2): 605-37.
                                                                                         28


Ellwood, David T. 2000. The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit and Social Policy
Reforms on Work, Marriage, and Living Arrangements. (Working Paper) Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Kennedy School of Government.

Feldstein, Martin. 1999. “Tax Avoidance and the Deadweight Loss of the Income Tax.”
Review of Economics and Statistics. Vol 81(4): 674-80. November.

Garces, Eliana, Duncan Thomas and Janet Currie. 2000. “Longer Term Effects of Head
Start.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 8054. Cambridge, MA:
NBER.

Gladden, Tricia and Christopher Taber. 2000. “Wage Progression Among Less Skilled
Workers,” in Finding Jobs: Work and Welfare Reform, David Card and Rebecca M. Blank,
eds. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Hotz, V. Joseph, Guido Imbens, and Jacob Klerman. 2000. “The Long-Term Gains from
GAIN: A Re-Analysis of the Impacts of the California GAIN Program.” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper 8007. Cambridge, MA: NBER.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Bruce D. Meyer. 1990. “The Impact of the Potential Duration of
Unemployment Benefits on the Duration of Unemployment.” Journal of Public Economics.
Vol 41: 45-72.

Meyer, Bruce D. 1995. “Lessons from the U.S. Unemployment Insurance Experiments.”
Journal of Economic Literature. Vol 33(1): 91-131.

Meyer, Bruce D. and Dan T. Rosenbaum. 1999. “Welfare, The Earned Income Tax Credit,
and the Labor Supply of Single Mothers.” NBER Working Paper No. W7363. Cambridge,
MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Michalopoulos, Charles and Gordon Berlin. 2001. “Financial Work Incentives for the
Working Poor.” In The New World of Welfare, Rebecca M. Blank and Ron Haskins, eds.
Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.

Michalopoulos, Charles, David Card, Lisa A. Gennetian, Kristen Harknett, and Philip K.
Robins. 2000. The Self-Sufficiency Project at 36 Months: Effects of a Financial Work
Incentive on Employment and Income. Ottawa, Canada: Social Research and Demonstration
Corporation. June.

Miller, Cynthia, Virginia Knox, Lisa A. Gennetian, Martey Dodoo, Jo Anna Hunter, and
Cindy Redcross. 2000. Reforming Welfare and Rewarding Work: Final Report on the
Minnesota Family Investment Program. Vol 1: Effects on Adults. New York: MDRC.
September

Murray, Charles. 1994. “Does Welfare Bring More Babies.” The Public Interest. Spring.
                                                                                             29




Nichols, Albert L. and Richard J. Zeckhauser. 1982. “Targeting Transfers through
Restrictions on Recipients.” American Economic Review, 72(2):372-77. May.

Okun, Arthur M. 1975. Equality and Efficiency: The Big Tradeoff. Washington D.C.: The
Brookings Institution.

Piketty, Thomas. 1995. “Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics. Vol 110(3): 551-84.

Schoeni, Robert F. 1996. “Does Aid to Families with Dependent Children Displace Familial
Assistance?” Unpublished manuscript, RAND.

Schweinhart, Lawrence J., Helen Barnes, and David Weikart. 1993. Significant Benefits:
The High-Scope Perry Preschool Study Through Age 27. Monograph of the High/Scope
Educational Research Foundation, Number Ten. Ypsilanti, MI: High/Scope Educational
Research Foundation.

Smith, Adam. 1976 (reprint). An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of
Nations. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

U.S. General Accounting Office. 1992. Early Intervention: Federal Investments Like WIC
Can Produce Savings. Washington, D.C.: G.A.O. April.
                                                                                                 30


                                             Table 1

              A Framework for Evaluating Efficiency/Equity Tradeoffs
I.     No Redistributive Transfers

Taxpayers:      Yt(et) = Income in the absence of redistributive transfers
                et = Effort in the absence of redistributive transfers

Recipients:     Yr(er) = Income in the absence of redistributive transfers
                er = Effort in the absence of redistributive transfers

Total income: Y = Yt + Yr

II.    With Redistributive Transfers

Taxpayers:      Y*t(e*t) = Income in the presence of redistributive transfers
                e*t = Effort in the presence of redistributive transfers

                T = Amount of tax dollars government seeks to raise
                G = Gains to taxpayers from redistributive transfers
                Lt(e*t – et) = Induced income losses to taxpayers from redistributive taxation

                Y*t(e*t) ≈ Yt(et) – T – Lt(e*t – et) + G

Recipients:     Yr(er) = Income in the presence of redistributive transfers
                er = Effort in the presence of redistributive transfers

                B = Transfer benefits received by recipients, where B = T – C, and
                C = Administrative costs of redistributive transfers
                Lr(e*r – er) = Induced income losses to recipients from redistributive transfers

                Y*r(e*r) ≈ Yr(er) + B – Lr(e*r – er)

Total income: Y* = Y*t + Y*r


Redistributive transfers involve efficiency costs if

                Y*t + Y*r < Yt + Yr
       or
                T + L t + Lr > B + G
       or
                Lt + Lr + C > G
                                                                                                 31


                                                 Table 2

      Effects of Two Financial Incentive Programs Tested Using Random
                                  Assignment
            (Shown is the difference in outcomes between experimentals and controls
                                 in third year after program start)

                                          Self-
                                       Sufficiency     Minnesota Family
                                         Project          Investment
           Outcome                   (SSP), Canada      Project (MFIP)

Employment (%)                          7.2***             11.5***
Annual Earnings ($)                    649***                571*
Annual Cash Transfers ($)              800***               614***
Annual Income ($)                      1449***             1185***
Poverty (%)                            -9.4***             -12.4***

Estimated income gains per               1.95                2.48
recipient for each dollar
of transfers
***Significant at 1 percent level.
* Significant at 10 percent level.

Sources: Employment, earnings, cash transfers, and annual income for both programs come
from Bloom and Michalopoulos (2001, Appendix Tables C.2 and C.3). The MFIP program
included a variety of components. Reported here are the results for the full program, that is,
the program that included financial incentives with a mandatory work program.

Poverty data for MFIP comes from Miller et al (2000, Table 4.5). Poverty data for SSP
comes from Michalopoulos et al (2000, Table ES.2).

Income gains per recipient for each dollar of transfers is shown for long-term welfare
recipients in SSP and MFIP. The equivalent ratios among recent single-parent applicants in
MFIP is 0.97, and among two-parent applicants is 0.40. These benefit/cost ratios are found in
Blank (forthcoming, Table 8) and are explained in more detail there.
