                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                     RATIONAL ASSET PRICES


                                       George M. Constantinides


                                          Working Paper 8826
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8826


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2002




I thank John Campbell, Gene Fama, Chris Geczy, Lars Hansen, John Heaton, Rajnish Mehra, Lubos Pastor,
Dick Thaler, and particularly Alon Brav and John Cochrane, for their insightful comments and constructive
criticism. Finally, I thank Lior Menzly, for his excellent research assistance and insightful comments
throughout this project. Naturally, I remain responsible for errors. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by George M. Constantinides. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Rational Asset Prices
George M. Constantinides
NBER Working Paper No. 8826
March 2002
JEL No. G1, E2, E3



                                              ABSTRACT

        The mean, co-variability, and predictability of the return of different classes of financial assets
challenge the rational economic model for an explanation. The unconditional mean aggregate equity
premium is almost seven percent per year and remains high after adjusting downwards the sample mean
premium by introducing prior beliefs about the stationarity of the price-dividend ratio and the (non)
forecastability of the long-term dividend growth and price-dividend ratio. Recognition that idiosyncratic
income shocks are uninsurable and concentrated in recessions contributes toward an explanation. Also
borrowing constraints over the investors’ life cycle that shift the stock market risk to the saving
middle-aged consumers contribute toward an explanation.




George M. Constantinides
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
gmc@gsb.uchicago.edu
A central theme in finance and economics is the pursuit of a unified theory of the rate of
return across different classes of financial assets. In particular, we are interested in the
mean, co-variability, and predictability of the return of financial assets. At the macro
level, we study the short-term risk-free rate, the term premium of long-term bonds over
the risk-free rate, and the aggregate equity premium of the stock market over the risk-free
rate. At the micro level, we study the premium of individual stock returns and of classes
of stocks, such as the small-capitalization versus large-capitalization stocks, the “value”
versus “growth” stocks, and the past losing versus winning stocks.
        The neoclassical rational economic model is a unified model that views these
premia as the reward to risk-averse investors that process information rationally and have
unambiguously defined preferences over consumption that typically (but not necessarily)
belong to the von Neumann-Morgenstern class. Naturally, the theory allows for market
incompleteness, market imperfections, informational asymmetries, and learning. The
theory also allows for differences among assets for liquidity, transaction costs, tax status,
and other institutional factors.
        The cause of much anxiety over the last quarter of a century is evidence
interpreted as failure of the rational economic paradigm to explain the price level and the
rate of return of financial assets both at the macro and micro levels. A celebrated example
of such evidence, although by no means the only one, is the failure of the representative-
agent rational economic paradigm to account for the large average premium of the
aggregate return of stocks over short-term bonds and the small average return of short-
term bonds from the last quarter of the nineteenth century to the present. Dubbed the
“Equity Premium Puzzle” by Mehra and Prescott (1985), it has generated a cottage
industry of rational and behavioral explanations of the level of asset prices and their rate
of return.
        Another example is the large increase in stock prices in the early and middle
1990s, which Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan decried as “Irrational
Exuberance” even before the unprecedented further increase in stock prices and price-
dividend ratios in the late 1990s.




                                                                                           1
       My objective is to revisit some of this evidence and explore the extent to which
the rational economic paradigm explains the price level and the rate of return of financial
assets over the past hundred plus years, both at the macro and micro levels.
       In Section I, I re-examine the statistical evidence on the size of the unconditional
mean of the aggregate equity return and premium. First, I draw a sharp distinction
between conditional, short-term forecasts of the mean equity return and premium and
estimates of the unconditional mean. I argue that the currently low conditional short-term
forecasts of the return and premium do not lessen the burden on economic theory to
explain the large unconditional mean equity return and premium, as measured by their
sample average over the past one hundred and thirty years. Second, I argue that even
though one may introduce one’s own strong prior beliefs and adjust downwards the
sample-average estimate of the premium, the unconditional mean equity premium is at
least six percent per year and the annual Sharpe ratio is at least 32 percent. These
numbers are large and call for an economic explanation.
       In Section II, I discuss limitations of the current theory to explain empirical
regularities. I argue that per capita consumption growth covaries too little with the return
of most classes of financial assets and this implies that the observed aggregate equity
return, the long-term bond return, and the observed returns of various sub-classes of
financial assets are too large, too variable, and too predictable.
       In the remaining sections, I revisit and examine the extent to which we can
explain the asset returns by relaxing the assumptions of complete consumption insurance,
perfect markets, and time-separable preferences. As the reader will readily observe—and
I offer my apologies—my choice of issues is eclectic and mirrors in part my own
research interests.
       In Section III, I show that idiosyncratic income shocks concentrated in periods of
economic recession play a key role in generating the mean equity premium, the low risk-
free rate, and the predictability of returns. I argue that insufficient attention has been paid
to the fact that the annual aggregate labor income exceeds annual dividends by a factor of
over twenty. Labor income is by far the single most important source of household
savings and consumption. The shocks to labor income are uninsurable and persistent and
arrive with greater frequency during economic contractions. Idiosyncratic income shocks



                                                                                             2
go a long way toward explaining the unconditional moments of asset returns and the
predictability of returns. The construct of per capita consumption is largely irrelevant in
explaining the behavior of asset returns because idiosyncratic income shocks are
averaged out in per capita consumption.
       In Section IV, I show that borrowing constraints over the life cycle play an
important role in simultaneously addressing the above issues and the demand for bonds. I
argue that insufficient attention has been paid to the consumers’ life cycle consumption
and savings decisions in a market with borrowing constraints. These considerations are
important in addressing the limited participation of consumers in the capital markets, the
irrelevance of the construct of per capita consumption, and the demand for short-term
bonds by consumers with moderate risk aversion, given that equities earn on average a
large premium over short-term bonds.
       In Section V, I discuss the role of limited market participation. In Section VI, I
discuss the role of habit persistence in addressing the same class of issues. In Section VII,
I conclude that the observed asset returns do not support the case for abandoning the
rational economic theory as our null hypothesis. Much more remains to be done to fully
exploit the ramifications of the rational asset-pricing paradigm.



                I.      How Large Is the Equity Premium?
       The average premium of the arithmetic rate of return of the S&P Composite Index
over the risk-free rate, measured over the last one hundred and thirty years, is almost
seven percent and the annual Sharpe ratio is 36 percent. If the equity premium is a
stationary process, then the average premium is an unbiased estimate of the unconditional
mean equity premium. One may introduce one’s own prior beliefs and shave about one
percent off the premium. The premium and the Sharpe ratio are still large and challenge
economic theory for an explanation.
       In Table I, I report the sample mean of the annual arithmetic aggregate equity
return and of the equity premium. I proxy the aggregate equity return with the S&P
Composite Index return. I proxy the annual risk-free rate with the rolled-over return on
three-month Treasury bills and certificates. The reported real return is CPI-adjusted for



                                                                                           3
inflation. Over the period 1872 to 2000, the sample mean of the real equity return is 8.9
percent and of the premium is 6.9 percent. Over the period 1926 to 2000, the sample
mean of the equity return is 9.7 percent and of the premium is 9.3 percent. Over the post-
war period 1951 to 2000, the sample mean of the equity return is 9.9 percent and that of
the premium is 8.7 percent. These sample means are large. Dimson, Marsh, and Staunton
(2002), Fama and French (2002), Ibbotson Associates (2001), Ibbotson and Chen (2001),
Mehra and Prescott (2002), Siegel (1998, 1999), and several others report the sample
means of the equity return and premium in the United States and other countries and
conclude that they are large. Some differences arise based on the proxy used for the risk-
free rate.
                                  —Table I about here—


        I draw a sharp distinction between conditional, short-term forecasts of the mean
equity return and premium and estimates of the unconditional mean. The conditional
forecasts of the mean equity return and premium at the end of the twentieth century and
the beginning of the twenty-first are substantially lower than the estimates of the
unconditional mean by at least three measures. First, based on evidence that price-
dividend and price-earnings ratios forecast aggregate equity returns and that the values of
these ratios prevailing at the beginning of the twenty-first century are well above their
historic averages, Campbell and Shiller (1998) and Shiller (2000) forecast a conditional
equity premium well below its sample average.1 Second, Claus and Thomas (2001)
calculate the expected aggregate equity premium to be a little above three percent in the
period 1985 to 1998, based on analysts’ earnings forecasts. Third, Welch (2001) reports
that the mean forecast among finance and economics professors for the one-year
conditional equity premium is 3.5 percent in 2001, down from six percent in 1997. These
findings are important in their own right and relevant in asset allocation.
        However, the currently low conditional, short-term forecasts of the equity
premium do not necessarily imply that the unconditional estimate of the mean premium is
lower than the sample average. Therefore, the low conditional forecasts do not
necessarily lessen the burden on economic theory to explain the large sample average of
the equity return and premium over the past one hundred and thirty years.



                                                                                         4
       The predictability of aggregate equity returns by the price-dividend and price-
earnings ratios raises the possibility that use of these financial ratios may improve upon
the estimates of the unconditional mean equity return (and premium) that are based on
the sample mean, an approach pursued earlier by Fama and French (2002).2 Over the
period 1872 to 2000, the price-dividend ratio increased by a factor of 4.6 and the price-
earnings ratio by a factor of 2.5. Over the period 1926 to 2000, the price-dividend ratio
increased by a factor of 3.9 and the price-earnings ratio increased by a factor of 2.6.3 One
may consider adjusting downwards the sample-mean estimate of the unconditional mean
return on equity, but it is unclear by how much.
       The size of the adjustment ought to relate to the perceived cause of the increase of
these financial ratios. In the year 1998, 52 percent of the United States adult population
held equity either directly or indirectly, compared to 36 percent of the adult population in
1989. This equitization has been brought about by the increased accessibility of
information on the stock market, electronic trading, the growth of mutual funds, the
growth of defined-contribution pension plans, and demographic changes. Other regime
shifts include the advent of the technology/media/telecoms “new economy” and changes
in the taxation of dividends and capital gains. Explanations of the price increase that rely
on economic models that are less than fully rational include cultural and psychological
factors and tap into the rich and burgeoning literature on behavioral economics and
finance.4
       How does one process this information and adjust the sample mean estimate of
the unconditional mean return and premium? To address this issue, I denote by
υt ≡ ln ( Pt / X t ) the logarithm of the ratio of the price to the normalizing variable X t ,
where the normalizing variable stands for the aggregate dividends, earnings, book equity,
National Income, or some combination of these and other economic variables.5 I choose
the normalizing variable X t in a way that I can plausibly assert that the log financial ratio

is stationary. Over the sample period of length T years, the mean annual (geometric)
growth of the financial ratio Pt / X t is given by (υT +1 − υ1 ) / T . I define the adjusted

estimator of the unconditional mean of the annual aggregate real equity return as the
sample mean return, less some fraction beta of the sample mean annual growth of the



                                                                                            5
                   SAMPLE − β (υT +1 − υ1 ) / T . If the equity return and the log financial ratio are
                 l
financial ratio, R

stationary processes, then the adjusted estimator is unbiased for any value of beta.6
However, the assumption of stationarity alone is insufficient to determine the value of
beta.
        The beta of the most efficient (mean squared error) adjusted estimator is equal to
the slope coefficient of the regression of the sample mean return on the sample mean
growth of the financial ratio, (υT +1 − υ1 ) / T . Since I have only one sample (of length T), I

cannot run such a regression and must rely on information outside the sample and/or prior
beliefs about the underlying economic model. In Appendix A, I present a set of sufficient
conditions that imply that the beta of the most efficient estimator within this class of
adjusted estimators is equal to one, when the adjustment is based on the price-dividend
ratio. In addition to stationarity, the other main conditions are that the price-dividend
ratio does not forecast the long-run growth in dividends and the long-run dividend
growth does not forecast the price-dividend ratio. Adoption of the stationarity and (non)
forecastability conditions requires strong prior beliefs.
        In Table I, I report the mean annual growth of various financial ratios. Over the
period 1951 to 2000, the mean annual growth of the price-dividend ratio is 3.4, the price-
earnings ratio is 2.7, the price-book equity ratio is 3.2, and the price-National Income
ratio is 1.3. Even if I subtract the entire mean annual growth of the price-earnings ratio
from the sample mean, the adjusted estimate of the unconditional mean premium is 6.0
percent and is large. The corresponding estimate over the 1926 to 2000 period is 8.0
percent.
        An alternative approach is to consider the longer sample period 1872 to 2000.
Over this period, the mean annual growth of the price-dividend ratio and price-earnings
ratio is 1.2 percent and 0.7 percent, respectively. Thus, this type of adjustment is largely a
non-issue over the full sample. Essentially, the change in the financial ratios is
“amortized” over 129 years and makes little difference in the estimate. Over the full
period 1872 to 2000, the sample mean equity premium is 6.9 percent and the annual
Sharpe ratio is 36 percent. Any adjustment with the average growth of the financial ratios




                                                                                                    6
still leaves the unconditional mean premium large and in need of an economic
explanation.



                   II.    Limitations of the Current Theory
          The neoclassical rational-expectations economic model parsimoniously links the
returns of all assets to the per capita consumption growth through the Euler equations of
consumption (see Breeden (1979), Lucas (1978), Merton (1973), and Rubinstein (1976)).
According to the theory, the risk premia of financial assets are explained by their
covariance with per capita consumption growth. However, per capita consumption
growth covaries too little with the returns of most classes of financial assets and this
creates a whole class of asset pricing puzzles: the aggregate equity return, the long-term
bond return, and the returns of various subclasses of financial assets are too large, too
variable, and too predictable. Attempts to leverage the low co-variability typically
backfire, implying that the observed risk-free rate is too low and has too low variance. I
discuss in some depth the aggregate equity puzzle because it exemplifies many of the
problems that arise in attempting to explain the premium of any subclass of financial
assets.
          The covariance of the per capita consumption growth with the aggregate equity
return is positive. The rational model explains why the aggregate equity premium is
positive. However, the covariance is typically one order of magnitude lower than what is
needed to explain the premium. Thus, the equity premium is a quantitative puzzle.7
          The equity premium puzzle is robust. One may address the problem by testing the
Euler equations of consumption or by calibrating the economy. Either way, it is a puzzle.
In calibrating an exchange economy, the model cannot generate the first and second
unconditional moments of the equity returns. In testing and rejecting the Euler equations
of consumption, one abstracts from the market clearing conditions. The rejections tell us
that variations in the assumptions on the supply side of the economy do not resolve the
puzzle.
          The challenge is a dual puzzle of the equity premium that is too high and the risk-
free rate that is too low relative to the predictions of the model. In calibrating an



                                                                                           7
economy, the strategy of increasing the risk aversion coefficient in order to lever the
effect of the problematic low covariance of consumption growth with equity returns
increases the predicted risk-free rate and aggravates the risk-free-rate puzzle. In testing
the Euler equations of consumption, the rejections are strongest when the risk-free rate is
included in the set of test assets.
          Several generalizations of essential features of the model have been proposed to
mitigate its poor performance. They include alternative assumptions on preferences,8
modified probability distributions to admit rare but disastrous market-wide events,9
incomplete markets,10 and market imperfections.11 They also include a better
understanding of data problems such as limited participation of consumers in the stock
market,12 temporal aggregation,13 and the survival bias of the United States capital
market.14 Many of these generalizations contribute in part toward our better
understanding of the economic mechanism that determines the pricing of assets. I refer
the reader to the excellent reviews in the textbooks by Campbell, Lo, and McKinlay
(1997) and Cochrane (2001), and in the articles by Campbell (2001, 2002), Cochrane
(1997), Cochrane and Hansen (1992), Kocherlakota (1996), and Mehra and Prescott
(2002).



     III. Idiosyncratic Income Shocks and Incomplete Markets
A.        The Role of Idiosyncratic Income Shocks
          In economic recessions, investors are exposed to the double hazard of stock
market losses and job loss. Investment in equities not only fails to hedge the risk of job
loss but also accentuates its implications. Investors require a hefty equity premium in
order to be induced to hold equities. In sum, this is the argument that I formalize below
and address the predictability of asset returns and their unconditional moments.
          The observed correlation of per capita consumption growth with stock returns is
low. Over the years, I have grown skeptical of how meaningful an economic construct
aggregate (as opposed to disaggregate) consumption is, and how hard we should push
aggregate or per capita consumption to explain returns. At a theoretical level, aggregate
consumption is a meaningful economic construct if the market is complete or effectively



                                                                                         8
so.15 In a complete market, heterogeneous households are able to equalize, state by state,
their marginal rate of substitution. The equilibrium in a heterogeneous-household, full-
information economy is isomorphic in its pricing implications to the equilibrium in a
representative-household, full-information economy, if households have von Neumann-
Morgenstern preferences.16 The strong assumption of market completeness is indirectly
built into asset pricing models in finance and neoclassical macroeconomic models
through the assumption of the existence of a representative household.
       Bewley (1982), Mankiw (1986), and Mehra and Prescott (1985) suggest the
potential of enriching the asset-pricing implications of the representative-household
paradigm, by relaxing the assumption of complete markets.17 Constantinides and Duffie
(1996) find that incomplete markets substantially enrich the implications of the
representative-household model. Their main result is a proposition demonstrating, by
construction, the existence of household income processes, consistent with given
aggregate income and dividend processes, such that equilibrium equity and bond price
processes match the given equity and bond price processes.
       The theory requires that the idiosyncratic income shocks must have three
properties in order to explain the returns on financial assets. First, they must be
uninsurable. If the income shocks can be insured, then the household consumption
growth is equal, state by state, to the aggregate consumption growth, and household
consumption growth cannot do better than aggregate consumption growth in explaining
the returns. Second, the income shocks must be persistent. If the shocks are transient,
then households can smooth their consumption by borrowing or by drawing down their
savings.18 Third, the income shocks must be heteroscedastic, with counter-cyclical
conditional variance.
       A good example of a major uninsurable income shock is job loss. Job loss is
uninsurable because unemployment compensation is inadequate. Layoffs have persistent
implications on household income, even though the laid-off workers typically find
another job quickly.19 Layoffs are counter-cyclical as they are more likely to occur in
recessions.
       The first implication of the theory is an explanation of the counter-cyclical
behavior of the equity risk premium: the risk premium is highest in a recession because



                                                                                        9
the stock is a poor hedge against the uninsurable income shocks, such as job loss, that are
more likely to arrive during a recession.
       The second implication is an explanation of the unconditional equity premium
puzzle: even though per capita consumption growth is poorly correlated with stocks
returns, investors require a hefty premium to hold stocks over short-term bonds because
stocks perform poorly in recessions, when the investor is most likely to be laid off.
       Since the proposition demonstrates the existence of equilibrium in frictionless
markets, it implies that the Euler equations of household (but not necessarily of per
capita) consumption must hold. Furthermore, since the given price processes have
embedded in them whatever predictability of returns by the price-dividend ratios,
dividend growth rates, and other instruments that the researcher cares to ascribe to
returns, the equilibrium price processes have this predictability built into them by
construction.


B.     Empirical Evidence and Generalizations
       Brav, Constantinides, and Geczy (2002) provide empirical evidence of the
importance of uninsurable idiosyncratic income risk on pricing. They estimate the RRA
coefficient and test the set of Euler equations of household consumption on the premium
of the value-weighted and the equally weighted market portfolio return over the risk-free
rate, and on the premium of value stocks over growth stocks.20 They do not reject the
Euler equations of household consumption with RRA coefficient between two and four,
although they reject the Euler equations of per capita consumption with any value of the
RRA coefficient. A RRA coefficient between two and four is economically plausible.
       Open questions remain that warrant further investigation. According to the theory
in Constantinides and Duffie (1996), periods with frequent and large uninsurable
idiosyncratic income shocks are associated with both dispersed cross-sectional
distribution of the household consumption growth and low stock returns. An interesting
empirical question is which moments of the cross-sectional distribution of the household
consumption growth capture the dispersion. Brav, Constantinides, and Geczy (2002) find
that, in addition to the mean and variance, the skewness of the cross-sectional distribution
is important in explaining the equity premium.


                                                                                         10
        Krebs (2002) provides a theoretical justification as to why it is possible that
neither the variance nor the skewness, but higher moments of the cross-sectional
distribution are important in explaining the equity premium. He extends the
Constantinides and Duffie (1996) model that has only lognormal idiosyncratic income
shocks by introducing rare idiosyncratic income shocks that drive consumption close to
zero. In his model, the conditional variance and skewness of the idiosyncratic income
shocks are nearly constant over time. Despite this, Krebs demonstrates that the original
proposition of Constantinides and Duffie remains valid, that is, there exist household
income processes, consistent with given aggregate income and dividend processes, such
that equilibrium equity and bond price processes match the given equity and bond price
processes. Essentially, he provides a theoretical justification as to why it may be hard to
empirically detect the rare but catastrophic shocks in the low-order cross-sectional
moments of household consumption growth. In Appendix B, I present an example based
on Krebs (2002).
        A promising direction for future research is to address the relation between the
equity return and the higher-order cross-sectional moments of household consumption
with Monte Carlo methods. Another promising direction is to instrument the hard-to-
observe time-series changes in the cross-sectional distribution with Labor Bureau
statistics.



              IV. The Life Cycle and Borrowing Constraints
A.      Borrowing Constraints over the Life Cycle
        Borrowing constraints provide an endogenous partial explanation for the limited
participation of young consumers in the stock market. Constantinides, Donaldson, and
Mehra (2002a) construct an overlapping-generations exchange economy in which
consumers live for three periods. In the first period, a period of human capital acquisition,
the consumer receives a relatively low endowment income. In the second period, the
consumer is employed and receives wage income subject to large uncertainty. In the third
period, the consumer retires and consumes the assets accumulated in the second period.
The key feature is that the bulk of the future income of the young consumers is derived



                                                                                          11
from their wages forthcoming in their middle age, while the future income of the middle-
aged consumers is derived primarily from their savings in equity and bonds.
       The young would like to invest in equity, given the observed large equity
premium. However, they are unwilling to decrease their current consumption in order to
save by investing in equity, because the bulk of their lifetime income is derived from
their wages forthcoming in their middle age. They would like to borrow, but the
borrowing constraint prevents them from doing so. Human capital alone does not
collateralize major loans in modern economies for reasons of moral hazard and adverse
selection. The model explains why many consumers do not participate in the stock
market in the early phase of their life cycle.
       The future income of the middle-aged consumers is derived from their current
savings in equity and bonds. Therefore, the risk of holding equity and bonds is
concentrated in the hands of the middle-aged saving consumers. This concentration of
risk generates the high equity premium and the demand for bonds, in addition to the
demand for equity, by the middle-aged.21 The model recognizes and addresses
simultaneously, at least in part, the equity premium, the limited participation in the stock
market, and the demand for bonds.
       The model serves as a useful laboratory to address a range of economic issues.
Campbell et.al. (2001), and Constantinides, Donaldson, and Mehra (2001) address the
cost of Social Security reform. Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2001) explore the
interaction of life cycle effects and the uninsurable wage income shocks and find that the
interaction plays an important role in explaining asset returns. Heaton and Lucas (1999)
explore whether changes in market participation patterns account for the recent rise in
stock prices and find that they do not.


B.     Utility of Wealth—An Old Folks’ Tale
       The low covariance of the growth rate of aggregate consumption with equity
returns is a major stumbling block in explaining the mean aggregate equity premium and
the cross-section of the asset returns, in the context of a representative-consumer
economy with time separable preferences. Mankiw and Shapiro (1986) find that the
market beta often explains asset returns better than the consumption beta does. Over the


                                                                                         12
years, a number of different economic models have been proposed that effectively
increase the covariance of equity returns with the growth rate of aggregate consumption,
by proxying the growth rate of aggregate consumption with the aggregate stock market
return in the Euler equations of consumption.22
        I present an old folks’ tale, introduced in Constantinides, Donaldson, and Mehra
(2002a, 2002b), that accomplishes this goal without introducing Epstein-Zin (1991)
preferences or preferences defined directly over wealth. Old folks who are rich enough to
be non-trivial investors in the capital markets care about their wealth just as much as
younger folks do, even though the state of their health and their medical expenses
account for their consumption patterns better than fluctuations of their wealth do. This
simple observation takes us a long way toward understanding why the stock market
return does a better job than the growth of aggregate consumption does in explaining
asset returns.
        In the context of an overlapping-generations economy, the major investors in the
market are the middle-aged households at the saving phase of their life cycle. These
households save with the objective to maximize the utility of their “consumption” in their
middle and old age. The insight here is that “consumption” of the old consists of two
components, direct consumption, cD ; and the “joy of giving,” cB , in the form of inter
vivos gifts and post mortem bequests. Since the old households’ direct consumption is
constrained by the state of their health, the correlation between the direct consumption of
the old and the stock market return is low, a prediction that is born out empirically.
Therefore, the balance of the old households’ wealth, cB , is a fortiori highly correlated
with the stock market return. In terms of a utility function of consumption at the old age,
u ( cD ) + v ( cB ) , that is separable over direct consumption and bequests, the model

predicts an Euler equation of consumption with marginal utility at the old age given by
v ' ( cB ) and not by u ' ( cD ) , where cB is proxied by the stock market value.

        This model remains to be tested. Nevertheless, it reinforces the general point that
per capita consumption measures neither the total consumption of the marginal investor
in the stock market nor that part of the marginal investor’s consumption that is
unconstrained by health and medical considerations.



                                                                                        13
                V.      Limited Stock Market Participation
       Limited stock market participation is another potential culprit in understanding
why models of per capita consumption do a poor job in explaining returns. Whereas we
understood all along that many households whose consumption is counted in the measure
of per capita consumption do not hold stocks, it took a paper by Mankiw and Zeldes
(1991) to point out that the emperor has no clothes.23 Even though 52 percent of the
United States adult population held stock either directly or indirectly in 1998, compared
to 36 percent in 1989, stockholdings remain extremely concentrated in the hands of the
wealthiest few. Furthermore, wealthy entrepreneurs may be infra marginal in the stock
market if their wealth is tied up in private equity.
       Mankiw and Zeldes (1991) calculate the per capita food consumption of a subset
of households, designated as asset holders according to a criterion of asset holdings
above some threshold. They find that the implied RRA coefficient decreases as the
threshold is raised. Brav and Geczy (1995) confirm their result by using the non-durables
and services per capita consumption, reconstructed from the Consumer Expenditure
Survey (CEX) database. Attanasio, Banks, and Tanner (2002), Brav, Constantinides, and
Geczy (2002), and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) find some evidence that per capita
consumption growth can explain the equity premium with a relatively high value of the
RRA coefficient, once we account for limited stock market participation. However, Brav,
Constantinides, and Geczy (2002) point out that the statistical evidence is weak and the
results are sensitive to experimental design.
       Limited stock market participation is a fact of life and empirical tests of the Euler
equations of consumption should account for it. However, my interpretation of the
empirical results is that recognition of limited stock market participation alone is
insufficient to explain the returns on assets. Essentially, the subset of households that are
marginal in the stock market are still subject to uninsurable idiosyncratic income risk
and we should take that into account also in attempting to explain asset returns.




                                                                                          14
                              VI. Habit Persistence
       Habit persistence has a long tradition in economic theory, dating back to Marshall
(1920) and Duesenberry (1949). It is the property of preferences that an increase in
consumption increases the marginal utility of consumption at adjacent dates relative to
the marginal utility of consumption at distant ones. Building on earlier work by Ryder
and Heal (1973) and Sundaresan (1989), I demonstrate in Constantinides (1990) that
habit persistence can, in principle, reconcile the high mean equity premium with the low
variance of consumption growth and with the low covariance of consumption growth
with equity returns. Habit persistence lowers the intertemporal elasticity of substitution in
consumption, given the risk aversion. The mean equity premium is equal to the
covariance of consumption growth with equity returns, divided by this elasticity.
Therefore, given the risk aversion, habit persistence lowers the elasticity and raises the
mean equity premium.24
       There are several interesting variations of the above class of preferences. Pollak
(1970) discusses a model of external habit persistence in which the consumer does not
take into account the effect of current consumption on future preferences. Abel (1990)
and Campbell and Cochrane (1999) address the equity premium in the context of models
with external habit persistence. In particular, the latter introduce a nonlinear specification
of habit, reverse-engineered to keep the variability of the interest rate low. The large
average equity premium, the predictability of long-horizon returns, and the behavior of
equity prices along the business cycle are induced by a volatile RRA coefficient that has
the value of eighty in the steady state and much higher still in economic recessions.
Calibrated with the actual history of aggregate consumption, the model hits the aggregate
price-dividend ratio in a number of periods but misses it in the 1950s and 1990s.
       A promising direction for future research is to endogenize the currently ad hoc
specification of the nonlinear habit. Another direction is to address the predictability of
asset returns and their behavior along the business cycle in a model that benefits from the
added flexibility of the nonlinear specification of habit but keeps risk aversion low and
credible with the specification of habit to be internal.




                                                                                           15
       Empirical tests of consumption-based models that incorporate habit persistence
and aimed at explaining asset returns produce mixed results.25 It is hardly surprising that
the results on both the habit and the external habit persistence models are mixed. The
National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) per capita consumption series is an
imperfect proxy of the consumption of investors that are marginal in the capital markets,
given the earlier-identified problems of incomplete consumption insurance, limited
participation of households in the capital markets, borrowing constraints, and the
exclusion of bequests from the definition of consumption. Both NIPA per capita
consumption and consumption surplus over habit have low covariance with asset returns.
Nonlinear refinements in the definition of habit do not remedy the problem of low
covariance with asset returns. Habit persistence may well gain in empirical relevance in
explaining asset returns, once we correctly measure the consumption of the unconstrained
marginal investors in the capital markets.
       Habit persistence is already gaining ground as an ingredient of economic models
addressing a diverse set of economic problems beyond asset pricing, including the
consumption-saving behavior and the home-equity puzzle. Habit persistence is a sensible
property of preferences. It is also a property that allows for the separate specification of
the RRA coefficient and the intertemporal elasticity of substitution within the class of
von Neuman-Morgenstern preferences.



                          VII. Concluding Remarks
       I examine the observed asset returns and conclude that the evidence does not
support the case for abandoning the rational economic model. I argue that the standard
model is greatly enhanced by relaxing some of its assumptions. In particular, I argue that
we go a long way toward addressing market behavior by recognizing that consumers face
uninsurable and idiosyncratic income shocks, for example, the loss of employment. The
prospect of such events is higher in economic downturns and this observation takes us a
long way toward understanding both the unconditional moments of asset returns and their
variation along the business cycle.




                                                                                         16
       I also argue that life cycle considerations are important and often overlooked in
finance. Borrowing constraints become important when placed in the context of the life
cycle. The fictitious representative consumer that holds all the stock market and bond
market wealth does not face credible borrowing constraints. Young consumers, however,
do face credible borrowing constraints. I trace their impact on the equity premium, the
demand for bonds—who holds bonds if the equity premium is so high? —and on the
limited participation of consumers in the capital markets.
       Finally, I argue that by relaxing the assumption of convenience that preferences
are time separable drives a wedge between the preference properties of risk aversion and
intertemporal elasticity of substitution, within the class of von Neumann–Morgenstern
preferences. Further work along these lines may enhance our understanding of the price
behavior along the business cycle with credibly low risk aversion coefficient.
       I believe that the integration of the notions of incomplete markets, the life cycle,
borrowing constraints, and other sources of limited stock market participation is a
promising vantage point from which to study the prices of asset and their returns both
theoretically and empirically within the class of rational asset pricing models.
       At the same time, I believe that specific deviations from rationality in the agents’
choices and in the agents’ processing of information potentially enhance the realism and
economic analysis of certain phenomena on a case-by-case basis.26 However, several
examples of apparent deviation from rationality may be reconciled with the rational
economic paradigm, once we recognize that rational investors have incomplete
knowledge of the fundamental structure of the economy and engage in learning.27 In any
case, the collection of these deviations from rationality does not yet amount to a new
economic paradigm that challenges the rational economic model.
       It has been more than sixty years since Keynes (1936) wrote about animal spirits,
and fifteen since Shiller (1984) wrote about noise traders and DeBondt and Thaler (1985)
wrote about stock market overreaction. I have yet to see an unambiguously articulated set
of principles that emerges from the kaleidoscope of these clinical investigations and that
is put forth as an alternative to the rational economic paradigm. Serious scholars are
keenly aware of this criticism and hard at work to address it. Until such a paradigm is put




                                                                                        17
forth and is empirically vindicated, the rational economic paradigm remains our principal
guide to economic behavior.




                                                                                      18
Appendix A. Estimation of the Unconditional Mean Return on Equity

        I define the adjusted estimator of the unconditional mean of the annual aggregate
real return on equity as

                        T
            R X     ∑ t +1
            l ≡ T −1 R − β T −1 (υ − υ ) = R
                        t =1
                                  T +1 1
                                           l
                                             SAMPLE − β T
                                                          −1
                                                             (υT +1 − υ1 ) .                  (A1)



The term υt ≡ ln ( Pt / X t ) is the logarithm of the price of aggregate equity, normalized

with the variable X t , where X t stands for the aggregate dividends, earnings, book
equity, National Income, or some other economic variable.

        I assume that Rt and υt are stationary processes. Then E [υT +1 − υ1 ] = 0 and R
                                                                                       l is
                                                                                         X



an unbiased estimator of the unconditional mean equity return. Note that the assumption
of stationarity alone does not determine the value of the parameter beta that provides the
most efficient estimator of the unconditional mean equity return. The variance of the
          l is
estimator R X




       ( )
       l = var R
   var R X
               l
                    (
                 SAMPLE        )  l
                        − 2 β cov R        (
                                    SAMPLE , T
                                               −1
                                                                           )
                                                  (υT +1 − υ1 ) + β 2 var (T −1 (υT +1 − υ1 ) ) (A2)


and is minimized when beta is set equal to



                               β* =
                                          (
                                          l
                                      cov R SAMPLE , T
                                                       −1
                                                          (υT +1 − υ1 )    ).                 (A3)
                                           var (T   −1
                                                         (υT +1 − υ1 ) )

The beta of the most efficient (mean squared error) estimator is equal to the slope
                                 l
coefficient of the regression of R SAMPLE on T
                                               −1
                                                  (υT +1 − υ1 ) .
        Since I have only one sample of length T, I cannot run such a regression and must
rely on information outside the sample and/or prior beliefs about the underlying
economic model. Essentially, within the sample of length T, I can examine the high-



                                                                                                 19
frequency behavior of the joint time-series Rt and υt , but I need to assert my prior beliefs
on how these findings relate to the behavior of the joint time-series at the T-year
frequency.
        For example, consider the case in which υt stands for the log price-dividend ratio.
Since a high price-dividend ratio forecasts in-sample low long-horizon returns, it is a
                                                                         l
plausible prior belief that it also forecasts low T-horizon returns, cov R        (
                                                                           SAMPLE , υ1)< 0 , for

T = 50 years (1951 to 2000) or T = 129 years (1872 to 2000). It is also a plausible prior
belief that periods of high returns are not followed by low price-dividend ratios, that is, it

                                 (
                                 l
is plausible to believe that cov R SAMPLE , υT +1)≥ 0 . Then equation (A3) implies that the beta

of the most efficient estimator is positive.
        I present a set of sufficient (but not necessary) conditions that imply that the beta
                                             l equals one. Let υ stand for the log price-
of the most efficient estimator in the class R X                t


dividend ratio and assume the following: (i) the returns and the price-dividend ratio are
stationary; (ii) the price-dividend ratio does not forecast the growth in dividends; (iii)
dividend growth does not forecast the price-dividend ratio; (iv) the price-dividend ratio
does not forecast the difference in the conditional variance of the capital gain rate and the
dividend growth rate; and (v) the difference in the conditional variance of the capital gain
rate and the dividend growth rate does not forecast the price-dividend ratio. To prove the
claim, I use a Taylor-series expansion


                           ∆υt +1 = ∆Pt +1 / Pt − ∆Dt +1 / Dt − kt +1
                                                                                          (A4)
                           where, kt +1 ≡ ( ∆Pt +1 / Pt ) / 2 − ( ∆Dt +1 / Dt ) / 2
                                                           2                  2




and write the sample mean of the arithmetic return as




                                                                                             20
                                       T
                       l
                       R SAMPLE ≡ T
                                    −1
                                       ∑ {Dt +1 / Pt + ∆Pt +1 / Pt }
                                      t =1
                                        T
                                = T −1 ∑ { Dt +1 / Pt + ∆Dt +1 / Dt + kt +1 + ∆υt +1}                 (A5)
                                       t =1
                                        T
                                = T −1 ∑ { Dt +1 / Pt + ∆Dt +1 / Dt + kt +1} + T −1 (υT +1 − υ1 ) .
                                       t =1




                          l
I substitute the value of R        from equation (A5) into equation (A3) and obtain the
                            SAMPLE



result that the variance of the estimator is minimized when the value of beta is one:


                       T                                  T                     
                  cov  ∑ Dt +1 / Pt , (υT +1 − υ1 )  cov  ∑ ∆Dt +1 / Dt , υT +1 
             β* =      t =1                         +     t =1                  
                            var (υT +1 − υ1 )                var (υT +1 − υ1 )
                              T                        T                       
                         cov  ∑ ∆Dt +1 / Dt , υ1  cov  ∑ kt +1 , (υT +1 − υ1 ) 
                       −      t =1               +     t =1                     +1                (A6)
                             var (υT +1 − υ1 )            var (υT +1 − υ1 )
                = 1.


The first term in equation (A6) is zero because the stationarity of the price-dividend ratio
implies


                                     T                            T                 
                                cov  ∑ Dt +1 / Pt , υT +1  = cov  ∑ Dt +1 / Pt , υ1  .            (A7)
                                     t =1                         t =1              


The second term in equation (A6) is zero because, by assumption, the dividend growth
rate does not forecast the price-dividend ratio. The third term is zero because, by
assumption, the price-dividend ratio does not forecast the dividend growth. Finally, the
fourth term is zero because, by assumption, the price-dividend ratio does not forecast and
is not forecasted by the difference of the conditional variance of the capital gain rate and
the dividend growth rate.
          Thus, when X t stands for the dividends and conditions (i)-(v) hold, the minimum
variance estimator in the class of estimators given by equation (A1) is


                                                                                                       21
                   l =R
                   R D
                       l
                         SAMPLE − T
                                    −1
                                       (υT +1 − υ1 )
                               T                                     T                                (A8)
                        = T −1 ∑ { Dt +1 / Pt + ∆Dt +1 / Dt } + T −1 ∑ kt +1.
                               t =1                                 t =1




Fama and French (2002) report adjusted estimates of the unconditional mean return (and
premium) based on the fundamentals dividends and earnings. Specifically, their estimate
of the expected stock return based on the dividend growth model is given by
    T
T −1 ∑ { Dt +1 / Pt + ∆Dt +1 / Dt } and their biased-adjusted estimate of the expected stock
    t =1
return     based   on    the       dividend     growth       model         is   effectively   given    by
    T                                  T
T −1 ∑ { Dt +1 / Pt + ∆Dt +1 / Dt } + T −1 ∑ kt +1 . Ibbotson and Chen (2001) also report adjusted
    t =1                               t =1
estimates of the unconditional mean return (and premium) based on dividends, income,
earnings, payout ratio, book equity, and National Income.




                                                                                                       22
Appendix B. Extension of the Constantinides and Duffie (1996) Model

         I illustrate an extension of the Constantinides and Duffie (1996) model along the
lines of Krebs (2002). The extension provides theoretical justification as to why it may be
hard to detect empirically in the low-order cross-sectional moments of household
consumption growth the rare but catastrophic shocks that play a major role in driving
asset prices.
         The ith household’s consumption, ci ,t , follows the process


                                                                cit            ct
                                                                          =         X i ,t ηi ,t .                      (B1)
                                                              ci , t −1       ct −1



The random variables {ηi ,t } have the following properties: distinct subsets of {ηi ,t } are

independent; for all i and t; ηi ,t is independent of ct −1 , ct , ci , t −1 , X i , t , and the asset prices;

and E ηi ,t  = 1 . Since the random variables {ηi ,t } are independent of the asset prices,

they do not contribute to the equity premium. One may choose to view them as
observation error, but does not have to.
         In the Constantinides and Duffie (1996) model, the idiosyncratic income shocks
                                        b ε i ,t −b 2 / 2
are lognormal: X i ,t = e t                                 with ε i ,t normal and ηi ,t ≡ 1 . The conditional variance, bt2 ,

explains the risk premia because it is modeled as counter-cyclical and correlated with the
stock returns. Whereas Brav, Constantinides, and Geczy (2002) find that the pricing
                 I                            −α

kernel I   −1
                ∑ (c
                i =1
                       i, t   / ci , t −1 )        goes a long way toward explaining the equity premium and

the value-versus-growth premium, they also find little evidence that the conditional
variance, bt2 , is correlated with stock returns, or indeed whether the time series of this
variance has any discernible pattern relative to the business cycle. I build this feature in
the model by choosing a binomial distribution for X i ,t .




                                                                                                                           23
         I assume that the random variables { X it } have the following properties: distinct

subsets of     { X it } are   independent; for all i and t, X it is independent of ct −1 , ct , ci , t −1 and

X i , t −1 ; and X it has the following binomial distribution:


                                                          −α −1         −1
                                             1 − yt π 1+α
                                   X i,t   =              , with probability 1 − π
                                                  1−π                                                                                    (B2)
                                                  −α −1       α −1
                                           = yt           π          , with probability π ,


where 0 < π << 1 , and α is the constant RRA coefficient. The variable yt , yt > 0 is
defined shortly. Since


                                                 c           c  c
                                              E  it | yt , t  = t ,                                                                    (B3)
                                                 ci , t −1 ct −1  ct −1


arguments along the lines in Constantinides and Duffie (1996) identify ct as the per
capita consumption.
         The time-t expectation of the ith household’s marginal rate of substitution,
conditional on {ct / ct −1 , yt } , is




                                                                        {                                                }
        c  −α c                                    −α
                                         − ρ  ct 
                                                                                          (                )
                                                                                                               −α
                                                          (1 − π ) 1 − yt−α π 1+α
                                                                  1+α
    E e                      , yt  = e 
                                                                           −1     −1
        −ρ      it
                       |    t
                                                                                                                   + yt E ηi−,tα 
        ci , t −1    ct −1              ct −1 
                                   
                                                                                                                                         (B4)
                                                                       −α
                                                    c 
                                            ≈ e− ρ  t                     (1 + yt ) E ηi−,tα  ,   for π << 1.
                                                    ct −1 


I define the variable yt implicitly with the equation




                                                                                                                                          24
                                                  −α
                                       ct 
                             e   −ρ
                                                     (1 + yt ) E ηi−,tα  = M t ,          (B5)
                                       ct −1 


where M t is the pricing kernel that supports the given joint process of aggregate income,
asset prices, and dividends. By construction, it follows that any individual household’s

marginal rate of substitution, e − ρ ( cit / ci , t −1 ) , supports the given joint process of
                                                                    −α




aggregate income, asset prices, and dividends.
        Finally, I demonstrate that the variance, skewness, and higher moments of the
cross-sectional distribution of the households’ consumption growth need not bear any
relationship to asset returns and the business cycle. This is despite the fact that each
individual household’s marginal rate of substitution supports the given joint process of
aggregate income, asset prices, and dividends.
        The N th central moment, N ≥ 1 , of the households’ logarithmic consumption
growth is the sum of the N th central moments of ln ( ct / ct −1 ) , ln ( X i ,t ) , and ln (ηi ,t ) ,

given the assumed independence of ct / ct −1 , X i ,t , and ηi ,t . It is easily shown that



                             limπ →0 E ( ln X i ,t )  = 0, N ≥ 1 .
                                                      N
                                                                                                (B6)
                                                       


If the probability of the idiosyncratic consumption shocks is sufficiently low, π << 1 , the
central moments of the households’ consumption growth are driven by the corresponding
central moments of the per capita consumption growth and ηi ,t . These moments need not

bear any pattern relating to the business cycle and need not be correlated in any particular
way with the asset returns. Despite this, each individual household’s marginal rate of
substitution supports the given joint process of aggregate income, asset prices, and
dividends. The illustration explains why it may be empirically difficult or infeasible to
detect the idiosyncratic consumption shocks in the cross-sectional moments of household
consumption growth.




                                                                                                   25
                                    REFERENCES

Abel, Andrew B., 1990, Asset prices under habit formation and catching up with the
       Joneses, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 80, 38-42.


Ait-Sahalia, Yacine, Jonathan A. Parker, and Motohiro Yogo, 2001, Luxury goods and
       the equity premium, Working paper #8417, NBER.


Aiyagari, Rao S., and Mark Gertler, 1991, Asset returns with transactions costs and
       uninsured individual risk, Journal of Monetary Economics 27, 311-331.


Altonji, Joseph G., Fumio Hayashi, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, 1992, Is the extended
       family altruistically linked? American Economic Review 82, 1177-1198.


Anderson, Evan W., Lars Peter Hansen, and Thomas J. Sargent, 2000, Robustness,
       detection and the price of risk, Working paper, University of Chicago.


Attanasio, Orazio P., James Banks, and Sarah Tanner, 2002, Asset holding and
       consumption volatility, Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.


Attanasio, Orazio P., and Steven J. Davis, 1997, Relative wage movements and the
       distribution of consumption, Journal of Political Economy 104, 1227-1262.


Bakshi, Gurdip, and Zhiwu Chen, 1996, The spirit of capitalism and stock market prices,
       American Economic Review 86, 133-157.


Bansal, Ravi, and John W. Coleman, 1996, A monetary explanation of the equity
       premium, term premium, and risk-free rate puzzles, Journal of Political Economy
       104, 1135-1171.




                                                                                    26
Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2000, Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of
       asset pricing puzzles, Working paper #8059, NBER.


Barberis, Nicholas, and Richard Thaler, 2002, A survey of behavioral finance, in George
       M. Constantinides, Milton Harris, and Rene Stulz, eds., Handbook of the
       Economics of Finance (North-Holland Elsevier, Amsterdam), forthcoming.


Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard H. Thaler, 1995, Myopic loss aversion and the equity
       premium puzzle, Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 73-92.


Bertaut, Carol C., and Michael Haliassos, 1997, Precautionary portfolio behavior from a
       life-cycle perspective, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 21, 1511-
       1542.


Bewley, Truman F., 1982, Thoughts on tests of the intertemporal asset pricing model,
       Working paper, Northwestern University.


Blume, Marshall E., and Stephen P. Zeldes, 1993, The structure of stock ownership in the
       U.S., Working paper, University of Pennsylvania.


Bodie, Zvi, Robert C. Merton, and William F. Samuelson, 1992, Labor supply flexibility
       and portfolio choice in a life cycle model, Journal of Economic Dynamics and
       Control 16, 427-449.


Boldrin, Michel, Lawrence J. Christiano, and Jonas D. M. Fisher, 2001, Habit
       persistence, asset returns, and the business cycle, American Economic Review 91,
       149-166.


Brav, Alon, George M. Constantinides, and Christopher C. Geczy, 2002, Asset pricing
       with heterogeneous consumers and limited participation: Empirical evidence,
       Journal of Political Economy, August, forthcoming.



                                                                                     27
Brav, Alon, and Christopher C. Geczy, 1995, An empirical resurrection of the simple
       consumption CAPM with power utility, Working paper, University of Chicago.


Brav, Alon, and J. B. Heaton, 2002, Competing theories of financial anomalies, Review of
       Financial Studies 15, 475-506.


Breeden, Douglas T., 1979, An intertemporal asset pricing model with stochastic
    consumption and investment opportunities, Journal of Financial Economics 7, 265-
    296.


Brown, Stephen J., William N. Goetzmann, and Stephen Ross, 1995, Survival, Journal of
       Finance 50, 853-873.


Campbell, John Y., 2001, Asset pricing at the millennium, Journal of Finance 55, 1515-
       1567.


Campbell, John Y., 2002, Consumption-based asset pricing, in George M.
       Constantinides, Milton Harris, and Rene Stulz, eds., Handbook of the Economics
       of Finance (North-Holland Elsevier, Amsterdam), forthcoming.


Campbell, John Y., Joao F. Cocco, Francisco J. Gomes, and Pascal J. Maenhout, 2001,
       Investing retirement wealth: A life-cycle model, in, John Y. Campbell and Martin
       Feldstein, Risk Aspects of Social Security Reform (University of Chicago Press,
       Chicago).


Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: A consumption-based
       explanation of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy
       107, 205-251.




                                                                                     28
Campbell, John Y., Andrew W. Lo, and A. Craig MacKinlay, 1997, The Econometrics of
       Financial Markets (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ).


Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller, 1988a, The dividend-price ratio and
       expectations of future dividends and discount factors, Review of Financial Studies
       1, 195-228.


Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller, 1988b, Stock prices, earnings, and expected
       dividends, Journal of Finance, 43, 661-676.


Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller, 1998, Valuation ratios and the long-run stock
       market outlook, Journal of Portfolio Management 24, 11-26.


Claus, James, and Jacob Thomas, 2001, Equity premia as low as three percent? Evidence
       from analysts’ earnings forecasts for domestic and international stock markets,
       Journal of Finance 56, 1629-1666.


Cocco, Joao F., Francisco J. Gomes, and Pascal J. Maenhout, 1999, Portfolio choice over
       the life cycle, Working paper, Harvard University.


Cochrane, John H., 1991, A simple test of consumption insurance, Journal of Political
       Economy 99, 957-976.


Cochrane, John H., 1997, Where is the market going? Uncertain facts and novel theories,
       Economic Perspectives (Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago) 21, 3-37.


Cochrane, John H., 2001, Asset Pricing (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ).


Cochrane, John H., and Lars Peter Hansen, 1992, Asset pricing explorations for
       macroeconomics, in Olivier J. Blanchard and Stanley Fischer, eds., NBER,
       Macroeconomics Annual (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).



                                                                                      29
Cogley, Timothy, 1999, Idiosyncratic risk and the equity premium: Evidence from the
       consumer expenditure survey, Working paper, Arizona State University.


Constantinides, George M., 1982, Intertemporal asset pricing with heterogeneous
       consumers and without demand aggregation, Journal of Business 55, 253-267.


Constantinides, George M., 1990, Habit formation: A resolution of the equity premium
       puzzle, Journal of Political Economy 98, 519-543.


Constantinides, George M., John B. Donaldson, and Rajnish Mehra, 2001, Junior must
       pay: Pricing the implicit put in privatizing social security, Working paper,
       University of Chicago.


Constantinides, George M., John B. Donaldson, and Rajnish Mehra, 2002a, Junior can’t
       borrow: A new perspective on the equity premium puzzle, Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 117, 269-296.


Constantinides, George M., John B. Donaldson, and Rajnish Mehra, 2002b, Junior is
       rich: Bequests as consumption, Working paper, University of Chicago.


Constantinides, George M., and Darrell Duffie, 1996, Asset pricing with heterogeneous
       consumers, Journal of Political Economy 104, 219-240.


Daniel, Kent, and David Marshall, 1997, The equity premium puzzle and the risk-free
       rate puzzle at long horizons, Macroeconomic Dynamics l, 452-484.


Danthine, Jean-Pierre, John B. Donaldson, and Rajnish Mehra, 1992, The equity
       premium and the allocation of income risk, Journal of Economic Dynamics and
       Control 16, 509-32.




                                                                                    30
Davis, James L., Eugene F. Fama, and Kenneth R. French, 2000, Characteristics,
       covariances, and average returns, Journal of Finance 55, 389-406.


DeBondt, Werner F. M., and Richard Thaler, 1985, Does the stock market overreact?
       Journal of Finance 40, 793-805.


Dimson, Elroy, Paul Marsh, and Michael Staunton, 2002, Triumph of the Optimists: 101
       Years of Global Investment Returns (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ).


Duesenberry, James S., 1949, Income, Saving, and the Theory of Consumer Behavior
       (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA).


Epstein, Larry G., and Stanley E. Zin, 1991, Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal
       behavior of consumption and asset returns: An empirical analysis, Journal of
       Political Economy 99, 263-286.


Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1988, Dividend yields and expected stock
       returns, Journal of Financial Economics, 22, 3-25.


Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2002, The equity premium, Journal of Finance
       57, 637-660.


Ferson, Wayne E., and George M. Constantinides, 1991, Habit persistence and durability
       in aggregate consumption, Journal of Financial Economics 29, 199-240.


Ferson, Wayne E., and Campbell R. Harvey, 1992, Seasonality and consumption–based
       asset pricing, Journal of Finance 47, 511-552.


Friend, Irwin, and Marshall E. Blume, 1975, The demand for risky assets, The American
       Economic Review 65, 900-922.




                                                                                       31
Gabaix, Xavier, and David Laibson, 2001, The 6D bias and the equity premium puzzle,
       in Ben Bernanke and Ken Rogoff, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001
       (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).


Goyal, Amit, and Ivo Welch, 1999, Predicting the equity premium, Working paper,
       UCLA.


Grossman, Sanford J., and Robert J. Shiller, 1981, The determinants of the variability of
       stock market prices, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 71,
       222-227.


Guiso, Luigi, Michael Haliassos, and Tullio Jappelli, 2001, Household Portfolios (MIT
       Press, Cambridge, MA).


Haliassos, Michael, and Carol C. Bertaut, 1995, Why do so few hold stocks? The
       Economic Journal 105, 1110-1129.


Hansen, Lars Peter, and Ravi Jagannathan, 1991, Implications of security market data for
       models of dynamic economies, Journal of Political Economy 99, 225-262.


Hansen, Lars Peter, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1982, Generalized instrumental variables
       estimation of nonlinear rational expectations models, Econometrica 50, 1269-
       1288.


He, Hua, and David M. Modest, 1995, Market frictions and consumption-based asset
       pricing, Journal of Political Economy 103, 94-117.


Heaton, John C., 1995, An empirical investigation of asset pricing with temporally
       dependent preference specifications, Econometrica 63, 681-717.




                                                                                      32
Heaton, John C., and Deborah J. Lucas, 1996, Evaluating the effects of incomplete
       markets on risk sharing and asset pricing, Journal of Political Economy 104, 443-
       487.


Heaton, John C., and Deborah J. Lucas, 1999, Stock prices and fundamentals, in Ben
       Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg, eds., Macroeconomics Annual 1999, National
       Bureau of Economic Research (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).


Heaton, John, C., and Deborah J. Lucas, 2000, Portfolio choice and asset prices: The
       importance of entrepreneurial risk, Journal of Finance 55, 1163-.


Hirshleifer, David 2001, Investor psychology and asset pricing, Journal of Finance 56,
       1533-1597.


Ibbotson Associates, 2001, Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation Yearbook (Ibbotson
       Associates, Chicago).


Ibbotson, Roger G., and Peng Chen, 2001, Stock market returns in the long run:
       participating in the real economy, Working paper, Ibbotson Associates.


Jacobs, Kris, 1999, Incomplete markets and security prices: Do asset-pricing puzzles
       result from aggregation problems? Journal of Finance 54, 123-163.


Jacobs, Kris, and Kevin Q. Wang, 2001, Idiosyncratic consumption risk and the cross-
       section of asset returns, Working paper, McGill University and University of
       Toronto.


Jagannathan, Ravi, and Narayana R. Kocherlakota, 1996, Why should older people invest
       less in stocks than younger people? Federal Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly
       Review 20, 11-23.




                                                                                     33
Jorion, Philippe, and William N. Goetzmann, 1999, Global stock markets in the twentieth
       century, Journal of Finance 54, 953-980.


Keynes, John M., 1936, The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money
       (Hartcourt, Brace and Company, New York).


Kocherlakota, Narayana R., 1996, The equity premium: It’s still a puzzle, Journal of
       Economic Literature 34, 42-71.


Krebs, Tom, 2002, Testable implications of consumption-based asset pricing with
       incomplete markets, Journal of Mathematical Economics, forthcoming.


Li, Yuming, 2001, Expected returns and habit persistence, Review of Financial Studies
       14, 861-899.


Lucas, Robert, Jr., 1978, Asset prices in an exchange economy, Econometrica 46, 1429-
       1446.


Lynch, Anthony W., 1996, Decision frequency and synchronization across agents:
       Implications for aggregate consumption and equity returns, Journal of Finance
       51, 1479-1497.


Mace, Barbara J., 1991, Full insurance in the presence of aggregate uncertainty, Journal
       of Political Economy 99, 928-956.


Mankiw, N. Gregory, 1986, The equity premium and the concentration of aggregate
       shocks, Journal of Financial Economics 17, 211-219.


Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Matthew D. Shapiro, 1986, Risk and return: consumption beta
       versus market beta, Review of Economics and Statistics 68, 452-459.




                                                                                     34
Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Stephen P. Zeldes, 1991, The consumption of stockholders and
       nonstockholders, Journal of Financial Economics 29, 97-112.


Marshall, Alfred, 1920, Principles of Economics: An Introductory Volume (Macmillan,
       London).


McGrattan, Ellen R., and Edward C. Prescott, 2001, Taxes, regulations, and asset prices,
       Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.


Mehra, Rajnish, 1998, On the volatility of stock prices: An exercise in quantitative
       theory, International Journal of Systems Science 29, 1203-1211.


Mehra, Rajnish, and Edward C. Prescott, 1985, The equity premium: A puzzle, Journal
       of Monetary Economics 15, 145-161.


Mehra, Rajnish, and Edward C. Prescott, 1988, The equity premium: A solution? Journal
       of Monetary Economics 22, 133-136.


Mehra, Rajnish, and Edward C. Prescott, 2002, The equity premium in retrospect, in
       George M. Constantinides, Milton Harris, and Rene Stulz, eds., Handbook of the
       Economics of Finance (North-Holland Elsevier, Amsterdam), forthcoming.


Menzly, Lior, Tano Santos, and Pietro Veronesi, 2001, Habit formation and the cross
       section of stock returns, Working paper, University of Chicago.


Merton, Robert C., 1973, An intertemporal capital asset pricing model, Econometrica 41,
       867-887.


Negishi, Takashi, 1960, Welfare economics and existence of an equilibrium for a
       competitive economy, Metroeconomica 12, 92-97.




                                                                                       35
Pollak, Robert, A., 1970, Habit formation and dynamic demand functions, Journal of
       Political Economy 78, 745-763.


Poterba, James, M., 2001, The rise of the “equity culture”: U.S. stockownership patterns,
       1989-1998, Working paper, MIT.


Rietz, Thomas A., 1988, The equity risk premium: A solution, Journal of Monetary
       Economics 22, 117-131.


Rubinstein, Mark, 1976, The valuation of uncertain income streams and the pricing of
       options, Bell Journal of Economics 7, 407-425.


Ryder, Harl E., and Geoffrey M. Heal, 1973, Optimum growth with intertemporally
       dependent preferences, Review of Economic Studies 40, 1-43.


Shiller, Robert, 1984, Stock prices and social dynamics, Brookings Papers on Economic
       Activity 2, 457-498.


Shiller, Robert, 2000, Irrational Exuberance (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ).


Siegel, Jeremy J., 1998, Stocks for the Long Run (McGraw-Hill, New York).


Siegel, Jeremy J., 1999, The shrinking equity premium, Journal of Portfolio Management
       26, 10-17.


Storesletten, Kjetil, Chris I. Telmer, and Amir Yaron, 2000, Consumption and risk
       sharing over the life cycle, Working paper, Carnegie Mellon University.


Storesletten, Kjetil, Chris I. Telmer, and Amir Yaron, 2001, Asset pricing with
       idiosyncratic risk and overlapping generations, Working paper, Carnegie Mellon
       University.



                                                                                       36
Sundaresan, Suresh M., 1989, Intertemporally dependent preferences and the volatility of
       consumption and wealth, Review of Financial Studies 2, 73-89.


Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, 2002, Limited asset market participation and the elasticity of
       intertemporal substitution, Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.


Vuolteenaho, Tuomo, 2000, Understanding the aggregate book-to-market ratio and its
       implications to current equity-premium expectations, Working paper, Harvard
       University.


Wachter, Jessica, 2001, Habit formation and returns on bonds and stocks, Working paper,
       New York University.


Weil, Philippe, 1989, The equity premium puzzle and the risk-free rate puzzle, Journal of
       Monetary Economics 24, 401-421.


Welch, Ivo, 2001, The equity premium consensus forecast revisited, Working paper, Yale
       University.




                                                                                       37
                                                              Table I
                                               The Equity Return and Premium
This table shows the sample mean and standard deviation of the annualized real arithmetic return on the
S&P Composite Index total return series; the sample mean of the real risk-free rate; and the sample mean of
the equity premium. The arithmetic rate of return on equity from the beginning to the end of year t is
defined as R = ( P + D − P ) / P , where P is the real price of the aggregate equity at the beginning of
              t +1          t +1    t +1   t        t    t

year t and D is the aggregate real dividend from the beginning to the end of year t. All returns and premia
             t +1

are in percent. Real returns are CPI-adjusted. The table also displays the mean annual growth,
 (100 / T ){ln ( P / X ) − ln ( P / X )} , of the price/X ratio, where X is the dividends, earnings, book equity,
                     T +1    T +1          1    1

or National Income. The pre-1926 S&P Index price series, the CPI series, the earnings series, and the
dividends series are obtained from Shiller’s database. The S&P composite Index returns series post 1926 is
obtain from the Ibbotson database. For years prior to 1926, the returns are calculated from the S&P 500
Index and dividend series, assuming no dividend reinvestment. The book equity series is obtained from
Davis, Fama, and French (2000) and Vuolteenaho (2000). The National Income is obtained from the
Bureau of Labor Statistics. The risk-free rate series is the one constructed by Mehra and Prescott (2002)
and is based on an annual average nominal return on three-month Treasury certificates and bills.

                                                        1872-2000 1872-1950 1951-2000 1926-2000

           Sample Mean S&P Return                             8.87       8.24    9.87       9.70
           Std of Return                                     18.49      19.28   17.32      20.33
           Sample Mean Risk-Free Rate                        2.00       2.54    1.15       0.40
           Sample Mean Premium                               6.87       5.69    8.72       9.30
           Std of Premium                                    19.19      20.23   17.45      20.50
           Sharpe Ratio                                       0.36       0.28    0.50       0.45


           Mean Annual Growth of:
           Price/Dividends                                   1.18       -0.22   3.39        1.81
           Price/Earnings                                    0.71       -0.57   2.73        1.28
           Price/Book Equity                                 1.18       -0.11   3.18        2.26
           Price/National Income                             NA          NA     1.27        NA




                                                                                                             38
                                                  Endnotes

1
    Campbell and Shiller (1988a, 1988b), Fama and French (1988), and Shiller (1984) provide early evidence
that the aggregate price-dividend and price-earnings ratios forecast aggregate equity returns. Goyal and
Welch (1999) argue that the out-of-sample evidence is less convincing. I do not review here the debates
and extensions relating to this literature. In the following paragraphs and in Appendix A, I argue that the
forecastability results provide little, if any, guidance to my primary goal in this section, the estimation of
the unconditional mean equity return.
2
    The estimators employed in Fama and French (2002) and in this section are compared in Appendix A.
3
     The increase in these financial ratios should be interpreted with caution. The increase in the price-
dividend ratio is due in part to an increase in share repurchases and a decrease in the fraction of dividend-
paying firms.
4
     I do not provide a systematic review of the offered explanations. Heaton and Lucas (1999), McGrattan
and Prescott (2001), and Shiller (2000) provide lucid accounts of a number of these explanations in the
context of both rational economic models and models that deviate from full rationality.
5
    The ratio of the stock market value to the National Income is discussed in Mehra (1998).
6
     A caveat is in order: without additional assumptions, it is unclear what optimality properties (beyond
unbiasedness) are associated with this class of estimators. Neither least squares, nor maximum likelihood,
nor Bayesian methods motivate this class of estimators without further assumptions.
7
    Ferson and Constantinides (1991), Grossman and Shiller (1981), Hansen and Jagannathan (1991), Hansen
and Singleton (1982), and many others test and reject the Euler equations of consumption. Mehra and
Prescott (1985) calibrate an economy to match the process of consumption growth. They demonstrate that
the unconditional mean annual premium of the aggregate equity return over the risk-free rate is, at most,
0.35 percent. This is too low, no matter how one estimates the unconditional mean equity premium. Weil
(1989) stresses that the puzzle is a dual puzzle of the observed too high equity return and too low risk-free
rate.
8
    For example, Abel (1990), Anderson, Hansen, and Sargent (2000), Bansal and Yaron (2000), Benartzi and
Thaler (1995), Boldrin, Christiano, and Fisher (2001), Campbell and Cochrane (1999), Constantinides
(1990), Epstein and Zin (1991), and Ferson and Constantinides (1991).
9
    The merits of this explanation are discussed in Mehra and Prescott (1988), and Rietz (1988).
10
     For example, Bewley (1982), Brav, Constantinides, and Geczy (2002), Constantinides and Duffie (1996),
Heaton and Lucas (1996), Krebs (2002), Mankiw (1986), Mehra and Prescott (1985), and Storesletten,
Telmer, and Yaron (2001).
11
     For example, Aiyagari and Gertler (1991), Bansal and Coleman (1996), Constantinides, Donaldson, and
Mehra (2002a), Daniel and Marshall (1997), Danthine, Donaldson, and Mehra (1992), He and Modest
(1995), and Heaton and Lucas (1996).




                                                                                                          39
12
     Attanasio, Banks and Tanner (2002), Brav, Constantinides, and Geczy (2002), Brav and Geczy (1995),
Mankiw and Zeldes (1991), and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002).
13
     Gabaix and Laibson (2001), Heaton (1995), and Lynch (1996).
14
     See Brown, Goetzmann, and Ross (1995). However, Jorion and Goetzmann (1999, Table 6) find that the
average real capital gain rate of a United States equities index exceeds the average rate of a global equities
index that includes both markets that have and have not survived by merely one percent per year.
15
     The market is effectively complete when all households have preferences that imply one-fund or two-
fund separation.
16
     See Constantinides (1982), Mehra and Prescott (1985, an unpublished earlier draft), and Negishi (1960).
17
     There is an extensive literature on the hypothesis of complete consumption insurance. See Altonji,
Hayashi and Kotlikoff (1992), Attanasio and Davis (1997), Cochrane (1991), and Mace (1991).
18
     Aiyagari and Gertler (1991) and Heaton and Lucas (1996) find that consumers facing transient shocks
come close to the complete-markets rule of complete risk sharing even with transaction costs and/or
borrowing costs, provided that the supply of bonds is not restricted to an unrealistically low level.
19
     The empirical evidence is sensitive to the model specification. Heaton and Lucas (1996) model the
income process as univariate and provide empirical evidence from the Panel Study on Income Dynamics
(PSID) that the idiosyncratic income shocks are transitory. Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2001) model
the income process as bivariate and provide empirical evidence from the PSID that the idiosyncratic
income shocks have a highly persistent component that becomes more volatile during economic
contractions. Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2000) corroborate the latter evidence by studying household
consumption over the life cycle.
20
     In related studies, Jacobs (1999) studies the PSID database on food consumption; Cogley (1999) and
Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) study the CEX database on broad measures of consumption; Jacobs and Wang
(2001) study the CEX database by constructing synthetic cohorts; and Ait-Sahalia, Parker, and Yogo
(2001) instrument the household consumption with the purchases of certain luxury goods.
21
     See also the discussion in the related papers by Bertaut and Haliasos (1997), Bodie, Merton, and
Samuelson (1992), Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout (1999), Jagannathan and Kocherlakota (1996) and
Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2001).
22
     Friend and Blume (1975) explain the mean equity premium with low RRA coefficient by assuming a
single-period economy in which the end-of-period consumption inevitably equals the end-of-period wealth.
Epstein and Zin (1991) introduce a recursive preference structure that emphasizes the timing of the
resolution of uncertainty. Even though the preferences are defined over consumption alone, the stock
market return enters directly in the Euler equations of consumption. Bakshi and Chen (1996) introduce a set
of preferences defined over consumption and wealth—the spirit of capitalism—that also have the effect of
introducing the stock market return in the Euler equations of consumption.
23
     Since then, several papers have studied the savings and portfolio composition of households, stratified by
income, wealth, age, education, and nationality. See Blume and Zeldes (1993), Haliassos and Bertaut


                                                                                                           40
(1995), Heaton and Lucas (1999, 2000), Poterba (2001), and the collected essays in Guiso, Haliassos, and
Jappelli (2001).
24
     Ferson and Constantinides (1991) test the special case of the linear habit model in which the habit
depends only on the first lag of own consumption and report that the habit model performs better than the
time-separable model and that the habit persistence parameter is economically and statistically significant.
See also Hansen and Jagannathan (1991), and Heaton (1995).
25
     Ferson and Harvey (1992) report positive results for the linear external habit model. Wachter (2001)
reports that long lags of consumption growth predict the short-term interest rate, as implied by the
nonlinear external habit model. Li (2001) reports that in both the linear and the non-linear external habit
models, the surplus consumption over habit has limited success in explaining the time series of the premia
of stock and bond portfolios. Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2001) develop an external habit model and
report that it helps explain the cross-section of asset returns.
26
     Barberis and Thaler (2002) and Hirshleifer (2001) provide excellent reviews of this literature.
27
     Brav and Heaton (2002) provide excellent discussion of these issues.




                                                                                                        41
