                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   GLOBAL TRANSMISSION OF INTEREST RATES:
                 MONETARY INDEPENDENCE AND CURRENCY REGIME


                                          Jeffrey A. Frankel
                                         Sergio L. Schmukler
                                             Luis Servén


                                         Working Paper 8828
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w8828


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2002




We are grateful to Michael Melvin, Jorge Streb, three anonymous referees, and participants at the
Universidad T. Di Tella-World Bank conference on currency regimes for very useful comments. We thank
Andrea Bubula, Tatiana Didier, Eduardo Fajnzylber, Changqing Sun, Nong Thaicharoen, Hairong Yu, and
particularly Yanchun Zhang for excellent research assistance. We also thank Atish Ghosh, Eduardo Levy
Yeyati, Federico Sturzenegger, and Hoger Wolf for generously providing us with their data. The World Bank
Latin American and the Caribbean Regional Studies Program provided financial support for this research.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research, the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.


© 2002 by Jeffrey A. Frankel, Sergio L. Schmukler and Luis Servén. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Global Transmission of Interest Rates:
Monetary Independence and Currency Regime
Jeffrey A. Frankel, Sergio L. Schmukler and Luis Servén
NBER Working Paper No. 8828
March 2002
JEL No. F31, F32, F33, F36



                                               ABSTRACT

        Using a large sample of developing and industrialized economies during 1970-1999, this paper
explores whether the choice of exchange rate regime affects the sensitivity of local interest rates to
international interest rates. In most cases, we cannot reject full transmission of international interest rates
in the long run, even for countries with floating regimes. Only large industrial countries can benefit, or
choose to benefit, from independent monetary policy. However, short-run effects differ across regimes.
Dynamic estimates show that interest rates of countries with more flexible regimes adjust more slowly
to changes in international rates.




Jeffrey A. Frankel                    Sergio L. Schmukler                    Luis Servén
Harvard University                    World Bank                             World Bank
79 JFK St.                            1818 H. St. NW                         1818 H. St. NW
Cambridge, MA 02138-5801              Washington, DC 20433                   Washington, DC 20433
and NBER                              sschmukler@worldbank.org               lserven@worldbank.org
jeffrey_frankel@harvard.edu
                       Global Transmission of Interest Rates:
                    Monetary Independence and Currency Regime


1. Introduction

       Changes in interest rates in major countries tend to have important effects on

other countries. For example, as has also been true in past episodes of global monetary

tightening, the 1999-2000 hikes in U.S. interest rates were rapidly reflected in interest

rate increases in other industrial and developing economies. In emerging markets, the

increases were in several cases proportionally larger than those experienced in the U.S.,

presumably because country and/or currency risks increased after the Fed decided to

tighten U.S. monetary policy. Even though the pressure to increase interest rates was felt

virtually across the board, one question remains unanswered: are countries with flexible

exchange rates more able to isolate their domestic interest rates from this type of negative

international shock? This issue of monetary independence, which lies at the heart of the

debate on currency arrangements, is the central question of this paper.

       The choice of exchange rate regime – floating, fixed, or somewhere in between –

has been a recurrent question in international monetary economics. According to the

conventional view, the two major advantages of fixing the exchange rate are: (1) reduced

transactions costs and exchange rate risk, that can discourage trade and investment, and

(2) a credible nominal anchor for monetary policy.

       The advantages of a flexible exchange rate, on the other hand, can generally be

described under one major property: it allows the country to pursue independent




                                             1
monetary policy.1           The argument in favor of monetary independence, instead of

constraining monetary policy by the fixed exchange rate, is the classic argument for

discretion instead of rules. When the economy is hit by a disturbance, such as a shift in

worldwide demand away from the goods it produces, the government would like to be

able to respond, so that the country does not go into recession. Under fixed exchange

rates, monetary policy is always diverted, at least to some extent, to dealing with the

balance of payments. Under the combination of fixed exchange rates and complete

integration of financial markets, which characterizes the European monetary union,

monetary policy becomes completely powerless.2 By freeing up the currency, on the

other hand, the country can respond to a recession by means of monetary expansion and

depreciation of the currency. This stimulates demand for domestic products and returns

the economy to desired levels of employment and output, more rapidly than would be the

case under the automatic mechanisms of adjustment on which a fixed-rate country must

rely.3

           According to the traditional arguments, under pegged exchange rates and

unrestricted capital flows, domestic interest rates cannot be set independently, but rather

must track closely those prevailing in the country to which the domestic currency is

pegged. By contrast, under a flexible exchange rate arrangement, the domestic interest

1
    To be sure, other factors enter as well. Two other advantages of an independent currency are that the
       government retains seignorage, and floating allows smooth adjustment to real shocks even in the
       presence of price frictions. Most of the important factors, however, can be lumped into the major
       arguments presented in the text.
2
    An expansion in the money supply has no effect: the new money flows out of the country, via a balance
       of payments deficit, just as quickly as it is created. In the face of an adverse disturbance, the country
       must simply live with the effects. After a fall in demand, for example, the recession may last until
       wages and prices are bid down, or until some other automatic mechanism of adjustment takes hold.
3
    For a more complete exposition of the advantages and disadvantages of alternative exchange rate regimes,
       see Frankel, Schmukler, and Servén (2001).


                                                        2
rate should be less sensitive to changes in international interest rates – other things equal.

Countries with intermediate regimes should also display less sensitivity to international

interest rates than countries with firm pegs.

       Despite these predictions, an alternative view – stated, among others, by Calvo

and Reinhart (2001 and 2002) and Hausmann, Panizza, and Stein (2001) – holds that

there exists “fear of floating,” that prevents countries with de jure flexible regimes from

allowing their exchange rates to move freely. According to this view, factors like lack of

credibility, exchange rate pass-through, and foreign-currency liabilities prevent countries

from pursuing an independent monetary policy, regardless of their announced regime.

Therefore, many countries, even if formally floating, are de facto “importing” the

monetary policy of major-currency countries, much as those with pegs. It has even been

suggested that interest rates might sometimes be more sensitive to U.S. rates in flexible-

rate developing countries than in fixed-rate countries, because flexible-rate developing

countries suffer from having to pay risk premia (both currency premia to compensate for

devaluation risk and country premia to compensate for default risk) and because these

premia may be sensitive to world interest rates.

       Although monetary independence has been at the heart of the debate on exchange

rate regimes, empirical evidence on the issue is still scarce. In particular, there are few

empirical studies on whether floating exchange rate regimes do indeed allow independent

monetary policy, in the sense that interest rates in countries with floating regimes are less

sensitive to foreign interest rates. Focusing on some countries whose regimes can be

clearly defined as either currency boards or floating regimes (such as those in Argentina,

Mexico, Hong Kong, and Singapore), Borensztein, Zettlemeyer, and Philippon (2001)




                                                3
find some evidence consistent with the traditional view.                    This study is particularly

interesting because it makes a particular effort to identify the response of interest rates to

exogenous shocks in world interest rates. On the other hand, selected country evidence

during the 1990s – reported in Frankel (1999) and Hausmann, Gavin, Pages, and Stein

(1999) – is consistent with the alternative view.

          The goal of this paper is to establish major empirical regularities concerning the

sensitivity of domestic interest rates to international interest rates under different

currency regimes. To do this, we analyze the widest possible spectrum of regimes, from

full exchange rate flexibility to currency boards. Thus, the paper should help place the

ongoing debate in the context of the observed facts, and allow an assessment of the

competing claims cited above on the relative merits of alternative exchange rate

arrangements from the perspective of monetary independence.4

          The paper extends the empirical literature in several directions.                  First, while

previous studies have been limited to a handful of countries over short time periods, here

we consider a much larger data set in both the cross-country and time-series dimensions,

by working with a sample of industrial and developing countries over the last three

decades. Second, we study both the long-run transmission of interest rates and their

dynamic adjustment under different exchange rate regimes. Third, we test the robustness

of the results to changes in sample period, empirical specification, and exchange rate

regime classification system. Finally, even though we work mainly with U.S. rates as our

primary indicator of “foreign interest rates,” we also take into account the emergence in

4
    There is an extensive empirical literature that studies the merits of different exchange rate regimes in
       other dimensions. For example, Ghosh, Gulde, Ostry, and Wolf (1996) analyze the behavior of
       inflation and growth under alternative exchange rate arrangements. Also, a related literature studies




                                                      4
recent years of other currency areas, most notably the Deutsche mark-European Monetary

Union (DM-EMU) zone. Thus, we examine the sensitivity of European interest rates to

German interest rates.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows.                  Section 2 introduces the

methodology and data used in this paper. Section 3 presents pooled estimation results by

exchange rate regime, income group, and decade. Section 4 presents individual-country

dynamic estimates for the 1990s. Section 5 summarizes the results and concludes. The

Appendix describes the exchange rate regimes in each country in the sample.



2. Methodology and Data

2.1 Methodology

       In principle, there are several factors that determine the extent to which domestic

and foreign interest rates move together.            The first one is the degree of financial

integration of the domestic economy into world markets. Barriers to international capital

flows can dampen the response of local rates to changes in international rates, allowing

monetary authorities in different countries to maintain different interest rate levels for

extended periods, even under fixed exchange rates.                 Second, the degree of real

international integration also affects the comovement of domestic and foreign interest

rates: if business cycles are highly synchronized across countries, domestic and foreign

rates will tend to move closely together, given other things. Third, the nature of shocks

also contributes to determine the degree of comovement.                  Unlike country-specific

idiosyncratic shocks, common shocks – such as financial and climatic – affect many


    the international transmission of anticipated inflation under different exchange rate regimes. See
    Holman and Rioja (2001).


                                                 5
countries simultaneously, which tend to be reflected in closer correlation of interest rates

for given degrees of international real and financial integration.

       Thus, monetary authorities otherwise able to develop independent monetary

policy are likely to choose similar policy stances – and hence similar interest rate patterns

– if the degree of international business cycle synchronization is high, and/or their

respective economies are subject to common shocks more often than not. In other words,

even under full monetary independence the observed path of interest rates will differ

across countries only to the extent that their authorities choose to pursue different

monetary policies.

       Notwithstanding these considerations, our primary concern here is to establish the

empirical regularities regarding the observed link between local and foreign interest rates,

rather than sorting out the role of each of the above factors. Thus, our starting point is the

empirical estimation of a simple reduced-form specification using panel data:

                          rilc,t = f i + β rt* + γ ' X i,t + ε i ,t ,                    (1)

where i = 1,...,N and t = 1,...,T respectively denote countries and time periods. Here rilc,t

represents the domestic nominal interest rate in local currency of country i at time t; fi is a

country-specific effect;5 rt* is the international interest rate; and Xi,t is a set of control

variables.   We assume that the error term εi,t has mean zero and is independently

distributed across countries, but is possibly heteroskedastic and serially correlated.

       In our basic panel specification we include no control variables (i.e., we drop Xit

from (1)). As a robustness check, however, we repeated our empirical experiments

including as control variable the difference between the domestic and foreign inflation




                                                     6
rates.6     We do this because much of the variation in nominal interest rates, across

countries and over time, could just reflect variation in currency (and/or country) risk

premia, both of which might be proxied by inflation differentials.7 However, adding the

inflation differential to our specification (1) causes virtually no change in the empirical

estimates, and thus to save space we only report a subset of the inflation-inclusive

experiments below.

           As a further robustness check, we also added into Xi,t a set of dummy variables to

control for turbulent periods, when the sensitivity of local interest rates to foreign ones

may differ from its “normal” value. Specifically, we used three dummies. The first one

is a “crisis” dummy constructed along the lines of the literature on exchange rate crises.8

The second is a hyperinflation dummy, equal to one when monthly inflation is above 50

percent. Finally, the third is a “transition” dummy to control for changes in the exchange

rate regime – specifically, exit from pegs to other regimes.9 Further, to allow some

additional flexibility in our specification we also interacted the three dummies with the



5
    Note that time-specific effects cannot be included, because they would be perfectly collinear with   rt* .
6
    All interest rates and inflation rates z are defined as ln (1+z). We also experimented with a somewhat
       more general version including separately domestic and foreign inflation, rather than entering them as
       a differential. Results with this broader specification, however, showed that in general the differential
       specification was not rejected by the data.
7
    For example, the currency premium could reflect anticipations of devaluation, which is customarily
       assumed to depend on inflation differentials. The country premium might reflect overall economic
       instability, which in empirical studies is often summarized by the inflation rate.
8
    Specifically, it takes a value of one when the cumulative depreciation of the nominal exchange rate over a
       three-month period is equal to or greater than 15 percent. We tried different variations with higher
       and lower depreciation thresholds and periods, without any material effect on the empirical results.
9
    Since such exits tend to be accompanied by considerable financial turbulence, in the absence of controls
       the new regime may be unduly associated with higher or more volatile interest rates and inflation, as
       noted by Edwards and Savastano (1999). The transition dummy takes a value of one in the month of
       the transition as well as those immediately preceding and following it. In other specifications, we
       experimented with longer transition periods and also dropping the corresponding observations. These
       alternative specifications had only a very modest impact on the parameter estimates of equation (1).



                                                        7
foreign interest rate. On the whole, the empirical results obtained from these experiments

were quite similar to those from the basic specification without controls, and hence to

save space they are not reported below.10

           We estimate equation (1) separately for each currency regime, since preliminary

evidence showed that neither the country effects nor the coefficients on the control

variables were equal across regimes.                     For each regime, we are interested in two

parameters, characterizing respectively the sensitivity of the local interest rate to the

foreign rate (β in equation (1) above), and the average level of the local interest rate (after

controlling for the foreign interest rate). The latter can be summarized by a parameter α,

defined as:

                                                  N

                                                  ∑f
                                              1
                                         α=              i   ,                                         (2)
                                              N   i =1


that is, the average of the country-specific effects under the regime in question.11

           In section 3 we report pooled estimates of α and β obtained on the full sample, as

well as grouping countries by per-capita income level and breaking the sample by decade

(1970s, 1980s, and 1990s), to see if there are any significant differences along these

dimensions.

           According to conventional wisdom, more flexible exchange rate regimes should

allow countries additional room to pursue their independent monetary policy. Therefore,

the sensitivity of local to international interest rates should increase with the rigidity of


10
     Those results are available upon request and downloadable from www.worldbank.org/lacconferences.
11
     Strictly speaking, this definition would apply if under each exchange rate regime all countries possessed
        the same number of time-series observations. In practice, this is not the case because our panel is
        unbalanced. The formula then is amended using weights given by the respective number of
        observations.



                                                             8
the exchange rate regime. In other words, for a given degree of capital mobility, real

integration, and other factors, we would expect β fixed 〉 β intermedia te 〉 β floating . In fact, in a fixed

exchange rate regime with full capital mobility we should expect β fixed = 1 . At the

opposite extreme, we would expect β floating 〈1 , except in the unlikely case that the

monetary authorities in floating exchange rate countries happen to choose the same

monetary policy rule as the world at large, and their economies exhibit perfectly

correlated business cycles (or are subject only to common shocks). In the case of floating

regimes, the exchange rate bears the burden of absorbing the shocks to international

interest rates.      In the case of intermediate regimes, including “dirty floating”

arrangements, the exchange rate absorbs less of the international shocks, so local interest

rates move more closely together with those abroad. Thus, we expect β fixed 〉 β intermedia te .

        The country-specific effect fi measures, for each country and under each regime,

the average level of the interest rate not accounted for by foreign interest rates (and the

inflation differential when included in the equation).                 Hence, fi may be viewed as

reflecting the mean level of currency premium and country premium not captured by

other variables. The average of the country-specific effects under each regime (α as

defined earlier) can then be interpreted as a measure of the regime’s mean currency

premium plus country premium under the null of β = 1 . Thus, if for example more

rigidly fixed exchange rate regimes reduce devaluation expectations, for given country

risk perceptions and levels of β we should obtain α fixed 〈α intermedia te 〈α floating .




                                                     9
           Equation (1) involves no dynamics, and hence it might be viewed as describing

the long-run relation between domestic and foreign interest rates.12 However, it may be

argued that the issue of monetary independence has at least as much to do with the short-

run adjustment of interest rates as with the long-run effect. Countries might not be able

to isolate themselves from fluctuations in world interest rates in the long run, but might

be able to do so temporarily. The degree of monetary autonomy would then be measured

by the length of time until full adjustment of the local interest rate to its foreign

counterpart.

           To assess the dynamics of interest rate adjustment, we employ a dynamic version

of (1) including lags of the dependent and independent variables. Our starting point is

Hendry’s GUM (general unrestricted model) specification describing the local interest

rate of a given country:

                                     P +1             Q +1        Q +1
                       rtlc = α 0 + ∑ d p rtlc− p + ∑ bk rt*−k + ∑ g l ' X t −l + ut .                   (3)
                                     p =1             k =0        l =0



This is just an unrestricted autoregressive-distributed lag (ARDL) model of order

(P + 1, Q + 1) .     With some straightforward manipulations, it can be rewritten as


                                                                   [                            ]
              P                Q                Q
     ∆rtlc = ∑ D p ∆rtlc− p + ∑ Bk ∆rt*−k + ∑ Gl ' ∆X t −l − δ rtlc−1 − f 0 − β rt*−1 − γ ' X t −1 + ut . (4)
              p =1            k =0             l =0



           Equation (4) is written in error-correction form, with the “long-run” solution

given by the term in square brackets in the right-hand side, analogous to (1) above.13 The




12
     In fact, this would be precisely the case in a panel cointegration context if domestic and foreign interest
        rates were non-stationary (but cointegrated); see Baltagi (2000).
13
     Note that a long-run equilibrium relation among the variables of interest may exist irrespective of
      whether they are I(0) or I(1); see Pesaran (1997).



                                                             10
speed of adjustment towards the long-run equilibrium is measured by the parameter

                                                             Q                     Q

          P                                  α            ∑b     k               ∑g     l
δ = 1 −  ∑ d p  , and we have defined f 0 = 0 , β =     k =1
                                                                       , and γ =   l =1
                                                                                              .
          p =1                               δ              δ                      δ

        Other things equal, for the reasons already mentioned above we would expect a

systematic association between the speed of adjustment δ and the exchange rate regime

– i.e., δ fixed 〉δ intermedia te 〉δ floating . Indeed, with no barriers to capital movements we should

find δ → 1 under fixed exchange rates. Conversely, with flexible exchange rates and

national authorities exercising independent monetary policy we should find much lower

values of δ . In the limit, with full independence we would expect to find δ → 0 , so that

the local interest rate does not revert to a long-run equilibrium relation with the foreign

interest rate.

        Rather than pooling the data, we estimate the dynamic specification (4) separately

for each country-currency regime episode in the sample. The reason is that even under

cross-country regime homogeneity of the long-run parameters (e.g., full adjustment of

local to foreign interest rates in the long run under every currency regime), heterogeneity

in the adjustment dynamics may exist among countries with similar exchange rate

regimes due to factors such as the degree of development of the financial system and the

openness of the capital account. Pooled estimation of (4) would then yield inconsistent

estimates (Pesaran and Smith 1995).




                                                 11
           Our approach to the estimation of (4) departs from the recent cointegration

literature and thus does not require pre-testing for order-of-integration conformability.14

Specifically, if the disturbance ut is serially uncorrelated (which basically requires

sufficiently long lag orders P and/or Q) and at most one long-run relation exists among

r lc , r * , and X, the speed of adjustment δ and the long-run parameters can be jointly

estimated by ordinary least squares (OLS), regardless of whether the variables are I(0) or

I(1).15

           Moreover, in the framework of equation (4) testing the null hypothesis that no

long-run relation exists among r lc , r * , and X is equivalent to testing the null hypothesis

δ = 0 ; see Pesaran, Shin, and Smith (2001). The test can be based on the magnitude of

the t-statistic of δ obtained from OLS estimation of (4), and is valid regardless of

whether the variables are I(0) or I(1).                However, the applicable critical values are

different in both scenarios, with that for the I(1) case lying above the one for the I(0)

case. Hence, if the t-statistic of δ exceeds the former critical value, the null of no long-

run relation can be unambiguously rejected; while if it falls short of the latter critical

value, the null of no long-run relation cannot be rejected regardless of the order of

integration of the variables. If the statistic falls between the two critical values, then the

evidence is inconclusive, and existence of a long-run relation depends on the order of

integration of the variables.16


14
     These pre-testing procedures face more often than not the problem of low power of standard unit root
       tests. In our case, a priori we would expect interest rates to be I(0) variables, as noted by Cochrane
       (1991). However, this is inessential for our estimation procedure.
15
     See Banerjee et al. (1993), Boswijk (1995), and Pesaran and Shin (1999). Estimates of the standard
       errors of the long-run parameters can be computed along the lines of Bardsen (1989).
16
     The critical values we use are taken from Table C2.iii in Pesaran, Shin, and Smith (2001).



                                                      12
           In our basic dynamic specification, we let X equal the inflation differential but set

γ = 0 , while allowing for Bk ≠ 0 . In other words, we let the inflation differential affect

the dynamic adjustment but not the long-run equilibrium, which is therefore analogous to

equation (1) above. However, we also repeated our estimations imposing both γ = 0 and

Bk = 0 , as well as allowing for both γ ≠ 0 and Bk ≠ 0 . In both cases, the results were

virtually identical to those obtained with the basic specification, and hence to save space

they are not reported below.17



2.2 Data

           Our basic source of interest rate data is the International Financial Statistics of the

International Monetary Fund (IMF). We work with monthly data on 90-day local money

market rates for the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s. We choose money market interest rates

because they reflect market forces better than deposit rates. The latter, while much more

widely available, are often subject to administrative controls and in many cases display

little movement over prolonged periods, which renders them uninformative for our

purposes.18 As international interest rate, we use the 90-day U.S. T-bill rate but, as we

shall discuss below, for some experiments we use also the German 90-day T-bill rate.19

           Our classification of exchange rate regimes is based on a quarterly database from

the IMF which encompasses a total of ten regime categories, based on officially reported


17
     These additional results are available upon request.
18
     In a number of cases we found that the money market interest rate data from IFS were identical to the
        deposit data. In such cases, we discarded countries/periods for which rates showed no variation or
        infrequent step-wise movements.
19
     We also experimented with the U.S. LIBOR dollar rate. The results were very similar, since the two
      rates are very highly correlated



                                                       13
exchange arrangements for the period 1975-1996.                   The Appendix lists the regimes

prevailing in each country over the sample period according to this source. We present

some empirical results (in Table 1 below) from estimating equation (1) using the detailed

regime categories in the original source. However, to simplify the analysis, in the rest of

our experiments we condense these categories into three broader exchange rate regimes:

fixed (pegs), intermediate (limited flexibility, crawls, bands, managed floating), and

flexible (free-floating).

           To assess the robustness of our results, we repeated our empirical estimations

using two alternative classifications.             The first one is that of Levy Yeyati and

Sturzenegger (2000), who propose a de facto classification based on actual data on

exchange rates and reserves, which is fairly different from the IMF-based one because the

latter reflects de jure information supplied by domestic monetary authorities. Below we

report a set of empirical results based on this alternative classification. The second

alternative classification is that of Ghosh, Gulde, Ostry, and Wolf (1996). Results using

this latter option were quite similar to those obtained using the IMF-based classification,

so we do not report them to save space.

           The rest of our data – exchange rates, inflation, and country indicators, such as

population and income level on which the sample selection is based – come from the

World Bank-IMF databases.

           We focus on industrial economies and middle-income developing countries.

Within this broad group, sample coverage is dictated by the availability of adequate

interest rate data.20 The sample that results comprises 46 countries (18 industrial and 28


20
     We dropped country-regime episodes possessing less than one year of consecutive monthly observations.
      We also excluded countries with population under one million, countries without availability of long


                                                    14
developing) in addition to the U.S. (whose interest rate is used as an explanatory variable)

and a total number of monthly observations exceeding 9,300.




3. Interest Rate Sensitivity: Pooled Estimates

       We first assess empirically the sensitivity of domestic interest rates to

international interest rates by estimating equation (1) using the entire sample, as well as

distinguishing between industrial and developing countries and considering subsamples

defined by time period.

       Table 1 presents the full-sample fixed-effects estimation results, using a five-

regime classification of currency arrangements. For each regime, we report the slope

parameter β and the level parameter α defined earlier, as well as the p-value from the test

of the null hypothesis β = 1 . The table shows the results obtained estimating separate

panels by exchange rate regime. Taken at face value, the slope coefficient estimates

show only modest numerical differences across regimes, although strictly speaking they

seem to conform to conventional wisdom: the point estimate is higher (at 0.62) under

pegged regimes than under intermediate and floating regimes (both equal to 0.53).

Indeed, for pegged regimes the slope estimate is not statistically different from unity –

and this applies whether the peg is to the U.S. dollar or to other currencies (although in

the former case the slope estimate is quite imprecise and insignificantly different from

zero as well). Among intermediate regimes, there is a contrast between bands, which



    exchange rate series (which automatically leads to the exclusion of Eastern European economies),
    low-income countries (in which the incidence of interest rate controls is more widespread), and
    countries with prolonged internal or external war periods.



                                                15
show a slope estimate similar to that of pegged regimes (0.60) and managed floats, whose

slope coefficient is estimated imprecisely and is not significantly different from zero.

           The estimated constants under each regime also deserve mention. As noted

earlier, they could be viewed as reflecting the level of the domestic interest rate

characteristic of each regime, after removing the effects of international interest rates.

The table shows that, given other things, the level of local interest rates is lowest under

fixed exchange rate arrangements – and among these, non-dollar pegs exhibit the lowest

interest rate levels. At the other extreme, floating and managed floating regimes tend to

exhibit the highest interest rate levels, given other factors.

           Unlike the differences in slopes, these differences in constant terms across

regimes are highly significant statistically.               One-sided Wald tests confirm that the

constant for fixed regimes is lower than the constant for intermediate regimes (the p-

value for the null that α fixed > α intermedia te is less than .001) and that the constant for

intermediate regimes is lower than the constant for floating regimes (the statistic for the

null α intermedia te > α floating yields a p-value of .003). Moreover, these tests yield the same

conclusion if we use alternative regime classifications and/or alternative specifications of

equation (1) adding the controls described earlier. In sum, the Wald tests do suggest that

more flexible regimes tend to have higher interest rates. 21

           In spite of the simplicity of the specification and the fairly large sample sizes, our

estimated equations capture a considerable amount of the observed variation in interest

rates, as shown by the R2 statistics in the table.



21
     Interestingly, this does not appear to result from lower average inflation in fixed regimes than the rest:
        the same result is found if we add inflation differentials to the estimated specification.



                                                       16
           The above estimates pool for each regime all countries and time periods.

However, a closer look seems warranted, because the underlying data may conceal a

considerable degree of heterogeneity along two major dimensions. First, the overall

sample includes countries with very diverse degrees of economic and financial

development. Specifically, industrial countries are financially more stable, and tend to

possess stronger and more credible institutions than developing countries. These factors

may allow them to pursue an independent monetary policy to a larger extent than

developing economies.

           Second, the long time span of the full sample may conceal significant variation

over time in the sensitivity of domestic to foreign interest rates, as barriers to

international capital movements have declined steadily over the last two decades.

Restrictions to capital movements were commonplace during the 1970s. In the 1980s,

many countries, especially developed nations, started removing barriers to capital flows

and liberalizing their financial systems. By the beginning of the 1990s, most developed

and developing countries had already liberalized their financial sectors.22 The increasing

degree of financial liberalization likely enhanced the comovement of domestic and

international interest rates, as shown in Kaminsky and Schmukler (2001).

           A third, more specific issue concerns the evolution of monetary arrangements in

most of Western Europe, which in the late 1980s and 1990s assigned to the DM the role

of hegemonic currency. For the countries involved in the DM (now EMU) zone of

influence, German interest rates likely provide a measure of international rates more

relevant than the U.S. rates used in Table 1.


22
     See Kaminsky and Schmukler (2002) for a chronology of financial liberalization.



                                                     17
       We address these issues in Tables 2 and 3, where we split the sample by income

group, decade, and exchange rate regime.           To keep the amount of information

manageable, we proceed in the same fashion as Ghosh et al. (1999) and condense the

various exchange rate regimes into the three broader categories shown in Table 1: fixed,

intermediate, and floating. Table 2 presents the results for developing countries by

decade and regime, while Table 3 does so for industrial countries, dividing the countries

according to the World Bank classification.

       Table 2 shows that the developing country subsample yields poor slope estimates

for the 1970s and 1980s. In the 1970s, none of the estimates is significantly different

from zero. In the 1980s, fixed regimes exhibit full transmission, with a slope estimate

significantly different from zero and almost exactly equal to one – but the underlying

sample consists of a single country. Intermediate and floating regimes continue to show

insignificant estimates.

       In contrast, the slope estimates for the 1990s are considerably larger and more

precise. For intermediate and floating regimes, the point estimates are close to unity –

although they still exhibit relatively large standard errors. For fixed regimes we obtain a

much larger slope estimate (1.81), statistically greater than one at conventional

significance levels, suggesting an over-adjustment of local interest rates.

       Table 3 presents the same information for industrial economies. It is important to

note that, according to the IMF exchange rate regime classification, our sample does not

include any industrial-country fixed regimes after the 1970s. In other words, during the

1980s and 1990s all developed countries in the sample followed either free-floating

regimes or intermediate ones. Moreover, we should also note that in the 1990s the




                                              18
majority of the intermediate regime countries belong to the DM-EMU zone, and thus for

this group we present estimates of the sensitivity of local interest rates to both U.S. rates

and German rates.

       The results in Table 3 show that the fixed regimes of the 1970s exhibit full

adjustment of local to international interest rates, while intermediate and floating regimes

show less-than-full adjustment in the 1970s and 1980s. The slope point estimates of the

former are somewhat larger than those of the latter, although the difference between both

is fairly modest.

       In the 1990s, three results emerge.          First, interest rates in countries with

intermediate regimes are wholly unaffected by U.S. interest rates. Second, once we take

account of the leading role of Germany in the DM zone, we find that the interest rates of

these countries show (more than) full adjustment to German rates. Third, interest rates in

countries with floating regimes also exhibit full transmission of U.S. rates. These results

suggest that as developed countries became more integrated in the 1990s, their interest

rates became fully sensitive to the relevant international interest rates – which in the case

of the EMU zone means the German rate rather than the U.S. rate.

       We next perform two robustness checks on these results. First, we add the

inflation differential as an explanatory variable. As already explained, much of the

variation in interest rates might reflect variation in currency and country premia, both of

which could be related to inflation differentials; omission of this factor might lead to an

overstatement of the role of foreign interest rates in the determination of local rates.

       Second, we adopt the alternative classification of exchange rate regimes proposed

by Levy Yeyati and Sturzenegger (LYS) (2000). This classification differs substantially




                                             19
from the original classification. For example, during the 1990s, only two developing

countries in our sample are classified as fixed regimes according to the IMF

classification, while 11 countries fall into this category according to the alternative

classification. The difference narrows for intermediate regimes, with 21 and 24 being

classified as such by the IMF and LYS classification, respectively. Regarding free-

floating regimes, the difference widens again, with ten countries being catalogued as

having such regimes according to the IMF and 19 countries according to LYS.

       The fact that the LYS classification is based on actual data on exchange rate and

reserve variation could help avoid some potential inaccuracies of the IMF’s de jure

classification. For example, monetary authorities could announce adoption of a free-

floating regime but actually target tightly the exchange rate, as suggested by the fear of

floating literature.   Such regime would be characterized as floating in the IMF

classification, and would cause our empirical procedure to understate the monetary

independence allowed by floating regimes – or, equivalently, overstate the degree to

which local interest rates adjust to foreign rates under floating arrangements. Likewise, a

regime formally announced as pegged (and described as such by the IMF classification)

might actually experience frequent realignments of the peg, which might allow the

authorities considerable room for setting interest rates independently from world rates. In

our empirical framework, this would cause our estimates to understate the degree of

monetary transmission under pegged regimes (although to some degree this effect was

captured in our additional experiments including transition dummies). Adoption of the

de facto LYS classification might help overcome possible biases introduced in our

estimates by the IMF de jure classification.




                                               20
        Tables 4 and 5 present the results from these robustness checks for developing

and industrial countries, respectively. To avoid cluttering the tables, we only report the

slope coefficient estimates, omitting the estimated coefficients on the inflation

differential when included in the specification.

        Table 4 reports the developing-country results.         The first three columns

correspond to the estimates from the inflation-inclusive specification. Comparison with

Table 2 reveals that the main effects from including the inflation differential are an

increased precision of the intermediate-regime slope estimates in the 1970s and 1980s,

and a decline in the point estimate of fixed regimes in the 1990s, which remains greater

than one although not significantly so. Indeed, in the latter decade all regimes now

exhibit slope estimates insignificantly different from unity, although that for fixed

regimes continues to be somewhat above the rest.

        The last three columns of Table 4 present the results obtained with the LYS

regime classification. The slope estimates for the 1970s and 1980s are even less precise

than those in Table 2, although numerically they are broadly similar. For the 1990s, the

alternative classification yields somewhat lower slope estimates that the original one for

fixed and intermediate regimes. The former still exhibit more-than-full interest rate

adjustment (although the point estimate is not significantly greater than one), while the

latter do not. Nevertheless, the slope estimate for intermediate regimes is higher in the

1990s than in the previous decades. The point estimate for floating regimes is similar,

but less precise, than that obtained with the original classification, and it also suggests

full interest rate adjustment.




                                             21
       Table 5 presents the robustness checks for industrial countries. In this case,

comparison of the first column of Table 5 with the results in Table 3 immediately reveals

that inclusion of inflation in the specification is completely inconsequential for the slope

point estimates. The results are virtually identical to those obtained with the basic

specification.

       The last three columns of Table 5 show the results obtained using the LYS regime

classification. For the 1970s, the slope estimates are broadly similar to those in Table 3:

fixed regimes show an estimate slightly above one, while the other regimes show much

smaller values that indicate only partial interest rate adjustment. However, the relative

ranking of intermediate and floating regimes is reversed relative to that in Table 3.

       For the 1980s and 1990s, the alternative classification yields some fixed-regime

observations, which were absent from Table 3. In the 1980s, their slope estimate is

significantly smaller than one, and very similar to those obtained for the other regimes in

the same decade. This suggests that in that decade all regimes behave fairly similarly –

they all exhibit less-than-full adjustment – what is consistent with the results for

intermediate and floating regimes during the 1980s reported in Table 3.

       In the 1990s the slope estimate for fixed regimes is negative and highly imprecise.

Under the LYS classification, this group turns out to consist of European countries in the

DM-EMU zone, so the fact that we find no response of their local interest rates to U.S.

rates is quite consistent with the results in Table 3 above. For the other regimes, the

estimates also show the same pattern as those in Table 3. Thus, for intermediate regimes

the estimate is insignificant when the role of the DM as leading currency in Europe is

ignored, and slightly above one (although not significantly so) when such role is taken




                                             22
into account. For floating regimes, the slope estimate is somewhat smaller, but also

slightly above one (and again not significantly so).

       To summarize this section, when heterogeneity along the income level and time

dimensions is ignored, the pooled estimates by exchange rate regime seem to lend modest

support to the conventional wisdom that fixed exchange rate regimes show greater

sensitivity of domestic to foreign interest rates than other regimes – although in general

all regimes show less-than-full transmission. Further, fixed regimes also tend to exhibit

lower average interest rates, for given levels of foreign interest rates.

       A closer look at the results reveals considerable differences between industrial

and developing countries and across time periods. Among developing countries it is

difficult to draw any clear inferences for the 1970s and 1980s, given the poor precision of

most point estimates. In the former decade, intermediate regimes appear to display the

highest degree of adjustment, while in the latter this role seems to correspond to pegged

regimes. In the 1990s, however, all developing-country regimes display full or near-full

adjustment of local to foreign interest rates – although the point estimates are generally

larger for fixed regimes (for which they even exceed unity) than for the rest.

Furthermore, these results are robust to the changes in specification and regime

classification explored here. The only exception is the less-than-full adjustment found

for intermediate regimes in the 1990s when using the alternative LYS classification.

       As for industrial countries, our empirical experiments are generally more precise.

Using the IMF classification we find that in the 1970s and 1980s only pegged regimes

(which are present only in the former decade) exhibit full interest rate transmission, while

the other regimes fall significantly short of it. In contrast, in the 1990s both intermediate




                                              23
and floating regimes show full (and, in some instances, more than full) adjustment of

local interest rates to foreign rates, once account is taken of the leading role of German

monetary policy in the DM zone. These conclusions hold regardless of whether inflation

differentials are added to the empirical specification. Use of the alternative regime

classification results in the appearance of fixed regimes in the 1980s and 1990s. In both

instances they display less than full adjustment, although in the 1990s this is due to the

use of the U.S. – rather than the German – interest rate as the relevant measure of

“foreign interest rate” for a group of countries in the DM-EMU area.             All other

conclusions reached with the IMF classification remain unchanged under the alternative

classification.



4. Interest Rate Sensitivity: Dynamic Estimates

         On the whole, the pooled estimates in the previous section suggest a convergence

across regimes in the 1990s towards full transmission of foreign interest rates, for both

industrial and developing countries.

         Given the absence of dynamics in our estimated specification, this conclusion

might be viewed as implying that no exchange rate arrangement prevents eventual

adjustment of local interest rates to foreign ones – i.e., no regime offers permanent

monetary autonomy. It may be argued that the relevant question concerns the degree of

temporary autonomy that various regimes offer to the monetary authorities – as measured

by the length of time it takes for local interest rates to fully reflect changes in foreign

rates.




                                            24
         To explore this issue, we turn to the dynamic specification (4). As already noted,

we estimate it on an individual-country basis given that a priori cross-country

heterogeneity in the dynamics could be considerable, depending on country-specific

factors such as financial system development and capital account regulations. Further,

we focus on the 1990s, when the convergence among regimes just noted is most apparent.

Finally, we focus on a few selected economies whose exchange rate regime can be

categorized in a relatively straightforward manner. For developing countries, we use

countries that appear classified in the same way in the IMF and LYS classifications, with

the exception of Chile.      (During most of the 1990s, Chile was widely known for

following an exchange rate band, so we categorize it as an intermediate regime despite

the fact that the LYS classification assigns Chile to the free-floating regimes.) For

developed countries, we take the European countries as intermediate regimes, since they

all were part of the DM-EMU area, and in addition we use a group of countries that are

widely regarded as following free-floating regimes.

         Tables 6 and 7 report individual-country estimates of equation (4) for developing

and industrial countries, respectively.     We use the Akaike information criterion to

determine the length of the lag specification.23 To keep the tables manageable, we only

report the estimates of the speed of adjustment δ and the long-run slope coefficient β ,

along with their standard errors and the p-value from the test of the null hypothesis

β = 1.

         Table 6 presents estimation results for nine developing countries, grouped in three

regime categories. Hard pegs (currency boards) consist of Argentina pre-2002 and Hong




                                             25
Kong. Intermediate regimes (including currency bands, managed floats, and similar

arrangements) involve Chile, Israel, Singapore, and Thailand. Free-floating regimes

comprise Mexico after the Tequila crisis, Philippines, and South Africa.

          The first two rows of Table 6 report the estimates for the “hard pegs” of

Argentina and Hong Kong. The estimated speeds of adjustment are numerically large

and highly significant, so that the null of no long-run relation can be unambiguously

rejected. The half life, calculated as ln(0.5) ln(1 + δ ) , is less than a month, around 14

days for Hong Kong and 19 days for Argentina. The point estimates of the long-run

slope coefficient are close to one, even exceeding it in the case of Argentina.

          The next block in Table 6 reports the results for intermediate regimes. Here the

estimated speeds of adjustment are much smaller than in the hard pegs, except perhaps

for Thailand. The half life ranges from more than one month in Thailand to more than

seven months in Chile. In the case of Singapore, the null of no long-run relation can be

rejected only for I(0) variables – which we regard as the most likely scenario anyway.

The long-run slope estimates are statistically not different from one, although in the case

of Chile the point estimate is close to three and quite imprecise. Thailand also shows a

slope estimate above unity, although not significantly.

          The last block in Table 6 reports the results for the three developing-country

floating regimes. Their estimated speeds of adjustment, and the respective t-statistics, are

lower than those found for pegged regimes – even lower than those for intermediate

regimes. The half life varies between more than four months in Mexico to more than

eight months in the Philippines. On the other hand, the long-run slope estimates are all

23
     For simplicity, we set P=Q in (4). Limited experimentation removing this restriction, as well as using



                                                     26
well above unity, with that of Mexico implausibly high, likely reflecting the high degree

of financial turbulence over the relatively short post-Tequila sample used here. Strictly

speaking, however, none of the slope coefficients is significantly different from one.

       On the whole, therefore, the individual developing country estimates in Table 6

suggest full long-run adjustment of interest rates under all regimes (with some indication

of over-adjustment in a majority of cases), with a faster speed of adjustment under hard

pegs than under the other regimes.

       Table 7 turns to the industrial countries. The top half of the table reports the

estimates for five European countries in the DM zone, for which, we use the German

interest rate as the benchmark measure of international rates. The speeds of adjustment

range from a high of 0.47 in Portugal to a low of 0.05 in Spain, implying a half life

between more than one month to more than 13 months. In the latter country the t-statistic

fails to reject the null of no long-run relation, but the test is invalidated by the presence of

serial correlation (as implied by the q-statistic). This might be due to the selection by the

Akaike criterion of too short a dynamic specification, a problem that seems to affect also

Belgium. Nevertheless, experiments imposing longer lag lengths led to similar parameter

estimates.   The long-run slope estimates for all these countries are above one, and

significantly so in the cases of Denmark and Portugal.

       The bottom half of Table 7 reports the results for six industrial-country floating

regimes – three relatively small economies (Australia, New Zealand, and Canada) and

three large ones (Germany, Japan, and the U.K.). The results reveal a sharp contrast

between the two – more specifically, between Germany and Japan, on the one hand, and



    the Schwartz criterion instead of the Akaike criterion, led to broadly similar results.



                                                     27
the rest of the countries, on the other. For the smaller-country floating regimes, the

speeds of adjustment are generally smaller than for the DM-zone countries. For New

Zealand the estimate is also imprecise, so that formally we cannot reject the null of no

long-run relation,24 although like with Spain there is some mild indication of serial

correlation that might invalidate the test. The point estimates of the long-run slope are all

above unity – almost significantly so in the case of Australia. The U.K. shows a long-run

slope estimate smaller than unity, although not significantly so, and its speed of

adjustment is somewhat above those of the smaller economies.

           For Germany and Japan, the situation is radically different.                     The speed of

adjustment estimates are very close to, and insignificantly different from, zero.

Moreover, the estimates are quite precise. Imposing other lag specifications instead of

the one selected by the Akaike criterion in Table 7 does not alter this result. Thus, for

these two countries we cannot reject the null of no long-run relation between domestic

and foreign interest rates at any reasonable confidence level.                      Since the estimated

equations show no symptom of serial correlation, the result is not due to dynamic

misspecification.          Absent a long-run relation, the long-run slope estimates are

meaningless and thus we omit them from the table.

           Like with the pooled estimates, we examined the sensitivity of the results reported

in this section to inclusion of the inflation differential in the long-run equilibrium




24
     Inspection of the critical values of Pesaran, Shin, and Smith (2001) shows that we can reject the null at
        the 10 percent level if the variables are I(0).



                                                      28
condition, and to exclusion of the inflation differential from both the long run and the

dynamics. The results changed only very marginally.25

          To summarize this section, the individual-country dynamic estimates for the

1990s show that only two major industrial economies (Germany and Japan) with floating

regimes vis-à-vis the U.S. fail to exhibit adjustment of their interest rates to the U.S.

interest rate. In this sense, only these two economies display clear evidence of monetary

independence over the sample period.

          With this exception, the country-specific estimates coincide with the pooled

estimates in suggesting that over the 1990s all exchange regimes display full adjustment

of domestic to international interest rates in the long run. Indeed, for some floating-

regime developing countries and smaller industrial economies we find evidence of over-

adjustment – i.e., local rates move more than one-for-one with foreign rates.

          The dynamic estimates also provide an idea of how long the long run is under

each exchange rate regime – i.e., how long it takes for local interest rates to adjust to

international rates. For developing-country hard pegs, the long run seems in fact quite

short – these regimes exhibit the fastest adjustment of local interest rates among all

regimes examined. At the other extreme, floating regimes seem to allow the longest

transition period, both among developing and industrial countries. In this sense, our

results seem to accord with the conventional wisdom that floating regimes provide

increased room for temporary monetary independence.




25
     Specifically, the main consequence of including inflation in the long run relation is to lower Mexico’s
       long-run slope estimate from 24 to 4, and Chile’s from 2.9 to 1.5. Excluding inflation from both the
       dynamics and the long-run equilibrium yields results very similar to those reported in the text.



                                                     29
5. Conclusions

       In this paper we have tested whether the transmission of international interest rate

changes to local rates is affected by the exchange rate regime. This is an important

question in the context of the debate on the choice of currency regime, in which the issue

of monetary independence has played a central role.             Proponents of free-floating

arrangements have argued that countries adopting floating regimes would be able to

pursue their own monetary policy goals, while advocates of hard pegs have questioned

the feasibility of such a strategy in a world of high international capital mobility.

       The paper has taken a first step towards assessing empirically the relative merits

of these two views, by reviewing the empirical regularities on international interest rate

linkages for a large sample of industrial and developing countries. The approach taken

here extends and generalizes earlier studies that have focused on a small group of

countries over brief time periods. Specifically, the paper has examined the evidence from

industrial and developing countries over the last three decades, using both pooled and

single-country empirical estimates. The objective is to establish the main stylized facts

that will need to be addressed in the debate on monetary independence and the choice of

currency regime. To do this, we have employed simple reduced-form specifications

relating domestic to world interest rates. In spite of their simplicity, the empirical models

capture a considerable proportion of the variance in local interest rates, both across

countries and over time.

       The main results of the paper can be summarized in three points. First, over the

last decade all exchange rate regimes exhibit high sensitivity of local interest rates to

international ones. Indeed, in the 1990s we find virtually no instances of less-than-full




                                              30
long-run transmission, regardless of exchange rate regime. This result emerges from both

the country-specific estimates and the pooled estimates, and for industrial and developing

countries alike. Interestingly, during the 1990s, interest rates in European countries of

the DM-EMU zone have become virtually insensitive to U.S. interest rates – but fully

sensitive to German interest rates. Thus, European countries have shifted from the U.S.

monetary area to the DM-EMU monetary, and the observed decline in the responsiveness

of their interest rates to U.S. interest rates does not signify any increase in their degree of

monetary independence.

       Second, our single-country dynamic estimates show that floating regimes do

entail increased monetary independence in the specific sense that the speed of adjustment

of domestic interest rates towards the long-run, one-for-one relation with international

rates is generally lower under floating regimes than under other regimes. Hence floating

regimes appear to offer at least a degree of temporary monetary independence.

       Third, the only exception to these general results is provided by two large

industrial countries (Germany and Japan), for which we find no evidence in the data of a

long-run relation between local and international (U.S.) interest rates.         Hence these

countries appear to be the only ones that can, and choose, to benefit from independent

monetary policy in the 1990s.

       On the whole, these results are robust to changes in empirical specification and, in

the case of the pooled estimates, to the use of alternative systems of classification of

exchange regimes.

       It is important to note one caveat of our analysis. Our assessment of monetary

independence is based on the observed degree of comovement of local and foreign




                                              31
interest rates.   Thus, our approach could understate the actual degree of monetary

independence offered by non-pegged regimes if their monetary authorities opt for not

making use of their monetary autonomy – be it due to fear of floating or because the

cycle at home and abroad happen to require very similar monetary policy stances.

        To conclude, the empirical regularities identified in the paper leave many

questions open for future research. We shall mention three. The first one concerns the

interpretation of our finding of full transmission in the 1990s, in fixed and flexible

regimes alike, except for large industrial economies. Does this mean that floating-regime

countries are not able to pursue their independent monetary policy, or rather that they

choose not to float, perhaps due to fear of floating?

        More generally, we have not explored the channels through which international

interest rates are transmitted to domestic rates – i.e., the relative roles of business cycle

synchronization, common shocks, and policy decisions. Nor have we examined the

impact of international rates on the country premium and the currency premium of local

interest rates. These questions are left for future research.




                                              32
Appendix: Exchange Rate Regime Classification

       The starting point is the IMF’s quarterly database on exchange rate regimes,

which encompasses a total of 10 categories, based on officially reported exchange

arrangements for the period 1975-1996.

       We transform the IMF database to a monthly basis, complementing the original

source with information contained in Cottarelli and Giannini (1997).           Finally, the

classification is extended until March 1999, using information from IMF reports and

publications, including the Exchange Rate Arrangements and Restrictions and the

International Finance Statistics, 1998 and 1999. For the countries used in the individual-

country estimates, we extend the classification until December 1999. In addition to the

original classification, we construct new categories to account for the specific currency to

which some fixed regimes are pegged.

       For most experiments in the paper, we condense the ten categories in the original

source into three broader exchange rate regimes: fixed (pegs), intermediate (limited

flexibility, crawls, bands, managed floating), and flexible (free-floating). Specifically,

pegged regimes include: peg to the U.S. dollar, peg to the French franc, peg to other

currencies (comprising Indian rupee, South African rand, British pound, and Deutsche

mark), peg to SDR (IMF basket), and basket pegs (including the so-called Bretton Woods

basket peg). Intermediate regimes include: limited flexibility with respect to a basket,

limited flexibility with respect to a single currency, limited flexibility with respect to a

cooperative arrangement (including the European Monetary System), managed floating,

crawling pegs, and crawling bands. The full details are given in the Appendix Table.




                                            33
References


Baltagi, B., 2000, Nonstationary Panels, Panel Cointegration, and Dynamic Panels,
       Elsevier Science.

Banerjee, A., J. Dolado, J. Galbraith, and D. Hendry, 1993, Co-integration, Error
       Correction, and the Econometric Analysis of Nonstationary Data, Oxford
       University Press.

Bardsen, G., 1989, “Estimation of Long-Run Coefficients in Error-Correction Models,”
      Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 51, p. 345-350.

Borensztein, Eduardo, Jeromin Zettelmeyer, Thomas Philippon, 2001, “Monetary
      Independence in Emerging Markets: Does the Exchange Rate Make a
      Difference,” IMF Working Paper WP/01/1.

Boswijk, P., 1995, “Efficient Inference on Cointegration Parameters in Structural Error
      Correction Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 69, 133-158.

Calvo, Guillermo and Carmen Reinhart, 2001, “Fixing for Your Life,” Brookings Trade
       Forum 2000, pp. 1-39.

Calvo, Guillermo and Carmen Reinhart, 2002, “Fear of Floating,” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 117:2.

Cochrane, John, 1991, “Comment on Campbell and Perron,” in Olivier Blanchard and
      Stanley Fischer, NBER Macroeconomics Annual, pp. 201-210.

Cottarelli, Carlo, and C. Giannini, 1997, “Credibility Without Rules,” IMF Occasional
       Paper No. 154, December.

Edwards, Sebastian and Miguel Savastano, 1999, “Exchange Rates in Emerging
      Economies: What Do We Know? What Do We Need to Know?” NBER Working
      Paper No. 7228, July.

Frankel, Jeffrey, 1999, “No Single Exchange Rate Regime is Right for All Countries or at
       All Times,” Graham Lecture, Princeton University. Essays in International
       Finance No. 215, Princeton University Press: Princeton, August 1999.

Frankel, Jeffrey, Sergio Schmukler, and Luis Servén, 2001, “Verifiability and the
       Vanishing Intermediate Exchange Rate Regime,” Journal of Development
       Economics, 66:2, pp. 351-386.

Ghosh, A., A. Gulde, J. Ostry, and H. Wolf, 1996, “Does The Nominal Exchange Rate
      Regime Matter?” IMF Economic Issues No. 2, NBER Working Paper No. 5874



                                          34
Hausmann, Ricardo, Michael Gavin, Carmen Pages-Serra, and Ernesto Stein, 1999,
     “Financial Turmoil and the Choice of Exchange Rate Regime,” mimeo, Inter-
     American Development Bank.

Hausmann, Ricardo, Ugo Panizza, and Ernesto Stein, 2001, “Why Do Countries Float the
     Way They Float?” Journal of Development Economics, 66:2, pp. 387-414.

Holman, Jill and Felix Rioja, 2001, “International Transmission of Anticipated Inflation
      under Alternative Exchange-Rate Regimes,” Journal of International Money and
      Finance, 20:4, pp. 497-519.

Kaminsky, Graciela and Sergio Schmukler, 2001, “Short-Lived or Long-Lasting? A New
      Look at the Effects of Capital Controls,” Brookings Trade Forum 2000, pp.
      125:178.

Kaminsky, Graciela and Sergio Schmukler, 2002, “Short-Run Pain, Long-Run Gain: The
      Effects of Financial Liberalization,” mimeo, GWU and World Bank.

Levy Yeyati, Eduardo and Federico Sturzenegger, 2000, “Classifying Exchange Rate
      Regimes: Deeds vs. Words,” mimeo, Universidad T. Di Tella.

Pesaran, M. Hashem, 1997, “The Role of Economic Theory in Modeling the Long Run,”
       Economic Journal, 107, 178-91.

Pesaran, M. Hashem and Yongcheol Shin, 1999, “An Autoregressive Distributed Lag
       Modelling Approach to Cointegration Analysis,” in Econometrics and Economic
       Theory in the 20th Century: The Ragnar Frisch Centennial Symposium, chapter
       11, (ed.) S. Strom, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Pesaran, M. Hashem, Yongcheol Shin, and Richard Smith, 2001, “Bounds Testing
       Approaches to the Analysis of Level Relationships,” Journal of Applied
       Econometrics, 16, 289-326.

Pesaran, M. Hashem, and Ron Smith, 1995, “Estimating Long-Run Relationships from
       Dynamic Heterogeneous Panels,” Journal of Econometrics, 68, 79-113.




                                          35
                                                   Table 1
                            Local Interest Rate Responsiveness to U.S. T-bill Rate
                                          by Exchange Rate Regime

The table reports the constant and slope coefficients of the local interest rate (money market) on the U.S. T-bill rate. The models are
calculated by exchange rate regime. All regressions contain country fixed effects, which are not reported in the table to save space. Data
are from industrialized and developing countries in the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s. Newey-West standard errors are in parenthesis. ** and
* mean that the estimate is statistically different from zero at the 5 percent and 10 percent significance level respectively.


                                                                                       Test                             Number of
                                                                International
                                                Constant                            slope = 1        R-squared          countries
                                                                 interest rate
                                                                                    (p-value)                         (observations)
Fixed regimes                                       0.05 **            0.62 **          0.14             0.66                 13
                                                  (0.01)             (0.26)                                                 (517)

           pegged to U.S. dollar                    0.08 **            0.58             0.26             0.61                 7
                                                  (0.02)             (0.37)                                                 (323)

           pegged to other currencies               0.02 **            0.64 **          0.20             0.71                 8
                                                  (0.00)             (0.28)                                                 (194)

Intermediate regimes                                0.10 **             0.53 **         0.00             0.74                 38
                                                  (0.00)              (0.09)                                               (6,109)

           band                                     0.05 **            0.60 **          0.00             0.52                 30
                                                  (0.00)             (0.08)                                                (4,098)

           managed floating                         0.11 **            0.17             0.01             0.72                 27
                                                  (0.02)             (0.32)                                                (2,011)

Free-floating regimes                               0.40 **            0.53 **          0.02             0.82                 26
                                                  (0.02)             (0.20)                                                (2,713)
                                      Table 2
               Local Interest Rate Responsiveness to U.S. T-bill Rate
                         Developing Countries by Decade
The table reports the slope coefficient of the local interest rate (money market) on the U.S. T-bill rate. The
models are calculated by exchange rate regime. All regressions contain country fixed effects, which are not
reported in the table to save space. Newey-West standard errors are in parenthesis. ** and * mean that the
estimate is statistically different from zero at the 5 percent and 10 percent significance level respectively.

                                                             Test                            Number of
                                     International
                                                          slope = 1       R-squared          countries
                                      interest rate
                                                          (p-value)                        (observations)

1970s:
Fixed regimes                                 0.05           0.00             0.94                4
                                            (0.11)                                              (191)

Intermediate regimes                          0.47           0.09             0.96                5
                                            (0.31)                                              (177)

Free-floating regimes                        -0.52           0.02             0.94                2
                                            (0.63)                                               (42)
1980s:
Fixed regimes                                 0.99 **        0.98             0.15                1
                                            (0.46)                                               (29)

Intermediate regimes                          0.08           0.10             0.73               13
                                            (0.56)                                             (1,091)

Free-floating regimes                        -0.12           0.01             0.90                4
                                            (0.46)                                              (294)
1990s:
Fixed regimes                                 1.81 **        0.02             0.09                2
                                            (0.36)                                              (164)

Intermediate regimes                          0.81 *         0.67             0.78               22
                                            (0.44)                                             (1,665)

Free-floating regimes                         0.91 *         0.84             0.54               10
                                            (0.47)                                              (575)
                                    Table 3
       Local Interest Rate Responsiveness to International Interest Rates
                      Industrialized Countries by Decade
The table reports the slope coefficient of the local interest rate (money market) on the U.S. and German T-bill
rate. The models are calculated by exchange rate regime. All regressions contain country fixed effects, which
are not reported in the table to save space. Newey-West standard errors are in parenthesis. ** and * mean that
the estimate is statistically different from zero at the 5 percent and 10 percent significance level respectively.

                                                            Test                                Number of
                                    International
                                                         slope = 1          R-squared            countries
                                     interest rate
                                                         (p-value)                            (observations)
1970s:
Fixed regimes                               1.03 **         0.87                0.79                  6
(U.S. T-bill rate)                        (0.19)                                                    (133)

Intermediate regimes                        0.58 **         0.00                0.33                 11
(U.S. T-bill rate)                        (0.13)                                                    (845)

Free-floating regimes                       0.43            0.04                0.55                  7
(U.S. T-bill rate)                        (0.28)                                                    (382)
1980s:
Fixed regimes                                   ..            ..                  ..                  ..
(U.S. T-bill rate)

Intermediate regimes                        0.49 **         0.00                0.71                  12
(U.S. T-bill rate)                        (0.10)                                                   (1,314)

Free-floating regimes                       0.36 *          0.00                0.78                  7
(U.S. T-bill rate)                        (0.19)                                                    (616)

1990s:
Fixed regimes                                   ..            ..                  ..                  ..
(U.S. T-bill rate)

Intermediate regimes                        0.00            0.00                0.24                  13
(U.S. T-bill rate)                        (0.15)                                                   (1,068)

Intermediate Regimes                        1.26 **         0.00                0.58                  13
(German T-bill rate)                      (0.09)                                                   (1,068)

Free-floating regimes                       0.94 **         0.84                0.48                 10
(U.S. T-bill rate)                        (0.29)                                                    (804)
                                                                                Table 4
                                         Alternative Specifications of Local Interest Rate Responsiveness to U.S. T-bill Rate
                                                                  Developing Countries by Decade

This table presents two variations of the regressions reported in Table 2. The first variation includes the inflation differential between each country and the U.S. as a regressor; the second one uses the Levy
Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2000) classification of exchange rate regimes. The table reports only the coefficients of the local interest rate (money market) on the U.S. T-bill rate to save space. The models are
calculated by exchange rate regime. All regressions contain country fixed effects, which are not reported in the table to save space. Newey-West standard errors are in parenthesis. ** and * mean that the
estimate is statistically different from zero at the 5 percent and 10 percent significance level respectively.


                                                                    With inflation rate                                                            Alternative regime classification
                                                                    Test                            Number of                                                   Test                           Number of
                                           International                                                                            International
                                                                 slope = 1       R-squared          countries                                                slope = 1       R-squared         countries
                                            interest rate                                                                            interest rate
                                                                 (p-value)                        (observations)                                             (p-value)                       (observations)

1970s:
Fixed regimes                                       0.05            0.00             0.94                 4                                 0.27                 0.00            0.93                4
                                                  (0.10)                                                (191)                             (0.25)                                                   (214)

Intermediate regimes                                0.51 *          0.07             0.96                 5                                 0.45                 0.15            0.96                3
                                                  (0.27)                                                (177)                             (0.39)                                                   (130)

Free-floating regimes                              -0.48            0.04             0.94                 2                                -0.49                 0.00            0.95                3
                                                  (0.71)                                                (42)                              (0.44)                                                   (66)
1980s:
Fixed regimes                                       0.87 *          0.79             0.17                 1                                 0.70                 0.62            0.93                8
                                                  (0.49)                                                (29)                              (0.62)                                                   (201)

Intermediate regimes                                0.42 **         0.00             0.87                 13                                0.34                 0.36            0.82                14
                                                  (0.18)                                               (1,091)                            (0.72)                                                   (853)

Free-floating regimes                              -0.01            0.03             0.90                 4                                -0.24                 0.03            0.84                10
                                                  (0.45)                                                (294)                             (0.57)                                                   (360)
1990s:
Fixed regimes                                       1.09 **         0.72             0.64                 2                                 1.13     **          0.71            0.89                11
                                                  (0.25)                                                (164)                             (0.35)                                                   (352)

Intermediate regimes                                0.76 **         0.53             0.82                 22                                0.52     **          0.03            0.72                24
                                                  (0.37)                                               (1,665)                            (0.22)                                                  (1,237)

Free-floating regimes                               0.82 *          0.69             0.55                 10                                0.97                 0.97            0.84                19
                                                  (0.45)                                                (575)                             (0.79)                                                   (764)
                                                                                  Table 5
                                     Alternative Specifications of Local Interest Rate Responsiveness to International Interest Rates
                                                                    Industrialized Countries by Decade

This table presents two variations of the regressions reported in Table 3. The first variation includes the inflation differential between each country and the U.S. or Germany as a regressor; the second one uses the
Levy Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2000) classification of exchange rate regimes. The table reports only the coefficients of the local interest rate (money market) on the U.S. and German T-bill rate to save space. The
models are calculated by exchange rate regime. All regressions contain country fixed effects, which are not reported in the table to save space. Newey-West standard errors are in parenthesis. ** and * mean that
the estimate is statistically different from zero at the 5 percent and 10 percent significance level respectively.

                                                                    With inflation rate                                                                   Alternative regime classification
                                                                      Test                     Number of                                                               Test                          Number of
                                            International                                                                                  International
                                                                   slope = 1       R-squared   countries                                                            slope = 1       R-squared        countries
                                             interest rate                                                                                  interest rate
                                                                   (p-value)                 (observations)                                                         (p-value)                      (observations)

1970s:
Fixed regimes                                         1.03 **         0.87             0.79               6                                        1.07 **             0.64             0.51               5
(U.S. T-bill rate)                                  (0.19)                                              (133)                                    (0.16)                                                  (148)

Intermediate regimes                                  0.60 **         0.00             0.33               11                                       0.32 **             0.00             0.39               12
(U.S. T-bill rate)                                  (0.13)                                              (845)                                    (0.10)                                                  (693)

Free-floating regimes                                 0.53 *          0.08             0.57               7                                        0.57 **             0.04             0.45               11
(U.S. T-bill rate)                                  (0.27)                                              (382)                                    (0.21)                                                  (519)

1980s:
Fixed regimes                                            ..             ..               ..                ..                                      0.51 **             0.00             0.73               8
(U.S. T-bill rate)                                                                                                                               (0.16)                                                  (322)

Intermediate regimes                                  0.49 **         0.00             0.72               12                                       0.44 **             0.00             0.79               14
(U.S. T-bill rate)                                  (0.10)                                             (1,314)                                   (0.14)                                                  (986)

Free-floating regimes                                 0.38 **         0.00             0.79               7                                        0.49 **             0.00             0.69               9
(U.S. T-bill rate)                                  (0.19)                                              (616)                                    (0.12)                                                  (622)

1990s:
Fixed regimes                                            ..             ..               ..                ..                                     -0.71                0.00             0.15               9
(U.S. T-bill rate)                                                                                                                               (0.38)                                                  (562)

Intermediate regimes                                  0.02            0.00             0.25               13                                       0.40                0.04             0.35               12
(U.S. T-bill rate)                                  (0.16)                                             (1,068)                                   (0.29)                                                  (667)

Intermediate regimes                                  1.26 **         0.00             0.58               13                                       1.16 **             0.09             0.70               12
(German T-bill rate)                                (0.09)                                             (1,068)                                   (0.09)                                                  (667)

Free-floating regimes                                 0.92 **         0.79             0.48               10                                       1.05 **             0.86             0.61               11
(U.S. T-bill rate)                                  (0.29)                                              (804)                                    (0.29)                                                  (643)
                                                                                Table 6
                                                         Local Interest Rate Responsiveness to U.S. T-bill Rate
                                                                         Developing Countries

The table reports the coefficients and test of error correction models by country, which include the inflation rate in the dynamics. The main text describes the equation being estimated. The
table reports the adjustment coefficient and the coefficient on the international interest rate from the long-run relation. Newey-West standard errors are in parenthesis. ** and * mean that the
estimate is statistically different from zero at the 5 percent and 10 percent significance level respectively. ## means that the t-statistic rejects the null of no long-run relation at the 5 percent
level regardless of the order of integration of the variables; # means that the rejection applies only to I(0) variables (see Pesaran, Shin, and Smith 2001).


                                                                                                International                 Test                            Q-statistic at
                                                   Number of           Adjustment                                                                                                  Number of
                                    Sample                                                       interest rate             slope = 1         R-squared            lag 3
                                                     lags              coefficient                                                                                                observations
                                                                                             (long-run relation)           (p-value)                           (p-value)

Fixed regimes:
Argentina                         1/91-12/99              2                   0.66 **                       1.28 **             0.41             0.73               0.14                106
                                                                            (0.06) ##                     (0.34)

Hong Kong                        1/94 - 12/99             0                   0.78 **                       0.91 **             0.84             0.41               0.78                 72
                                                                            (0.12) ##                     (0.43)

Intermediate regimes:
Chile                              1/90-8/99              1                   0.09 **                       2.86                0.35             0.86               0.26                115
                                                                            (0.03) ##                     (1.99)

Israel                            1/90-12/99              2                   0.15 **                       0.83 **             0.56             0.37               0.59                118
                                                                            (0.04) ##                     (0.29)

Singapore                         1/90-12/99              3                   0.12 **                       0.99 **             0.97             0.28               0.93                117
                                                                            (0.05) #                      (0.43)

Thailand                           1/90-3/97              0                   0.48 **                       1.40 **             0.20             0.25               0.89                 87
                                                                            (0.09) ##                     (0.30)

Free-floating regimes:
Mexico                           12/94-12/99              0                   0.15 **                      24.50 **             0.05             0.42               0.71                 61
                                                                            (0.06) #                     (11.94)

Philippines                      1/90-12/99               2                   0.08 **                       2.16 **             0.23             0.16               0.84                118
                                                                            (0.03) #                      (0.95)

South Africa                     1/90--12/99              1                   0.09 **                       1.75 **             0.20             0.15               0.96                119
                                                                            (0.04) #                      (0.58)
                                                                                         Table 7
                                           Local Interest Rate Responsiveness to International Interest Rates
                                                                Industrialized Countries
The table reports the coefficients and test of error correction models by country, which include the inflation rate in the dynamics. The main text describes the equation being
estimated. The table reports the adjustment coefficient and the coefficient on the international interest rate from the long-run relation. Newey-West standard errors are in
parenthesis. ** and * mean that the estimate is statistically different from zero at the 5 percent and 10 percent significance level respectively. ## means that the t-statistic rejects the
null of no long-run relation at the 5 percent level regardless of the order of integration of the variables; # means that the rejection applies only to I(0) variables (see Pesaran, Shin, and
Smith 2001). N/A means not applicable.


                                                                                           International                Test                            Q-statistic at
                                                  Number of          Adjustment                                                                                         Number of
                                Sample                                                      interest rate             slope =1         R-squared            lag 3
                                                    lags             coefficient                                                                                       observations
                                                                                        (long-run relation)           (p-value)                          (p-value)
Intermediate regimes:
Belgium               1/90-12/98                         0                   0.34 **                   1.02 **            0.66             0.25              0.01                 108
(German T-bill rate)                                                       (0.08) ##                 (0.05)

Denmark                         1/90-12/99               2                   0.28 **                   1.26 **            0.02             0.27              0.99                 118
(German T-bill rate)                                                       (0.06) ##                 (0.11)

Netherlands                     1/90-12/98               2                   0.22 **                   1.01 **            0.82             0.39              0.66                 106
(German T-bill rate)                                                       (0.08) #                  (0.04)


Portugal                        1/90-12/99               0                   0.47 **                   1.81 **            0.00             0.27              0.97                 120
(German T-bill rate)                                                       (0.07) ##                 (0.12)

Spain                           1/90-12/99               0                   0.05 **                   1.53 **            0.11             0.06              0.00                 120
(German T-bill rate)                                                       (0.02)                    (0.33)

Free-floating regimes:
Australia                       12/90-12/99              3                   0.14 **                  1.39 **             0.05             0.62              0.98                 63
(U.S. T-bill rate)                                                         (0.03) ##                (0.19)

Canada                           1/90-12/99              0                   0.06 **                  1.43 **             0.49             0.12              0.64                 119
(U.S. T-bill rate)                                                         (0.02) ##                (0.63)

New Zealand                       1/90-8/99              0                   0.09 **                  1.64 **             0.19             0.11              0.11                 119
(U.S. T-bill rate)                                                         (0.04)                   (0.48)

United Kingdom                   1/90-12/99              2                   0.24 **                  0.72 **             0.37             0.42              0.79                 86
(U.S. T-bill rate)                                                         (0.06) ##                (0.30)

Germany                          1/90-12/99              1                   0.00                      N/A                N/A              0.23              0.94                 119
(U.S. T-bill rate)                                                         (0.01)

Japan                            1/90-12/99              5                   0.01                      N/A                N/A              0.38              0.78                 115
(U.S. T-bill rate)                                                         (0.01)
                                              Appendix Table
                       List of Countries in Sample and Their Exchange Rate Regimes
                          Period                                    Exchange Regime Classification
         Country
                      from        to                        Narrow Classification                      Broad Classification
Argentina            Jan-80    Mar-81                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                     Apr-81    Jun-82                        Independently floating                         Floating
                     Jul-82    Jun-89                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                     Jul-89    Nov-89                          Peg to U.S. dollar                             Fixed
                     Dec-89    Feb-91                        Independently floating                         Floating
                     Mar-91    Mar-99                          Peg to U.S. dollar                             Fixed
Australia            Oct-74    Nov-76             Limited flexibility with respect to a basket            Intermediate
                     Dec-76    Nov-83                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                     Dec-83    Jun-96                        Independently floating                         Floating
Austria              Feb-70    Aug-71                      Bretton Woods basket peg                           Fixed
                     Sep-71    Sep-94             Limited flexibility with respect to a basket            Intermediate
                     Oct-94    Dec-98    Limited flexibility with respect to a cooperative arrangement    Intermediate
Belgium              Feb-70    Dec-71                      Bretton Woods basket peg                           Fixed
                     Jan-72    Jan-99    Limited flexibility with respect to a cooperative arrangement    Intermediate
Bolivia              Jan-95    Dec-97                        Independently floating                         Floating
                     Jan-98    Dec-98                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                     Jan-99    Mar-99                            Crawling peg                             Intermediate
Canada               Jan-75    Mar-99                        Independently floating                         Floating
Chile                Jan-78    May-79                        Independently floating                         Floating
                     Jan-80    May-82                          Peg to U.S. dollar                             Fixed
                     Jun-82    Jun-82                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                     Jul-82    Dec-98                      Crawling peg to a basket                       Intermediate
                     Jan-99    Mar-99                            Crawling band                            Intermediate
Colombia             Mar-95    Dec-98                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                     Jan-99    Mar-99                            Crawling band                            Intermediate
Costa Rica           Jan-90    Dec-91                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                     Jan-92    Sep-95                        Independently floating                         Floating
                     Oct-95    Dec-98                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                     Jan-99    Mar-99                            Crawling Peg                             Intermediate
Denmark              Jan-72    Mar-99    Limited flexibility with respect to a cooperative arrangement    Intermediate
Dominican Republic   Mar-96    Mar-99                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
Ecuador              Nov-86    Sep-94                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                     Oct-94    Sep-95                      Crawling peg to a basket                       Intermediate
                     Oct-95    Dec-98                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                     Jan-99    Mar-99                            Crawling band                            Intermediate
Egypt                Jan-97    Mar-99                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
El Salvador          Jan-97    Mar-99                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
Finland              Dec-77    Aug-92             Limited flexibility with respect to a basket            Intermediate
                     Sep-92    Sep-96                        Independently floating                         Floating
                     Oct-96    Mar-99    Limited flexibility with respect to a cooperative arrangement    Intermediate
Germany              Feb-70    Apr-70                      Bretton Woods basket peg                           Fixed
                     May-70    Dec-71                        Independently floating                         Floating
                     Jan-72    Mar-73                      Bretton Woods basket peg                           Fixed
                     Apr-73    Mar-99    Limited flexibility with respect to a cooperative arrangement    Intermediate
Greece               Jan-90    Dec-94                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                     Jan-95    Dec-96                        Independently floating                         Floating
                     Jan-97    Feb-98                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                     Mar-98    Mar-99    Limited flexibility with respect to a cooperative arrangement    Intermediate
Guatemala            Jan-97    Mar-99                        Independently floating                         Floating
Hong Kong, China     Dec-90    Mar-99                          Peg to U.S. dollar                             Fixed
Indonesia            Jan-83     Jul-98                         Managed floating                           Intermediate
                     Aug-98     Jul-98                       Independently floating                         Floating
Ireland              Mar-72    Apr-72                      Bretton Woods basket peg                           Fixed
                     Jun-72    Dec-78                         Peg to pound sterling                           Fixed
                     Jan-79    Mar-99    Limited flexibility with respect to a cooperative arrangement    Intermediate
Israel               Jan-90    Nov-91             Limited flexibility with respect to a basket            Intermediate
                     Dec-91    Dec-98                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                     Jan-99    Mar-99                            Crawling band                            Intermediate
Italy                Jan-71    Dec-71                      Bretton Woods basket peg                           Fixed
                     Jan-72    Jan-73           Limited flexibility with respect to U.S. dollar           Intermediate
                     Feb-73    Dec-78                        Independently floating                         Floating
                     Jan-79    Aug-92    Limited flexibility with respect to a cooperative arrangement    Intermediate
                     Sep-92    Sep-96                        Independently floating                         Floating
                     Oct-96    Mar-99    Limited flexibility with respect to a cooperative arrangement    Intermediate
Japan                Jan-70    Dec-72                      Bretton Woods basket peg                           Fixed
                     Jan-73    Mar-99                        Independently floating                         Floating
Korea, Rep.          Aug-76    Dec-79                          Peg to U.S. dollar                             Fixed
                     Jan-80    Nov-97                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                     Dec-97    Mar-99                        Independently floating                         Floating
Kuwait               Jan-79    Mar-99             Limited flexibility with respect to a basket            Intermediate
Lebanon              Jan-82    Dec-94                        Independently floating                         Floating
Malaysia             Jan-70    Jun-72                         Peg to pound sterling                           Fixed
                     Jul-72    Jun-73                          Peg to U.S. dollar                             Fixed
                     Jul-73    Aug-75                        Independently floating                         Floating
                     Sep-75    Mar-93             Limited flexibility with respect to a basket            Intermediate
                                           Appendix Table
                    List of Countries in Sample and Their Exchange Rate Regimes
                       Period                                    Exchange Regime Classification
        Country
                   from        to                        Narrow Classification                      Broad Classification
                  Apr-93    Aug-98                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                  Sep-98    Mar-99                          Peg to U.S. dollar                             Fixed
Mauritius         Jan-88    Sep-94             Limited flexibility with respect to a basket            Intermediate
                  Oct-94    Mar-99                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
Mexico            Apr-81    Jun-82                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                  Jul-82    Sep-82                          Peg to U.S. dollar                             Fixed
                  Oct-82    Nov-94                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                  Dec-94    Mar-99                        Independently floating                         Floating
Netherlands       Jan-70    Apr-70                      Bretton Woods basket peg                           Fixed
                  May-70    Dec-71                        Independently floating                         Floating
                  Jan-72    Dec-98    Limited flexibility with respect to a cooperative arrangement    Intermediate
New Zealand       Mar-85    Feb-85                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                  Mar-85    Mar-99                        Independently floating                         Floating
Norway            Jan-72    Nov-78    Limited flexibility with respect to a cooperative arrangement    Intermediate
                  Dec-78    Oct-90             Limited flexibility with respect to a basket            Intermediate
                  Nov-90    Nov-92    Limited flexibility with respect to a cooperative arrangement    Intermediate
                  Dec-92    Apr-94                        Independently floating                         Floating
                  May-94 Mar-99                             Managed floating                           Intermediate
Paraguay          Oct-90    Jun-98                        Independently floating                         Floating
Philippines       Oct-81    Jun-82           Limited flexibility with respect to U.S. dollar           Intermediate
                  Jul-82    Sep-84                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                  Oct-84    Mar-99                        Independently floating                         Floating
Portugal          Jan-83    Sep-90                      Crawling peg to a basket                       Intermediate
                  Oct-90    Mar-92                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                  Apr-92    Mar-99    Limited flexibility with respect to a cooperative arrangement    Intermediate
Singapore         Aug-73    Jun-87             Limited flexibility with respect to a basket            Intermediate
                  Jul-87    Mar-99                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
South Africa      Feb-70    Apr-72                      Bretton Woods basket peg                           Fixed
                  May-72    Sep-72                         Peg to pound sterling                           Fixed
                  Oct-72    May-74                          Peg to U.S. dollar                             Fixed
                  Jun-74    Jun-75                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                  Jul-75    Jan-79                          Peg to U.S. dollar                             Fixed
                  Feb-79    Mar-99                        Independently floating                         Floating
Spain             Jan-74    Jan-74                      Bretton Woods basket peg                           Fixed
                  Feb-74    Dec-75             Limited flexibility with respect to a basket            Intermediate
                  Jan-76    Dec-87                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                  Jan-88    May-89                        Independently floating                         Floating
                  Jun-89    Mar-99    Limited flexibility with respect to a cooperative arrangement    Intermediate
Sweden            Jan-70    Dec-71                      Bretton Woods basket peg                           Fixed
                  Jan-72     Jul-77   Limited flexibility with respect to a cooperative arrangement    Intermediate
                  Aug-77    Apr-91             Limited flexibility with respect to a basket            Intermediate
                  May-91    Oct-92    Limited flexibility with respect to a cooperative arrangement    Intermediate
                  Nov-92    Mar-99                        Independently floating                         Floating
Switzerland       Sep-75    Sep-78                        Independently floating                         Floating
                  Oct-78    Dec-79                        Peg to Deutsche mark                             Fixed
                  Jan-80    Mar-99                        Independently floating                         Floating
Thailand          Jan-77    Feb-78                          Peg to U.S. dollar                             Fixed
                  Mar-78    Jun-81             Limited flexibility with respect to a basket            Intermediate
                  Jul-81    Mar-82                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                  Apr-82    Oct-84           Limited flexibility with respect to U.S. dollar           Intermediate
                  Nov-84    Jun-97             Limited flexibility with respect to a basket            Intermediate
                  Jul-97    Jun-98                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                  Jul-98    Mar-99                        Independently floating                         Floating
Turkey            Apr-86    Dec-98                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                  Jan-99    Mar-99                            Crawling peg                             Intermediate
United Kingdom    Jul-72    Apr-72                      Bretton Woods basket peg                           Fixed
                  May-72    Jun-72           Limited flexibility with respect to U.S. dollar           Intermediate
                  Jul-72    Feb-87                        Independently floating                         Floating
                  Mar-87    Feb-88                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                  Mar-88    Sep-90                        Independently floating                         Floating
                  Oct-90    Jun-92    Limited flexibility with respect to a cooperative arrangement    Intermediate
                  Jul-92    Mar-99                        Independently floating                         Floating
Uruguay           Dec-92    Dec-98                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                  Jan-99    Mar-99                            Crawling band                            Intermediate
Venezuela         Apr-96    Dec-98                          Managed floating                           Intermediate
                  Jan-99    Mar-99                            Crawling band                            Intermediate
