NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAX INCIDENCE

Don Fullerton
Gilbert E. Metcalf

Working Paper 8829
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8829

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2002

This paper is prepared for a forthcoming volume of the Handbook of Public Economics edited by Alan
Auerbach and Martin Feldstein. We are grateful for helpful suggestions from Alan Auerbach, Tom Barthold,
Leora Friedberg, Michael Keen, and Rob Williams. This paper is part of the NBER's research program in
Public Economics. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Don Fullerton and Gilbert E. Metcalf. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Tax Incidence
Don Fullerton and Gilbert E. Metcalf
NBER Working Paper No. 8829
March 2002
JEL No. H22

ABSTRACT
This chapter reviews the concepts, methods, and results of studies that analyze the incidence of
taxes. The purpose of such studies is to determine how the burden of a particular tax is allocated among
consumers through higher product prices, workers through a lower wage rate, or other factors of
production through lower rates of return to those factors. The methods might involve simple partial
equilibrium models, analytical general equilibrium models, or computable general equilibrium models.
We review partial equilibrium models, where the burden of a tax is shown to depend on the
elasticity of supply relative to the elasticity of demand. In particular, we consider partial equilibrium
models with imperfect competition. Turning to a general equilibrium setting, we review the classic model
of Harberger (1962) and illustrate its generality by applying it to a number of different contexts. We also
use this model to demonstrate the practicality of analytical general equilibrium modeling through the use
of log linearization techniques.
We then turn to dynamic models to show how a tax on capital affects capital accumulation, future
wage rates, and overall burdens. Such models might also provide analytical results or computational
results. We also focus on relatively recent models that calculate the lifetime incidence of taxes, with both
intratemporal and intertemporal redistribution. Finally, the chapter reviews the use of incidence methods
and results in the policy process.

Don Fullerton
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
dfullert@eco.utexas.edu

Gilbert E. Metcalf
Department of Economics
Tufts University
Medford, MA 22105
and NBER
gmetcalf@tufts.edu

-1-

March 4, 2002

Introduction
Tax incidence is the study of who bears the economic burden of a tax. Broadly
put, it is the positive analysis of the impact of taxes on the distribution of welfare within a
society. It begins with the very basic insight that the person who has the legal obligation
to make a tax payment may not be the person whose welfare is reduced by the presence
of the tax. The statutory incidence of a tax refers to the distribution of tax payments
based on the legal obligation to remit taxes to the government. Thus, for example, the
statutory burden of the payroll tax in the United States is shared equally between
employers and employees. Economists, quite rightly, focus on the economic incidence,
which measures the changes in economic welfare in society arising from a tax. The
standard view of the economic burden of the payroll tax in the United States is that it is
borne entirely by employees.
Economic incidence differs from the statutory incidence because of changes in
behavior and consequent changes in equilibrium prices. Consumers buy less of a taxed
product, so firms produce less and buy fewer inputs – which changes the net price of each
input. Thus the job of the incidence analyst is to determine how those other prices
change, and how those changes affect different kinds of individuals.
Incidence analyses abound in the literature, but they can be roughly classified into
a few categories. In particular, when these studies analyze distributional effects of taxes
across groups, Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980) note that we economists have used five
different ways of dividing taxpayers into groups. First, we can focus on the impact of
taxes on consumers as opposed to producers. A partial equilibrium diagram can identify
both the loss of consumer surplus and the loss of producer surplus resulting from a tax.
Second, we can narrow the focus to analyze the impact of a tax specifically on the
relative demands for different factors and the returns to those factors (such as capital,
labor, or land). The pathbreaking general equilibrium analysis of Harberger (1962)
simply ignores the consumer side by assuming that everybody spends their money the
same way, and then he derives the burden of a tax on capital as opposed to labor. Third,
we can group individuals by some measure of economic well-being, in order to analyze
the progressivity of a tax or tax system. Pechman and Okner (1974) is perhaps the classic
analysis of the U.S. tax system that groups taxpayers by annual income, while Fullerton
and Rogers (1993) group taxpayers by a measure of lifetime resources. Fourth, taxes can
be evaluated on the basis of regional incidence. Such an analysis might focus on regional
differences within a country (e.g. Bull et al. (1994)), or it might focus on international
differences. Finally, taxes can have intergenerational effects. For example, insufficient
social security taxes could bring about a transfer from future generations to the current
generation. These effects can be captured by the generational accounting approach of
Auerbach et al. (1991), but see Barro (1974) for a dissenting view.
We begin in Section 1 with some definitions and concepts that will be used
throughout this chapter. Next, we turn to a review of static analytical models of tax
incidence. We begin with a simple partial equilibrium model, and then proceed to
general equilibrium models. While many of the principles and lessons from partial
equilibrium analysis carry over to general equilibrium analysis, the latter affords a greater
richness and insight than do the partial equilibrium models. In addition, we find a
number of instances of results that are "surprising", in the sense that the outcome in the
general equilibrium model could not occur in a partial equilibrium model. Along the
way, we present examples of empirical incidence analyses with estimates of the burden of
the U.S. tax system or individual taxes in the U.S. system. All of these analyses assume

-2-

March 4, 2002

perfectly competitive markets, and section 3 provides a discussion of incidence in
imperfectly competitive markets.
In section 4, we turn to dynamic models. Allowing for endogenous capital
accumulation adds both an important type of behavioral change and considerable
complexity. Dynamic models also allow the researcher to distinguish between "old" and
"new" capital, a source of considerable redistribution in the case of tax reforms. Section
5 continues the analysis in a dynamic framework by investigating the incidence of tax
systems over the life cycle. If individuals make consumption decisions on the basis of
lifetime income (Modigliani and Brumberg (1954)), then annual income analyses of
consumption taxes might be biased towards finding regressivity. Fullerton and Rogers
(1993) have looked most thoroughly at this question, and interestingly, they find that the
bias predicted by others is not nearly as severe as predicted.
Section 6 focuses on the use of distributional analysis in the policy process.
Policy economists face an inherent tradeoff between theoretical rigor and the need for
rapid, easily-comprehensible distributional analysis. Economists at several government
agencies have refined the available techniques for measuring and reporting incidence
impacts of taxes. In this section, we describe both the techniques used to analyze taxes
and methods of presenting information to policy makers so that they can make informed
decisions. Naturally, other economists have criticized many of the techniques used in the
policy process, and we review some of those criticisms here.
Finally, we note that incidence analysis can be more broadly applied than we do
in this chapter. We ignore incidence analyses of government spending programs (e.g.
Musgrave et al. (1974) or McClellan and Skinner (1997)). Such a spending program can
also affect relative prices, and so economic incidence again can differ from statutory
incidence. The principles and concepts described in this chapter are not limited to tax
analysis and can easily be applied to government spending programs as well.
1.

Basic Machinery of Incidence Analysis
In this section we sketch out various concepts and definitions that are commonly
used in incidence analysis. We also describe and provide some motivation for analytic
techniques that we will use frequently in this chapter.
1.1.

Definitions and Concepts
A number of concepts are used in incidence analyses. In the introduction, we
already drew a distinction between statutory incidence (the legal payers of the tax) and
economic incidence (those who lose real income). We now make further distinctions that
are useful to sharpen our understanding of the incidence of various taxes.
To begin, economists might say that a commodity tax is passed forward, which
means that the consumer price rises and consumers of that good bear the burden. The
price received by the supplier might be unchanged. On the other hand, if the consumer
price is unchanged when a commodity tax is imposed, then the price received by the
supplier must fall. In that case, the burden is passed backward onto suppliers (or more
precisely, onto labor, capital, or other factors in production). Similarly, a tax that is
passed forward to consumers has burdens on the "uses side" (depending on how people
use their income), while a tax that is passed backward has burdens on the "sources side"
(because labor and capital are sources of income).
All of these terms must be employed with care. A longstanding principle in tax
incidence analysis is that real burdens depend on real allocations, not on the price level or
choice of numeraire. Thus, even for a tax on a particular commodity, the true incidence

-3-

March 4, 2002

does not depend on whether monetary authorities accommodate by allowing an increase
in that price (and thus in the overall price level). Only relative prices matter. Because
the price level is irrelevant, however, so must be the question about whether the overall
burden is on the uses side or the sources side! Instead, what matters is how changes in
relative output prices affect different groups (if some spend more than the average share
of income on the taxed good), and how changes in relative factor prices affect different
groups (if some earn more than the average share of income from the factor employed
intensively in the taxed industry).
Thus the first job for a complete incidence study is to determine effects on all
relative prices. A study might legitimately focus just on the uses side if groups have
different spending patterns but all have the same sources of income (or if the taxed
industry uses the average capital/labor ratio so that reduced production does not affect
relative factor prices). Conversely, a study might focus just on the sources side if all
groups spend the same fraction of income on the taxed good (and the taxed industry
makes intensive use of labor, capital, or other factor). If the tax affects both output prices
and factor prices, then a complete study would divide individuals into groups based on
some measure of income, obtain data on all sources of income and all uses of income of
each group, and use that data to calculate each group’s net economic burden from a tax.
Regardless of how the burden is calculated, for each income group, their relative
burdens of a tax can be compared using the ratio of the economic burden to income. A
tax is said to be progressive if this ratio rises with income, regressive if it falls with
income, and proportional if the ratio is constant. A common misconception is that
progressivity is defined by rising marginal tax rates. For example, a flat tax or negative
income tax can have a constant marginal tax rate and still be progressive. Let the tax
liability (T) be the following linear function of income (Y):
(1.1)

T = m(Y-A)

where m is the marginal tax rate, and A>0 is a family allowance. If income falls below
A, then T can be negative (the taxpayer receives a payment from the government).1
With this tax system, the average tax rate (T/Y) starts at negative infinity, rises to zero at
an income level equal to A, and then continues to rise with income (approaching m
asymptotically). This tax is progressive, because the average tax rate rises with income,
despite the fact that it has a constant marginal tax rate. For a different example, the
Medicare portion of the payroll tax on employees has a constant marginal rate of 2.9
percent, but this tax is regressive because it applies only to wage income (while nonwage income tends to be concentrated in higher income groups).2
Care also is required when we define the incidence experiment. In particular,
when we want to determine the distributional effects of raising a particular tax, we need
to specify what is done with the revenues. While partial equilibrium incidence analyses
often ignore the distribution of the proceeds, a more complete analysis takes into account

1

The Flat Tax has been proposed in many forms. Perhaps the most well known variant is due to Hall and
Rabushka (1995). Some plans have T=max[0, m(Y-A)], so taxes are only positive, but A>0 still means
that the system is progressive: the average tax rate (T/Y) is zero up to income Y=A, and then it starts to rise
with Y. Because T can be negative in equation (1.1), this system is often called a Negative Income Tax.
2
This statement ignores the benefits arising from the Medicare system, a point we take up below, as well as
the employer portion of the tax. However, our statement about the regressivity of the tax is not affected by
the fact that employers pay half the tax.

-4-

March 4, 2002

what is done with the tax revenue. Logically, we have three alternatives. First, absolute
incidence analysis refers to the assumption that the proceeds of the tax under
investigation are simply held by government, but then a full analysis would need to
consider the effects of the change in government debt. Second, a balanced-budget
incidence analysis is one that assumes the revenue is spent, but then the distributional
effects depend on how the revenue is spent.3 Third, a differential incidence analysis
assumes that the revenue is used to reduce some other tax, but then the distributional
effects depend on the effects of the tax being reduced. None of these alternatives isolates
the effects of the tax being raised! Still, however, one way to neutralize the effects of the
use of the revenue is to assume that the government spends it exactly the same way that
consumers would have spent it (as in Harberger (1962)). This balanced-budget incidence
analysis is equivalent to a differential analysis that uses the revenue to reduce lump-sum
taxes on consumers – but only if the money goes to exactly the same individuals who
were bearing the burden, so that they can spend it the same way they were spending it
before the first tax was imposed. Any other use of the revenue with altered spending
could itself affect prices.
An advantage of differential incidence analyses with lump sum tax rebates is that
different analyses are additive in the following sense. If one study considers tax proposal
A with proceeds used to lower lump sum taxes by X, and a second study considers tax
proposal B with proceeds used to lower lump sum taxes by X, then the two studies can be
combined to analyze the differential incidence of a shift from tax system A to tax system
B (or vice versa). Fullerton and Rogers (1997) illustrate how differential tax incidence
can modify conventional thinking in the case of a uniform consumption tax. Normally, a
uniform consumption tax has the attractive property that no commodity is taxadvantaged.4 Yet Fullerton and Rogers note that relative prices still change, and
consumers are differentially affected, if the uniform consumption tax is used to replace an
existing system that does have differential commodity taxes.
Up to now, we have been a bit vague as to the meaning of the burden of a tax. A
straightforward measure of the burden of a tax is the equivalent (or compensating)
variation. The equivalent variation (EV) is the amount of lump-sum income that a person
would give up to avoid a particular tax change (such as the imposition of a tax or a
complex change to a system of taxes). So long as the taxpayer can take some action to
influence the amount of taxes paid (short of tax evasion), the EV will exceed the tax
revenue collected from the taxpayer – and the difference is defined as the deadweight loss
of the tax. The true economic burden of a tax, therefore, exceeds the revenue loss to the
taxpayer unless the tax is lump-sum in nature. Figure 1.1 illustrates. A commodity (X)
is provided with perfectly elastic supply, S. The Marshallian demand curve is DM. Prior
to a tax, CF is purchased at a price of 0C. When a tax on X is imposed, the supply curve
shifts up to S' (to reflect the cost of production inclusive of the tax). Demand falls to AB
and tax revenue of ABDC is collected. The equivalent variation for this tax is the area
between the old and new prices to the left of the compensated demand curve (DC) and
equals ABEC. It exceeds the taxes collected by the deadweight loss triangle BDE.
FIGURE 1.1 ABOUT HERE

3

For example, the regressive effects of the social security payroll tax are substantially modified if one
includes the effects of using those revenues to provide progressive social security benefits.
4
Note, however, that Ramsey (1928) considerations provide no optimal tax rationale for uniform
consumption taxation except in certain circumstances.

-5-

March 4, 2002

Note the strong informational requirements for this measure of tax burden. The
researcher needs to know the utility function (or equivalently the expenditure function) to
measure EV.5 As we shall note below, a number of alternative measures of the burden of
a tax are used in practice. A second approach is to measure the change in consumer's
surplus. Willig (1976) provides bounds on the income elasticity of demand under which
the change in consumer's surplus provides a good approximation of EV. In Figure 1.1,
the change in consumer's surplus is ABFC. A third approach is to measure the tax
actually paid (ABDC in Figure 1.1).6 This approach ignores the component of the
economic burden arising from the deadweight loss. For small taxes, this can provide a
good approximation to the true burden of the tax, but for large taxes it can significantly
underestimate the true burden. Finally, another common approach is simply to look at
the change in net-of-tax prices following tax changes. In Figure 1.1, only the consumer
price changes (by AC), and the full burden of the tax is said to be on the consumer.
Before finishing basic concepts and definitions, we have a few other useful terms.
A unit tax (t) is applied at a particular dollar amount per unit of the good or factor, and so
it raises a price from p to p+t. An example is a "specific" excise tax. In contrast, an ad
valorem tax (τ) is some fraction or percentage of the product price, and so it raises a
price from p to p(1+τ). An example is a local 8% sales tax. Any particular tax law
might be worded either way, and it might be analyzed either way so long as the
researcher is careful to employ the proper correspondences (such as τ = t/p).7 For
consistency, we use just ad valorem rates below.
Another definitional device useful to incidence analysts is the unit convention,
which is just a way to define what is one unit of a good. Apples can be priced per pound,
per ton, or per bushel, and this choice has no real effect even though the price looks very
different. Therefore we can define a unit as whatever amount costs one dollar (before
taxes). Then the initial price is one, and we can focus on tax changes that may raise that
price or lower it. Similarly, if one person buys a car for $20,000 while another buys a car
for $10,000, we simply say that the first person has purchased twice as much car. The
price they face is the same ($1 per unit). This convention has the added advantage that a
one-cent unit tax is the same as a one percent ad valorem tax.
Finally, we must be careful about what is in the denominator of the tax rate. A
tax-exclusive rate is expressed as a fraction of the price excluding tax, while a taxinclusive rate refers to a fraction of the price including tax. An example of the former is a
50% sales tax that raises the price from $1 to $1.50, and an example of the latter is an
income tax that takes 33% of all income. These numbers were chosen to make the point
that the individual may be indifferent between these two taxes, since government takes
one-third of real resources either way. But it matters to the researcher: a 50% sales tax is
not the same as a 50% income tax! In this chapter, we primarily use a tax-exclusive rate,
so the net price is p and the gross price is p(1+τ). Similarly, if τ is a wage tax, then
5

Hausman (1981) shows how to recover the utility function and thus to derive the EV from observed
Marshallian demand functions. While this insight is important, it simply pushes back the information
problem from that of specifying the utility function correctly to that of specifying the demand function
correctly.
6
The EV is the measure of burden in computational general equilibrium (CGE) models discussed below,
while the tax actually paid is used as the measure of burden in studies with incidence assumptions (such as
Pechman and Okner (1974)). For taxes paid by businesses, such studies use specific incidence assumptions
to allocate the tax burden among income groups.
7
The different wording of the tax has been shown to matter in particular models, such as those with
imperfect competition. See section 3 below.

-6-

March 4, 2002

the net wage is w and the gross wage is w(1+τ). This latter rate needs to be interpreted
carefully since it is not the usual income tax rate.
1.2.

Log-Linearization
Many recent studies of tax incidence have built large-scale computable general
equilibrium (CGE) models that specify particular functional forms for production and for
consumer behavior and then calculate the effects of a large tax change on each product
price and on each factor return. Such models are necessary in order to capture much
detail with many production sectors, consumer groups that own different factors and buy
different goods, and large taxes that have non-marginal effects on prices.
On the other hand, many interesting conceptual questions of tax incidence can be
addressed using small models that can be solved analytically. Because we address many
such questions in this chapter using analytical “log-linearization” methods attributable to
Jones (1965), and because we wish to convey the methods of tax incidence analysis to
graduate students in economics, we now explain this method quite fully at the outset.
The basic point of this method is to be able to specify a set of general non-linear
production functions and consumer behavioral relationships, to convert these equations
into a set of simpler linear equations, and then to solve these linear equations in a way
that shows quite clearly the effect of a tax change on each price and on each quantity.
To explain why it is called log-linearization, consider the wage tax example
mentioned above where the net wage is w, the gross wage is w(1+τ), and the price of
consumption is p. Defining W as the real gross wage cost to the firm, we have:
(1.2)

W = w(1+τ)/p.

To make this nonlinear equation into a linear relationship, take natural logs of both sides,
(1.3)

ln(W) = ln(w) + ln(1+τ) – ln(p)

and then differentiate:
(1.4)

dW/W = dw/w + dτ/(1+τ) – dp/p

Next, use a “hat” to denote a proportional change, so Ŵ ≡ dW / W and p̂ ≡ dp / p . For
convenience, every tax rate is treated a little differently, where τˆ ≡ dτ /(1 + τ) . Using
these definitions, we have:
(1.5)

Ŵ = ŵ + τˆ − p̂

The nonlinear equation (1.2) might be part of a system of nonlinear equations that is
difficult to solve, but this “log-linearization” technique can be applied to every one of
those nonlinear equations to produce a system of linear equations like (1.5).8 If the
system has N equations with N unknowns, then it is easy to solve (using successive

8

Log-linearization is simply a first-order Taylor series approximation around the initial equilibrium. It is
completely appropriate for calculating the effects of a small tax change, but sometimes the method has been
applied to a large tax change such as the repeal of a tax – as if all of the derivatives were constant.

-7-

March 4, 2002

substitution or Cramer’s Rule). For example, if the goal is to calculate the effects of a tax
change, τ̂ , then the relevant unknowns might include changes in equilibrium prices
( Ŵ, ŵ , p̂) and changes in equilibrium quantities such as labor, capital, and output.
Before getting to a general equilibrium system of such equations, however, we
provide a complete illustration of the log-linearization technique for a simple partial
equilibrium model of just the labor market. Thus other prices are fixed (so p̂ = 0 , and

Ŵ = ŵ + τˆ ). Even this simple model yields important and interesting results, however,
regarding the difference between statutory and economic incidence. Because workers
receive the net wage w, employers bear the statutory burden and face the gross wage cost
w(1+τ). Depending on labor demand and supply behaviors, however, the burden can be
shifted through a change in the equilibrium net wage.
To model such behavior, first consider the definition of the elasticity of labor
supply (LS) with respect to the net wage (w):
dLS / LS
(1.6)
ηS ≡
.
dw / w
Using the hat notation ( L̂S = dLS / LS ), the nonlinear relationship in (1.6) can be rewritten
as ηS ≡ L̂S / ŵ , and further re-arrangement provides:
(1.7)

L̂S = ηS ŵ .

The point here is that we have taken a definition and turned it into a behavioral equation:
if the net wage changes by a certain amount, then equation (1.7) tells us how labor supply
responds. 9 It is one linear equation for our system. Next, if ηD is the elasticity of labor
demand (LD) with respect to the gross wage (W), then similar rearrangement provides
(1.8)

L̂D = η D ( ŵ + τˆ ) ,

In this model, we assume that ηD ≤ 0 and ηS ≥ 0 are known parameters. In response to
an exogenous tax increase ( τˆ > 0 ), behaviors follow equations (1.7) and (1.8), but
reaching a new equilibrium means that the change in labor demand must equal the change
in labor supply:
(1.9)

L̂S = L̂D

We now have a system of three linear equations (1.7, 1.8, and 1.9) in three unknowns
( L̂S , L̂D , and ŵ ). We can solve for ŵ in terms of exogenous parameters (ηS, ηD, and τ̂ )
by setting (1.7) equal to (1.8) and re-arranging:
(1.10)

9

ŵ
ηD
= S D
η −η
τˆ

These elasticity definitions and resulting behavioral equations provide simple examples of loglinearization, but later sections take more care to derive such behaviors from first principles. In Section
2.2, we formally develop the relationship between the labor supply elasticity and primitive preference
parameters.

-8-

March 4, 2002

The expression in equation (1.10) lies between 0 and –1, and it shows what fraction of the
tax is shifted from employers to workers.10 Each side of the market tries to avoid the tax
by changing behavior: a larger labor supply elasticity (ηS >> 0) in (1.10) means a smaller
fall in the net wage to workers ( ŵ ).11 Or, if employers can be more elastic (larger
ηD < 0 ), equation (1.10) implies a larger fall in w (and therefore less increase in the
gross wage cost of employers). Certain special cases deserve mention: if labor supply is
perfectly inelastic (ηS=0), or if labor demand is perfectly elastic (ηD infinite), then the
right-hand side of (1.10) is -1, and ŵ = −τˆ . Then the net wage w falls by the full
amount of the tax, with no change in the gross wage cost to employers.
The principle illustrated in equation (1.10) extends to a tax in any kind of
competitive market. For example, a commodity tax burden will be shared by consumers
and producers based on the relative elasticities of demand and supply.12
We leave as a simple exercise the derivation of the economic incidence of a tax
on wage income when the statutory incidence of the tax is on workers rather than on
employers.13 This exercise demonstrates an important principle: in markets with no
impediments to market clearing, the economic incidence of a tax depends only on
behavior (ηS and ηD) and not on legislative intent (statutory incidence).
We next show some log-linearization techniques that are useful for building a
general equilibrium model where supplies and demands are not specified directly, as
above, but are instead based on maximizing behavior. Suppose that an output X is
produced using both labor L and capital K with constant returns to scale:
(1.11)

X = F(K,L)

This functional form is very general and nonlinear. Differentiate to get:
dX = FKdK + FLdL

(1.12)

where FK is the marginal product of capital (∂F/∂K), and FL is the marginal product of
labor (∂F/∂L). Divide through by X, and we have:
dX FK K dK FL L dL
=
⋅
+
⋅
X L
X
X K

(1.13)

Define θ as the factor share for capital (rK/pXX), where r is the rental price of capital
and pX is the price of X. With perfect competition, where r = pXFK and W = pXFL, the
10

In terms of the measures of "burden" discussed in section 1.1, this approach uses the price change itself
rather than the dollar amount of tax paid or the equivalent variation.
More precisely, η must be large relative to − η .
12
Hines et al. (1995) show that when demand and marginal cost curves are linear, both buyers and sellers
face the same percentage reduction in surplus upon introduction of a commodity tax regardless of demand
and supply elasticities. While the burden on consumers may be higher in absolute terms if demand is
relatively less elastic than supply, Hines et al. note that the benefits of the market accrue predominantly to
consumers (i.e. consumer surplus prior to the tax is greater than producer surplus). The authors interpret
this result as support for viewing commodity taxes as flat rate taxes on market surplus, analogous to flat
rate income taxes.
13
This exercise would require redefinition of w as the gross wage and w(1-τ) as the net wage.
11

S

D

-9-

March 4, 2002

factor share for capital will equal FKK/X and the factor share for labor will equal FLL/X.
And with constant returns to scale, factor shares sum to one, so (1.13) becomes:
(1.14)

X̂ = θK̂ + (1 − θ)L̂

While the production function tells us how total labor and capital yield total output, this
differential equation tells us how small changes in labor and capital yield changes in
output. It is a linear equation in three of the important unknowns ( X̂, K̂ , L̂ ).
Finally, for this section, consider the definition of the elasticity of substitution
between capital and labor in production (omitting taxes for the moment):
d (K / L ) /(K / L )
σ≡
(1.15)
d ( w / r ) /( w / r )
If we do the differentiation in the numerator, it becomes
LdK − KdL L dK dL
(1.16)
⋅ =
−
= K̂ − L̂ .
L
K K
L2
Then, with a similar differentiation of the denominator, we have:
K̂ − L̂
(1.17)
σ=
ŵ − r̂
In fact, many use (1.17) directly as the definition of the elasticity of substitution. A
simple rearrangement of the definition turns it into a statement about behavior:
(1.18)

K̂ − L̂ = σ( ŵ − r̂ )

This procedure converts the complicated nonlinear equation (1.15) into a linear equation.
With the labor tax, where firms react to the gross wage w(1+τ), we would have
(1.19)

K̂ − L̂ = σ( ŵ + τˆ − r̂ )

For any exogenous tax change (with endogenous change in the wage and interest rate),
equation (1.19) tells us how the firm reacts by changing its use of labor and capital. It is
one more linear equation for our system.
While a computational general equilibrium model must specify a particular
functional form for production, such as Cobb-Douglas or Constant Elasticity of
Substitution (CES), the production function in (1.11) avoids this limitation. It can be any
function with constant returns to scale. However, this log-linearization method is valid
only for small changes. It does not require a constant factor share θ (as in CobbDouglas) or a constant elasticity of substitution σ (as in CES); instead, it only requires
that we know the initial observed θ and σ. In the rest of this chapter, we will use this
logic to arrive at equations like (1.14) and (1.19) virtually without explanation.
The main purpose of this subsection was to define log-linearization and to provide
a few examples. That purpose is completed, and so we are ready to start using this
method to derive important incidence results.
2.

Static Analytical Models
We begin our survey by looking at static economic models of tax incidence. Such
models are particularly good for analyzing taxes that don't affect saving or investment.

-10-

March 4, 2002

Many of the insights that we can glean from these models are more general and carry
over to richer, complex models with a full specification of saving, investment, and
intertemporal optimization.
2.1.

Two-Sector General Equilibrium Model
We first turn to the two-sector general equilibrium model with two factors of
production (capital, K, and labor, L). Production of two goods (X and Y) occurs in a
constant returns to scale environment:
X = F( K X , L X )
(2.1)
Y = G (K Y , L Y )
Each factor has a fixed total supply but can freely migrate to either sector (with no
unemployment). Thus
KX + KY = K
(2.2)
LX + LY = L
Also, since each factor is fully mobile between sectors, it must earn the same after-tax
return in both sectors.14 Harberger (1962) used this model to consider a tax on capital in
one sector. Before considering Harberger's specific experiment, we set up the model
more generally to consider a number of taxes. In all cases, we return the tax proceeds
lump sum to consumers, all of whom are identical. Because all consumers spend their
money the same way, we can focus on incidence effects on the sources side.15 Income
for capital is r K (where r is the nominal return to capital), while income for labor is
w L (where w is the nominal wage rate). Since K and L are fixed, we can focus on
changes in the ratio of r to w to see how the burden of the tax is shared.
We develop the model using equations of change, the log-linearization method of
Jones (1965) described above. Totally differentiate the equations in (2.2) to get
λ LX L̂ X + λ LY L̂ Y = 0
(2.3)
λ KX K̂ X + λ KY K̂ Y = 0
where λLX is the fraction of labor used in the production of X (the original LX/ L ,
before the change). The other λ terms are defined similarly.
Production technology can be represented by the elasticity of substitution between
K and L for each good (σX and σY):
K̂ X − L̂ X = σX ( ŵ + τˆ LX − r̂ − τˆ KX )
(2.4)
K̂ Y − L̂ Y = σY ( ŵ + τˆ LY − r̂ − τˆ KY )

14

This model is characterized by the “perfect” assumptions (such as perfect competition, perfect mobility,
perfect information, and perfect certainty). Harberger (1962) provided an extremely useful benchmark case
that can be solved easily, and he established a research agenda for virtually all of the following incidence
literature: what happens with imperfect competition, imperfect mobility, uncertainty, variable factor
supplies, unemployment, nonconstant returns to scale, an open economy, some other distortion such as an
externality, more than two factors, more than two sectors, or more than one type of consumer?
15
Harberger assumed homothetic and identical preferences and that government used the revenue to
purchase X and Y in the same proportions as do consumers. With either Harberger's assumption or ours,
one can ignore uses side effects of the partial factor tax.

-11where τˆ ij =

March 4, 2002

d τ ij

, is a tax on factor income (i=L,K) in the production of good j (j=X,Y).
1 + τ ij
Capital is paid the value of its marginal product in competitive markets:

pXFK = r(1+τKX)
pYGK = r(1+τKY)
just as labor is paid the value of its marginal product in each industry:
(2.5)

(2.6)

pXFL = w(1+τLX)
pYGL = w(1+τLY)

where pX is the producer price of X and pY the producer price of Y . Given (2.5) and
(2.6), and constant returns to scale, the value of output in each industry must equal factor
payments:
(2.7)

pXX = w(1+τLX)LX + r(1+τKX)KX
pYY = w(1+τLY)LY + r(1+τKY)KY

Totally differentiate the equations in (2.7) and evaluate at τij = 0 to obtain:
p̂X + X̂ = θKX (r̂+ τˆ KX + K̂ X) + θLX ( ŵ + τˆ LX + L̂ X )
(2.8)
p̂Y + Ŷ = θKY (r̂+ τˆ KY + K̂ Y) + θLY ( ŵ + τˆ LY + L̂ Y )
where the θ’s are the factor shares. For example, θKX is the share of sales revenue in
sector X that is paid for capital (θKX ≡ r(1+τKX)KX/(pXX)).
In a similar fashion, we can totally differentiate the production functions in (2.1)
and use (2.5) and (2.6) to obtain
X̂ = θKX K̂ X + θLX L̂ X
(2.9)
Ŷ = θKY K̂ Y + θLY L̂Y
Note for future reference that the shares of each factor’s use add to one,
λ LX + λ LY = 1
(2.10)
λKX + λ KY = 1
and that the value shares going to each factor within an industry must add to one:
(2.11)

θKX + θLX = 1
θKY + θKY = 1

Finally, we can characterize consumer preferences by the elasticity of substitution
(in demand) between X and Y (σD) :16

16

Consumer behavior is captured by preferences (as represented by the elasticity of substitution between
X and Y) and the budget constraint. Equation (2.12) would also hold in a more general model with a
labor-leisure choice if leisure is separable and the sub-utility function for X and Y is homothetic. The

-12(2.12)

March 4, 2002

X̂ − Ŷ = − σD ( p̂X + τˆ X − p̂Y − τˆ Y ) ,

where the consumer price for X is px(1+τx) and τx is an ad valorem tax on X. The
consumer price for Y is similarly defined.
Equations (2.3), (2.4), (2.8), (2.9), and (2.12) are nine equations in the ten
unknowns X̂, Ŷ, p̂X , p̂Y , ŵ , r̂, L̂ X , L̂ Y , K̂ X , and K̂ Y . Since we focus on real behavior (no
money illusion), we must choose a numeraire (fix one of the price changes to zero),
giving us nine equations in nine unknowns.
Setting up the system at this level of generality allows us to illustrate a basic
equivalency between two tax options. For plan 1, consider an equal tax increase on labor
and capital used in the production of X (with no change of tax rates in Y). Define τ̂ as
this common increase ( τˆ ≡ τˆ KX = τˆ LX ). Equations (2.3), (2.4), (2.9), and (2.12) are
unchanged. Equation (2.8) becomes
p̂1X − τˆ + X̂ = θKX (r̂ + K̂ X ) + θLX ( ŵ + L̂X )
(2.8′)
p̂Y + Ŷ = θKY (r̂+ K̂ Y ) + θLY ( ŵ + L̂Y )
where p̂1X is the change in pX under this plan. As an alternative, consider plan 2 with
an output tax on X defined by τˆ ≡ τˆ X (and τˆY = 0 ), where this τ̂ is the same size as
the one above. In this case, equations (2.3), (2.4), (2.8), and (2.9) are unchanged while
equation (2.12) becomes
X̂ - Ŷ = - σD ( p̂ 2X + τˆ - p̂Y )
(2.12′)
Then it is easy to show that the equilibria under the two tax systems are the same: so long
as p̂1X = p̂ 2X + τˆ , then all other outcomes are identical. Basically, p̂1X is the change in the
price paid by consumers in plan 1 where pX must rise to cover the tax on factors, while
p̂ 2X + τˆ is the price paid by consumers in plan 2 when the tax is on output. This points out
a basic tax equivalence: an equal tax on all factors used in the production of a good yields
the same incidence effects as a tax on output of that industry. Below, we discuss other
tax equivalencies noted by Break (1974) and McLure (1975).
Before analyzing this system further, we pause to note that this very simple model
is quite flexible and can be used to analyze a number of different problems. In the next
section, we consider a special case of this model.
2.2.

Special Cases: One-Sector Model
With suitable modifications, the general model can be recast for various
interesting special cases. We consider a one-sector model in some detail, in which one
good is produced using labor and capital. We interpret the good Y in the Harberger
model as leisure produced by the production function Y = LY. We can now interpret the
labor market constraint in equation (2.2) as a time constraint where time can be spent
providing labor (LX) or leisure (LY=Y). The price of leisure is the net wage rate (pY = w).

consumer budget constraint here is unnecessary, as it is implied by equation (2.7) and the assumption that
tax revenues are rebated lump sum to consumers (an example of Walras's Law).

-13-

March 4, 2002

No capital is used in the production of leisure, and all capital is used to produce X
(KX = K ). Thus, KX is fixed in the short run (though competition among firms in X
means that capital continues to be paid the value of its marginal product). The equations
defining the system now become
λ LX L̂ X + λ LY Ŷ = 0
L̂ X = σ X (r̂ + τ̂ KX - ŵ - τ̂ LX )
(2.13)

p̂X + X̂ = θKX (r̂ + τ̂ KX ) + θLX (ŵ + τ̂ LX + L̂ X )
X̂ = θLX L̂ X
X̂ - Ŷ = σ D (ŵ - p̂X - τ̂ X )

from which we can solve for X̂, Ŷ, p̂X , ŵ, r̂, and L̂ X (with one numeraire). To begin
solving, we can eliminate leisure (Y) from the system and reduce it to market variables
only. Solve the first equation of (2.13) for Ŷ and substitute into the fifth equation, to get:
L̂ = σX (r̂ + τ̂ K - ŵ - τ̂ L )
(2.14)

p̂ + X̂ = θK (r̂ + τ̂ K ) + θL (ŵ + τ̂ L + L̂)
X̂ = θL L̂
X̂ + φL̂ = σD (ŵ - p̂ - τ̂ X )

where φ = λLX/λLY is the ratio of labor to leisure. We also drop the subscript X since
the system now has only one market good.
The analysis of a tax on capital is very simple. Note that r̂ and τ̂ K always
appear together as r̂+ τˆ K in all equations of (2.14). Therefore, as long as r̂ = −τˆ K in
the first two equations, nothing else is affected. Thus the tax on capital is borne fully by
owners of capital – an unsurprising result since capital is inelastically supplied.
Next consider just a tax on labor. Using (2.14), we can set τˆ K = τˆ X = 0 , choose
X as numeraire, and solve for p̂, L̂, X̂, r̂, and ŵ as functions of τ̂ L . Simple manipulation
reduces the system to two equations in two unknowns:
 σD 

 ŵ = σ X (r̂ − ŵ − τ̂ L )
 φ + θL 
(2.15)

θ K r̂ + θ L (ŵ + τ̂ L ) = 0
Rather than immediately solve for ŵ and r̂ as functions of τ̂ L , we first rewrite
these two equations in terms of labor demand and supply elasticities. From the second
equation in (2.15) we have:
(2.16)

r̂ = - (θ L / θ K )( ŵ + τˆ L )

Next, substitute that into the first equation in (2.14) to get
L̂ = - σX (ŵ + τˆ L ) ≡ ηD (ŵ + τˆ L )
(2.17)
θK

-14-

March 4, 2002

where ηD is the elasticity of demand for labor with respect to its cost. This equation
shows how the general equilibrium model can be used to generate the earlier simple
partial equilibrium behavior as a special case.
To derive the elasticity of supply for labor, it is convenient to work with the
individual budget constraint. Defining M as non-labor income (i.e. capital income), this
budget constraint is
(2.18)

pX = wL + M

Retaining the output price for the moment, as if we had not yet assigned a numeraire,
totally differentiate this constraint to get
(2.19)

p̂ + X̂ = θ L (ŵ + L̂) + θ K M̂ .

We next combine equation (2.19) and the fourth equation in (2.14) and rearrange to get
an expression for labor supply as a function of prices and income:
(2.20)

(θ L + φ )L̂ = (σD - θ L )(ŵ - p̂) - θ K (M̂ - p̂)

Equation (2.20) is a key equation from which we can recover a number of important
behavioral parameters. First, note the absence of money illusion. If all prices and
nominal incomes change by the same percentage ( ŵ = p̂ = M̂ ), then (2.20) implies no
effect on labor supply ( L̂ = 0 ). Hence we can operate with or without the numeraire
assumption. Second, note that labor supply can be affected by any change in the real
wage (w/p) or in real income (M/p). If we hold real non-labor income constant, then the
last term in (2.20) is zero, and the labor supply elasticity (ηS) is defined by
σ -θ
S
L̂ = D L ( ŵ − p̂) ≡ η ( ŵ − p̂) .
(2.21)
θL + φ
This ηS is an uncompensated labor supply elasticity. The first term in its numerator is
the substitution effect, while the second term is the income effect. For the incidence
analysis below, we assume no initial taxes and that the revenue from the introduction of
this labor tax ( τ̂ L ) is returned to households in a lump-sum fashion. Thus income effects
are not relevant, and we need the compensated labor supply elasticity ( η CS ).17 From
equation (2.21) it is evident that this elasticity is:18
σD
S
(2.22)
.
ηC =
θL + φ
Using L̂ = ηSC ŵ together with L̂ = ηD (ŵ + τˆ L ) from (2.17) yields:

17

Note that income effects can be ignored if one starts at a Pareto-optimum. Otherwise, income
compensation won't eliminate the full income effect.
18
The compensated labor supply elasticity can also be derived from an application of Slutsky's Equation.

-15-

March 4, 2002

ŵ
ηD
= S
τ̂ L η C − η D

(2.23)
and substituting this into (2.16) yields:
(2.24)

r̂  θ L  − η SC 
.
= 
τ̂ L  θ K  η SC − η D 

These two equations are the general equilibrium solution for the effects of the labor tax
τ̂ L on each factor price, expressed in terms of parameters. Yet note the similarity
between equation (2.23) in the general equilibrium model and equation (1.10) in the
partial equilibrium model. The only difference is that the partial equilibrium model
ignores the use of the revenue and therefore employs an uncompensated elasticity,
whereas the general equilibrium model assumes return of the revenue and therefore uses
a compensated elasticity.19
Finally, for the one-sector model of this section, we turn to consideration of an ad
valorem tax on output at rate τX. Since the producer price is fixed at p=1 (our
numeraire), the consumer price p(1+τX) will rise. And since the real wage is w/(1+τX),
the change in the real wage is ŵ − τ̂ X . Using steps similar to the derivation of (2.23) and
(2.24), we find how real factor prices adjust to a change in τX :
ŵ − τ̂ X  ηSC 
 −1
(2.25)
=  S
D 
τ̂ X
 ηC − η 
and
(2.26)

r̂ − τ̂ X θ L  − ηSC 
 −1 .

=
τ̂ X
θ K  ηSC − η D 

Again, we see how relative elasticities matter.
This section illustrates the circumstances under which a partial equilibrium model
can be viewed as a special case of a general equilibrium model.20 Anybody who writes
down only the simple equations (1.7) and (1.8) for demand and supply of labor can say it
is a general equilibrium model with one sector that uses two inputs, where utility is
defined over leisure and consumption. A similar procedure, left as an exercise, could
develop a model of the market for commodity X with an elasticity of demand for X
and supply of X, in order to study the effects of a tax on X. A corresponding general
equilibrium model could be constructed to include only two goods in utility (X and Y),
one factor like labor that is mobile between production of either good, and another factor

19

If the tax revenues were used to finance a government project, which employs some labor L or output
X, then earlier equations would have to be re-specified. However, if that government project is separable
in the individual's utility function, then the result in equation (2.23) would be identical to (1.10).
20
In a model with many consumption goods, the same kind of isolation of the labor market is possible by
assuming separability between leisure and consumption and homotheticity in the sub-utility function
defined over the consumption goods.

-16-

March 4, 2002

that is specific to each industry.21 Then the elasticity of demand for X would depend
primarily on the elasticity of substitution in utility, and the elasticity of supply of X
would depend primarily on the elasticity of substitution in production.
Overall, this section has shown how results in the literature that uses a one-sector
model can be derived directly from the two-sector model of Harberger (1962).
2.3.

Analysis of the Two-Sector Model
We now return to the original model in section 2.1 with two sectors and two
factors. Incidence on the uses side is based on the change in pX/pY, while incidence on
the sources side is based on the change in w/r. We therefore simplify the analysis by
reducing the system of nine equations to three, where the unknowns are ( p̂X - p̂Y ) , ( ŵ - r̂ )
and ( X̂- Ŷ ). We solve for these unknowns in terms of exogenous parameters (like the θ
and λ shares) and exogenous tax changes (the various τˆ ’s).
The first equation of our system is equation (2.12), repeated below as the first
equation of (2.27), shown in Table 2.1. To get the second equation of our system,
substitute equation (2.9) into (2.8) and then subtract the second equation in (2.8) from the
first one. The result is the second equation of (2.27) in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1. Three Equations in Three Unknowns

(X̂ - Ŷ) = - σD (p̂X - p̂Y ) −σ D (τˆ X − τˆ Y )
(2.27)

(p̂X - p̂Y) = (θLX - θLY )( ŵ - r̂) + (τˆ KX − τˆ KY ) + θ LX (τˆ LX − τˆ KX ) − θ LY (τˆ LY − τˆ KY )

(λ LX - λ KX )(X̂- Ŷ) = (σX (λ LX θKX + λ KX θLX ) + σY (λ LY θKY + λ KY θLY ) )( ŵ - r̂)
+ σX (λ LX θKX + λ KX θLX )(τˆ LX − τˆ KX ) + σY (λ LY θKY + λ KY θLY )(τˆ LY − τˆ KY )

To get the third equation, first use (2.9) and subtract its second equation from its
first equation. Then use (2.4) to get:
(2.28)

X̂- Ŷ = L̂ X - L̂ Y + (θKX σX - θKY σY )( ŵ - r̂) + θKX σX (τˆ LX − τˆ KX ) −θKY σY (τˆ LY − τˆ KY )

Then equations (2.3) and (2.4) can be combined to show that
(2.29)
L̂ X - L̂ Y =

1
((λKX σX + λKY σY )( ŵ - r̂) + λ KX σ X (τˆ LX − τˆ KX ) + λ KY σ Y (τˆ LY − τˆ KY ) )
λ LX - λKX

Substitute (2.29) into (2.28) and simplify to get the third equation in our system (equation
(2.27) of Table 2.1).

21

If the production function is X=F(LX,KX), where LX is mobile and KX is fixed, then the industry will
supply more of X as its price rises, by bidding more labor away from the other industry.

-17-

March 4, 2002

The three equations in (2.27) can be solved for the three unknowns ( p̂X - p̂Y ,
ŵ - r̂ , and X̂- Ŷ ) as functions of the changes in tax rates. Note that the system in (2.27)
has not yet assigned a numeraire, and that it includes all possible tax rates. Before
solving, we return to the topic of tax equivalencies, and then provide a graphical analysis
of a marginal increase in the tax on capital income in sector X.22
In our initial setup of the two-sector model (at the end of section 2.1), we noted
that a tax on both factors in one industry (with τˆ LX = τˆ KX ) is equivalent to a tax on the
output of that industry ( τ̂ X ). This result appears in the first row of Table 2.2.23
Table 2.2: Tax Equivalencies
τLX
and
τLY
↓
τL

and
and
and

τKX
and
τKY
↓
τK

→
→
→

τX
and
τY
↓
τ

Using the equations in this section, we can now explain the first column of Table
2.2, which says that a tax on both industries’ use of labor at the same rate is equivalent to
a tax on the consumer’s labor income. To show this, using our system of three equations,
set all τˆ LX = τˆ LY and replace those rates with τ̂ L . Then note that the terms ŵ − r̂ + τˆ L
appear together throughout the system of three equations, and thus a new equilibrium
holds with ŵ = − τˆ L and with no change in any quantity or in the ratio of the gross wage
to the interest rate. The entire burden of this tax falls on labor, because it applies at the
same rate in both sectors, and labor has fixed total supply. In this model, a tax on a factor
in both sectors is a lump-sum tax and affects that factor only.
In the bottom row of Table 2.2, either τL or τK is a lump sum tax, so the two
together is a lump sum tax on all income, τ. In the final column, either τX or τY alone
would change production and impact various prices, but τX and τY together at the same
rate is equivalent to a lump-sum tax on all income, τ, with no effect on any allocations or
relative prices. A simple look at the consumer’s budget constraint shows that a tax on
both goods at the same rate is the same as a tax on both factors at the same rate.
Next we turn to the graphical analysis of our three equation system (in equation
(2.27)). Consider the special case of a tax on capital income in sector X, holding all
other tax changes to zero. The first equation in (2.27) relates the relative demand for
goods (X/Y) to the ratio of prices (pX/pY). In Figure 2.1, this downward sloping demand
equation (D) is graphed in the upper right quadrant.24 The third equation relates the
relative supply of goods (X/Y) to relative factor prices (w/r). It is drawn as an upward
sloping function in the upper left quadrant of Figure 2.1, for the case where X is
22

Our graphical analysis is from Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980), but see McLure (1974) for another
graphical exposition.
23
See Break (1974), McLure (1974), and Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980).
24
The first equation is a linear equation in the form ( X̂ − Ŷ ) = a + b( p̂ X − p̂ Y ) , but this linear equation is
b

derived from a nonlinear equation in the form X/Y=A(pX/pY) . Starting with the latter equation, take the
natural log of both sides and differentiate to get the former equation. Thus (X/Y) in Figure 2.1 is a
nonlinear function of (pX/pY).

-18-

March 4, 2002

relatively labor intensive (λLX > λKX). In this case, as the production of X rises relative
to the production of Y, the demand for labor rises relative to demand for capital (which
raises the wage rate relative to capital return, w/r). Finally, the second equation (2.27)
relates output prices to factor prices. Assuming X is more labor intensive in value (θLX
> θLY), an increase in w/r increases the price of X relative to the price of Y. This
relationship is graphed in the lower right quadrant of Figure 2.1.
FIGURE 2.1 ABOUT HERE
We now use those two curves together to "derive" the supply curve (S) in the
upper right quadrant. First, start with a given output price ratio (point A1 on the
horizontal axis). Through the curve in the lower right quadrant, this output price ratio
implies a particular factor price ratio (point A2). Follow this factor price ratio through the
45° line in the lower left quadrant to the upper left quadrant where the factor price ratio
(point A3) implies a particular output ratio. Together with the original output price ratio
at A1, this output ratio gives us a point on a "supply" schedule (A4). Then, starting at a
different output price ratio, (e.g. B1), we can find another output ratio and thus sketch out
the upward-sloping supply schedule (S). The intersection of this supply schedule with
the demand curve (the first equation) indicates equilibrium in Figure 2.1.
Next consider how a capital income tax ( τ KX ) changes the equilibrium (see Figure
2.2). The point E0 indicates the pre-tax equilibrium, and E1 indicates the post-tax
equilibrium. In the lower right quadrant, the tax on capital in sector X shifts the output
price curve to the right, reflecting a higher price for good X (for any given factor price
ratio). Meanwhile, in the upper left quadrant, the tax also shifts the factor demand curve
to the left, reflecting a desire to shift out of capital and into labor (for any given output
combination). The desired shift from capital to labor raises the wage rate relative to the
interest rate (point W1 relative to W0).
FIGURE 2.2 ABOUT HERE
These new curves can be used to trace out a new “supply” curve in the upper right
quadrant that is unambiguously shifted down and to the right, which means an
unambiguous increase in pX/pY and an unambiguous decrease in X/Y. The effect on
w/r is ambiguous, however. This tax may be borne disproportionately by capital
( ŵ − r̂ >0), by labor ( ŵ − r̂ <0), or in proportion to their income shares ( ŵ − r̂ =0).25 We
now derive the effect on w/r from a change in τKX (holding all other tax changes to
zero). The three-equation system above can be solved to obtain our version of the
famous Harberger (1962) equation:
1
(2.30)
wˆ - r̂ = σ X a X - σ D λ* θ KX τˆ KX
D

[

]

where a i = θ Ki λ Li + θ Li λ Ki , i = X , Y , λ* = λ LX − λ KX , θ * = θ LX − θ LY and
D = σ D λ*θ * + σ X a X + σ Y aY . This denominator is unambiguously positive.26 In the

25

With no change in relative factor prices, burdens cannot differ on the sources side: the tax merely raises
the price of the taxed good, relative to factor prices. Capital and labor spend the same fraction of their
incomes on the taxed good, so the two factors bear burdens in proportion to their shares of national income.
Thus capital’s burden can only be larger than labor’s burden if r falls relative to w.
26
To show that D is positive, first note that all parameters in the second and third terms are positive.
Then, to show that the first term is positive, we show that (λLX - λKX) and (θLX - θLY) must be of the same
sign (either both positive or both negative). We have θLX-θLY equal to θLXθKY – θKXθLY, which in turn

-19-

March 4, 2002

numerator, the first term in brackets is positive, while the sign of the second term
depends on the relative capital intensity of the taxed sector. If X is capital intensive
(λLX < λKX), then this subtracted term is negative, the whole numerator is positive, and
τKX raises w/r (the burden is disproportionately on capital). This case is clear because
the tax applies to capital, but only in the capital-intensive sector! If X is labor intensive,
however, then the outcome is ambiguous: the tax is a partial factor tax on capital, but it is
imposed on the labor-intensive sector.
The impact of a tax on capital in sector X can be decomposed into two
components: a substitution effect and an output effect. The first term in brackets on the
right hand side of (2.30) represents the substitution effect and is unambiguously positive
(indicating how the burden of the partial capital tax falls on capital). Its magnitude
depends on the degree of factor substitution in the taxed industry (σX). The second term
reflects the fact that the tax applies only in one industry, so it raises the price of that good
and thereby induces a shift in demand from X to Y. As capital and labor are shed by
the taxed sector, they must be absorbed by the other sector. If sector X is labor
intensive (λLX > λKX), the wage rate must fall for sector Y to be willing to hire the excess
labor. The magnitude of this output effect depends on the elasticity of substitution in
demand (σD). In this case (and as drawn in Figure 2.2), the output and substitution effects
offset, and it is impossible to say whether w/r will rise or fall in response to a tax on
KX.
The system of three equations in (2.27) includes many possible tax rates to
analyze, but the methods are all similar to the methods just employed to analyze τKX.
We just make one last point about one other tax rate, a tax on the sale of X ( τˆ X > 0 ).
Solving for ŵ − r̂ as a function of τ̂ X yields
σ (λ - λ )
ŵ - r̂ = - D LX KX τˆ X
(2.31)
D
where D is as defined above. Note that this is precisely the output effect from the partial
factor tax in (2.30). This result follows because either θ KX τ̂ KX or τ̂ X equals the change
in tax revenue as a fraction of the consumer expenditure on X.
Equation (2.30) can be generalized to allow for non-homothetic preferences and
public demand for consumption goods that differs from private demand. Vandendorpe
and Friedlaender (1976) have carried out this analysis. Their model also allows for preexisting distortionary taxation. Consider an experiment in which the partial factor tax on
capital used in the production of X is increased, with revenues returned lump sum to
consumers. Thus public demands for X and Y are fixed, while private demands (XP,
YP) can change. This more-general model now provides a demand-side force affecting
the change in w/r. Equation (2.30) becomes

[

]

1
wˆ - r̂ = ~ σ X a X - σ~ D λ* θ KX + λ*η~B τˆ KX
D
~
where σ D is the elasticity of substitution between X and Y in consumption suitably
modified to account for government consumption of a fraction of output,

(2.32)

equals (wr/(pXXpYY))(LXKY – KXLY). If θLX-θLY > 0, then LXKY – KXLY > 0, which implies that λLXλKY
- λLYλKX = λLX - λKX > 0. However, this result is only guaranteed in a model with no other taxes.

-20-

March 4, 2002

XP
Y P 
η X − 
η Y is the difference in income elasticities weighted by the share of
 X 
 Y 
private consumption (XP, YP) in total output (X, Y), and B is a measure of the initial
excess burden of pre-existing taxes. This B will be negative to the extent that X is
initially taxed more heavily than Y.
Relative to the original Harberger equation (2.30), the third term inside the
brackets in equation (2.32) is an added demand-side effect. Intuitively, we can track this
added effect in three steps, in the case where B < 0. First, an increase in taxes on capital
used in the production of X increases the relative burden on X and adds to the excess
burden of the tax system. This burden effect is first order and constitutes a reduction in
real output (and hence income) to society. Second, the term η~ translates this real income
loss into a relative shift in demands for X and Y. Imagine that preferences were still
homothetic, so that income elasticities equal 1, but that the private share of consumption
of X is less than the corresponding share for Y. In that case, η~ < 0. The loss in income
induces a drop in both private demands (XP and YP), but public demands are fixed. In
this case, (XP/X) < (YP/Y) means that the drop in total demand for X will be less than
the drop in total demand for Y. Factors must shift over from production of Y to X.
Third, λ* translates the change in relative-output demands into changes in relative-factor
demands. If production of X is more labor intensive ( λ* > 0), the shift in production
from Y to X will increase the demand for labor. This will drive the wage rate up
relative to the interest rate. Note that λ*η~B is positive, based on our assumptions in this
example, so we get the desired positive effect on wˆ − rˆ . Equation (2.32) indicates
precisely how Harberger eliminates this demand-side effect. He assumes homotheticity
and that public consumption of X and Y are in the same proportions as private
consumption, which together ensure that η~ equals zero.
Recognizing the tremendous usefulness of the basic Harberger model, many
economists in the following decades developed many other extensions, generalizations
and applications. As one example, Mieszkowski (1972) considers the incidence of the
local property tax in an extended model with three factors of production (land, as well as
labor and capital). As another example, McLure (1970) considers the effects of imperfect
factor mobility. These extensions and generalizations are important, but beyond the
scope (and page limits) of this chapter. Readers can find thorough reviews of this
literature in McLure (1975) and in Shoven and Whalley (1984).

η~ = 

2.4.

The Corporate Income Tax
The original paper by Harberger (1962) uses the general equilibrium model to
analyze the corporate income tax. To do this in a two-sector model, he must assume that
the whole corporate sector produces only one output (X), and that the corporate income
tax is effectively a tax on all capital used in that sector (τKX). We now turn to some of the
special cases of his model, to illustrate the impact of a tax on corporate capital. As in
Harberger, we can choose the wage as numeraire ( ŵ =0) and focus on the return to
capital to indicate relative factor returns.
First, when do we know that r̂ < 0 (the burden of the tax falls disproportionately
on capital)? From (2.30), a sufficient condition for this outcome is that the corporate
sector is capital intensive. However, a different sufficient condition can be found by a
rearrangement of the numerator to include (σX - σD)λLXθKX as the only term with
ambiguous sign. Then σX > σD is a sufficient condition for r̂ < 0 . In other words, this

-21-

March 4, 2002

tax on capital in X disproportionately burdens capital if firms in X can shift out of
capital more readily than consumers can shift out of X. In fact, higher σX always raises
the burden on capital; as it approaches infinity, the limit of (2.30) is - r̂ = τˆ KX (the rate of
return falls by the full amount of the tax). Because the return falls by the full amount of
the tax in both sectors, the total burden on capital is more than the revenue. The cost of
capital is unchanged in X, and lower in Y, so labor gains!
Second, we can ask, under what conditions is the tax burden shared equally
between labor and capital ( r̂ = 0 )? As σY in the denominator of (2.30) approaches
infinity, we can see that r̂ approaches zero. A large value of σY just means that the
untaxed sector can absorb whatever excess capital is no longer used in the taxed sector.
Another way to guarantee that r̂ = 0 , from (2.30), is to have:
(2.33)

σD (λ LX - λ KX ) θKX = σX (λLX θKX + λ KX θLX )

Necessary conditions are that the corporate sector is labor intensive (λLX > λKX) and that
consumers can readily substitute (σD > σX).27
Third, when can this partial tax on capital fall disproportionately on labor? The
taxed sector must be very labor intensive for the output effect to dominate the substitution
effect and not just to offset part of it.
Fourth, when does the entire burden of the tax fall on capital? This special
outcome occurs where dr (K ) = - d τ KX (r K X ), which says that the fall in capital income
equals the tax revenue collected. For the initial imposition of the tax, where dτ KX = τˆ KX ,
this equation can be rewritten as
r̂
= - λ KX .
(2.34)
τˆ KX
In the special case where σX = σY = σD , substitution of this single σ into equation (2.30)
shows that it is multiplied times everything in the numerator, and everything in the
denominator, so it factors out and disappears. Further rearrangement finds that D = 1 in
the denominator and that the bracketed expression in the numerator equals λKX. Thus,
the case with all the same elasticities of substitution yields the result that capital bears the
entire burden of the corporate income tax. A further special case of this special case is
the Cobb-Douglas case where all elasticities of substitution are one.28
The original paper by Harberger (1962) considered plausible parameter values
and likely empirical outcomes. First, he finds that the corporate sector is indeed labor
intensive. This result itself is sometimes surprising to those who think about the
corporate sector’s large manufacturing plants, but remember also the number of workers
at those plants: labor intensity is relative, and the non-corporate sector includes a lot of
agriculture where a single worker can sit atop a large harvester covering many acres of
valuable land (which is part of capital in the aggregation with only two factors). The

27
28

The second condition follows from the fact that λLXθKX + λKXθLX = θKX(λLX-λKX) + λKX.

In fact, as shown in McLure and Thirsk (1975), the case where all utility and production functions are
Cobb-Douglas yields an easy analytical solution for the incidence of a large tax (without using loglinearization techniques that are limited to small changes).

-22-

March 4, 2002

labor intensity of the corporate sector is important because it means that the burden of
this tax on capital might be on labor.
Next, Harberger considers alternative values for the key elasticities of substitution
(σX, σY, and σD). He considers some of the 27 possible combinations that can arise when
each of those three parameters can take any of three values (0.5, 1.0, and 1.5).
Sometimes capital bears less than the full burden of the corporate income tax (τKX), and
sometimes it bears more than the full burden of the tax, but the main message coming out
of his original 1962 paper is that capital is likely to bear approximately the full burden of
the corporate income tax, more or less. And capital mobility means that the burden is on
all capital, not just corporate capital.
To explain this empirical result, it is important to remember the conceptual result
above that capital bears the full burden of the tax anytime the three elasticities are equal
(σX = σY = σD). Then if one of those parameters varies above or below the common
value, capital’s burden will be somewhat more or less than the full burden of the tax.
Harberger’s main focus was the sources side, finding the change in relative factor
prices (r/w). He ignored the uses side by assuming that all consumers as well as the
government buy X and Y in the same proportions. Although his 1962 paper did not
solve for relative goods prices, the same model can also be used to solve for the other
unknowns such as p̂X and p̂Y (where labor is numeraire). Interestingly, even while
capital is bearing the full burden of the tax, τKX also raises the price of X (thus placing
additional burden on those who in fact consume disproportionate amounts of X) and
lowers the price of Y (thus providing gains to those who consume more than the average
amount of Y). That untaxed industry experiences a fall in their cost of capital, while the
wage is fixed at 1.0, so competition among firms in the industry means that the output
price must fall. In other words, even though the main effect of this tax is that government
confiscates resources from the private sector, one of the effects is that some individuals
are made better off – anybody who earns most of their income from labor and who
spends disproportionately on products of the non-corporate sector.
Many of the empirical studies reviewed below choose to follow the original
Harberger (1962) result that all capital income bears approximately the full burden of the
corporate income tax, and thus they allocate that tax in proportion to the capital income
of each household. However, Harberger assumed (1) a fixed capital stock, (2) a closed
economy, (3) no financing decisions, and (4) no uncertainty. We therefore note four
challenges to his modeling of corporate tax burdens.
First, in an intertemporal model, the corporate tax might reduce the net rate of
return only in the short run, until savings fall enough to reduce the future capital stock
and raise the return back up to its long run rate. The smaller capital stock means a lower
wage rate, so labor can bear more than the full burden of the tax (e.g. Judd (1985a)). This
possibility is discussed more in section 4 below (dynamic models).
Second, in a small open economy with international capital mobility, the
corporate tax might just drive capital elsewhere so that domestic savers earn the same net
return as before. This drives down the domestic capital stock, and thus the domestic
wage rate, so again the burden falls on labor (e.g. Mutti and Grubert (1985)). Yet
Bradford (1978) shows that capital does indeed bear the burden of a local tax on capital,

-23-

March 4, 2002

in the aggregate. The tax burden is not on local investors but is spread across all
investors worldwide.29
Third, if investment is financed by debt, then the return is paid as tax-deductible
interest. If investment proceeds to the point where the marginal unit just breaks even,
with no return above and beyond the interest paid, then no corporate tax applies to the
marginal investment. Indeed, as pointed out by Stiglitz (1973), all corporate investment
may be financed by debt at the margin. If so, then the corporate tax is a lump-sum tax on
infra-marginal investments financed by equity. Then it does not distort the allocation of
resources, and it does not affect the return in the non-corporate sector.
Fourth, as pointed out by Gentry and Hubbard (1997), much of the corporate tax
applies not just to the risk-free portion of the return to equity-financed investment, but
also to a risk premium, to infra-marginal profits, and to lucky windfalls. This has
implications for a differential tax incidence analysis of a switch from an income tax to a
consumption tax. Such a switch would eliminate the tax only on the first component, and
it would continue to tax the other components. Then, since those other components of
capital income are concentrated in the top income brackets, they argue that a
consumption tax is more progressive than estimated under conventional incidence
assumptions. In other words, typical differential incidence studies of a shift from income
to consumption taxation err by assuming that the burden of the corporate income tax falls
on all capital income, which is disproportionately concentrated in high income brackets,
because most of that capital income would still be taxed under a consumption tax. The
corporate income tax adds only the burden on risk-free returns, which are not so
concentrated in high-income brackets.
2.5.

The Property Tax
Local jurisdictions typically impose a yearly tax on the value of real property –
both land and improvements. Alternative "views" of the incidence of this tax have been
hotly debated, and general equilibrium analysis has radically changed economists'
thinking. First, the property tax has been viewed as an excise tax on housing services that
is regressive because housing expenditures are a high proportion of the budgets of lowincome families. This "old view" is typically associated with Simon (1943), but it dates
back to Edgeworth (1897). Second, the property tax has been viewed as a profits tax on
capital income that is progressive because that source of income is a high proportion for
high-income families. This view is called the "new view," although it originates with
Brown (1924). Perhaps it is new relative to Edgeworth (1897)!30
Mieszkowski (1972) reconciles these views in a Harberger general equilibrium
modeling framework. If τ i is the tax rate on property in community i, we can
decompose the rate into two components as τ i = τ + ε i where τ is the average
property tax rate over the entire country, and ε i is the deviation of the local rate from
the national average. By construction, the average of ε i across all communities is zero.

29

See the discussion in Kotlikoff and Summers (1987). In contrast, Gravelle and Smetters (2001) argue
that imperfect substitutability of domestic and foreign products can limit or even eliminate the incidence
borne by labor, even in an open economy model. They find that the tax is borne by domestic capital, as in
the original Harberger model.
30
The property tax has also been viewed as a tax on site rents that is shifted to landowners. Marshall (1890)
provides an early statement of this "classical" view, but Simon (1943) points out that classical economists
divide the property tax into a portion falling on land rents and a portion falling on improvements.

-24-

March 4, 2002

Mieszkowski argues that the first component of τ i can be viewed as a national tax on
housing capital at rate τ . Using the Harberger framework, he then argues that this tax
burdens all capital. The second component, Mieszkowski continues, can be viewed as a
differential tax that can be positive or negative. This differential tax might be passed
forward to consumers of housing or passed backwards to immobile factors (workers or
landowners). Mieszkowski concludes that the bulk of this differential tax is passed
forward to consumers.
Even in Mieszkowski's model, note that the regressivity of the tax depends on
what sort of tax change is contemplated. A uniform nation-wide increase in property tax
would impact capital income, which is progressive under the "new" view. In contrast, a
single community's increase in property tax would likely raise that town's cost of
housing, which is regressive under the "old" view.31
Next, Hamilton (1976) articulates a third view, called the "benefit" view, that the
property tax is neither regressive nor progressive because it is really no tax at all.32
Building on Tiebout (1956), Hamilton argues that mobile taxpayers would not live in any
jurisdiction that charges a tax higher than the value of its local public goods and services
– unless property values adjusted to reflect the differential between the value of services
received and taxes paid (the "fiscal surplus"). In other words, house prices would rise by
the capitalized value of any positive stream of fiscal surpluses or fall by the capitalized
value of any negative stream (where taxes exceed services). If the local property tax
becomes a voluntary price paid for those local goods and services, then it is no tax at all.
Thus, we have the “old” view, the “new” view, and the “no” view of the property tax.33
Hamilton's focus is on the efficiency impact of property taxes. He argues that the
property tax per se has no distributional impact because of capitalization. His story is not
complete yet, as he notes that the value of land is higher when used to construct housing
that is below the average value of housing in the community. Because the property tax
on such a house would be less than the (uniform) services provided, the fiscal surplus for
such a house will be positive, and the landowner can extract those rents when selling the
site. This shift in the mix of housing will lead to a shift in the burden of the property tax
from owners of below-average-value housing to owners of above-average-value housing.
In response, a countervailing political force will limit this shift (zoning or some other
form of regulation). The outcome of this political process cannot be predicted in an
economic model, and zoning could be so restrictive as to limit the amount of low-value
housing to levels that are inefficient (and that lead to a shift of the burden of property tax
from high-value homeowners to low-value homeowners). Hamilton concludes that it is
impossible to determine the incidence of property taxes until we have a better
understanding of the political forces influencing land-use policy.

31

Part of the early "debate" is published in two papers by Musgrave (1974) and Aaron (1974), but they also
point out the importance of institutional detail when doing incidence analyses. Musgrave generally supports
the old view, and he notes that many rental markets in urban areas are likely to be imperfectly competitive.
Thus, some of the insights from section 3 below may be useful for thinking about property tax incidence.
Aaron generally supports the new view. He notes that, even under the old view, the portion of the property
tax falling on rental housing may well be progressive since the ratio of market value to rent rises with rent
(more expensive houses have relatively low monthly rent).
32
Hamilton (1975) first states this argument, but Hamilton (1976) extends it to heterogeneous communities.
33
Zodrow and Mieszkowski (1983) review this literature, and Zodrow (2001) provides a possible
reconciliation of these various views.

-252.6

March 4, 2002

Empirical Work
Remaining with the property tax, for the moment, we note that Oates (1969) first
attempts to measure empirically the degree of capitalization of property taxes into
property values. This type of measurement turns out to be a complicated statistical
exercise, however, and economists continue to disagree about the degree of
capitalization. Many economists believe that the benefit view should imply complete
capitalization of property taxes (holding public services and other amenities constant). If
so, then perhaps an empirical test of capitalization could help us choose between views.
Alas, Mieszkowski and Zodrow (1985) point out that property taxes may be capitalized
under both the benefit view and the new view. Thus, while capitalization is an important
phenomenon in tax incidence theory, it is not useful as an empirical test among views of
the property tax.
One interesting study by Carroll and Yinger (1994) looks at property taxes in
rental markets rather than homeowner markets. They find that nearly one-half of
property tax differentials are passed back to landlords, a result consistent (at least
partially) with the new view.
Turning to the corporate income tax, we note the attempt by Krzyzaniak and
Musgrave (1963) to estimate the burden econometrically using a time-series regression of
the corporate output price on the corporate tax rate and other control variables such as the
unemployment rate. They obtain the surprising result that the corporate income tax is
“overshifted”, meaning that the corporate sector is able to raise prices by more than the
amount of the tax – and increase their profits. While this overshifting may provide
evidence of imperfect competition, as we discuss below, this approach was largely
discredited subsequently by considerations of reverse causality. Especially during war
years, shortages mean that corporations can raise prices and make profits, which induces
Congress to raise the tax rate. We know of no other subsequent attempt to estimate
corporate tax incidence econometrically. Thus, while the Harberger model is extremely
useful for analysis, the predictions have not exactly been “tested”. Debate continues
about the incidence of the corporate income tax as well.
Without resolving any of these debates, another empirical approach can apply the
theoretical developments just described to find the implications for a large number of
households across the income spectrum (Pechman and Okner (1974) and Musgrave et al.
(1974)). First, this approach must specify how the burden of each tax is shifted (and can
specify more than one outcome, for sensitivity analysis). Then, each scenario is applied
to micro-data on households’ sources and uses of income. Pechman and Okner (1974)
merge data files for a sample of 72,000 households. They use information on
demographic characteristics such as age and family size, and tax return items such as
income from dividends, interest, rent, capital gains, and wages and salaries. They
classify households into annual income groups using a measure of economic income that
includes transfers, the household’s share of corporate retained earnings, and the imputed
net rental income from owner-occupied homes. They use tax actually paid as the total
burden of each tax to be allocated. Then, for each set of assumptions about the shifting
of each tax, they add up the burdens on each household.
Pechman and Okner assume for all cases that the burden of the personal income
tax remains with the household, the employee part of the payroll tax remains with the
worker, and the burden of sales and excise taxes falls on households according to their
consumption patterns. The employer share of the payroll tax is sometimes allocated
entirely to workers, and it is sometimes allocated equally between workers and
consumers. The property tax is assumed to affect either the return to landowners

-26-

March 4, 2002

specifically or all capital owners generally. Finally, for the corporate income tax, they
consider several cases with different proportions of the burden on shareholders, capital
owners, wage-earners, and consumers. They look only at taxes and ignore the
distributional effects of any government spending.34
For each combination of incidence assumptions, Pechman and Okner calculate the
effective tax rate on each household, defined as the total tax burden as a fraction of
economic income. Their results indicate that the most progressive set of assumptions do
not yield markedly different results than the least progressive set of assumptions. In
either case, the overall U.S. tax system is roughly proportional over the middle eight
deciles. The effective tax rate is higher, however, at the top and bottom tails of the
income distribution. At very low-income levels, any positive consumption implies a
positive sales tax burden divided by a small income in the denominator. At the other end
of the distribution, the rate is high because of the progressive personal income tax and
assumed corporate tax burdens from disproportionate holding of corporate stock.
This finding of rough proportionality has shaped tax policy debates for the past
two decades.35 The general consensus is that the progressive effects of the personal
income tax and the corporate income tax are more or less offset by the regressive impacts
of payroll taxes, sales taxes, and excise taxes. Musgrave et al. (1974) reach similar
conclusions. In contrast, however, Browning and Johnson (1979) find that the U.S. tax
system as a whole is highly progressive. They assume that sales and excise taxes raise
product prices, but government transfers are indexed to provide the same real benefits,
thus protecting low-income transfer recipients. These taxes do not fall on consumption
generally, but only on consumption out of factor income.
These studies all have three problems. First, they classify households by annual
income rather than by income over some longer time period (such as an entire lifetime).36
Second, they assume the allocation of a total tax burden equal to tax actually paid, not a
burden based on each group's change in consumer welfare (such as the equivalent
variation, EV). Third, they use results from different kinds of models to guide their
assumptions about the incidence of each tax, but they do not calculate these effects in a
single model [see Devarajan et al. (1980) for a direct comparison of incidence
assumptions and computable general equilibrium calculations].
To address the first such problem, Davies et al. (1984) construct lifetime histories
of earnings, transfers, inheritances, savings, consumption, and bequests. Using Canadian
survey data, they measure lifetime income and use it to classify households, and then add
up each household’s lifetime burdens under each set of incidence assumptions. Thus,
34

Thus, when they allocate the burdens of payroll taxes, they ignore the distributional effects of using those
revenues to provide social security benefits. This treatment is most troublesome if a marginal increase in
benefits is tied to a marginal payment of tax, because then only the difference is really a "burden."
35
The 1966 data used by Pechman and Okner (1974) were updated by Pechman (1985). There, he finds
that progressivity fell due to an upward trend in payroll taxes and downward trend in corporate taxes.
Browning (1986) indicates that the new data understate transfers and overstate labor income for the poorest
groups, and that appropriate adjustments to the data would make the 1985 tax system appear no less
progressive than the 1966 system. Pechman (1987) corrects his data and finds virtually no change in
progressivity at the low end of the income distribution, but he still finds reduced progressivity at the very
top of the income distribution (due to reduced taxes on capital).
36
An individual at a given percentile of a particular year’s annual income distribution may appear at a
different place in the lifetime income distribution, both because annual income is volatile and because it
tends to rise systematically and then fall with age. Tax incidence across lifetime income groups may also
be affected by the shape of the earnings profile: if those with higher lifetime incomes have earlier peaks in
their earnings profiles, then they must save more for retirement and bear more burden from taxes on capital.

-27-

March 4, 2002

they extend the approach of Pechman and Okner to a lifetime context. They find that
personal income taxes are less progressive in a lifetime context, while sales and excise
taxes are less regressive, so the Canadian tax system is as mildly progressive in the
lifetime framework as it is in the annual framework.37
In a different approach to this first problem, Slemrod (1992) notes that a
"snapshot" of one year suffers from fluctuations, while a lifetime income perspective
requires heroic data assumptions. Slemrod argues that a "time-exposure" of about seven
years may be a reasonable compromise. He compares 1967-73 to 1979-85. While annual
income inequality has risen substantially over those decades, Slemrod finds less increase
in time-exposure income inequality. However, the effect of taxes on inequality is the
same in both cases.
To address the last two problems, other researchers have built explicit general
equilibrium models that can calculate the effect of all taxes simultaneously on all prices
and quantities, from which they can calculate utility-based measures of consumer
welfare. For example, Ballard et al. (1985) specify production functions for 19 industries
that use both primary factors and intermediate inputs. Each tax may affect the demand
for each factor in each industry. They also specify 12 income groups that receive
different shares of income from labor, capital, and indexed government transfers.
Assuming utility maximization, they calculate demands for each good by each group that
depend on product prices and on after-tax income, while factor supplies depend on net
factor returns. The imposition of any tax may then affect prices, and they calculate the
EV to measure the burden of each group.
A different type of general equilibrium model is built by Auerbach et al. (1983)
and fully described in Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987). Auerbach and Kotlikoff sacrifice
intragenerational heterogeneity to concentrate on intergenerational redistribution. Their
model has only one sector but allows for 55 overlapping generations with life-cycle
savings decisions. Instead of calculating the incidence of a tax across 12 income groups,
they calculate the incidence across age groups. In particular, they find that the switch
from an income tax to a wage tax would reduce the burden on the elderly, while the
switch to a consumption tax would substantially raise tax burdens on the elderly.
Auerbach and Kotlikoff provide the first computational model of lifetime tax
incidence for different age groups, but cannot calculate progressivity across different
income groups. Later efforts proceed to calculate lifetime tax incidence for different
income groups at each age (Fullerton and Rogers (1993), and Altig et al. (2001)). All of
these computational general equilibrium models can calculate the incidence of each tax
using explicit production functions and utility-based measures of welfare (such as EV),
but computational feasibility requires some aggregation across households – such as
considering only 12 income groups.
In contrast, the approach based on Pechman and Okner (1974) must assume the
incidence of each tax without utility or production functions, but can employ detailed
micro data on many thousands of households. This detailed approach also allows
calculations of incidence across dimensions other than income (by region, race, gender,
or other demographic characteristics). For these reasons, several recent efforts also build

37

Poterba (1989) classifies households by current consumption, as a proxy for lifetime income, and he
therefore finds that consumption taxes are less regressive than when using annual income to classify
households. Lyon and Schwab (1995) use data from the PSID in a life-cycle model, finding that cigarette
taxes are just as regressive when using lifetime income rather than annual income as the classifier. They
find that alcohol taxes are slightly less regressive.

-28-

March 4, 2002

upon the original approach of Pechman and Okner. For example, Kasten et al. (1994)
combine data from the Labor Department’s Consumer Expenditure Survey, the
Commerce Department’s Census Bureau, and the Treasury Department’s tax returns.
Instead of trying to construct a “full” measure of economic income, however, they
classify households by a measure of realized cash income. They calculate federal income
taxes and payroll taxes for each household, and they assign corporate taxes and federal
excise tax burdens according to assumptions about their incidence (but they omit all state
and local taxes on income, sales, and property). Despite major changes in federal tax
policy between 1980 and 1993, they find virtually no change in the overall level of
taxation or in the distribution of burdens, except a slight decline in the effective tax rate
for those in the top one percent of the income distribution.
As another example, Gale et al. (1996) use data from the Survey of Income and
Program Participation (SIPP) and classify households by “expanded” income that
includes some imputations (e.g. employer-provided health insurance) but not others (e.g.
imputed rental income from owner-occupied homes). They consider federal and state
income taxes, corporate taxes, and payroll taxes, but not federal excise taxes, state sales
taxes, or local property taxes. They do consider transfer income. Like prior authors, they
find that the current tax system is progressive.
While the three studies mentioned above appear quite similar, it is important to
note that they differ in subtle but important ways that can affect the incidence results
obtained: each such study makes its own choices about where to get the data, whether to
use individual taxpayers or families, which set of taxes to put in the numerator of the
effective tax rate (ETR) calculation, and what definition of income to use to classify
taxpayers (and to put in the denominator of the ETR calculation). Even once the ETR is
calculated at each income level, these studies could choose from among many measures
of progressivity.38
We now turn to empirical tests of these incidence assumptions. First, for the
payroll tax, virtually all applied incidence studies assume that both the employee share
and the employer share are borne by the employee (through a fall in the net wage by the
full amount of payroll tax). This assumption has been tested and confirmed repeatedly,
going back to Brittain (1971) who used a 1958 cross-section of 13 industries in 64
nations and found full burdens on labor. Gruber (1997) reviews other more recent
empirical studies that use both cross-section and time-series data, consistently finding full
burdens on labor. Gruber (1997) himself uses data from a survey of manufacturing plants
in Chile over the 1979-86 period to estimate the effects of dramatic 1981 cuts in that
country’s payroll tax, and finds that “the reduced costs of payroll taxation to firms appear
to have been fully passed on to workers in the form of higher wages …” (p. S99).39
Second, for sales and excise taxes, the standard assumption is that burdens fall on
the consumers of taxed products (through higher prices). For example, Fullerton (1996)
and Metcalf (1999) employ a model with constant returns to scale and perfect
competition, such that the long-run supply curve is flat, and any product tax logically
must be passed on to purchasers. They then use input-output evidence on each industry’s

38

Kiefer (1984) reviews indices of progressivity. For example, the Pechman and Okner (1974) index is
calculated as the Gini coefficient after taxes minus the Gini coefficient before taxes, all divided by the latter
((GiniAT – GiniBT)/GiniBT). Other measures such as the Suits Index (Suits (1977)) are based on the tax
concentration curve.
39
In a survey of all labor economists at top-40 U.S. institutions, Fuchs et al. (1998) find that the median
belief about the payroll tax is that 20 percent of the burden is borne by employers.

-29-

March 4, 2002

purchases of taxed products to calculate the increase in the cost of production of each
industry – and thus the increase in each equilibrium output price. Finally, data on
consumer expenditures can be used to indicate which consumers pay those higher
prices.40
This assumption, too, has been tested, but results are mixed. If the flat supply
curve in the above analysis is replaced by an upward-sloping supply curve, then the
burden of an excise tax might be shared in any proportions between consumers and
producers, such that product price rises by less than the tax. In contrast, several studies
reviewed by Poterba (1996) find “overshifting”, such that the product price rises by more
than the tax. In his own analysis, however, Poterba uses city-specific clothing price
indices for 14 cities during 1925-39 (finding less-than-complete forward shifting) and
eight cities during 1947-77 (finding mild, if any, overshifting). On the other hand, Besley
and Rosen (1999) point out that overshifting is perfectly consistent with several models
of imperfect competition (as discussed more in the next section). They find substantial
overshifting for more than half of the 12 goods they study in 155 cities. This result
would make excise taxes even more regressive than conventionally thought.
Finally, for the personal income tax, applied studies have consistently assumed
that economic incidence is the same as statutory incidence – on the taxpayer – even
though this assumption has never been tested.
In summary, few of the standard assumptions about tax incidence have been
tested and confirmed (e.g. payroll tax). Most others have never been reliably tested (the
personal income tax, corporate income tax, and local property tax). The standard
assumption about the corporate income tax that the burden falls 100% on capital remains
the standard assumption even though it is commonly believed to be false (because of
international capital mobility and endogenous saving).41 The standard assumption about
sales and excise taxes is that the burden is shifted 100% to consumers, and this
assumption has been tested several times. Some of these studies cannot reject 100%
shifting to consumers, while others find significantly less than 100% shifting, and still
others find significantly more than 100% shifting.
Many general equilibrium simulation studies “calculate” the incidence of each tax
based on carefully-articulated theories, and many data-intensive studies use these results
to “assume” the incidence of each tax. But competing theories are rarely tested, and so
econometric estimation remains fertile ground for new research.
3.

Imperfect Competition
In this section, we consider the effects of taxation in imperfectly competitive
markets. The analysis, for the most part, is partial equilibrium in nature, and we consider
both ad valorem and specific taxes on output.42 Imperfectly competitive markets can
appear in a wide variety of forms, and the tax analyst faces the difficult task of
determining which model is appropriate in each application (see Tirole (1988) for an
40

Metcalf (1999) uses the methodology of Caspersen and Metcalf (1994) to compute a measure of lifetime
income for each household, and thus can calculate the incidence of these excise taxes across lifetime
income groups or across annual income groups. He finds that excise taxes on fuels are regressive when
measured annually by themselves, but can be slightly progressive when measured on a lifetime basis if the
revenue is used to reduce payroll and personal income taxes in a progressive fashion.
41
Fuchs et al. (1998) surveyed public finance economists at top-40 U.S. institutions and found that the
median belief about the corporate income tax is that 40 percent of the burden is borne by capital.
42
Unlike perfect competition, the incidence impact of equal revenue ad valorem and specific taxes differs
in imperfectly competitive markets. See Delipalla and Keen (1992) for a comparison of these two taxes.

-30-

March 4, 2002

excellent discussion of different models). Broadly speaking, we can first classify models
on the basis of whether they consider homogeneous or heterogeneous products. Models
with different firms producing identical products include the Bertrand oligopoly and the
Cournot-Nash oligopoly model. Those with heterogeneous goods include the
monopolistic competition models (e.g. Dixit and Stiglitz (1977) and Spence (1976)),
location models (e.g. Hotelling (1929) and Salop (1979)), and models of vertical
differentiation (e.g. Gabszewicz and Thisse (1979) and Shaked and Sutton (1982)).
Whether products are homogeneous or heterogeneous, we will find that the impact of
taxes on prices works through both direct and indirect channels (with the indirect
channels differing across models).
3.1.

Oligopolies
Let us first turn to the case of Bertrand oligopoly with identical firms and a
constant returns to scale production function. Bertrand competition is a Nash equilibrium
concept in which firms compete in prices. The price equilibrium is quite simple: firms
compete by lowering prices until all firms set price equal to their common marginal cost.
No firms earn economic profits, leaving no incentive for entry or exit. The effects of a
unit tax on output in such a model is straightforward. Since the producer price cannot fall
below marginal cost, the entire tax is passed forward to consumers. More generally, even
with a positive aggregate supply elasticity, the Bertrand model and perfect competition
produce the same equilibrium outcome.
We next turn to the Cournot-Nash oligopoly model in which identical firms
compete by choosing levels of output conditional on their expectations of their
competitors' output levels. We proceed in two steps: first by fixing the number of firms
in the market at N and then by allowing free entry. To simplify matters, we will assume
firms are identical and that the equilibrium is symmetric.43
Consider firm i in the market. Its profit function is given by
(3.1)

πi(qi) = (1-τv)p(qi + Q-i)qi –c(qi) - τsqi

where qi is the output of the ith firm, Q-i is the output of all other firms in the market, and
p(Q) is the inverse demand function for market demand Q. The cost function is c(qi),
and τv and τs are ad valorem and specific taxes on q with statutory incidence on the firm.
The first order condition for the ith firm is given by
(3.2)

(1-τv)p'qi + (1-τv)p – c' – τs = 0

where a prime indicates a first derivative. Second order conditions are
(3.3)

(1-τv)p"qi + 2(1-τv)p' – c" < 0

or

43

The Cournot-Nash assumption is that firm i optimizes assuming that other firms do not adjust output in
response. An alternative approach is to apply a conjectural variation assumption. Let λ = dQ/dqi - 1 be the
conjectured response in output of all other firms as firm i increases output by 1 unit. The Cournot-Nash
assumption is equivalent to assuming that λ equals 0. Papers that employ the conjectural variations
approach include Katz and Rosen (1985), Seade (1985), and Stern (1987). They also consider tax
incidence in a Cournot model with a fixed number of firms.

-31-

(3.4)

March 4, 2002

~
p'
(η + N + Nk ) < 0
N

where ~
p ≡ (1 − τ v )p is the producer price, η = Qp"/p' is the elasticity of the slope of the
c"
inverse demand function and k = 1 − ~ measures the relative slopes of the demand and
p'
marginal cost curves. Since p' < 0, the second order conditions require η+N+Nk > 0.
In a symmetric equilibrium, we need only solve for p and q using the two
equations:
(3.5)

p = p(Nq)

(3.6)

(1-τv)p'(Nq)q + (1-τv)p(Nq) – c'(q) = τs.

Differentiating (3.6) with respect to τs and rewriting, we get:
dq
1
=~
(3.7)
.
dτs p ' (η + N + k )
It follows directly that
(3.8)

dQ
N
=~
dτs p ' (η + N + k )

and
(3.9)

 dQ 
d~
p
N
 =
.
= (1 − τ v )p' 
dτ s
 dτ s  η + N + k

If second-order conditions hold, then η+N+Nk > 0. And, if η+N+k > 0, then output falls
and the tax is (to some extent) passed forward to consumers. The degree of forward
shifting of the unit tax on output depends on the elasticity of the slope of the inverse
demand function (η), the number of firms (N), and the relative slopes of the marginal
cost and inverse demand functions (k).
Overshifting occurs when the producer price rises by more than the excise tax.
As we showed in an earlier section, this outcome is impossible in perfectly competitive
markets. Once imperfectly competitive markets are allowed, overshifting becomes a
possibility and can be guaranteed in some model specifications. Overshifting can occur
because of the existence of market power and strategic behavior among firms. Firms
recognize that forward shifting of the tax will decrease demand for their product. Thus,
under some circumstances, they will wish to raise the price more than the increase in tax
to compensate for the revenue loss from decreased demand.44

44

Note that overshifting does not imply an increase in profits for the firm. In fact, if demand is CobbDouglas, profits are unaffected by a marginal increase in a specific tax despite the existence of overshifting.

-32-

March 4, 2002

By definition, overshifting occurs if the derivative in (3.9) is greater than 1, which
means that η+k < 0. If costs are linear in output, then c″=0 and k=1, so a necessary and
sufficient condition for overshifting (d ~
p /dτs > 1) is that η < -1. Consider a constant
elasticity demand function with demand elasticity ε < 0. In that case, η = (1-ε)/ε <-1 for
all ε < 0. Overshifting will always occur, and it increases as demand becomes less elastic
(as η increases in absolute value).
Producer prices rise with an increase in an ad valorem tax as follows:
d~
p
Np(1 + 1 ε)
,
(3.10)
=
dτ v
η+ N + k
where ε < 0 is the price elasticity of demand. Overshifting of an ad valorem tax occurs
when the percentage change in the producer price exceeds 100 percent, and it occurs in
this model when -N < η+k<N/ε.
Having analyzed tax incidence in the fixed-N Cournot oligopoly, analysis of
monopoly markets is straightforward (simply set N=1).45 Assuming no pre-existing ad
valorem tax, a monopolist can shift more than 100 percent of an excise tax (τs) when
1/(η+1+k) > 1, or -1 < η+k < 0. With linear costs, overshifting occurs when -2 < η < -1.
Overshifting cannot occur in the simple case of linear demand and linear costs (because
η=0 and k=1). From equation (3.9), d ~
p /dτs equals 1/2 in the linear demand/cost case.
On the contrary, if demand is of the constant elasticity type, and costs are linear, then
overshifting will always occur in the monopoly model. Thus the two models most
typically assumed (constant slope or constant elasticity) each impose a particular
incidence pattern in the monopoly model with constant marginal costs of production (see,
for example, Musgrave (1959)).
Returning to the general oligopoly model with fixed number of firms, note that N
does not affect the overshifting condition for excise taxes but does affect the degree of
overshifting. Again, we consider the case with no pre-existing ad valorem tax. Assume
that -N < η+k < 0 (so that d ~
p /dτs > 1). Then d2 ~
p /dτsdN < 0. In other words, for given
values of η and k, overshifting is maximized for a monopolist and disappears as N
approaches infinity.
Now allow for free entry in the Cournot model. In addition to equations (3.5) and
(3.6), we need a third equation to pin down the equilibrium number of firms. Firms will
enter until the marginal firm earns zero profits. With identical firms, the zero profit
condition becomes
(3.11)

(1-τv)p(Nq)q – c(q) – τsq = 0

Equations (3.5), (3.6), and (3.11) determine p, q, and N. We now limit our discussion to
changes in excise taxes and assume τv equals zero. Thus ~
p equals p, and
dp
N( k + 1)
(3.12)
.
=
dτs η + N + Nk
With a linear cost function (k=1), dp/dτs > 1 iff η < 0. We now have a wider class of
aggregate demands for which overshifting will occur (see Besley (1989) for a fuller

45

See Bishop (1968) for an early treatment of ad valorem and unit taxes under monopoly.

-33-

March 4, 2002

analysis of this point). The indirect effect of the tax on industry structure contributes to
overshifting (where structure here means the number of firms). To see this, note that
dN
N  η + k +1 


(3.13)
=
dτs p' q  η + N + Nk 
and dN/dτs < 0 if η+k+1 > 0. With a positive fixed cost and constant marginal cost, then
the equilibrium number of firms will fall in the range of η between –2 and zero. This
decrease in firms tends to drive up prices, and the effect is that overshifting occurs for η
between –1 and 0 in the variable-N case but not in the fixed-N case. Note that this
overshifting does not lead to increased economic rents for producers: in the free-entry
model, profits are always zero, so the effect of the unit tax is to drive up costs of
production and to induce exit if aggregate demand is sufficiently elastic.
More generally,
 p − c − t  dN 
dp dp
.
 −
(3.14)
−
= 
dτs dτs N  η + N + k  dτs 
Entry and exit affect the degree of forward shifting through changes in the equilibrium
number of firms. Assuming η+N+k > 0 (consumer prices rise with a unit tax in the
fixed-N case), then consumer prices rise more as the equilibrium number of firms falls so
long as some market power is in effect (p-c-t > 0). This indirect price effect arises
because the decrease in the equilibrium number of firms yields increased market power
for the remaining firms. Interestingly, if we start at an efficient equilibrium with no
market power, then taxes have no indirect effect on prices. The result that part of the
incidence impact of a tax occurs through changes in the equilibrium number of firms is a
result that will occur in a number of models of imperfectly competitive firms, as we shall
see later.
Delipalla and Keen (1992) show that in both the Cournot-Nash and free-entry
oligopoly models, ad valorem taxes are less likely to lead to overshifting than unit taxes.
Venables (1986) notes that ad valorem taxes dampen the impact of output changes on
prices and thus make the market act more like a perfectly competitive market. Applying
that insight here, ad valorem taxes will have an impact more like taxes in perfectly
competitive markets and so should lead to less overshifting than unit taxes.
Support for overshifting in imperfectly competitive markets appears in a number
of empirical studies. Karp and Perloff (1989) econometrically estimate the conjectural
− 1 ) in the Japanese market for televisions. They find
variations parameter ( λ = dQ
dq i
evidence for imperfectly competitive markets and, based on that conclusion, derive the
incidence of a domestic luxury tax on televisions. They find more than 100 percent
forward shifting. Their conclusions depend heavily on the structural assumptions
imposed in their model. Harris (1987) analyzed the 1983 increase in the U.S. federal
excise tax on cigarettes from $.08 to $.16 per pack.46 He finds that the $.08 tax increase
led to a consumer price rise of $.16 per pack. As mentioned in the previous section,
Besley and Rosen (1999) investigate the impact of changes in state and local sales taxes

46

The increase was first temporary but was made permanent in 1986. See Harris (1987) for details.

-34-

March 4, 2002

on product prices for a highly disaggregated set of commodities.47 They employ
quarterly data for 12 goods in 155 cities over a nine-year period (1982-1990), about 4200
observations per commodity. They find overshifting for a number of commodities,
including bread, shampoo, soda, and underwear. They cite evidence by Anderson (1990)
for market power in many local grocery markets, and estimated markups that are 2.355
times price for retail trade, from Hall (1988).
Poterba (1996), in contrast, finds no evidence for overshifting of sales taxes. The
major difference between the Besley and Rosen study and the Poterba study is the level
of disaggregation; it is possible that any overshifting in the latter study is obscured by
changes in composition of the items in the bundles studied.48 Doyle (1997) also finds
evidence of overshifting in the new car market, where a one-dollar increase in tax is
associated with a price increase ranging from $2.19 for luxury cars to $2.97 for trucks.
3.2.

Differentiated Products
The oligopoly models discussed above suffer from the restrictive assumptions that
goods are identical and that no distinction can be made between different brands. In
some markets (e.g. agricultural commodity markets), this may be a reasonable
assumption. In most other markets, however, producers go to great length to differentiate
their products. Product differentiation creates some monopoly power, and the results in
the fixed-N oligopoly model indicate that the ability to pass taxes forward depends
importantly on the number of competitors in the market. In this section, we consider
several models of differentiated products and examine the relationship between product
competition and tax incidence.
We begin with Dixit and Stiglitz (1977) and their model of monopolistic
competition. This is a somewhat special model in that each product competes with all
other products, and the main thrust of the model is to illustrate the benefits of product
variety. It is useful to begin with this model, however, as it highlights the importance of
product differentiation – a feature left out of the homogeneous-good oligopoly model.
Consider the following simplified Dixit-Stiglitz model of product variety based on
Krugman (1980). Consumers are identical and maximize a utility function
1 N
(3.15)
U( x1 , x 2 ,..., x N ) = ∑ x iθ , 0 < θ < 1.
θ i =1
Consumption goods enter utility symmetrically but are not perfect substitutes (unless θ
equals 1). Individuals maximize utility subject to the budget constraint that (exogenous)
income (M) equals expenditures:
N

(3.16)

∑p x
i =1

i

i

=M

where pi is the consumer price of the ith good. From the first order conditions, we can
derive the demand functions:
1
>1
(3.17)
xi = λ-εpi-ε, ε =
1− θ

47

They consider such items as a three-pound can of Crisco, a dozen large Grade-A eggs, a 200-count box
of Kleenex facial tissues, and (naturally) the board game Monopoly.
48
The studies also differ by cities and time periods examined and econometric specifications employed.

-35-

March 4, 2002

where λ is the private marginal utility of income. If N is large, we can assume that the
pricing decisions of an individual firm will have negligible effect on λ and demand can
be written as
(3.18)

xi = Api-ε

and is of the constant elasticity variety.
Firms maximize profits, and we assume that costs are linear of the form cxi + F,
where c is marginal cost and F is fixed cost. Letting ~
p ≡ (1-τv)p be the producer price
with an ad valorem tax (τv), the firm's pricing rule is given by the standard monopolist's
pricing rule:
 ε 
~
(3.19)
p=
(c + τs ) .
 ε −1
For either an excise or ad valorem tax applied to a particular industry only, we can
differentiate equation (3.19). Thus
d~
p
ε
(3.20)
> 1,
=
dτs ε − 1
and
(3.21)

d~
p
= 0.
dτ v

The insights from monopoly model in the last section carry forward: an excise tax is
more than 100 percent forward shifted (constant elasticity and linear cost result), while an
ad valorem tax has no impact on the producer price but is entirely shifted forward to
consumers.
A disadvantage of the Dixit-Stiglitz model is that all products are treated as equal
competitors with other products. A quick look at any number of markets indicates that
this assumption is untenable. We next turn to a model of spatial competition where firms
locate themselves in product space to capture maximal customers in a simultaneous entry
game. We use the Salop (1979) circle model as developed to analyze ad valorem and
excise taxes by Kay and Keen (1983).49 The virtue of the circle model is that it explicitly
allows for modeling of the number of firms in equilibrium (unlike the linear model of
Hotelling (1929)). Following Salop, we assume N identical firms simultaneously
deciding whether to enter a market where consumers are located uniformly around the
circle, and where each consumer wishes to purchase 1 unit of the product. Firms that
enter locate equidistantly around a unit circle. Thus in equilibrium, each firm will face
demand of 1/N (assuming the market is covered). Each individual will purchase at most

49

Anderson et al. (2001) provide a more general analysis that incorporates the Kay and Keen model as a
special case. These authors stress the similarity of results under a Bertrand-Nash environment with
differentiated products to the Cournot-Nash setting with homogeneous products analyzed by Delipalla and
Keen (1992). Metcalf and Norman (2001) extend the Kay and Keen model to allow for price
discrimination and costly re-anchoring of product types in response to entry.

-36-

March 4, 2002

one unit of the good, and each prefers to purchase the good of quality or location x that
is as close as possible to their most-preferred quality (x*). Specifically, the consumer’s
cost of the good is the purchase price (pi) plus a "transport cost" that is assumed to be a
constant h times the distance from their location |x - x*|. Utility for a consumer who
purchases a unit of x obtains utility equal to
(3.22)

U = s −p−h x − x* ,

where s is an arbitrary constant sufficiently large to ensure U>0.
Consider a consumer located at x̂ , between 0 and 1/N from firm i. That
consumer will be indifferent between purchasing from firm i and firm i+1 if
(3.23)

pi + h x̂ = p + h(1/N - x̂ )

where pi is the price charged by the ith firm, and p is the price charged by other firms. For
that price pi (making the consumer at x̂ indifferent), demand for the ith firm's good,
D(pi,p), will be equal to 2 x̂ . Solve (3.23) for x̂ and double it, to get:
p − pi 1
+
(3.24)
D(pi,p) =
h
N
The firm maximizes profits by choosing price. It faces an ad valorem tax rate τv and a
unit tax rate τs. Profits are given by
 p − pi 1 
(3.25)
π i = ((1 − τ v )p i −c − τ s )
+ −F
N
 h
where c is marginal cost and F is fixed cost. Take the derivative, set it equal to zero, and
set pi equal to p (assuming identical firms have equal price in equilibrium), to yield:
h c + τs
(3.26)
pi = +
N 1 − τv
p ):
We can rewrite this in terms of the producer price ( ~
(1 − τ v ) h
~
(3.27)
p=
+ c + τs .
N

Thus, unit taxes are fully passed forward in the sense that the producer price rises by the
full amount of the tax.50 Strictly speaking, this statement is only true if the equilibrium
number of firms is unaffected by changes in the excise tax.
We need a second equation to pin down the equilibrium number of firms. A zeroprofit condition for the marginal firm does this. In equilibrium, each firm covers 1/N of
the market. Plug this supply into the profit function and set profits equal to zero, to get:
((1 − τv )pi −c − τs ) 1  = F .
(3.28)
N
50

From equation (3.26), the consumer price rises by more than the unit tax in the presence of an ad valorem
tax. The increase in price by the firm to cover the unit tax must also cover an increase in ad valorem tax
collections. It is not the case, however, that the unit tax is more than 100 percent passed forward.

-37-

March 4, 2002

Substituting equation (3.26) into (3.28) and solving for N, we get:
(1 − τ v )h
(3.29)
.
N=
F
While a change in the excise tax does not affect the equilibrium number of firms, a
change in the ad valorem tax does.
Ad valorem tax incidence can be decomposed into two components: a direct effect
and an indirect effect through the change in the equilibrium number of firms. Fixing N,
∂ (1 − τ v )p
p
h
∂~
≡
=− .
(3.30)
N
∂τ v N
∂τ v
N
The complete incidence is given by
(3.31)

∂~
p
1 Fh
1 h
=−
=−
,
∂τ v
2 1− τv
2N

exactly half the incidence in (3.30) where N is fixed. In other words, firm exit cuts the
burden on producers in half (and raises the burden on consumers).51
Some of the theories described in this section have also been incorporated into
computable general equilibrium models with imperfect competition. For example, Harris
(1984) builds an open-economy trade model of Canada with 29 different industries, of
which 20 are potentially noncompetitive. He specifies a fixed cost for each plant within
an industry, free entry, and two alternative models (with and without product
differentiation). He finds that “the estimated welfare gains from trade liberalization are
substantial in the industrial organization model and on the order four times larger than the
gains estimated from the competitive model” (p. 1031). In terms of incidence,
internationally-mobile capital in his model means that capital-owners are unaffected, but
his Table 2 (p.1028) reveals that the gain in labor productivity from trade liberalization
can be four to six times higher in the imperfectly competitive models.
Once we allow for heterogeneous products, we see new avenues for taxes to affect
equilibrium prices. Consider a duopoly model with heterogeneous goods in which firms
compete over price, and product quality is endogenous. Cremer and Thisse (1994)
present a model of vertical product differentiation and show that a uniform ad valorem
tax applied to both firms reduces the consumer price in equilibrium. Part of the price
decrease arises from a decrease in quality and hence reduction in marginal (and average)
production costs. But the authors note that the price decrease exceeds the cost reduction.
A reduction in quality differences sharpens price competition and reduces monopoly
power of firms.
A general point can be made here. With differentiated products, taxes can affect
prices over additional avenues, whether through the degree of product variety as in the
Kay and Keen model or through the distribution of product quality as in the Cremer and
Thisse model. Non-price competition can substantially affect the degree to which output

51

Firms exit because an increase in ad valorem taxation is equivalent (from the firm's point of view) to an
increase in fixed cost relative to revenue. See Kay and Keen (1983) for details.

-38-

March 4, 2002

taxes are passed forward to consumers and can lead to counterintuitive results, as in the
Cremer and Thisse model.52
4.

Dynamic Models and Incidence
Models with intertemporal optimization allow for endogenous saving and
investment. The essential engine of long-run incidence in these models is the impact of
taxes on capital-labor ratios (and thus factor prices). We shall also see, however, that
short-run inelastic capital supply plays an important role through asset price revaluations
in response to tax policy. Anticipations also become important.
Beginning in the 1960s, research on factor taxation in a dynamic setting used
neoclassical growth models either with exogenously-specified savings functions or with
overlapping generations (OLG models). In a two-period setting, OLG models have been
extensively discussed by Kotlikoff and Summers (1987) and Kotlikoff (2001), and we
refer the reader there for more detail. Here, we briefly discuss capital income taxation in
a growing economy using a model due to Feldstein (1974). We then turn to perfectforesight models in which savings behavior follows explicitly from consumer
preferences. This provides a link between the savings function and the pure rate of time
preference that is lacking in the previous literature. Finally, we turn to asset-pricing
models and transition dynamics.
4.1.

Taxation in a Growing Economy
Static models of tax incidence cannot easily capture the impact of changes in the
capital-labor ratio on factor prices. Consider a simple linearly-homogeneous production
function y = f(k), where output per worker (y) is a function of the capital-labor ratio (k).
With competitive pricing, each factor price will be a function of k:
(4.1)

r(k) = f'(k)

(4.2)

w(k) = f(k) - kf'(k)

where r is the rental rate of capital and w the wage rate. As k grows, the rental rate
decreases and the wage rate increases. If net capital income is taxed at rate τ, and r is the
net rental rate, then the marginal product of capital is equal in equilibrium to (1+τ)r.
Feldstein (1974) develops a model to analyze the long-run incidence of a capital income
tax and concludes that much (if not all) of the burden of the tax is shifted to workers in
the form of lower wages resulting from a decline in the capital-labor ratio. He notes that
a change in the tax on capital income per person (rk) has two components:
d( rk )
dr
dk
(4.3)
= k +r
.
dτ
dτ
dτ
He argues that second term should not be viewed as a burden of the tax, but rather as a
shift in the timing of consumption. Thus, Feldstein measures the long-run burden of a
new capital income tax as the ratio of the loss to capitalists (-kdr) to the new tax revenue

52

In the Cremer and Thisse model, the impact of ad valorem taxes on market power has obvious welfare
implications. They show that a small increase in a uniform ad valorem tax from a no-tax equilibrium is
always welfare improving. See Auerbach and Hines (2000) in this volume for further discussion.

-39-

March 4, 2002

(rkdτ); the burden on owners of capital from an increase in tax is the ratio of (-kdr) to the
loss in real income (-(kdr+dw)).
The conclusions from the model are particularly stark in a two-class world in
which all savings is from capital income only. Assuming that the savings rate s is a
function of the net rate of return (s = s(r)), then saving per person equals s(r)rk. In the
long-run steady state, the capital stock must grow at the rate of growth of the population
(n), and equilibrium in capital markets requires
(4.4)

s(r)rk = nk.

The net rate of return (r) is a function of the growth rate of the population (n) only, and is
unaffected by a change in the capital income tax rate. Thus, capital owners bear none of
the burden of the tax in the steady state. Even if the savings rate out of labor income is
positive, much of the burden of the capital tax can be shifted to labor.53
Once saving is endogenous, other "standard" results can also be reversed. For
example, because land is inelastically supplied, many presume that a tax on land is borne
by the landowner. In a model where land serves not only as a factor of production but
also as an asset, however, Feldstein (1977) shows that a tax on land rent then induces
investors to increase holdings of other assets in their portfolios. The resulting increase in
reproducible, physical capital can then lead to an increase in the wage rate and a decrease
in the return to physical capital. Hence, part of the tax on land rent is shifted to capital,
with wage rates rising in response to the greater capital-labor ratio.
Boadway (1979) points out that focusing on the steady state provides an
incomplete picture of the impact of a capital income tax. He takes Feldstein's (1974)
model and parameter assumptions and carries out simulations of a marginal increase in
capital income taxation that finances a reduction in labor income taxation. In steady
state, labor is made worse off by the shift, with wage rates falling over 7 percent in the
long run.54 But Boadway shows that the wage rate first rises before falling, and in fact is
higher for 65 years in his simulation.55 A complete picture of the burden would have to
discount and add up the workers’ gains and losses over time.
One simple way to measure the burden shift would be to compute the present
discounted value of the change in wage income assuming some given discount rate. We
note four problems with this approach. First, the discount rate is exogenous rather than
being linked to consumer preferences. Second, it would be preferable to have some
dynamic measure of compensating or equivalent variation for the tax shift. Third, the
savings rate s(r) does not follow from consumer preferences. Fourth, it depends only on
current information with no anticipations. For example, an announcement today of a
temporary surtax on capital income for ten years that would begin five years from now
should have an impact on capital accumulation over the next five years. The models of
Feldstein, Grieson, and Boadway cannot capture this effect. We turn next to a model
based on Judd (1985a) that addresses all four of these concerns.

53

Feldstein presents an example with Cobb-Douglas production. With equal savings rates for labor and
capital, he calculates that 1/3 of the tax is shifted to labor. With a savings rate for capital twice that for
labor, half the tax is shifted.
54
Grieson (1975) also shows that a shift from wage to capital income taxation can make workers worse off
in the long run through a decrease in the steady-state capital-labor ratio.
55
He also reports results where the wage rate rises for over 75 years.

-40-

March 4, 2002

4.2.

Taxation in a Perfect Foresight Model
The essential departure in the model of Judd (1985a) is the assumption of perfect
foresight by an infinitely-lived individual. Perfect foresight is an extreme assumption
and perhaps should be viewed as one end of a continuum; it has the attractive quality of
allowing individuals to look forward and thus to make decisions today on the basis of
beliefs about the world in the future.
Consider a very simple world with only two people: a capitalist and a worker,
each of whom lives forever.56 The capitalist earns income only from the rental of capital,
while the worker earns income only from labor supply (fixed at one unit). Workers do
not save, and the only purpose of taxation is to redistribute income from capitalists to
workers.57 If τ is the tax rate on capital income, we can consider policy experiments of
the form dτ = εh(t) where ε is small and h(t) is used to represent the timing of the policy
under consideration. For example, h(t) = 1 for t ≥ 0 would be an immediate permanent
increase in capital income taxation , while h(t) = 1 for t ≥ T would be a permanent
increase beginning at some date T in the future (but announced at time 0). Finally, a
temporary tax increase could be modeled by h(t) = 1 for 0 ≤ t ≤ T, and h(t) = 0 for t>T.
Output is produced according to a concave production function f(k) which gives
output per worker in terms of capital per worker. The produced good is taken as the
numeraire good and can be used for consumption or investment. In equilibrium, factor
prices are given by
(4.5)

rt = f'(kt)

(4.6)

wt = f(kt) – ktf'(kt)

where rt is the rental rate for capital and wt is the wage paid to the worker.
Whereas neoclassical growth models (e.g. Feldstein (1974), Grieson (1975),
Boadway (1979), and Bernheim (1981)) do not directly link savings behavior to key
utility parameters (in particular, the pure rate of time preference), Judd models savings
behavior directly from the intertemporal optimization problem of capitalists.58
Specifically, the capitalist maximizes an additively-separable utility function of the
isoelastic form:
∞
k 1− β
− ρt ( c t )
k
U = ∫e
dt
(4.7)
1−β
0
by choosing a time path of consumption ( cik ) and capital (kt) subject to the constraint
c k + k& = (1 − τ)rk
(4.8)
t

56

t

t

The infinitely-lived consumer assumption can be justified in terms of the dynastic model of Barro
(1974).
57
These assumptions are all innocuous. See Judd (1987) for discussion of endogenous labor supply and
other generalizations.
58
To avoid confusion about who is a worker as opposed to a capitalist, Judd specifies that the worker does
not save anything. Consumption for the worker is simply the wage received plus a transfer from the
government, financed by the capital income tax.

-41-

March 4, 2002

and some given level of the capital stock at time zero (k0). The pure rate of time
preference (ρ) is fixed (and the same both for the capitalist and the worker). A dot over a
variable indicates a time derivative. The parameter β is the elasticity of the marginal
utility of consumption. We assume that utility is concave in consumption so that β > 0.
Along an optimal path, the capitalist trades off a unit of consumption today against the
benefit of increased consumption in the future from investing the unit and receiving a net
return in the future:
(4.9)

k
t

k −β
t

u ' ( c ) = (c )

∞

= ∫e
t

− ρ(s − t )

∞

(1 − τ)ru ' (c )ds = ∫ e − ρ ( s − t ) (1 − τ)r (c kt ) − β ds .
k
t

t

The optimal time path of consumption for the capitalist is determined by differentiating
(4.9) and substituting in (4.5):
− (ρ − (1 − τ)f ' (k ))c k
k
&
(4.10)
,
c =
β
where we have omitted the time subscripts. Capital accumulation is given by
(4.11)

k& = (1 − τ)kf ' (k ) − c k .

Equations (4.10) and (4.11) are the equations of motion for the system.
In the steady state, equation (4.10) shows that the net return to capital is constant
and equal to ρ. This suggests that capital taxes are shifted entirely to workers through
adjustments in the capital-labor ratio. While the net return is fixed in the long run,
however, it can vary along a transition path to the new steady state, and redistribution can
occur along this transition path. For a complete picture, as we shall see, it is important to
focus not only on the steady state but on the entire transition path.
We now entertain a change in capital income taxation where a policy of the form
dτ = εh(t) is announced as of the present time (t=0). Thus the equations of motion
become
− (ρ − (1 − τ − εh ( t ))f ' (k ))c k
k
(4.10')
,
c& =
β
and
(4.11')

k& = (1 − τ − εh ( t ))kf ' (k ) − c k .

Consumption and capital (as well as their time derivatives) are now functions of ε as well
∂c kt
k
, evaluated at ε=0 (and similarly for other variables). Judd
as time. Let c ε ( t ) ≡
∂ε
differentiates equations (4.10') and (4.11') with respect to ε, evaluating the derivatives at
ε=0 and at the initial steady-state level of capital. Defining µ > 0 as
2
4θ L 
ρ  θ L
 θL 
(4.12)
,
µ = 1−
+ 1 −  +
2
βσ 
σ
σ




-42-

March 4, 2002

where θL is labor's share of output and σ is the elasticity of substitution between labor
and capital in production, Judd shows that the initial shock to consumption of the
capitalist equals59
ρ  ρ − µβ  c k

 ,
(4.13)
c εk (0) = H(µ)
1 − τ  ρ  β
where H(µ) is the Laplace transform of h(t) evaluated at µ. For any discount rate s,
∞

H(s) = ∫ e − st h ( t )dt is the present value of the policy function h(t). It is easy to show that
0

µ > ρ iff β < 1. Also, Judd shows that µβ < ρ iff β < 1. Thus, capitalists may
immediately increase or decrease their consumption in response to an announced increase
in capital income taxation. Increased future capital income taxation has an income effect
that works to reduce present consumption. On the other hand, the substitution effect
works to shift consumption from the future to the present. If β < 1, the substitution effect
dominates and consumption increases. For β > 1, the preference for smooth consumption
makes the income effect dominant. The role of the policy duration appears in H(µ),
where H(µ) increases with the duration of the tax increase. Thus, consumption at time
zero falls more for a longer duration tax increase (in present value terms) when the
income effect dominates (β > 1). Note that consumption falls now, even if the start of the
tax increase is delayed. But the drop in consumption is attenuated as a tax hike of fixed
duration is put further off into the future.
To determine the degree to which the tax and transfer scheme benefits workers,
we need to know how the consumption path for workers changes in response to an
increase in capital income taxation. Consumption for the worker is given by
c wt = f(k) – kf'(k) + (τ+εh(t))kf'(k)

(4.14)

where the first two terms are wage income and the last term is the transfer financed by
∂c wt
w
capital income taxation. Define c ε ( t ) ≡
evaluated at ε=0, and Bεw as the discounted
∂ε
increase in lifetime utility measured in time zero consumption arising from the tax
increase,
∞

Bεw =

(4.15)

∫e
0

− ρt

u ' (c wt )c εw ( t )dt
u ' (c 0w )

.

Judd shows that

(4.16)

59




Bεw = kf ' H(ρ)1 −






H(µ)  µβ   τ  σ


−
β
+
−
+
1
1
1




 ρ
  1 − τ θ
ρ
H
(
)
 L

 
.


1− β




Judd solves the linear differential equation system by first taking Laplace transforms. See Judd (1985b)
for details on this derivation.

-43-

March 4, 2002

We can now specify the policy experiments and evaluate the impact on consumers.
4.2.1. Immediate Temporary Tax Increase
A short-lived tax increase put into place at time zero can be modeled as h(t)
equaling 1 for small t and 0 otherwise. If dt is the length of the time the temporary tax
increase is in place, then H(µ) = H(ρ) = dt and H(µ)/H(ρ) is one (approximately). Thus,





β  µ  τ σ
w

1 − 
B ε = kf ' H(ρ) 1 +
+ 1 .
(4.17)
 1 − β 
ρ  1 − τ θ L

 14444244443 
(A)


Recall that β < 1 iff µ > ρ. Thus the term in parentheses in (4.17) labeled A is negative
and workers are better off from this temporary incremental tax hike if this term is less
than 1 in absolute value. If the initial capital income tax is sufficiently low, then workers
are better off. This follows from the continuity of Bεw in τ and the fact that this
expression evaluated at τ=0 is

ρ − µβ 

Bεw = kf ' H(ρ)1 +
(4.17')
 ρ(1 − β) 
as well as the fact that β < 1 iff ρ > µβ. For pre-existing τ sufficiently large, Bεw will be
negative, and so workers do not always benefit from an increase in the capital income
tax. Essentially, the worker would like to save some of the large transfer but is precluded
from doing so by high transactions costs or other institutional barriers; in that case, the
worker would prefer capital income to be left with the capitalist who will invest it (and so
make a portion of it available to the worker in the future through future taxes and
transfers).
4.2.2. Immediate Permanent Tax Increase
Now consider a permanent tax increase implemented at time zero. Thus h(t)
equals 1 for all t. The function H(s) = s-1 and Bεw now equals

kf ' β 
ρ  τ σ
1 −

Bεw =
+ 1 .
(4.18)
ρ 1 − β  µβ  1 − τ θL

Again, Bεw is positive for small τ but becomes negative for τ sufficiently large. Equation
(4.18) can be contrasted to the measures of burden in Feldstein (1974) and Boadway
(1979). While Boadway makes the point that wages may initially increase as a result of
redistributive taxation, he does not provide a utility-based measure of the gains from the
tax shift. Equation (4.18) is just such a measure.
4.2.3. Announced Permanent Tax Increase
Finally, consider the announcement today of a permanent tax increase to be put
into effect at some later time. Thus h(t) equals 0 for t < T and equals 1 for t > T. The
ρ
ratio H(µ)/H(ρ) now equals e − (µ − ρ ) T and goes to zero as T gets large if µ > ρ (and
µ
explodes if ρ > µ). Now the benefit of redistributions to the worker depends critically on
the value of β. If β < 1, then µ > ρ, and Bεw is zero if τ equals zero (and negative if τ >

-44-

March 4, 2002

0). Thus, the worker is made worse off from an announced future increase in capital
income taxation, starting at a positive level of taxation, even with the proceeds
transferred to the worker. The decrease in the capital stock along the path prior to the
enactment of the tax increase will reduce wages, which in present value terms are more
valuable than any future increase in transfers.
In the case that β > 1, then ρ > µ, and H(µ)/H(ρ) dominates in equation (4.16).
The terms including H(µ)/H(ρ) will be positive (since µβ > ρ), and workers benefit from
a tax increase. Highly concave utility (high β) implies strong intertemporal smoothing of
consumption and slow capital stock adjustment to new tax rates. Thus, future tax
increases will not lead to immediate and rapid reductions in the capital stock (which
would hurt the worker). While 100 percent shifting of the tax eventually occurs, the
burden shift can occur quite slowly, allowing a period during which labor benefits from
the higher tax.60
4.2.4. The Role of Anticipations
The last result indicates the importance of anticipation in perfect foresight models.
We can make this point more emphatically by considering policy changes designed in
such a way that they lead to no change in the consumption of the capitalist at time zero.
Given the desire to smooth intertemporal consumption in the additively-separable utility
function, any deviation from a steady-state consumption path at time zero must arise from
a surprise in tax policy. Thus, a policy that leads to cεk(0) = 0 is a policy that is perfectly
anticipated by capitalists. From equation (4.13), cεk(0) equal to zero implies that
 µβ 
 equals zero, and so
H(µ)1 −
ρ 

τ σ
Bεw = −H(ρ) kf '
(4.19)
1 − τ θL
which is zero if τ is zero and negative otherwise. In other words, workers cannot benefit
from a tax policy that is perfectly anticipated by capital owners. It is the surprise at time
zero along with an inelastic short-run supply of capital that generates a benefit for
workers from a tax and transfer scheme.
The Judd model illustrates a number of key points. First the incidence of a tax in
a dynamic model can have strong effects through changes in saving and investment and
consequently the capital-labor ratio. Both the perfect-foresight model and the
neoclassical growth model make this point clearly. The perfect-foresight model,
however, illustrates the importance of anticipations and surprises and suggests the
possibility of lump-sum taxes on existing capital at the time of the announcement of a
new tax regime ("old" capital).61 Because of the importance of anticipations and lumpsum characteristics of some tax policies, we pursue this further by developing a model in
which taxes affect welfare through changes in asset prices. This model will make clear
the distinction between "old" and "new" capital and the role of anticipations.

60

This focus on anticipations distinguishes this analysis from that of other neoclassical growth models with
workers and capitalists.
61
Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987) also emphasize the normative possibilities associated with taxing old
capital in a lump-sum fashion.

-45-

March 4, 2002

4.3.

Incidence and the Market Value of Capital
We present a simple partial equilibrium model of capital investment that
emphasizes the importance of costs of adjustment in changing the capital stock. In the
Judd (1985a) model previously described, capital accumulation depended on preferences
and, in particular, the concavity of the utility function. Costs of adjusting the capital
stock played no role. However, firms can incur significant costs during the process of
major investment projects.62 Summers (1985) presents a simple model to illustrate how
corporate tax policy can affect investment as well as the market value of capital in place.
Costs of adjustment are captured in a simple capital-supply relationship. Consider
a good that is produced with capital, K, according to the concave production function
F(K). Let the price of this good as well as the market price of capital equal 1.63 Firms
wish to invest when the market value of the firm's capital exceeds its replacement cost at
the margin. Investment is costly, however, and so firms adjust their capital stock towards
some desired level slowly according to the function
& =  g V  − δ K
(4.20)
K
 K

   
where V is the value of the firm, δ is the rate of depreciation, and a dot indicates a time
derivative. The function g has the property that g(1) = 0 and g' > 0. Defining q=V/K,
equation (4.20) is a standard Tobin investment function (Tobin (1969)).
Firms finance investment out of retained earnings, and the opportunity cost of
funds for equity-holders equals ρ. Thus, if equity-holders are to receive a return equal to
ρ, the value of the firm must evolve over time according to the relation
&
D V
ρ= +
(4.21)
V V
where D is the dividend paid to equity-holders. Dividends are equal to
D = F'(K)K -τ(F'(K)-δ)K – g(q)K

(4.22)

where τ is the tax rate on income net of economic depreciation. Combining (4.21) and
(4.22), the value of the firm evolves as
(4.23)

& = ρV − F' (K )K + τ(F' (K ) − δ)K + g (q )K .
V

We can re-express the change in value of the firm in terms of the change in value per
dollar of existing capital ( q& ):64
(4.24)

q& = (ρ + δ − g (q) )q + g (q) − (1 − τ)F' (K ) − τδ .

62

Large-scale urban transportation projects are a good example of investment projects that generate largescale costs to businesses and residents in the urban area (for example, the Big Dig in Boston).
63
We abstract from inflation.
64

Differentiate q = V/K to get

& .
& / K − q (K
& / K ) . Then substitute (4.20) for K
& and (4.23) for V
q& = V

-46-

March 4, 2002

Equations (4.20) and (4.24) form the equations of motion for our system in terms of K
& = 0 and q& = 0 ), q takes the value q* such that g(q*) =
and q. In the steady state (with K
δ, and the steady-state capital stock (K*) is defined by
(4.25)

(1-τ)(F'(K*)-δ) = ρq*.

Net of depreciation and tax, the return on capital must equal ρ, the return available on
other investments. We illustrate the movements of K and q through the use of a phase
diagram (Figure 4.1). The diagram breaks the q-K space into four regions bounded by
& = 0 loci. Above the K
& = 0 locus, the capital stock grows (depicted in
the q& = 0 and K
the NE and NW quadrants with a horizontal arrow pointing to the right). Below this
locus, the capital stock declines. To the right of the q& = 0 locus, q grows (depicted by the
arrows pointing upward) while to the left, q falls. The intersection of these two lines is
the steady-state.
FIGURE 4.1 ABOUT HERE
The capital stock can only adjust slowly in response to shocks, but q can adjust
instantaneously to any level. The dotted line is the saddle-point path moving to the
steady-state from either the NW or SE. Consider some catastrophe that reduces the
capital stock from K* to K1 (an earthquake, say). With perfect foresight, the value of the
remaining capital (per unit of K) would immediately jump from q* to q1. With q now
greater than q*, investment would exceed depreciation, and the capital stock would
slowly return to K*. With myopic expectations, by contrast, q would jump immediately
up further to the q& = 0 locus, as investors do not anticipate the capital loss that follows
when new capital comes on line. Such a movement would not be sustainable (in the
sense of q moving continuously back to q*), as movement from the q& = 0 locus would be
horizontally to the right, into a region where q and K both increase. This is a region of
speculative bubbles, which must collapse at some point (with the price dropping back to
the saddle-path).
Along the saddle-path, owners of capital would receive the normal rate of return.
While the dividend yield exceeds the required rate of return, the investor incurs a capital
loss as new net investment drives down the market price of capital. The only
beneficiaries of the destruction of part of the capital stock are the owners of the
undestroyed capital who earn a windfall capital gain at time zero.
We first use the model to illustrate a basic point about tax capitalization.
Consider an increase in the corporate tax rate (τ). This shifts the q& = 0 locus to the left
& = 0 locus unchanged. See Figure 4.2. The result is an immediate drop
but leaves the K
in the value of capital (a movement from A to B in Figure 4.2). All of the burden of the
tax has been capitalized into a price drop at the time of enactment. No future capital
owners will be affected, as the return on capital equals ρ along the saddle-path from B to
C. Capitalization of taxes into asset prices complicates incidence analysis considerably.65
FIGURE 4.2 ABOUT HERE
The model can also be used to make an important point about the distinction
between old and new capital. Old capital is capital in place at the time of a change in tax
policy. Consider the enactment of a tax credit for the purchase of new capital. Because
65

See Aaron (1989) for a discussion of this point along with other issues that complicate the analysis of
tax policy.

-47-

March 4, 2002

of the reduction in taxes, this might ordinarily be viewed as advantageous to all capital
owners. To use this model to analyze this policy change, equation (4.20) must be
modified to account for the fact that the price of capital has been reduced from 1 to 1-s,
where s < 1 is the level of the investment tax credit.
& =  g q  − δ K .
K
(4.20')
  (1 − s)  
 
 
The reduction in taxes increases the funds available to pay out as dividends. Equation
(4.24) is accordingly modified:

 q 
 q 
(4.24')
q& =  ρ + δ − g 
 − (1 − τ)F' (K ) − τδ
 q + (1 − s)g 
1− s 
1− s 

& = 0 loci move. See Figure
As s is increased from zero, both the q& = 0 and the K

& = 0 locus shifts down from q* to (1-s)q*. Simultaneously, the q& = 0 locus
4.3. The K
shifts to the right. The immediate impact on q is indeterminate. On the one hand, the
rightward shift in the q& = 0 locus operates to create a windfall gain to owners of old
capital: any future capital they purchase will be less expensive, and so dividends can be
& = 0 locus operates to
increased. On the other hand, the downward shift in the K
generate a windfall loss: old capital must now compete with new capital that is less
expensive. As drawn, the second effect dominates. Prior to the increase in the
investment tax credit, the economy is at point A with q=q*. The investment tax credit
leads to an immediate drop in q from A to B. Over time, q drops further as the economy
moves from B to C. This move does not imply a further loss in value, because the capital
loss is exactly offset by an above-normal dividend yield so that investors along the path
from B to C receive the normal rate of return (ρ). The tax credit has the desired effect of
increasing the capital stock but the unexpected effect of burdening the owners of old
capital with a windfall loss at the time of enactment. We leave it as an exercise for the
reader to work out the price path for an announcement at time zero of an investment tax
credit to be implemented at a given future date.
FIGURE 4.3 ABOUT HERE
Dynamic incidence modeling has evolved considerably in the past twenty-five
years. With increased computer power, it has become possible to create large-scale
computable general equilibrium (CGE) models to evaluate tax policy over the lifetime, as
well as to consider questions of capital accumulation and intergenerational
redistributions. We turn now to models of lifetime tax incidence analysis, and we
consider how these models provide new light on old issues.
5.

Lifetime Tax Incidence
Up to this point, we have focused only indirectly on the relevant time frame for
our incidence analysis. To classify households from rich to poor, most of the applied
studies reviewed in section 2.4 use income from one year, but others use income from an
entire lifetime. Intermediate choices also are possible, as Slemrod (1992) uses "time
exposure" income from a period of seven years.
We now turn to models of lifetime tax incidence and begin with a very simple
example to illustrate the importance of the time horizon. Consider a world with identical
individuals such that one person of each age is alive at any given time. Figure 5.1
illustrates the income profile of each individual throughout life. Income is low at the

-48-

March 4, 2002

beginning of life and increases to a peak before decreasing as the individual approaches
retirement. Annual income at any given age is measured by the height of the curve, and
lifetime income is the area under the curve.
FIGURE 5.1 ABOUT HERE
Given our assumptions about identical individuals and the pattern of births and
deaths, Figure 5.1 can also be interpreted as the distribution of income in the economy at
any given point of time. Young and old have low annual income, while the middle-aged
have high annual income. An annual tax incidence analysis using this snapshot of
income would give the erroneous impression of considerable income inequality in this
economy, despite the fact that everyone is identical. On the basis of the lifetime, the
economy has no income inequality at all.
FIGURE 5.2 ABOUT HERE
Now let us complicate the economy slightly and allow for two types of people
with different lifetime income profiles (see Figure 5.2). Individuals with profile Y1 earn
less income at any age than do those with profile Y2. Now the comparison gets more
complicated. An annual income analysis will rank the person at F as the richest person in
the economy, followed by the three individuals B, E, and G. It then ranks individuals at
A, C, D, and H as the poorest. This classification inappropriately groups a lifetime-poor
person at the peak of earnings (point B) with lifetime-rich individuals at either the
beginning or end of their earnings profiles (E and G).
A lifetime incidence analysis can yield a sharply different conclusion about the
progressivity of any given tax as compared to an annual income analysis. Returning to
our simple model of identical individuals, one of whom is alive at any given time,
consider a consumption-smoothing model as posited by Modigliani and Brumberg
(1954). In Figure 5.3, income is hump-shaped as above, and consumption is constant
throughout life. At ages below A1, individuals borrow to finance consumption. Between
A1 and A2, they repay debt and start to save. In retirement (after A2), individuals draw
down savings to finance consumption. In the absence of bequests, the areas B1 and B2
are equal to S (in present value).
FIGURE 5.3 ABOUT HERE
An annual incidence analysis of a tax on consumption would compare the average
effective tax rate (tax as a percentage of income) across different annual income groups.
Consider a flat consumption tax with no exemptions. For the young and the elderly, this
tax as a fraction of annual income could be quite high (and possibly exceed 100 percent).
The average tax rate would be lowest for those individuals at the peak of their profile,
those whose earnings exceed consumption. Thus a consumption tax would look highly
regressive. On a lifetime income basis, however, the average tax rate (lifetime
consumption taxes divided by lifetime income) would simply equal the tax rate on
consumption. Then the tax is strictly proportional.
A bit of thought leads to the conclusion that differences in the degree of
progressivity between lifetime and annual income analyses will vary depending on the
tax under investigation. Continuing with our simple economy, consider a tax equal to a
fixed percentage of wage income. On a lifetime basis this tax is proportional, but on an
annual basis it will look somewhat regressive since capital income is left out of the tax
base. However, the degree of regressivity implied in an annual income analysis will be
sharply lower than in the case of our simple consumption tax, because the average tax
rate can never exceed the statutory tax rate on wages.
Analyses of lifetime tax incidence have been carried out in a number of fashions.
One approach is to build an overlapping generations (OLG) computable general

-49-

March 4, 2002

equilibrium (CGE) model of an economy with a representative agent in each cohort (see,
for example, Auerbach et al. (1983) or Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987)). Such models are
very useful for understanding the intergenerational incidence of government policies
(Kotlikoff (2001)). They are not well suited, however, to studying the intragenerational
redistribution brought about by government policies. A second approach is to jettison the
CGE analysis of age cohorts, but instead focus on lifetime heterogeneity using incidence
assumptions in the style of Pechman and Okner (1974). An example is the Davies et al.
(1984) lifetime model based on Canadian data. A third approach is to combine both
intertemporal and intratemporal heterogeneity. Fullerton and Rogers (1993) were one of
the first to build a complete CGE model of this type.
Empirical incidence analyses from a lifetime perspective suffer from the lack of
data on the entire lifetime income and consumption patterns of households. Thus, any
attempt to apply the lifetime approach requires heroic assumptions. In the Davies et al.
model, for example, all income streams are exogenous and the consumption path is based
on an additive isoelastic utility function. Interest and growth rates are predetermined
based on Canadian data, and the model calculates lifecycle consumption, income, tax
payments, and government transfers.66
Other empirical studies use annual data to construct a proxy for lifetime income.
Poterba (1989) invokes the Modigliani and Brumberg (1954) consumption-smoothing
story to study U.S. federal excise taxes. With perfect lifecycle consumption smoothing,
and individuals identical except for lifetime income levels, current consumption is
proportional to lifetime income. Thus Poterba uses current consumption to categorize
individuals by lifetime income. For alcohol, fuel, and tobacco taxes, he finds striking
differences between annual and lifetime incidence. Metcalf (1994) applied a similar idea
to the system of state and local sales taxes in the United States and finds that a case can
be made for viewing this system of taxes as progressive, contrary to accepted wisdom.
The shift to a lifetime perspective is one important factor blunting the regressivity of state
and local sales taxes. In addition, most states exempt a variety of goods with low income
elasticities, thereby adding to the progressivity of the system.
Other efforts to carry out lifetime incidence analysis using (primarily) annual data
include Lyon and Schwab (1995), Caspersen and Metcalf (1994), Gale et al. (1996), and
Feenberg et al. (1997), among others. Caspersen and Metcalf use data from the Panel
Study on Income Dynamics (PSID) to estimate age-earnings profiles for individuals
based on variables that exist in both the PSID and the Consumer Expenditure Survey
(CEX). The PSID has excellent data on income across households and years, so it is a
good source for estimating age-earnings profiles that can be used to construct measures
of lifetime income. Unfortunately, the PSID has minimal consumption data, which
precludes distributional analysis of consumption taxes. The CEX, on the other hand, has
excellent consumption data but poor income data. Hence, Caspersen and Metcalf use the
PSID to predict age-earnings profiles for households in the CEX. For the introduction of
a value added tax (VAT) in the United States, they find that a lifetime incidence analysis
sharply reduces regressivity.
In another effort to capture lifecycle considerations, Gale et al. (1996) carry out
an analysis in which they restrict their sample to married families with the head between
the ages of 40 and 50, arguing that this approach reduces the inappropriate comparisons
66

They find that the incidence of the overall Canadian tax system is mildly progressive under either a
lifetime or an annual incidence framework. Personal income taxes look less progressive, while
consumption taxes look less regressive under the lifetime incidence framework.

-50-

March 4, 2002

between people either at the beginning or end of their earnings career with people at the
peak of their earnings. They find that this approach does not alter their conclusions about
the distributional implications of a shift from income to consumption taxation.67
These studies all measure changes in tax liabilities rather than changes in welfare.
As we discussed in the introduction, changes in tax liabilities misrepresent the change in
welfare for various reasons. An advantage of a general equilibrium model (whether
analytical or numerical) is that the researcher can make assumptions about the form of
utility and explicitly measure changes in welfare in dollar terms (typically using the
equivalent variation). Fullerton and Rogers (1993) construct a lifetime computable
general equilibrium model to study the U.S. tax system.68 We sketch out this model and
compare its lifetime results to the classic annual results of Pechman and Okner (1974).
Fullerton and Rogers build a model with consumers of different ages and different
lifetime incomes. All have the same lifetime utility function, but differ in labor
productivity (and hence wage rate). Lifetime utility is a nested-CES function with the
top-level allocating consumption and labor across time:
(5.1)

T

U = ∑ a 1t ε1 x (tε1 −1) ε1 

 t =1

ε1

(ε1 −1)

where T is length of life (known with certainty), xt is the amount of the composite
commodity consumed at time t, ε1 is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, and at is a
weighting parameter that reflects the consumer's underlying rate of time preference.
Economic life is 60 years, from ages 20 to 79. Lifetime utility is maximized subject to
the lifetime budget constraint
T
 qt 
 = Id
x t 
(5.2)
∑
t −1 
t =1
 (1 + r ) 
where qt is the composite price of xt, r is the net-of-tax rate of return, and Id is the present
value of lifetime discretionary income.69 The composite price, qt, is implicitly defined
by equation (5.2) and will turn out to be a weighted average of the prices of the
components of xt. A benefit of the nested-CES utility structure is that the demand
functions can be solved sequentially beginning at the top nest of the utility function.
q t = q t /(1 + r ) t −1 , then the maximization of (5.1) subject to (5.2) yields standard
Defining ~
CES demands in terms of prices ~
q t . In an important simplification, Fullerton and Rogers
assume that these prices can be calculated from the current interest rate. These “myopic
expectations” mean that each equilibrium period can be calculated before proceeding to

67

Metcalf (1999), however, carries out an incidence analysis of an environmental tax reform using the
lifetime methodology of Caspersen and Metcalf (1994) and also using a cohort analysis similar to Gale et
al. He finds that the two approaches give very different answers, suggesting that the cohort approach is not
a good proxy for a more complete lifetime analysis. One possible reason follows from the permanent
income hypothesis (Friedman (1957)). If people make decisions on the basis of permanent rather than
annual income, then any deviations between the two will magnify the perceived regressivity of a
consumption tax. Lifetime income approaches are less likely to suffer from this measurement problem.
68
Other results from this model are presented in Fullerton and Rogers (1991, 1995, 1996, 1997).
69
They use a Stone-Geary sub-utility function with minimum required expenditures, so Id is net of the cost
of required expenditures. Only discretionary consumption (in excess of required consumption) is available
for lifetime smoothing, so x is defined as discretionary consumption.

-51-

March 4, 2002

the next period, sequentially, whereas perfect foresight would require endogenous
calculation of all periods’ prices and interest rates simultaneously.
Lifetime income includes bequests received. Rather than model endogenous
bequest behavior, Fullerton and Rogers assume that each individual must bequeath the
same level bequest at death as received at birth, after adjusting for economic and
population growth. Bequests received (and left) as a fraction of income are calibrated to
data from Menchik and David (1982).
At the next level of the nest, consumers choose between purchased consumption
goods and leisure according to the sub-utility function:
(5.3)

(ε 2 −1)
1
 1 (ε 2 −1)

x t = α t ε 2 c t ε 2 + (1 − α t ) ε2 l t ε 2 



ε2

(ε 2 −1)

where c t is a composite commodity consumed at time t, l t is leisure at time t, ε2 is the
elasticity of substitution between consumption and leisure, and αt is a weighting
parameter. The time endowment is fixed at 4,000 hours per year, and the wage rate per
effective labor unit is constant, but wage rates can vary across individuals based on
individual labor productivity. The individual chooses leisure and labor (Lt) based on
maximization of the sub-utility function in (5.3) subject to the budget constraint
(5.4)

pt ct + w t l t = q t x t ,

This maximization yields demands for l t and c t . Then composite consumption is
modeled as a Stone-Geary function of individual consumption goods (cit):
N

(5.5)

c t = ∏ (c it − b it ) βit .
i =1

The model includes 17 consumer goods (N=17), minimum required consumption (bit),
and marginal share parameters (βit). The Stone-Geary function is a parsimonious
specification that allows consumption shares to vary across income, and across age
groups, as is observed in the data. It also dampens consumption fluctuations, thereby
making savings less sensitive to changes in the interest rate.70
Using the Consumer Expenditure Survey, Fullerton and Rogers estimate 408
parameters: bit and βit for 17 goods for each of 12 different 5-year age brackets. Thus
taxes will affect income groups differentially on the sources side because of different
relative factor incomes and on the uses side because of different observed spending
shares. And yet the modelers need not assume that the rich are fundamentally different
from the poor, in terms of preferences. Here, the fundamental difference between rich
and poor is simply their income levels. All 12 groups in the model have the same utility
function, with the same 408 parameters, but low-income groups spend much of their
money on the minimum required purchases while other groups spend more in proportions
given by the marginal expenditure shares.
Next, Fullerton and Rogers convert the vector of 17 consumer goods (C) to a
vector of 19 producer goods (Q) using the Leontief transformation C = ZQ, where Z is

70

See Starrett (1988) for a discussion of the sensitivity of savings to changes in the interest rate in StoneGeary and isoelastic utility functions.

-52-

March 4, 2002

a 17 by 19 transformation matrix. Finally, they distinguish corporate (Qc) and noncorporate (Qnc) output using another sub-utility function
(5.6)

 1
Q j =  γ j ε3 (Q cj ) ( ε3 −1) ε3 + (1 − γ j )


1

εj

nc ( ε 3 −1) ε3
j

(Q )





ε3

(ε 3 −1)

where ε3 is the elasticity of substitution, and γj is a weighting parameter for industry j.
This function explains the co-existence of corporate and non-corporate production within
a single industry, and it explains differences in production patterns across industries.
Maximization subject to the budget constraint ( p cj Q cj + p ncj Q ncj = p Qj Q j ) yields demands
for Q cj and Q ncj that depend on relative prices – which, in turn, depend on differential
taxation of the corporate sector.
Whereas the corporate and non-corporate prices are observable, the various price
indices are not. Fullerton and Rogers take the Lagrangian multiplier from this last
maximization and invert it, to obtain
(5.7)

(

p Qj = γ j (p cj ) + (1 − γ j )( p ncj )1−ε3

)

1

(1− ε 3 )

.

Knowing these prices, they use the transition matrix Z to recover consumer prices
( p i = ∑ p Qj Z ji ). Then the reciprocal of the Lagrangian multiplier from the maximization
of the Stone-Geary utility function is the price of the composite commodity:
p
p t = ∏  i
i =1  β it
N

(5.8)





βit

and finally,
(5.9)

(

q t = α t p 1t−ε 2 + (1 − α t ) w 1−ε 2

)

1

(1− ε 2 )

.

With an explicit utility function, Fullerton and Rogers can measure the equivalent
variation (EV) associated with any change in the tax system. They carry out differential
tax incidence experiments where they replace a particular tax with a proportional tax on
lifetime labor endowments. If U0 is lifetime utility under the old tax regime, and U1 is
lifetime utility under the new tax regime, then
(5.10)

EV = (U1 - U0)P0,

where P0 is a price index on the lifetime bundle {xt} calculated at old prices.
Production in each of the 19 industries is based on a similar nested structure. At
the top level, value added is combined with intermediate goods from other industries in a
Leontief production function. Value added is a CES function of labor (L) and a capital
aggregate ( K ), where σ1 is the elasticity of substitution. Aggregate capital is then a CES
combination of five capital types, where σ2 is the elasticity of substitution, to capture
differential tax treatment of equipment, structures, land, inventories, and intangibles.
Note that production is constant returns to scale, so firms earn zero profits in a
competitive environment. This is a common assumption in many CGE models used to

-53-

March 4, 2002

measure tax incidence. Firms solve a simple one-period optimization problem, in
contrast to consumers who solve an intertemporal maximization problem. Dynamics are
not ignored, however, in that interest rates affect capital accumulation.
The government engages in three activities in this model. First, it makes transfer
payments that vary according to age and income. Second, it produces goods and services
sold in the market place. In this regard, the government is simply one more producer
using capital, labor, and intermediate goods for production. Third, government buys
goods and services for a public good that enters utility in a separable fashion.
The treatment of taxes in the Fullerton and Rogers model is similar to that of
Ballard et al. (1985). Personal income taxes are specified as a linear function of
consumer income, with a constant slope and an intercept that varies across lifetime
income categories and age. The slope measures the marginal tax rate, while the intercept
captures various deductions and exemptions that vary across consumers. Payroll taxes
are treated as ad valorem taxes on the use of labor services by industry.71 Retail sales
taxes are treated as ad valorem taxes on consumer goods, while excise taxes are ad
valorem taxes on producer goods. Business tax provisions are incorporated using the
cost-of-capital approach of Hall and Jorgenson (1967). This includes corporate taxes at
both the federal and state level, property taxes, investment incentives, and depreciation
deductions. These tax provisions affect the demand for capital by firms, which affects
the interest rate used both in the consumer’s problem and in the firm’s cost of capital.
Finally, Fullerton and Rogers group households into lifetime income categories
through a two-step procedure. Using data from the PSID, they estimate lifetime profiles
for wages, taxes, and transfers. They estimate wage rate rather than wage income
regressions, since labor supply is endogenous in their model. These wage rates vary on
the basis of age, education, race, and sex. Using the estimated coefficients, they forecast
and backcast wages of each individual to create a lifetime wage profile. An initial
measure of lifetime income (LI) is then given by the equation
60
4000 ⋅ w t
(5.11)
LI = ∑
t −1
t =1 (1 + r )
where r is a discount rate, and wt is the actual wage for any year in the sample, or an
estimated wage for any other year.72 In the second step of the procedure, individuals are
sorted into 12 groups on the basis of this initial measure of lifetime income.73 For each
group, the log of the wage rate is again regressed on age, age squared, and age cubed.
This 2-step procedure allows wage profiles to differ across income groups. Differences
in the wage profiles will create differences in savings patterns across groups, which will
play an important role in determining the incidence of capital income taxation.
FIGURE 5.4 ABOUT HERE
Figure 5.4 shows estimated wage profiles for different lifetime income groups.
Both the curvature of the wage profiles and the location of the peak varies across groups.
More sharply curved wage profiles mean individuals must engage in more saving to

71

No distinction is drawn between the employer and employee share of the payroll tax, under the
assumption that statutory incidence does not affect the economic incidence.
72
The lifetime income measure is adjusted for taxes and transfers. For couples, each individual is given the
average income for the two spouses.
73
They first divide the sample into ten deciles. They then subdivide the top decile into the top 2 percent
and next 8 percent, and the bottom decile into the bottom 2 percent and next 8 percent.

-54-

March 4, 2002

smooth consumption. An earlier peak also means more savings – for consumption in
later years.
Table 5.1 shows the burden of all U.S. taxes in 1984, as measured by the lifetime
EV benefit as a percentage of lifetime income of a switch from the existing tax system to
a proportional lump-sum labor-endowment tax. Except for the first group (the bottom 2
percent of the distribution), every income group gains. These benefits are roughly flat
from the second through tenth income groups and then rise sharply in the highest two
income groups (top ten percent of the population). This pattern of proportionality across
the middle of the income distribution with progressivity at the top end matches the
findings of Pechman and Okner (1974) and Pechman (1985) in their annual income
incidence analyses. Fullerton and Rogers's results differ from Pechman's at the bottom of
the income distribution. The former find progressivity at the lowest end, while the latter
finds regressivity.
Table 5.1. Lifetime Incidence of
U.S. Tax System in 1984
Lifetime Income
EV as a percentage of
Category
Lifetime Income
1
-0.06
2
3.13
3
1.41
4
2.37
5
3.58
6
1.39
7
3.46
8
2.51
9
2.95
10
3.01
11
5.55
12
11.10
All, in steady state
3.52
PV(EV)/LI
1.29
Source: Fullerton and Rogers (1993), Table 7-15

The table shows distributional results in the new steady state. The sum of the 12
groups’ gains from shifting to the lump-sum tax is large, measuring 3.5 percent of their
aggregate lifetime income. This large gain comes about, in part, through a substantial tax
on endowments of older generations during the transition. In present value terms, the
gains are less than half, reflecting the fact that losses accrue to living generations while
gains primarily accrue to future generations.
While the degree of progressivity in the U.S. tax system appears similar in either
annual or a lifetime incidence analyses, important differences remain for particular taxes.
Perhaps the most important difference is that Pechman finds that corporate taxes are
progressive because of the sources side of income. Since high-income people
disproportionately earn capital income, they are most impacted by a capital income tax.
In contrast, Fullerton and Rogers find that the corporate tax does not appreciably affect
factor prices (because the statutory corporate rate is largely offset in 1984 by the
investment tax credit and accelerated depreciation allowances). Instead, the corporate tax
affects relative output prices (because some industries have larger corporate sectors and

-55-

March 4, 2002

get more credits and allowances). Thus it primarily affects individuals on the uses side of
income. For the lower part of the distribution, the tax is regressive because the poor tend
to spend greater fractions of incomes on goods produced in the corporate sector. At the
top end of the distribution, the tax is progressive because of the nature of the replacement
tax. The proportional tax on labor endowments does not tax inheritances, and the rich
receive larger inheritances, so they benefit from the tax on labor endowment.
Another important finding of the model is that sales and excise taxes continue to
be regressive when measured on a lifetime basis – whereas previous work by Poterba
(1989) and others hypothesized that consumption taxes would look roughly proportional
on a lifetime basis. Fullerton and Rogers note two reasons. First, the utility structure that
they employ does not specify a minimum required leisure expenditure. The lifetime poor
must spend a greater share of their income on required goods, so they pay more sales tax
as a fraction of lifetime income. Thus, some regressivity is built into the model structure.
Second, goods with high tax rates tend to be goods with high estimated minimum
required purchases (alcohol, tobacco, and gasoline).
Another advantage of lifetime models is the ability to capture intergenerational
transfers. Consider sales and excise taxes, for example. Figure 5.5 groups individuals by
age of birth, rather than by lifetime income, and it shows the equivalent variation as a
percent of lifetime income (for the replacement of sales and excise taxes by a
proportional tax on labor endowment). The EV as a fraction of income for the entire
population is 0.44 percent. The figure shows how the EV varies across cohorts. For
those born after the tax reform goes into effect (individuals to the right of the vertical line
in the middle of the graph), EV is roughly 1 percent of lifetime income. For those born
prior to the reform, EV is substantially lower and approaches zero for the oldest groups.
This picture tells a complicated incidence story. Older generations get less of a benefit
from the tax shift because the replacement tax is a tax on their time endowment – which
translates, for the elderly, into a tax on their leisure time.
FIGURE 5.5 HERE
Lifetime incidence models can be constructed to focus on both intergenerational
and intragenerational redistribution. The Fullerton and Rogers model focuses on both
types of redistributions, but assumes myopic expectations about future prices as well as
ad hoc bequest behavior. Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987) construct a dynamic model with
a perfect foresight equilibrium,74 but they have a representative agent in each cohort and
thus focus only on intergenerational redistribution arising from fiscal policy.75 Altig et
al. (2001) build on the Auerbach-Kotlikoff model, but follow Fullerton and Rogers in
adding intragenerational heterogeneity. They use the new model to measure the utility
gains and losses from different types of fundamental tax reforms. But because their
replacement tax is different from the one in Fullerton and Rogers, results from the two
models cannot easily be compared.
As noted earlier, a complete picture of the incidence of government fiscal policy
would take into account transfers as well as taxes (Browning (1985), Browning (1993)).
Auerbach et al. (1991) develop “generational accounts” to measure the fiscal impact of
government taxes and transfers over each cohort's lifetime. A generational account is

74

An early published version of the model was in Auerbach et al. (1983). For a brief history of the model's
development, see Kotlikoff (2000).
75
The Auerbach-Kotlikoff model also has only one type of good and makes no distinction between
corporate and non-corporate production, thus limiting its ability to provide meaningful incidence results for
the existing tax system.

-56-

March 4, 2002

simply a measure of a cohort's net tax payments (taxes less transfers) from today until all
members of the cohort die. For a cohort born in year k, its account in year t is defined as
k +D T P
(5.12)
N t , k = ∑ s, k (ss, k− v )
s = v (1 + r )
where Ts,k is the net tax for cohort k in year s, Ps,k is the population weight for cohort k
in year s (accounting for mortality and immigration), r is the discount rate, v = max(t,k),
and D is maximum length of life. For generations already born (k < t), the account Nt,k
is the present value of all future net tax payments discounted back to year t. For future
generations (k > t), Nt,k discounts net tax payments back to year k. For generations alive
at time t, net tax payments into the future are based on current law and government
projections of changes in tax and transfer programs. For years beyond government
projections, taxes and transfers are assumed to grow at the growth rate assumed for the
whole economy, thereby keeping net tax payments fixed relative to income. To assess
net tax payments for future cohorts, we begin with the government intergenerational
budget constraint:
∞

t

(5.13)

∑N

k =t −D

t,k

+

∑N

k = t +1

(1 + r )

t,k
k −t

∞

=∑
s=t

Gs
− Wtg .
s−t
(1 + r )

Equation (5.13) states that the government budget constraint must be balanced over time.
Future net tax payments (left hand side of (5.13)) must equal the present value of future
government consumption (Gs) less net government wealth in year t ( Wtg ). The first term
on the left hand side is the stream of remaining net tax to be paid by cohorts alive at year
t. The second term is the net tax paid by future cohorts. Assuming some path for future
government purchases, as well as knowledge of the current net wealth stock, the right
hand side of equation (5.13) is fixed. The first term on the left hand side is also known,
leaving the second term as a residual. Finally, for these residual net tax payments to be
divided across different future cohorts, it is assumed that average per capita tax
payments grow at the same rate as productivity growth. Thus, for future generations, net
tax liability relative to lifetime income is constant.76 Table 5.2 gives an example of the
calculation of net tax payments, from Gokhale et al. (1999).
Table 5.2. Net Tax Payments (Present Value in thousands of $1995)
Generation's Age in 1995
Male
Female
0
77.4
51.9
20
182.2
115.0
40
171.2
99.0
60
-25.5
-52.0
80
-77.2
-90.2
Future Generations
134.6
90.2
Source: Gokhale et al. (1999), Tables 21.1, 21.2

Ignoring the newborn for the moment, net tax payments are highest for the young
and decline with age. This reflects the fact that the current elderly will pay little in taxes
76

Other assumptions can be made, depending on the experiment under consideration.

-57-

March 4, 2002

relative to the benefits they receive in future years. Of course, the elderly in 1995 had
paid taxes prior to 1995, but the table does not take account of those past taxes.
Following equation (5.12), it focuses only on future net tax liabilities. Women have
lower net tax liabilities, reflecting both their smaller tax payments and higher benefit
receipts (largely due to social security and mortality differences between men and
women). The newborn have a lower net tax liability since their taxes and transfers, for
the most part, will not begin for some time into the future and so in present value terms
are smaller.77 For future generations, we see the current fiscal imbalance: taxes will
have to be raised on future generations in order to bring the government's budget into
balance.
Net tax payments in the tables above cannot be compared for any cohorts other
than newborns and future generations, since net tax payments are only computed over a
portion of the lives of generations currently alive in 1995. To compare all cohorts both
living and not yet born, net tax liabilities can be computed for each cohort over their
entire lifetime and discounted back to time zero for each cohort. Similarly, lifetime
income can be calculated and discounted back to time zero. Then an average tax liability
can be calculated as the ratio of lifetime taxes to lifetime income.78 Table 5.3 shows
lifetime net tax rates for living and future generations, from Gokhale et al. (1999).

Year of Birth
1900
1920
1940
1960
1980
1995
Future Generations

Table 5.3. Lifetime Net Tax Rates
Net Tax Rate
Gross Tax Rate
23.9
28.0
29.6
36.4
32.5
40.3
33.3
44.1
30.8
43.0
28.6
41.7
49.2
--

Gross Transfer Rate
4.0
6.7
7.8
10.8
12.2
13.1
--

Source: Gokhale et al. (1999), Table 21.3

For generations born from 1900 to 1960, the increase in net tax rates reflects the growth
of government over the first half of the century (see gross tax rates in the middle
column). The decline in net tax rates since 1960 reflects longer life expectancies and the
rapid increase in medical transfers (see transfers in the last column). The bottom row
indicates that the current policy cannot persist. Net tax rates will have to increase from
28.6 percent (for people born in 1995) to 49.2 percent, an increase of 72 percent.
The calculation of these generational accounts is in the spirit of the Pechman and
Okner analysis rather than the CGE models of Fullerton and Rogers or Auerbach and
Kotlikoff. It takes fiscal policy as given, and it allows neither for behavioral responses
nor for changes in factor prices in response to government policies. Fehr and Kotlikoff
(1999) compare net tax burdens using both generational accounting and the AuerbachKotlikoff CGE model described above. They find that the generational accounts
methodology works well for closed economies and for economies with minimal capital
adjustment costs.
77

Gokhake et al. use a discount rate of 6 percent. Adjusting for the fact that newborns enter the work force
roughly 20 years in the future, the corresponding net tax payment would be 248.2, which is 36 percent
higher than that of people born in 1975.
78
This calculation is similar to the methodology of Fullerton and Rogers.

-58-

March 4, 2002

Generational accounting has been used to look at Social Security and Medicare
policy (Auerbach et al. (1992)) as well as to compare tax and transfer systems in various
countries around the world (Auerbach et al. (1999)).
6.

Policy Analysis
Applied incidence analysis plays an important role in tax policy making, as the
results of government studies help determine the course of actual reform. Most such
studies use recent incidence theory, as described above, to allocate the burden of each tax
among income groups using much data about the sources and uses of income in each
group (as in Pechman and Okner (1974) or Gale, et al. (1996)). This approach forms the
foundation for analyses undertaken by the U.S. Congressional Budget Office (CBO), the
Office of Tax Analysis (OTA) of the U.S. Department of the Treasury, and the U.K.
Office for National Statistics.79 We focus here primarily on the incidence analysis by the
staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation (JCT) of the U.S. Congress.80
A key tool used by policy makers in their consideration of changes to the tax
system is the distributional table. Table 6.1 presents a distributional table for the repeal
of the federal communications excise tax for the calendar year 2003. The first column
indicates the income categories over which the tax is distributed. This column has a
number of features. First, the unit of observation is the tax-filing unit, so a data point in
any of the income categories may be a single taxpayer or a couple filing jointly. Thus, if
a married couple each earn $17,000 and file separately, they show up in this table as two
data points in the second row of the table. If they file jointly, however, they appear in the
fourth row.81 Second, the annual time frame is used for measuring income. Third, the
JCT uses a measure of income called “expanded income.” This measure is defined as
adjusted gross income (AGI) plus tax-exempt interest, employer contributions for health
plans and life insurance, the employer share of payroll taxes, worker's compensation,
nontaxable Social Security benefits, the insurance value of Medicare benefits, alternative
minimum tax preference items, and excluded income of U.S. citizens living abroad. This
measure is an effort to conform more closely to a Haig-Simons definition of income.82 It
is by no means a close proxy for economic income, however, nor is it a close proxy for
lifetime income. One advantage of expanded income is its explicit recognition that factor
income by itself is inadequate for measuring income, and another advantage is its easy
calculation from readily-available data, primarily tax returns. These features help make
the measure more readily understandable to policy makers, many of whom have limited
economics education.83 Fourth, the number of tax filing units differs across the income

79

See Bradford (1995) for a discussion and critique of this type of analysis in the United States. For the
United Kingdom, Lakin (2001) reports figures that are very similar in nature to those for the U.S.: "The
proportion of gross income paid in direct tax by the top fifth of households is almost double that paid by
those in the bottom fifth: 24 per cent compared with 13 per cent. Indirect taxes have the opposite effect to
direct taxes taking a higher proportion of income from those with lower incomes" (p.35). We cannot know
whether the similarity of results is because of similar methodology or because of similar policies.
80
See Joint Committee on Taxation (1993). Cronin (1999) describes the OTA methodology, while Kasten
et al. (1994) describe work at CBO.
81
OTA uses the family as the unit of observation, combining tax returns of all members of the family.
82
OTA uses a measure called Family Economic Income (FEI) that is more comprehensive and therefore
closer in spirit to Haig-Simons income. In addition to data from tax returns, FEI requires imputations of
certain income sources. See Cronin (1999) for details.
83
The need for a simple income measure may help explain why imputed rental income for owner-occupied
housing is excluded.

-59-

March 4, 2002

categories. In 1995, for example, the number of tax returns filed in the $10,000 to
$20,000 AGI category was roughly 20 times the number in the over-$200,000 AGI
category.84 Fifth, taxpayers are grouped into income categories on the basis of year 2000
income, the first year of analysis in this report. Any changes in income due to either
transitory fluctuations or trends do not shift taxpayers across brackets.
Table 6.1. Distributional Effects of Repeal of Federal Communications
Excise Tax: Calendar Year 2003
Effective Tax Rate
Change in Federal Taxes
Income Category
Present Law
Proposal
Millions
Percent
Percent
Percent
Less than $10,000
-$324
-4.3%
9.3%
8.9%
10,000 to 20,000
-621
-2.3%
7.4%
7.2%
20,000 to 30,000
-608
-0.9%
12.4%
12.3%
30,000 to 40,000
-572
-0.6%
16.0%
16.0%
40,000 to 50,000
-490
0.4%
17.4%
17.3%
50,000 to 75,000
-920
-0.3%
19.9%
19.9%
75,000 to 100,000
-531
-0.2%
22.4%
22.3%
100,000 to 200,000
-421
-0.1%
25.1%
25.1%
200,000 and over
-371
-0.1%
28.6%
28.6%
Total: All
-$4,858
-0.3%
21.5%
21.5%
Taxpayers
Source: Joint Committee on Taxation (2000)
The second column of Table 6.1 shows the aggregate change in federal taxes for
each income category, while the third column shows the change as a percentage of
expanded income. The essential point to understand about this measure is that it is an
estimate of the change in tax payments, not the change in tax burden. Figure 6.1
illustrates the distinction for a simple case where supply is perfectly elastic. Consider an
existing tax that shifts the supply curve from S0 to S1, and an increase that shifts the
supply curve from S1 to S2. The tax increase will raise revenue by an amount equal to AF, but the increased tax burden is area A+B. These are quite different sizes, and they may
even differ in sign. Depending on the price elasticity of demand, the higher tax rate may
increase or decrease tax revenue (area A may be less than area F). However, the
increased tax burden given by the area A+B is unambiguously positive.85 Thus the use of
tax revenue as a proxy for burden can lead to the incorrect conclusion that a higher tax
rate could reduce tax burden. As discussed below, the Joint Committee on Taxation
reported distribution tables based on tax burdens rather than tax revenues for a brief
while. OTA reports burden estimates, but only reports area A as the increased burden,
ignoring the deadweight loss (area B).86
FIGURE 6.1 ABOUT HERE

84

U.S. Bureau of the Census (1999), Table 559. Note that these AGI categories do not correspond exactly
to the expanded income categories in Table 6.1.
85
Here we ignore distinctions between the change in consumer surplus and equivalent or compensating
variation.
86
See Cronin (1999) for a discussion of other issues associated with measuring burden.

-60-

March 4, 2002

Finally, for each income category, the table reports effective tax rates (the ratio of
tax payments to expanded income) under current law and under the proposed policy
change. The proposal portrayed in Table 6.1 would be characterized as progressive, since
average tax rates fall the most for lower income groups.
This approach is subject to a number of criticisms.87 In addition to the issues
highlighted above, another problem is the failure to take account of asset price changes
and implicit taxation. In section 4.3 above, we made the point that tax capitalization
complicates the task of identifying who bears the burden of a tax. Subsequent owners are
observed to pay a tax, in distributional tables, but they may not bear any burden if they
bought the asset for a reduced amount. Distributional analyses also ignore implicit
taxation, which occurs when a tax-favored asset pays a lower rate of return than a
comparable non-favored asset. Consider, for example, state and local municipal debt that
is exempt from federal tax.88 If the taxable rate is 8 percent and the tax-exempt rate is 6
percent, then the implicit tax on municipal debt is 25 percent. Distributional tables ignore
this implicit tax, despite its equivalence to an explicit 25 percent tax that is used to pay
those who now benefit from the reduced rate on municipal debt.89
In 1993, the Joint Committee on Taxation made significant changes in their
methodology for distributing the burden of taxes, as described in Joint Committee on
Taxation (1993) as well as Barthold and Jack (1995).90 Despite the fact that many of the
changes were short-lived, they are worth discussing because they illustrate a creative
effort to apply economic theory to the policy process. In making the changes, the JCT
attempted to adhere to three broad principles: 1) to make calculations on the basis of the
economic incidence rather than the statutory burden of a tax, 2) to be consistent in the
treatment of taxes expected to have the same economic incidence (regardless of the
statutory incidence), and 3) to use a methodology that allows comparisons of unrelated
tax proposals.
In addition to the choice of the “expanded income” measure described above, the
JCT made two other significant conceptual changes. First, they measured burden from
tax changes rather than just distributing tax payments across groups. Above, we noted
that using changes in tax revenue as a proxy for changes in burden can lead to the
anomalous result that a tax increase is beneficial to the taxpayer (ignoring the use of
proceeds from the tax). Like OTA, the JCT did not propose to measure the change in
consumer surplus, but rather to use a proxy that could easily be estimated from existing
data. Unlike OTA, however, the JCT measured burden by the change in tax revenue that
would occur if behavior were fixed. Thus, in Figure 6.1, the JCT's measure of the burden
from a tax increase would be the area A+B+C.
Second, the JCT chose to measure the burden of a tax proposal over a five-year
window.91 Prior to that time, the JCT measured burdens within a single year. The
second principle noted above was violated in cases where some or all of the burden of a
tax fell outside of the one-year window. Shifting to a five-year window does not solve

87

See, for example, Graetz (1995) and Browning (1995).
State and local debt is often exempt from state taxation also.
89
Gordon and Slemrod (1983) find that the rich benefit from tax-exempt municipal debt through lowered
taxes payments, while the poor benefit from increased expenditures made possible by the lower borrowing
rate paid by communities.
90
Also, see Barthold et al. (1995) for a comparison of the new JCT methodology and the OTA and CBO
methodologies.
91
The five-year window is similar to the “time-exposure” measure of Slemrod (1992).
88

-61-

March 4, 2002

this problem but reduces its impact since less of a tax is likely to fall outside a five-year
window (and because the present value of tax changes five years out is lower than the
present value one year out). The JCT chose not to go to an infinite window for a number
of reasons. Results are sensitive to the choice of discount rate in an infinite-horizon
model, and economic forecasting of key variables required for revenue estimation
become increasingly unreliable for years further into the future. Furthermore, it is simply
not credible to assume that tax policy will remain unchanged into the distant future. Thus
a shorter time horizon was chosen.
The JCT then reports an annuitized measure that accounts for economic growth.
To illustrate the idea, we take an example from Joint Committee on Taxation (1993).
Assume a discount rate of 10 percent, and economic growth of 5 percent, and consider
three proposals. First, consider a permanent tax reduction of $100 per year beginning
immediately. The JCT assumes that the value of the tax reduction will grow at the
overall rate of economic growth and so will be worth $105 next year and $110, $116,
and $122 in subsequent years. The JCT calculates an annuity equivalent for year one that
is also assumed to grow at the overall rate of economic growth. In this case, the annuity
equivalent is $100 for year one (followed by 105, 110, 116, and 122). Second, consider
an immediate tax cut of $100 that lasts only one year, with a present value of simply
$100. The five-year annuity equivalent would be $22 in year one (an amount that could
grow at five percent per year over the five-year window and be discounted at 10 percent
to yield a present value of $100). For a final example, take a permanent $100 per year
tax cut that is postponed for four years, so that the first year of benefits occurs in the last
year of the five-year window. The value in the last year is $122, which in present value
terms equals $83. The annuity equivalent would be $18 in the first year. Table 6.2
shows the tax reductions that the JCT would report in a five-year window.
Table 6.2. Annuitizaton of Taxes in JCT Methodology
Year
Total
Proposal
1
2
3
4
5
Immediate permanent tax
100 105 110 116 122 553
reduction of $100/year
Immediate temporary tax
22
23
24
25
26
120
reduction of $100
Postponed permanent tax
18
19
20
21
22
100
reduction of $100/year
The third proposal (with a permanent $100/year tax cut) looks very much like the
second proposal (with a $100 tax cut in only one year), because only the first year of the
delayed permanent tax cut is counted. A one-time tax reduction in year five would give
the same annuity equivalent as is recorded in this third row of Table 6.2. Comparing
rows 2 and 3, it is clear that an immediate tax reduction of $100 is worth more than a
postponed reduction of $122, a result that follows because the 10 percent discount rate
exceeds the 5 percent growth rate.
Two other issues described in the 1993 JCT publication relate to the treatment of
a broad-based consumption tax such as a national retail sales tax. The first issue is
whether the general price level rises (to accommodate forward shifting of the tax) or
remains unchanged (in which case taxes are shifted backward in the form of lower factor
incomes). Real factor prices are the same in either case, and the status of the general
price level would appear to have no impact on the measured distribution of the tax

-62-

March 4, 2002

burden, but government transfer programs complicate the analysis (Browning and
Johnson (1979)). Some transfers to the poor are stated in nominal dollars, so a
consumption tax shifted forward into higher prices will reduce the real purchasing power
of these transfers. If the consumption tax is shifted backwards into lower factor prices,
however, recipients of these government transfers are not affected.92 Whether the general
price level rises or not depends importantly on monetary policy and cannot be predicted
beforehand. But the price level response may have an important impact on the outcome
of the analysis, especially as it relates to households with the lowest incomes.93
The second issue about the consumption tax is when to allocate the tax. We can
allocate a consumption tax when consumption occurs, or when the income that finances
that consumption is earned. The advantage of the latter approach is that the analysis then
conforms to the third principle above, namely, to use techniques that allow analysts to
combine proposals. In particular, the JCT says that it facilitates the comparison of
consumption taxes to income taxes (the predominant type of tax analyzed by the JCT).
The distinction between allocating consumption taxes when consumption occurs
or when the income is earned is only relevant with any saving or dissaving. This, in fact,
is the main reason for using lifetime measures of income for consumption tax analysis, as
discussed above. Since lifecycle changes in net wealth can be quite large, over periods of
more than five years, the JCT measure of the burden of a consumption tax can still be
quite different from the burden measured in a lifetime analysis.
Rather than allocating the consumption tax, the JCT converts a broad-based
consumption tax into a combined tax on wage income and old capital. To see the
equivalence, consider the budget constraint of an individual with k years remaining in life
at the time a consumption tax is imposed:
k
k
w L
(1 + τ)C t
W0 + ∑ t t t =∑
,
(6.1)
t
t = 0 (1 + r )
t = 0 (1 + r )
where W0 is the person's net wealth at time 0, wtLt is wage income in year t, Ct is
consumption, τ is the consumption tax rate, and r is the rate of return available to the
individual. The JCT approach works by defining a tax at rate ~τ on old capital (W0) and
wage income such that 1 − ~τ = 1 /(1 + τ). Then equation (6.1) becomes
k
k
(1 − ~τ ) w t L t
Ct
.
(6.2)
(1 − ~τ ) W0 + ∑
=
∑
t
t
(1 + r )
t =0
t = 0 (1 + r )
From the individual's point of view, the consumption tax is equivalent to a tax on wage
income plus a capital levy.94
These two issues give rise to four possible ways of distributing a consumption tax.
Following the JCT's notation, we can distinguish:
92

They would be affected if policy makers reduced transfers in nominal terms, which seems unlikely.
Many transfers in the U.S. are indexed, including social security, food stamps, and in-kind health care,
but other non-indexed transfers are received by the lowest income bracket, as discussed below. Also, the
price-level problem and the response of the Federal Reserve to the imposition of a tax is not, in principle,
limited to general consumption taxes. Consider an income tax that is assumed to be shifted backwards to
labor and capital. The Federal Reserve could increase the monetary supply and allow nominal prices to
rise, to keep nominal factor prices from changing (even though real factor prices still fall).
94
The lump-sum component of a consumption tax with no transition rules is a major source of efficiency
gain from a consumption tax relative to a wage tax. See Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987) for more on this
point. As an aside, individuals who have negative net wealth at the time of the imposition of a
consumption tax receive a lump-sum subsidy equal to ~
τ W0. Thus the consumption tax redistributes from
lenders to those in debt (relative to a tax just on wages).
93

-63(p,C):
(p,Y):
(w,C):
(w,Y):

March 4, 2002

prices allowed to rise and burden assigned as consumption occurs;
prices allowed to rise and burden assigned as income occurs;
factor prices fall and burden assigned as consumption occurs;
factor prices fall and burden assigned as income occurs.

Our Table 6.3, taken from JCT (1993), shows the impact of the four different approaches
on the distribution of a comprehensive 5-percent tax on consumption.
Table 6.3. Distributional Impact of a 5 percent Comprehensive Consumption Tax
(as a percentage of pre-tax income)
Income Class
(p,C)
(p,Y)
(w,Y)
(w,C)
$0-$10,000
3.70
3.69
2.84
2.85
10,000-20,000
2.66
2.68
2.86
2.83
20,000-30,000
2.90
3.00
3.10
2.99
30,000-40,000
2.92
3.04
3.20
3.07
40,000-50,000
2.94
3.10
3.26
3.10
50,000-75,000
2.77
2.97
3.21
2.99
75,000-100,000
2.63
2.88
3.01
2.74
100,000-200,000
2.50
2.84
2.92
2.57
200,000 and over
1.76
2.78
2.86
1.76
Source: Joint Committee on Taxation (1993), Table 3, p. 55

As noted above, whether prices are allowed to rise primarily affects the burden of
the tax at the very low end of the income distribution (because some transfers are not
indexed). On the other hand, the timing of the tax burden affects the very top of the
income distribution (because they undertake most savings). The measured burden of a
consumption tax in the highest-income group is roughly one percent of pre-tax income
higher when allocated on the basis of income rather than consumption.95
The first column of Table 6.3 (labeled (p,C)) is the traditional method for
distributing consumption taxes, and it makes consumption taxes look sharply regressive.
If the (w,Y) method were used to distribute consumption taxes, they would look nearly
proportional. Instead, the JCT favors the (p,Y) approach, on the basis of some empirical
evidence that the introduction of value added taxes in Europe led to at-least-partial
forward shifting into higher consumer prices, combined with the JCT's wish to adhere to
their third principle of tax comparability.
The JCT used the approach outlined in Joint Committee on Taxation (1993) for a
brief while, but it then reverted to an approach that distributes tax payments rather than
burdens, on a year-by-year basis instead of using five-year windows. In particular, the
analysis in Table 6.1 accords with current JCT policy.
Both Joint Committee on Taxation (1993) and Cronin (1999) illustrate creative
efforts to bridge the gap between economic theory and real-world policy analysis. In
addition to theoretical rigor, policy analysts need measures that are easily constructed
from readily-available data and easily understood both by the public and by policy
makers. The retreat at the JCT from the innovations described in Joint Committee on

95

A dollar of saving receives relief from a full dollar of a consumption tax when the tax is allocated as
consumption occurs, but it only receives relief equal in value to the annuity that a dollar buys when the
consumption tax is allocated as income is earned.

-64-

March 4, 2002

Taxation (1993) is perhaps discouraging, particularly in light of the tentative nature of the
steps towards a more-comprehensive lifetime measure of economic burden arising from
changes in tax policy. But it should be recognized that much of the policy process occurs
in an informal give-and-take between policy makers and staff economists; it may be in
this latter environment that incidence theory can be most effective.96
7.

Conclusion
The field of incidence analysis has progressed dramatically in the past twenty
years, as new research has yielded fresh insights into the burden of taxes in imperfectly
competitive models and in intertemporal models. The increase in computing power and
the availability of large-scale data sets have also enriched our understanding of tax
incidence. Moreover, the power of recent analytical models and of new data sets is
evident in recent attempts by government economists to bring state-of-the-art incidence
analysis to policymakers.
Yet, the basic tools of log-linearization in simple two-sector models are just as
useful today as they were in Harberger’s classic 1962 paper. These techniques are still
frequently used in studies of new taxes, externalities, imperfect competition, and other
non-tax distortions. Such analytical models can yield important insights that do not
follow directly from complicated computable general equilibrium models. In fact, many
researchers now combine both approaches within a single paper, as they find it useful to
push the analytical results as far as is possible, for intuition, before turning to numerical
methods to determine likely magnitudes. Using all of these techniques, the topic of tax
incidence will continue to be an area of productive research yielding further insights in
the years to come.

96

But see Graetz (1995) for a more pessimistic viewpoint.

-65-

March 4, 2002

p

B

A

S'

D

C

E

F

DC
0

S

DM

X
Figure 1.1 The Economic Burden of a Tax on X

-66-

March 4, 2002

X/Y

B4

S

A4
D
w/r

B3

A3

A1
A2

B2
w/r
Figure 2.1 Equilibrium in Output and Factor Markets

B1

px/py

-67-

March 4, 2002

X/Y

S
E0
E1
w/r

W1

W0

S'
D
px/py

w/r

Figure 2.2 Partial Factor Tax in General Equilibrium

-68-

March 4, 2002

q

q1
q*

& =0
K

q& = 0

K1

K*

Figure 4.1 Asset Price Model Phase Diagram

K

-69-

March 4, 2002

q

q

A

*

C
B

K*
Figure 4.2 An Increase in the Corporate Tax Rate

K

-70-

March 4, 2002

q

q

A

*

B
(1 − s)q

*

C

K*
Figure 4.3 An Investment Tax Credit

K

-71-

March 4, 2002

Income

Y

Age
Figure 5.1 Income Over the Lifetime

-72-

March 4, 2002

F

E

G

B

D

H
A

C
Y2
Y1
Age

Figure 5.2 Lifetime Income
Heterogeneity

-73-

March 4, 2002

S

C

B1

B2

Y

Age
A1

A2

Figure 5.3 Lifetime Income and
Consumption

-74-

March 4, 2002

Wage
Rate

Age
Figure 5.4 Wage Profiles

-75-

March 4, 2002

EV as percentage of
Lifetime Income

1.0

0.0

-60

-40

0

40

80
Age in Year of Reform

Figure 5.5 Intergenerational Transfers

-76-

March 4, 2002

px

S2
A

B

C
S1

E

F
S0
D

X
Figure 6.1 Measuring Tax Burden for
Policy Analysis

-77-

March 4, 2002

References
Aaron, H.J. (1974), "A New View of Property Tax Incidence", American Economic
Review 64:212-221.
Aaron, H.J. (1989), "Politics and the Professors Revisited", American Economic Review
79:1-15.
Altig, D., A.J. Auerbach, L.J. Kotlikoff, K.A. Smetters, and J. Walliser (2001),
"Simulating Fundamental Tax Reform in the United States", American Economic Review
91:574-595.
Anderson, K.B. (1990), A Review of Structure-Performance Studies in Grocery Retailing
(Bureau of Economics, Federal Trade Commission, Washington, DC).
Anderson, S.P., A. de Palma, and B. Kreider (2001), "Tax Incidence in Differentiated
Product Oligopoly", Journal of Public Economics 81:173-192.
Atkinson, A.B., and J.E. Stiglitz (1980), Lectures on Public Economics (McGraw-Hill,
New York).
Auerbach, A.J., J. Gokhale, and L.J. Kotlikoff (1991), "Generational Accounts: A
Meaningful Alternative to Deficit Accounting", Tax Policy and the Economy 5:55-110.
Auerbach, A.J., J. Gokhale, and L.J. Kotlikoff (1992), "Social Security and Medicare
Policy from the Perspective of Generational Accounting", Tax Policy and the Economy
6:129-145.
Auerbach, A.J., and J.R. Hines (2001), "Taxation and Economic Efficiency", in: A.J.
Auerbach, and M. Feldstein, eds., Handbook of Public Economics, Vol. 3 (Elsevier Press,
Amsterdam).
Auerbach, A.J., and L.J. Kotlikoff (1987), Dynamic Fiscal Policy (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge).
Auerbach, A.J., L.J. Kotlikoff, and W. Leibfritz, eds. (1999), Generational Accounting
Around the World (University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London).
Auerbach, A.J., L.J. Kotlikoff, and J. Skinner (1983), "The Efficiency Gains from
Dynamic Tax Reform", International Economic Review 24:81-100.
Ballard, C.L., D. Fullerton, J.B. Shoven, and J. Whalley (1985), A General Equilibrium
Model for Tax Policy Analysis (University of Chicago Press, Chicago).
Barro, R.J. (1974), "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?", Journal of Political Economy
82:1095-1117.

-78-

March 4, 2002

Barthold, T.A., and W. Jack (1995), "Innovations in the JCT Distribution Methodology",
in: D.F. Bradford, ed., Distributional Analysis of Tax Policy (AEI Press, Washington,
DC) 148-163.
Barthold, T.A., J.R. Nunns, and E. Toder (1995), "A Comparison of Distribution
Methodologies", in: D.F. Bradford, ed., Distributional Analysis of Tax Policy (AEI Press,
Washington, DC) 96-110.
Bernheim, B.D. (1981), "A Note on Dynamic Tax Incidence", Quarterly Journal of
Economics 96:705-723.
Besley, T. (1989), "Commodity Taxation and Imperfect Competition: A Note on the
Effects of Entry", Journal of Public Economics 40:359-367.
Besley, T.J., and H.S. Rosen (1999), "Sales Taxes and Prices: An Empirical Analysis",
National Tax Journal 52:157-178.
Bishop, R.L. (1968), "The Effects of Specific and Ad Valorem Taxes", Quarterly Journal
of Economics 82:198-218.
Boadway, R. (1979), "Long-Run Tax Incidence: A Comparative Dynamic Approach",
Review of Economic Studies 46:505-511.
Bradford, D.F. (1978), "Factor Prices May Be Constant but Factor Returns Are Not",
Economics Letters 1.
Bradford, D.F. (1995), ed., Distributional Analysis of Tax Policy (American Enterprise
Institute Press, Washington, DC).
Break, G.F. (1974), "The Incidence and Economic Effects of Taxation", in: A.S. Blinder,
et al., eds., The Economics of Public Finance (Brookings Institution, Washington, DC).
Brittain, J.A. (1971), "The Incidence of Social Security Payroll Taxes", American
Economic Review 61:110-125.
Brown, H.G. (1924), The Economics of Taxation (Holt, New York).
Browning, E.K. (1985), "Tax Incidence, Indirect Taxes, and Transfers", National Tax
Journal 38:525-533.
Browning, E.K. (1986), "Pechman's Tax Incidence Study: A Note on the Data",
American Economic Review 76:1214-1218.
Browning, E.K. (1993), "Transfers and Tax Incidence Theory", Public Finance 48:138141.
Browning, E.K. (1995), "Tax Incidence Analysis for Policy Makers", in: D.F. Bradford,
ed., Distributional Analysis of Tax Policy (AEI Press, Washington, D.C.) 164-180.

-79-

March 4, 2002

Browning, E.K., and W.R. Johnson (1979), The Distribution of the Tax Burden
(American Enterprise Institute, Washington, DC).
Bull, N., K.A. Hassett, and G.E. Metcalf (1994), "Who Pays Broad-Based Energy Taxes?
Computing Lifetime and Regional Incidence", Energy Journal 15:145-164.
Carroll, R., and J. Yinger (1994), "Is the Property Tax a Benefit Tax? The Case of Rental
Housing", National Tax Journal 47:295-316.
Caspersen, E., and G. E. Metcalf (1994), "Is a Value Added Tax Regressive? Annual
Versus Lifetime Incidence Measures", National Tax Journal 47:731-746.
Cremer, H., and J.-F. Thisse (1994), "Commodity Taxation in a Differentiated
Oligopoly", International Economic Review 35:613-633.
Cronin, J. A. (1999), U.S. Treasury Distributional Analysis Methodology (Office of Tax
Analysis, Washington, DC).
Davies, J. B., F. St Hilaire, and J. Whalley (1984), "Some Calculations of Lifetime Tax
Incidence", American Economic Review 74:633-649.
Delipalla, S., and M. Keen (1992), "The Comparison between Ad Valorem and Specific
Taxation under Imperfect Competition", Journal of Public Economics 49:351-367.
Devarajan, S., D. Fullerton, and R. A. Musgrave (1980), "Estimating the Distribution of
Tax Burdens: A Comparison of Different Approaches", Journal of Public Economics
13:155-182.
Dixit, A.K., and J.E. Stiglitz (1977), "Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
Diversity", American Economic Review 67:297-308.
Doyle, M.P. (1997), The Effects of Interest Rates and Taxes on New Car Prices (Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC).
Edgeworth, F.Y. (1897), "The Pure Theory of Taxation," The Economic Journal 7:46-70.
Feenberg, D.R., A.W. Mitrusi, and J.M. Poterba (1997), "Distributional Effects of
Adopting a National Retail Sales Tax", Tax Policy and the Economy 11:49-90.
Fehr, H., and L.J. Kotlikoff (1999), "Generational Accounting in General Equilibrium",
in: A.J. Auerbach, and L.J. Kotlikoff, eds., Generational Accounting around the World
(University of Chicago Press, Chicago).
Feldstein, M. (1974), "Incidence of a Capital Income Tax in a Growing Economy with
Variable Savings Rates", Review of Economic Studies 41:505-513.
Feldstein, M. (1977), "The Surprising Incidence of a Tax on Pure Rent: A New Answer
to an Old Question," Journal of Political Economy 85:349-60.

-80-

March 4, 2002

Friedman, M. (1957), A Theory of the Consumption Function (Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ).
Fuchs, V.R., A.B. Krueger, and J.M. Poterba (1998), "Economists' Views About
Parameters, Values, and Policies: Survey Results in Labor and Public Economics",
Journal of Economic Literature 36:1387-1425.
Fullerton, D. (1996), "Why Have Separate Environmental Taxes?", Tax Policy and the
Economy 10:33-70.
Fullerton, D., and D.L. Rogers (1991), "Lifetime Versus Annual Perspectives on Tax
Incidence", National Tax Journal 44:277-287.
Fullerton, D., and D.L. Rogers (1993), Who Bears the Lifetime Tax Burden? (Brookings
Institution, Washington, DC).
Fullerton, D., and D.L. Rogers (1995), "Distributional Effects on a Lifetime Basis", in:
D.F. Bradford, ed., Distributional Analysis of Tax Policy (AEI Press, Washington, DC)
262-294.
Fullerton, D., and D.L. Rogers (1996), "Lifetime Effects of Fundamental Tax Reform",
in: H.J. Aaron, and W.G. Gale, eds., Economic Effects of Fundamental Tax Reform
(Brookings Institution Press, Washington, DC) 321-347.
Fullerton, D., and D.L. Rogers (1997), "Neglected Effects on the Uses Side: Even a
Uniform Tax Would Change Relative Goods Prices", American Economic Review
87:120-125.
Gabszewicz, J.J., and J.-F. Thisse (1979), "Price Competition, Quality and Income
Disparities", Journal of Economic Theory 20:340-359.
Gale, W., S. Houser, and J.K. Scholz (1996), "Distributional Effects of Fundamental Tax
Reform", in: H. Aaron, and W. Gale, eds., Economic Effects of Fundamental Tax Reform
(Brookings Institution, Washington, DC) 281-315.
Gentry, W., and R.G. Hubbard (1997), "Distributional Implications of Introducing a
Broad-Based Consumption Tax", Tax Policy and the Economy 11:1-47.
Gokhale, J., B. Page, R., and J.R. Sturrock (1999), "Generational Accounts for the United
States: An Update", in: A.J. Auerbach, et al., eds., Generational Accounting around the
World (University of Chicago Press, Chicago) 489-517.
Gordon, R.H., and J. Slemrod (1983), "A General Equilibrium Simulation Study of
Subsidies to Municipal Expenditures", Journal of Finance 38:585-594.
Graetz, M.J. (1995), "Distributional Tables, Tax Legislation, and the Illusion of
Precision", in: D.F. Bradford, ed., Distributional Analysis of Tax Policy (AEI Press,
Washington, DC) 15-78.

-81-

March 4, 2002

Gravelle, J.G., and K. Smetters (2001), Who Bears the Burden of the Corporate Tax in
the Open Economy (NBER Working Paper 8280, Cambridge, MA).
Grieson, R.E. (1975), "The Incidence of Profit Taxes in a Neo-Classical Growth Model",
Journal of Public Economics 4:75-85.
Gruber, J. (1997), "The Incidence of Payroll Taxation: Evidence from Chile", Journal of
Labor Economics 15:S72-101.
Hall, R.E. (1988), "The Relationship between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S. Industry",
Journal of Political Economy 96:921-947.
Hall, R.E., and D.W. Jorgenson (1967), "Tax Policy and Investment Behavior",
American Economic Review 57:391-414.
Hall, R.E., and A. Rabushka (1995), The Flat Tax (Hoover Institution Press, Stanford).
Hamilton, B.W. (1975), "Zoning and Property Taxation in a System of Local
Governments", Urban Studies 12:205-211.
Hamilton, B.W. (1976), "Capitalization of Intrajurisdictional Differences in Local Tax
Prices", American Economic Review 66:743-753.
Harberger, A.C. (1962), "The Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax", Journal of
Political Economy 70:215-240.
Harris, J.E. (1987), "The 1983 Increase in the Federal Cigarette Excise Tax", Tax Policy
and the Economy 1:87-111.
Harris, R. (1984), "Applied General Equilibrium Analysis of Small Open Economies
with Scale Economies and Imperfect Competition", American Economic Review
74:1016-1032.
Hausman, J.A. (1981), "Exact Consumer's Surplus and Deadweight Loss", American
Economic Review 71:662-676.
Hines, J.R., Jr., J.C. Hlinko, and T.J.F. Lubke (1995), "From Each According to His
Surplus: Equi-Proportionate Sharing of Commodity Tax Burdens", Journal of Public
Economics 58:417-428.
Hotelling, H. (1929), "Stability in Competition", The Economic Journal 39:41-57.
Joint Committee on Taxation (1993), Methodology and Issues in Measuring Changes in
the Distribution of Tax Burdens (U.S. Congress, Washington, DC).
Joint Committee on Taxation (2000), Distributional Effects of the Chairman's
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R. 3916 (Repeal of the Federal
Communications Excise Tax) for Markup by the Committee on Ways and Means on May
17, 2000 (U.S. Congress, Washington, DC).

-82-

March 4, 2002

Jones, R.W. (1965), "The Structure of Simple General Equilibrium Models", Journal of
Political Economy 73:557-572.
Judd, K.L. (1985a), "Redistributive Taxation in a Simple Perfect Foresight Model",
Journal of Public Economics 28:59-83.
Judd, K.L. (1985b), "Short-Run Analysis of Fiscal Policy in a Simple Perfect Foresight
Model", Journal of Political Economy 93:298-319.
Judd, K.L. (1987), "A Dynamic Theory of Factor Taxation", American Economic Review
77:42-48.
Karp, L.S., and J.M. Perloff (1989), "Estimating Market Structure and Tax Incidence:
The Japanese Television Market", Journal of Industrial Economics 37:225-239.
Kasten, R., F. Sammartino, and E. Toder (1994), "Trends in Federal Tax Progressivity,
1980-93", in: J. Slemrod, ed., Tax Progressivity and Income Inequality (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge) 9-50.
Katz, M., and H.S. Rosen (1985), "Tax Analysis in an Oligopoly Model", Public Finance
Quarterly 13:3-19.
Kay, J.A., and M.J. Keen (1983), "How Should Commodities Be Taxed?", European
Economic Review 23:339-358.
Kiefer, D.W. (1984), "Distributional Tax Progressivity Indexes", National Tax Journal
37:497-513.
Kotlikoff, L.J. (2000), "The A-K Model -- Its Past, Present, and Future", in: G. Harrison,
et al., eds., Using Dynamic CGE Models for Policy Analysis (North Holland,
Amsterdam).
Kotlikoff, L.J. (2001), "Generational Policy", in: A.J. Auerbach, and M. Feldstein, eds.,
Handbook of Public Economics, Vol. 3 (Elsevier, Amsterdam).
Kotlikoff, L.J., and L.H. Summers (1987), "Tax Incidence", in: A. Auerbach, and M.
Feldstein, eds., Handbook of Public Economics, Vol. 2 (Elsevier Science, Amsterdam)
1043-1092.
Krugman, P. (1980), "Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of
Trade", American Economic Review 70:950-959.
Krzyzaniak, M., and R.A. Musgrave (1963), The Shifting of the Corporation Income Tax
(Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore).
Lakin, C. (2001), "The Effects of Taxes and Benefits on Household Income, 1999-2000,"
Economic Trends 569:35-74.

-83-

March 4, 2002

Lyon, A.B., and R.M. Schwab (1995), "Consumption Taxes in a Life-Cycle Framework:
Are Sin Taxes Regressive?", Review of Economics and Statistics 77:389-406.
Marshall, A. (1890), Principles of Economics, 8th ed. (Macmillan and Co., London).
McClellan, M., and J. Skinner (1997), The Incidence of Medicare (NBER Working Paper
6013, Cambridge, MA).
McLure, C.E. (1970), "Taxation, Substitution, and Industrial Location", Journal of
Political Economy 78:112-132.
McLure, C.E., Jr. (1974), "A Diagrammatic Exposition of the Harberger Model with One
Immobile Factor", Journal of Political Economy 82:56-82.
McLure, C.E., Jr. (1975), "General Equilibrium Incidence Analysis: The Harberger
Model after Ten Years", Journal of Public Economics 4:125-161.
McLure, C.E., Jr., and W.R. Thirsk (1975), "A Simplified Exposition of the Harberger
Model, I: Tax Incidence", National Tax Journal 28:1-27.
Menchik, P.L., and M. David (1982), "The Incidence of a Lifetime Consumption Tax",
National Tax Journal 35:189-203.
Metcalf, G.E. (1994), "The Lifetime Incidence of State and Local Taxes: Measuring
Changes During the 1980s", in: J. Slemrod, ed., Tax Progressivity and Income Inequality
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge) 59-88.
Metcalf, G.E. (1999), "A Distributional Analysis of Green Tax Reforms", National Tax
Journal 52:655-681.
Metcalf, G.E., and G. Norman (2001), Oligopoly Deregulation and the Taxation of
Commodities (Tufts University Working Paper, Medford, MA).
Mieszkowski, P.M. (1972), "The Property Tax: An Excise Tax or a Profits Tax?", Journal
of Public Economics 1:73-96.
Mieszkowski, P., and G.R. Zodrow (1985), "The Incidence of a Partial State Corporate
Income Tax", National Tax Journal 38:489-496.
Modigliani, F., and R. Brumberg (1954), "Utility Analysis and the Consumption
Function: An Interpretation of Cross-Section Data", in: K.K. Kurihara, ed., PostKeynesian Economics (Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick) 388-436.
Musgrave, R.A. (1959), The Theory of Public Finance (McGraw-Hill, New York).
Musgrave, R.A. (1974), "Is a Property Tax on Housing Regressive?", American
Economic Review 64:222-229.

-84-

March 4, 2002

Musgrave, R.A., K.E. Case, and H. Leonard (1974), "The Distribution of Fiscal Burdens
and Benefits", Public Finance Quarterly 2:259-311.
Mutti, J., and H. Grubert (1985), "The Taxation of Capital Income in an Open Economy:
The Importance of Resident-Nonresident Tax Treatment", Journal of Public Economics
27:291-309.
Oates, W.E. (1969), "The Effects of Property Taxes and Local Public Spending on
Property Values: An Empirical Study of Tax Capitalization and the Tiebout Hypothesis",
Journal of Political Economy 77:957-971.
Pechman, J. (1985), Who Paid the Taxes: 1966-85? (Brookings Institution Press,
Washington DC).
Pechman, J.A. (1987), "Pechman's Tax Incidence Study: A Response", American
Economic Review 77:232-234.
Pechman, J.A., and B.A. Okner (1974), Who Bears the Tax Burden? (Brookings
Institution Press, Washington, DC).
Poterba, J. (1989), "Lifetime Incidence and the Distributional Burden of Excise Taxes",
American Economic Review 79:325-330.
Poterba, J. (1996), "Retail Price Reactions to Changes in State and Local Sales Taxes",
National Tax Journal 49:165-176.
Ramsey, F.P. (1928), "A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation", The Economic Journal
37:47-61.
Salop, S.C. (1979), "Monopolistic Competition with Outside Goods", Bell Journal of
Economics 10:141-156.
Seade, J.E. (1985), Profitable Cost Increases and the Shifting of Taxation: Equilibrium
Responses of Markets in Oligopoly (University of Warwick, Warwick).
Shaked, A., and J. Sutton (1982), "Relaxing Price Competition through Product
Differentiation", The Review of Economic Studies 49:3-13.
Shoven, J.B., and J. Whalley (1984), "Applied General Equilibrium Models of Taxation
and International Trade: An Introduction and Survey", Journal of Economic Literature
22:1007-1051.
Simon, H.A. (1943), "The Incidence of a Tax on Urban Real Property," Quarterly Journal
of Economics 59:398-420.
Slemrod, J.B. (1992), "Taxation and Inequality: A Time-Exposure Perspective", Tax
Policy and the Economy 6:105-127.

-85-

March 4, 2002

Spence, M. (1976), "Product Selection, Fixed Costs, and Monopolistic Competition",
Review of Economic Studies 43:217-235.
Starrett, D. (1988), "Effects of Taxes on Savings", in: H.J. Aaron, et al., eds., Uneasy
Compromise: Problems of a Hybrid Income-Consumption Tax (Brookings Institution
Press, Washington, DC) 237-268.
Stern, N. (1987), "The Effects of Taxation, Price Control and Government Contracts in
Oligopoly and Monopolistic Competition", Journal of Public Economics 32:133-158.
Stiglitz, J.E. (1973), "Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy, and the Costs of Capital,"
Journal of Public Economics 2:1-34.
Suits, D.B. (1977), "Measurement of Tax Progressivity", American Economic Review
67:747-752.
Summers, L.H. (1985), "The Asset Price Approach to the Analysis of Capital Income
Taxation", in: G.R. Feiwil, ed., Issues in Contemporary Macroeconomics and
Distribution (Macmillan, London) 429-443.
Tiebout, C.M. (1956), "A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures", Journal of Political
Economy 64:416-424.
Tirole, J. (1988), The Theory of Industrial Organization (The MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA).
Tobin, J. (1969), "A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory", Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking 36:227-239.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (1999), Statistical Abstract of the United States: 1999 (U.S.
Government Printing Office, Washington, DC).
Vandendorpe, A.L., and A.F. Friedlaender (1976), "Differential Incidence in the Presence
of Initial Distorting Taxes", Journal of Public Economics 6:205-229.
Venables, A.J. (1986), "Production Subsidies, Import Tariffs, and Imperfectly
Competitive Trade", in: D. Greenaway, and P.K.M. Tharakan, eds., Imperfect
Competition and International Trade (Wheatsheaf, Sussex).
Willig, R. (1976), "Consumer's Surplus without Apology", American Economic Review
66:589-597.
Zodrow, G. (2001), "The Property Tax as a Capital Tax: A Room with Three Views",
National Tax Journal 54:139-156.
Zodrow, G.R., and P.M. Mieszkowski (1983), "The Incidence of the Property Tax: The
Benefit View Vs. The New View", in: G.R. Zodrow, ed., Local Provision of Public
Services: The Tiebout Model after Twenty-Five Years (Academic Press, New York) 109129.

