                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               ECONOMIC BACKWARDNESS IN POLITICAL PERSPECTIVE


                                          Daron Acemoglu
                                         James A. Robinson


                                        Working Paper 8831
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w8831


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2002




We are grateful to Hans-Joachim Voth and seminar participants at the Canadian Institute of Advanced
Research, DELTA, Harvard, Pompeu Fabra and Stanford for comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Daron Acemoglu and James A. Robinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Economic Backwardness in Political Perspective
Daron Acemoglu and James A. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 8831
March 2002
JEL No. H2, N10, N40, O1, O3, O4



                                              ABSTRACT

        We construct a simple model where political elites may block technological and institutional
development, because of a "political replacement effect''. Innovations often erode elites' incumbency
advantage, increasing the likelihood that they will be replaced. Fearing replacement, political elites are
unwilling to initiate change, and may even block economic development. We show that elites are
unlikely to block development when there is a high degree of political competition, or when they are
highly entrenched. It is only when political competition is limited and also their power is threatened that
elites will block development. We also show that such blocking is more likely to arise when political
stakes are higher, and that external threats may reduce the incentives to block. We argue that this model
provides an interpretation for why Britain, Germany and the U.S. industrialized during the nineteenth
century, while the landed aristocracy in Russia and Austria-Hungary blocked development.




Daron Acemoglu                                           James A. Robinson
Massachusetts Institute of Technology                    University of California at Berkeley
Department of Economics                                  Department of Political Science and
E52-380                                                  Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive                                        210 Barrows Hall
Cambridge, MA 02142                                      Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER                                                 jamesar@socrates.berkeley.edu
daron@mit.edu
I.   Introduction

     Government policies and institutions shape economic incentives, and via this chan-
nel, have a first-order impact on economic development. Why, then, do many societies
adopt policies that discourage investment and maintain institutions that cause economic
backwardness? Perhaps, politically powerful groups (elites) are not in favor of economic
growth. But why? It would appear that economic growth would provide more resources
for these groups to take over or tax, increasing their economic returns. So why don’t
powerful groups always support economic development?
     In this paper, we develop a theory of ineﬃcient government policies and institu-
tions. All else equal, politically powerful groups would welcome superior institutions
and technologies. But in practice all else is not equal, because superior institutions and
technologies may reduce their political power, and make it more likely that they will be re-
placed. At the center of our theory is therefore the idea of “a political replacement eﬀect”:
changes in institutions or the introduction of new technologies often create turbulence,
eroding the advantage of political incumbents. This makes politically powerful groups
fear losing power and oppose economic and political change, even when such change will
benefit society as a whole.
     To understand the mechanism at work and its potential applications, consider a
concrete example: industrialization in the nineteenth century. Bairoch (1982) estimates
that between 1830 and 1913, world manufacturing output increased by a factor of 5
(see Table 1 Panel A). Nevertheless, this process was highly uneven across regions and
countries. He also calculates that over the same period manufacturing output in developed
countries (Europe and North America) increased by a factor of over 10, while it declined
in the Third World. Among developed countries, there were also marked diﬀerences:
while Britain and the U.S. adopted new technologies and industrialized rapidly, Russia,
Austria-Hungary and Spain lagged behind. Why did these countries fail to adopt new
technologies that would have increased their incomes?
     These diﬀerences in performance motivated Gerschenkron’s famous essay, Economic
Backwardness in Historical Perspective (1962), which focused on how relatively backward
economies lacking the economic prerequisites for industrialization could compensate in
diﬀerent ways, and assumed that there was no variation in the desire to industrialize.
However, in later work Gerschenkron recognized that the desire to promote the institu-


                                             1
tions necessary for industrialization varied considerably across countries. Indeed, in the
countries that lagged the most, rather than actively promoting industrialization, political
elites opposed it. Gerschenkron argued that in the case of Austria-Hungary, the state not
only failed to promote industrialization, but rather

        “economic progress began to be viewed with great suspicion and the railroads
        came to be regarded, not as welcome carriers of goods and persons, but as
        carriers of the dreaded revolution. Then the State clearly became an obstacle
        to the economic development of the country.” (1970, p. 89).

       So the problem of understanding why industrialization was rapid in some countries,
while in others it did not get oﬀ the ground, is closely related to understanding why in some
countries the state encouraged industrialization, while in others it did not. More explicitly:
why did the state and the political elites in some societies not only fail to encourage
industrialization but even go as far as blocking the introduction of new technologies, as
well as of economic institutions necessary for industrialization, such as the production of
well-functioning factor markets, property rights, and legal systems?1
       Our answer emphasizes the political replacement eﬀect:2 political elites will block
beneficial economic and institutional change when they are afraid that these changes will
destabilize the existing system and make it more likely for them to lose political power and
future rents. In the context of industrialization, the monarchy and landowning interests,
opposed industrialization and the necessary institutional changes, precisely because these
changes were likely to erode their political power. In fact, in most cases, the rise of mar-
kets and industrialization have been associated with a shift of political power away from
traditional rulers and landowners towards industrial and commercial interests, and ulti-
mately to popular interests and the masses. For example, in Russia the Tzar and political
elites were initially strongly opposed to industrialization, or even to the introduction of
railways. When industrialization in Russia finally got underway after the Crimean War,
it brought social turbulence in urban centers, and political and social change, culminating
   1
      Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001) present evidence that only countries with good institutions
were able to benefit from the opportunity to industrialize during the nineteenth century.
    2
      The intuition is similar to the well-known “replacement eﬀect” in industrial organization, emphasized
by Arrow (1962), whereby incumbent monopolists are less willing to innovate than entrants because they
would be partially replacing their own rents. Here too, incumbents are less willing to innovate because
they would be destroying part of their incumbency advantage and political rents. This motivates the use
of the term “political replacement eﬀect”.


                                                    2
in the 1905 Revolution. This is the idea underlying our political replacement eﬀect. Even
though the political elites in Russia may have preferred industrialization if they could be
sure of maintaining power and taxing the proceeds, in practice they did oppose it because
they were afraid of losing their political power.
     The presence of the political replacement eﬀect implies that a Coase Theorem type
of logic, maintaining that investments that increase the size of the social pie will always
be carried out, does not apply. There is no (credible) way of compensating ex post the
political elites who lose their power. So when they have power, these elites may want to
prevent technological and institutional change, even though such change would increase
the size of the social pie.
     In addition to proposing a mechanism for why countries may fail to adopt superior
technologies and institutions, our framework also gives a number of comparative static
results that are useful in interpreting the historical evidence. We show that both politi-
cal elites that are subject to competition and those that are highly entrenched are likely
to adopt new technologies. With intense political competition, elites prefer to innovate,
because otherwise they are likely to be replaced. With a high degree of entrenchment,
incumbents are willing to innovate, because they are not afraid of losing political power.
It is elites that are entrenched but still fear replacement that will block innovation. This
non-monotonicity provides an interesting interpretation of the cross-country diﬀerences
in industrialization. New technologies were rapidly adopted in the U.S. where there was
a high degree of political competition, and in Britain and subsequently Germany where
the political elites–the landed aristocracy– were suﬃciently entrenched. In contrast, in
Russia and Austria-Hungary, where the monarchy and the aristocracy controlled the po-
litical system, but feared replacement, they were firmly against industrialization. Instead,
they continued to rely on the existing system of production, including the feudal relations
between lords and serfs.
     We will also show that economic change is more likely to be blocked when there
are greater rents to political elites from staying in power. This suggests another factor
contributing to stagnation in Russia and Austria-Hungary may have been the substantial
rents obtained by the landed aristocracy from the more feudal labor relations in the agri-
cultural sector of these countries. Rents were also influenced by the political institutions.
At the dawn of the nineteenth century both Russia and Austria-Hungary were ruled by
absolute monarchies who were unconstrained by representative political institutions. In


                                             3
the U.S. and Britain political institutions were very diﬀerent. The U.S. constitution with
its separation of powers, checks and balances, and distribution of authority between state
and federal levels of government several restricted political rents. In Britain the absolute
monarchy had been to a large extent emasculated by the Glorious Revolution of 1688 and
had lost many prerogatives. Therefore, an important determinant of attitudes towards
change will be the pre-existing political institutions: when these institutions limit political
rents, elites will be more favorable towards change.3
       The reasoning on the role of rents also suggests that diﬀerences in the level of human
capital may be important in shaping the elites’ attitudes towards industrialization; since
human capital is complementary to industrial activity, a high level of human capital makes
future gains from industrialization larger relative the rents from preserving the existing
system, thus discouraging blocking by the elites.4
       Finally, we show that external threats often make incumbents more pro-innovation,
since falling behind technologically makes counties vulnerable to foreign invasion. This
insight may explain why the Russian defeat in the Crimean war or the American blockade
of Japan changed political elites’ attitudes towards industrialization and modernization.
       There is now a large literature on the political economy of growth. One strand, for
example, Alesina and Rodrik (1994) and Persson and Tabellini (1994), emphasizes that
high taxation reduces the incentives to invest. Another strand, for instance Lancaster
(1973), Bardhan (1984), Tornell and Velasco (1992), Benhabib and Rustichini (1996),
and Alesina and Perotti (1996), argues that non-cooperative distributional conflict dis-
courages investment and growth.5 Another strand, for example Olson (1996), argues that
   3
     Hence, in some sense, our analysis attempts to explain why some countries developed Gerschenkron’s
(1962) economic prerequisites for industrialization, while others did not. In doing so, it emphasizes
the importance of “institutional prerequisites,” which encouraged economic and institutional change by
reducing the rents that political elites would obtain by blocking change.
   4
     Human capital diﬀerences could also matter through nonpolitical channels. More generally, although
there are a variety of nonpolitical reasons for the diﬀerences in industrialization, our reading of the
evidence, discussed in detail in Section VI, suggests that political factors were essential. This view
supported by the notion that Russia and Austria-Hungary industrialized rapidly once the political barriers
were removed or weakened, for example, following the Crimean war in Russia and the 1848 Revolution
in Austria-Hungary.
   5
     Both of these approaches could be adapted to generate predictions about technology adoption and
institutional change. For example, failure to adopt institutions encouraging investment and new tech-
nologies in Russia or Austria-Hungary could be linked to higher inequality in these countries, leading to
higher rates of taxation or political instability. Nevertheless, the comparative statics derived in this liter-
ature do not do a good job of capturing the essential elements of the nineteenth-century industrialization
experience. First, income and capital tax rates were low in all countries and probably higher in Britain
than Russia where the state had little fiscal base. Second, while Britain and the United States were


                                                      4
coordinated instititional changes are needed to promote development and this poses a
collective action problem. However, our reading of the evidence suggests that when po-
litical elites wanted to promote institutonal change, such as in Russia after the defeat in
the Crimean war and in Japan under the threat of Western domination, they could do so
very eﬀectively.
     More related is the literature on interest group politics. This literature suggests that
existing powerful interest groups may block the introduction of new technologies in order
to protect their economic rents, and societies are able to make technological advances
only if they can defeat such groups. In the context of development economics, this idea
was first discussed by Kuznets (1968), developed at length by Olson (1982) and Mokyr
(1990), and formalized by Krusell and Rios-Rull (1996) and Parente and Prescott (2000).
Although the idea that monopolists, or other interest groups, may block technical change
at first appears similar to the thesis in this paper, it is fundamentally diﬀerent. We argue
that what is important is not economic rents that will be destroyed by the introduction
of new technologies, but the political power of the elites. After all, if the groups that have
the political power to block change were to maintain their political power after the change
is implemented, why wouldn’t they be able to use the same power to redistribute some
of the gains to themselves? This reasoning suggests that whether certain groups will lose
economically or not is not as essential to their attitudes towards change as whether their
political power will be eroded. This view is consistent with the fact that British landed
aristocracy, which maintained its political power, supported industrialization despite its
adverse eﬀects on land values (see Section VI).
     Finally, this paper relates to our previous research emphasizing the importance of
political factors in economic development, e.g. Acemoglu and Robinson (2000a,b) and
Robinson (1997). In particular, in Acemoglu and Robinson (2000a), we suggested the idea
that the greater impediment to economic development was not groups whose economic
interests were adversely aﬀected by economic change, but those whose political power
were threatened. This paper formalizes that idea and analyzes the interaction between
political competition and the desire of political elites’ to block innovation.6
probably the most stable countries politically, Germany experienced the 1848 revolutions as intensely as
Austria-Hungary did.
   6
     Chaudhry and Garner (2001a) incorporate the idea suggested in Acemoglu and Robinson (2000a)
into a growth model. Bourguignion and Verdier (2000) is another related paper, since they analyze how
political elite may want to prevent the masses from obtaining education, because educated individuals are
more likely to vote. A more recent paper by Garner and Chaudhry (2001b) analyzes in detail a model of


                                                   5
      It is also interesting to note in this context that our proposed theory reverses the
standard view in Marxist social science and much of economics that economic forces
(the substructure) shape political processes (the superstructure). While emphasizing the
economic interests influencing political decisions, our theory is about political forces–
concerns about political power–determining whether superior institutions and technolo-
gies will be adopted, and therefore whether beneficial economic change will take place.
      The paper is organized as follows. Section II outlines our basic model and charac-
terizes the optimal technology/institutions adoption decision. Section III looks at the
decentralized equilibrium, and shows why political elites may not want to introduce su-
perior technologies or institutions. It also establishes the non-monotonicity result that it
will be elites that are partially entrenched, and fear replacement, that are more likely to
resist change. In Section IV, we extend the model to include additional sources of rents
for political elites as well as human capital diﬀerences. We show that when the political
stakes are higher, new innovations are less likely to be adopted, while greater human
capital makes innovation more likely. Section V shows how external threats might induce
more positive attitudes towards economic change among political elites. In Section VI, we
interpret the historical experience of European and Japanese industrialization through the
lenses of our model, and discuss why attitudes towards innovation in hierarchical societies
may have been adverse.


II.    The Basic Model

      We now discuss a simple model to illustrate the political mechanism preventing the
introduction of superior technologies and institutions.

A.     The Environment
      Consider an infinite horizon economy in discrete time consisting of a group of citizens,
with mass normalized to 1, an incumbent ruler, and an infinite stream of potential new
rulers. All agents are infinitely lived, maximize the net present discounted value of their
political competition between countries, and shows how political competition can foster growth, and also
how institutional reform in one country, which leads to innovation there, may create positive spillovers on
a neighboring country that will feel threatened (see also Robinson, 1997, on this). Finally, a recent paper
by Aghion, Alesina and Trebbi (2001) analyzes how the extent of entrenchment of politicians aﬀects their
willingness to undertake political reform.



                                                    6
income and discount the future with discount factor, β. While citizens are infinitely lived,
an incumbent ruler may be replaced by a new ruler, and from then on receives no utility.
       There is only one good in this economy, and each agent produces:

                                               yt = At ,

where At is the state of “technology” available to the citizens at time t. At should be
thought of as technology broadly construed, so that it also captures the nature of economic
institutions critical to production. For example, a change in the enforcement of property
rights such as the creation of new legal institutions, or the removal of regulations that
prevent productive activities, or any kind of political and economic reform that encourages
investment would correspond to an increase in At . In light of this, we will use the terms
“innovate” and “adopt the new technology and “institutional change” interchangeably.
       When a new technology is introduced or there is beneficial institutional change, A
increases to αA, where α > 1. The cost of adopting the new technology or initiating
institutional change is normalized to 0. In addition, if there is political change and the
incumbent ruler is replaced, this also aﬀects the output potential of the economy as
captured by A. In particular, when the incumbent does not adopt a new technology,
the “cost of political change”–that is, the cost of replacing the incumbent–is zA, while
this cost is z 0 A when he introduces the new technology. Notice that this “cost” can be
negative; it may be less costly to replace the incumbent ruler than keeping him in place,
for example because he is “incompetent”.
       Therefore, more formally:

         At = At−1 ((1 − pt )(1 + (α − 1)xt )) + pt (1 + (α − 1)xbt − xt z 0 − (1 − xt ) z)) ,     (1)

where xt = 1 or 0 denotes whether the new technology is introduced (xt = 1) or not
(xt = 0) at time t by the incumbent ruler, while xbt = 1 or 0 refers to the innovation
decision of a new ruler. Also, pt = 1 denotes that the incumbent is replaced, while pt = 0
applies when the incumbent is kept in place.7
       When xt = 0, the cost of replacing the ruler is z, and when xt = 1, it is z 0 . This
allows us to model the notion that costs of political change depend on whether the new
   7
     Notice that if the incumbent is replaced, what matters is the innovation decision of the newcomer.
So even when the incumbent has chosen xt = 1, if the newcomer chooses x     bt = 0, the new technology
will not be introduced. This assumption is inconsequential, however, since we will see below that the
newcomer will always choose x bt = 1.


                                                  7
technology has been adopted. When the new technology is not introduced, the position
of the incumbent is relatively secure, and it will be more costly to replace him. When the
new technology is adopted, there is political uncertainty and turbulence, and part of the
advantages of the incumbent are eroded. As a result, the cost of replacing the incumbent
may be lower.
        More explicitly, we assume that z and z 0 are random variables, enabling stochastic
changes in rulers along the equilibrium path. The distribution function of these two
shocks diﬀer: z is drawn from the distribution F N and z 0 is drawn from F I , which is
first-order stochastically dominated by F N , capturing the notion that the introduction of
a new technology erodes part of the incumbency advantage of the initial ruler.
                                                                                  h               i
        To simplify the algebra, we assume that F I is uniform over µ − 12 , µ +              1
                                                                                              2
                                                                                                      , while
                       h                        i
    N                          1            1
F       is uniform over γµ −   2
                                 , γµ   +   2
                                                    , where γ ≥ 1. In this formulation, µ is an inverse
measure of the degree of political competition: when µ is low, incumbents have little
advantage, and when µ is high, it is costly to replace the incumbent. Note that µ can be
less than 12 , and in fact, we will focus much of the discussion on the case in which µ < 12 ,
so that citizens sometimes replace rulers. The case of µ = 0 is of particular interest, since
it implies that there is no incumbency advantage, and z is symmetric around zero.
        On the other hand, γ is a measure of how much the incumbency advantage is eroded
by the introduction of a new technology: when γ = 1, the costs of replacing the ruler are
identical irrespective of whether a new technology is introduced or not. A new entrant
becomes the incumbent ruler in the following period after he takes control, and it will, in
turn, be costly to replace him.
        Citizens replace the ruler if a new ruler provides them with higher utility. This
assumption is made for simplicity, and similar results are obtained if citizens’ replacement
decision translates into stochastic replacement of rulers (e.g., via revolution, coup, or
simple shift of power). We assume that if an incumbent is replaced then whether or not
innovation takes place in that period depends on what the new ruler does. Thus if the
incumbent innovates but is replaced the new ruler can decide not to innovate and this
implies that there is no innovation (though as we shall see along the equilibrium path a
new ruler always innovates).
        Finally, rulers levy a tax T on citizens. We assume that when the technology is A,
citizens have access to a non-taxable informal technology that produces (1 − τ )A. This
implies that it will never be optimal for rulers to impose a tax greater than τ .


                                                          8
       It is useful to spell out the exact timing of events within the period.

      1. The period starts with technology at At .

      2. The incumbent decides whether to adopt the new technology, xt = 0 or 1.

      3. The stochastic costs of replacement, zt or zt0 , are revealed.

      4. Citizens decide whether to replace the ruler, pt .

      5. If they replace the ruler, a new ruler comes to power and decides whether to adopt
         the new technology xbt = 0 or 1.

      6. The ruler in power decides the tax rate, Tt .

B.       Social Planner’s Solution
       We start by characterizing the technology adoption and replacement decisions that
would be taken by an output-maximizing social planner. This can be done by writing the
end-of-period Bellman equation for the social planner, S(A). As with all value functions,
we use the convention that S(A) refers to the end-of-period value function (after step 6 in
the timing of events above). By standard arguments, this value function can be written
as:

       S(A) = A +                                                                                                   (2)

         ·       Z h³              ´                    ³                                               ´i
             S
       β x              1 − pSI (z 0 ) S(αA) + pSI (z 0 ) xbS S((α − z 0 ) A) + (1 − xbS )S((1 − z 0 ) A)        dF I +

                   Z h³                ´                    ³                                               ´i          ¸
       (1 − xS )           1 − pSN (z) S(A) + pSN (z) xbS S((α − z) A) + (1 − xbS )S((1 − z) A)                  dF N

where xS denotes whether the social planner dictates that the incumbent adopts the new
technology, while xbS denotes the social planner’s decision of whether to adopt the new
technology when he replaces the incumbent with a new ruler. pSI (z 0 ) ∈ {0, 1} denotes
whether the planner decides to replace an incumbent who has innovated when the real-
ization of the cost of replacement is z 0 , while pSN (z) ∈ {0, 1} is the decision to keep an
incumbent who has not innovated as a function of the realization z.


                                                                9
      Intuitively, when technology is given by A, the total output of the economy is A,
and the continuation value depends on the innovation and the replacement decisions.
If xS = 1, the social planner induces the incumbent to adopt the new technology, and
the social value when he is not replaced is S(αA). When the planner decides to replace
the incumbent, there is a new ruler and the social planner decides if he will adopt the
new technology, xbS . In this case, conditional on the cost realization, z 0 , the social value
is S((α − z 0 ) A) or S((1 − z 0 ) A) depending on whether the new technology is adopted.
Notice that if xbS = 1 and the newcomer innovates, this aﬀects the output potential of
the economy immediately, hence the term (α − z 0 ) A. The second line of (2) is explained
similarly following a decision by the planner not to innovate. The important point in this
case is that the cost of replacement is drawn from the distribution F N not from F I .
      By standard arguments, S (A) is strictly increasing in A. This immediately implies
that S((α − z 0 ) A) > S((1 − z 0 ) A) since α > 1, so the planner will always choose xbS = 1.
The same reasoning implies that the social planner would like to replace an incumbent
who has innovated when S((α − z 0 ) A) > S(αA), i.e., when z 0 < 0. Similarly, she would
like to replace an incumbent who has not innovated when S((α − z) A) > S(A), i.e., when
z < α − 1. Substituting for these decision rules in (2), the decision to innovate or not
boils down to a comparison of
                                   ÃZ                         !       ÃZ                                !
                                      µ+ 12                              0
                                                          0                              0          0
         Value from innovating =              S (αA) dz           +             S ((α − z ) A) dz
                                      0                                 µ− 12

and
                                      ÃZ                          !    ÃZ                               !
                                         γµ+ 12                           α−1
        Value from not innovating =               S (A) dz +                       S ((α − z) A) dz
                                          α−1                             γµ− 12

In the Appendix, we show that the first expression is always greater. Therefore, the social
planner always innovates. Intuitively, the society receives two benefits from innovating:
first, output is higher, and second the expected cost of replacing the incumbent is lower.
Both of these benefits imply that the social planner always strictly prefers xS = 1. For
future reference, we state:

Proposition 1 The social planner always innovates, that is, xS = 1.


III.     Equilibrium

      We now characterize the decentralized equilibrium of this game. We will limit at-
tention to pure strategy Markov Perfect Equilibria (MPE) of this repeated game. The

                                                10
strategy of the incumbent in each stage game is simply a technology adoption decision,
x ∈ [0, 1], and a tax rate T ∈ [0, 1] when in power, the strategy of a new entrant is also
similarly, an action, xb ∈ {0, 1} and a tax rate Tb . The strategy of the citizens consists
of a replacement rule, p (x, z, z 0 ) ∈ {0, 1}, with p = 1 corresponding to replacing the
incumbent. The action of citizens is conditioned on x, because they move following the
technology adoption decision of the incumbent. At this point, they observe z, which is
relevant to their payoﬀ, if x = 0, and z 0 , if x = 1. An MPE of this game consists of a
                         n                       o
strategy combination x, T, xb, Tb , p (x, z, z 0 ) , such that all these actions are best responses
to each other for all values of the state A.
     We will characterize the MPEs of this game by writing the appropriate Bellman
equations. Let us denote the end-of-period value function of citizens by V (A) (once again
this is evaluated after step 6 in the timing of events), with A inclusive of the improvement
due to technology adoption and the losses due to turbulence and political change during
this period. With a similar reasoning to the social planner’s problem we have

     V (A) = A(1 − T ) +                                                                              (3)

       · Z
     β x     [(1 − pI (z 0 )) V (αA) + pI (z 0 ) (xbV ((α − z 0 ) A) + (1 − xb)V ((1 − z 0 ) A))] dF I +

               Z                                                                                      ¸
     (1 − x)       [(1 − pN (z)) V (A) + pN (z) (xbV ((α − z) A) + (1 − xb)V ((1 − z) A))] dF N

where pI (z 0 ) and pN (z) denote the decisions of the citizens to replace the incumbent as
a function of his innovation decision and the cost realization. Intuitively, the citizens
produce A and pay a tax of T A. The next two lines of (3) give the continuation value of
the citizens. This depends on whether the incumbent innovates or not, x = 1 or x = 0,
and on the realization of the cost of replacing the incumbent. For example, following
x = 1, citizens observe z 0 , and decide whether to keep the incumbent. If they do not
replace the incumbent, pI (z 0 ) = 0, then there is no cost, and the value to the citizens
is V (αA). In contrast, if they decide pI (z 0 ) = 1, that is, they replace the incumbent,
then the value is V ((α − z 0 ) A) when the newcomer innovates, and V ((1 − z 0 ) A) when he
doesn’t. The third line is explained similarly as the expected continuation value following
a decision not to innovate by the incumbent.
     The end-of-period value function for a ruler (again evaluated after step 6 in the timing


                                                  11
of the game, so once he knows that he is in power) can be written as
                        · Z                                              Z                              ¸
                                          0                 I                                       N
  W (A) = T A + β x            (1 − pI (z )) W (αA)dF + (1 − x)              (1 − pN (z)) W (A)dF           . (4)

The ruler receives tax revenue of T A, and receives a continuation value which depends on
his innovation decision x next period. This continuation value also depends on the draw
z 0 or z, indirectly through the replacement decisions of the citizens, pI (z 0 ) and pN (z).
          Standard arguments immediately imply that the value of the ruler is strictly increas-
ing in T and A. Since, by construction, in an MPE the continuation value does not depend
on T , the ruler will choose the maximum tax rate T = τ .
          Next, consider the innovation decision of a new ruler. Here, the decision boils down
to the comparison of W ((1 − z) A) and W ((α − z) A). Now the strict monotonicity of (4)
in A and the fact that α > 1 imply that xb = 1 is a dominant strategy for the entrants.
          The citizens’ decision of whether or not to replace the incumbent ruler is also simple.
Again by standard arguments V (A) is strictly increasing in A. Therefore, citizens will
replace the incumbent ruler whenever V (A) < V (A0 ) where A is the output potential
under the incumbent ruler and A0 is the output potential under the newcomer. Now
consider a ruler who has innovated and drawn a cost of replacement z 0 . If citizens keep
him in power, they will receive V (αA). If they replace him, taking into account that the
new ruler will innovate, their value is V ((α − z 0 ) A). Then, their best response is:

                              pI (z 0 ) = 0 if z 0 ≥ 0 and pI (z 0 ) = 1 if z 0 < 0.                          (5)

Next, following a decision not to innovate by the incumbent, citizens compare the value
V (A) from keeping the incumbent to the value of replacing the incumbent and having the
new technology, V ((α − z) A). So:8

                        pN (z) = 0 if z ≥ α − 1 and pN (z) = 0 if z < α − 1.                                  (6)

          Finally, the incumbent will decide whether to innovate by comparing the continuation
values. Using the decision rule of the citizens, the return to innovating is
R µ+ 12
 µ− 12
          (1 − pI (z 0 )) · W (αA)dF I , and the value to not innovating is given by the expression
R γµ+ 12
 γµ− 12
           (1 − pN (z)) · W (A)dF N . Now incorporating the decision rules (5) and (6), and
    8
    Note that replacement rule of the citizen is identical to the one used by the social planner. This shows
that the only source of ineﬃciency in the model stems from the innovation decision by the incumbent
ruler.


                                                       12
exploiting the uniformity of the distribution function F I , we obtain the value of innovating
as                                                                      ·       ¸
                                          h                i 1
               Value from innovating = 1 − F I (0) W (αA) = P  + µ W (αA)           (7)
                                                             2
where the function P is defined as follows: P [h] = 0 if h < 0, P [h] = h if h ∈ [0, 1],
and P [h] = 1 if h > 1, making sure that the first term is a probability (i.e., it does not
become negative or greater than 1). Similarly, the value to the ruler of not innovating is
                              h                i            ·                  ¸
                                     N                        1
  Value from not innovating = 1 − F (α − 1) W (A) = P           + γµ − (α − 1) W (A) ,
                                                              2
                                                                                       (8)
which diﬀers from (7) for two reasons: the probability of replacement is diﬀerent, and the
value conditional on no-replacement is lower.
                                                  h                    i       h          i
                                                      1                            1
         It is straightforward to see that if P       2
                                                          + γµ − (α − 1) < P       2
                                                                                       + µ , so that the
probability of replacement is higher after no-innovation than innovation, the ruler will
always innovate–by innovating, he is increasing both his chances of staying in power and
his returns conditional on staying in power. Therefore, there will only be blocking of
technological or institutional change when
                              ·                 ¸    ·      ¸
                                1                      1
                            P     + γµ − (α − 1) > P     +µ ,                         (9)
                                2                      2
i.e., when innovation, by creating “turbulence,” increases the probability that the ruler
will be replaced. For future reference, note that by the monotonicity and continuity of
the function P [.] there exists a γ̄ such that (9) holds only when γ > γ̄. Therefore, as long
as γ ≤ γ̄, there will be no blocking of new technologies or institutional change.
         To fully characterize the equilibrium, we now conjecture that both value functions
are linear, V (A) = v (x) A and W (A) = w (x) A. The parameters v (x) and w (x) are
conditioned on x, since the exact form of the value function will depend on whether
there is innovation or not.9 Note however that w (x) and r (x) are simply parameters,
independent of the state variable, A. It is straightforward to solve for these coeﬃcients
(see the Appendix). Here, the condition for the incumbent to innovate, that is, for (7) to
be greater than (8), can be written simply as:
                          ·       ¸                 ·                 ¸
                            1                         1
               w (x) αAP      +µ      ≥ w (x) AP        + γµ − (α − 1)                              (10)
                            2                         2
                                    ⇐⇒
                          ·       ¸         ·                  ¸
                            1                  1
                       αP     +µ      ≥ P        + γµ − (α − 1) .
                            2                  2
     9
    More generally, one might want to write v (x, x̂) and w (x, x̂), but we suppress the second argument
since in any MPE, we have x̂ = 1.

                                                  13
     When will the incumbent adopt the new technology? First, consider the case µ = 0,
where there is no incumbency advantage (i.e., the cost of replacing the incumbent is
symmetric around 0). In this case, there is “fierce” competition between the incumbent
                                                               h i        h                   i
                                                                1             1
and the rival. Condition (10) then becomes αP                   2
                                                                     >P       2
                                                                                  − (α − 1) , which is always
satisfied since α > 1. Therefore, when µ = 0, the incumbent will always innovate, i.e.,
x = 1. By continuity, for µ low enough, the incumbent will always innovate. Intuitively,
when µ is low, because the rival is as good as the incumbent, citizens are very likely
to replace an incumbent who does not innovate. As a result, the incumbent innovates
in order to increase his chances of staying in power. The more general implication of
this result is that incumbents facing fierce political competition, with little incumbency
advantage, are likely to innovate because they realize that if they do not innovate they
will be replaced.
     Next, consider the polar opposite case where µ ≥ 1/2, that is, there is a very high
                                                                     h        i           h                     i
                                                                          1                   1
degree of incumbency advantage. In this situation P µ +                   2
                                                                                  =1≥P        2
                                                                                                  + γµ − (α − 1) ,
so there is no advantage from not innovating because the incumbent is highly entrenched
and cannot lose power. This establishes that highly entrenched incumbents will also adopt
the new technology.
     The situation is diﬀerent, however, for intermediate values of µ. Inspection of con-
dition (10) shows that for µ small and γ large, incumbents will prefer not to adopt the
new technology. This is because of the political replacement eﬀect in the case where γ >
γ̄: the introduction of new technology increases the likelihood that the incumbent will be
replaced, eﬀectively eroding his future rents.10 As a result, the incumbent may prefer not
to innovate in order to increase the probability that he maintains power. The reasoning is
similar to the replacement eﬀect in industrial organization emphasized by Arrow (1962):
incumbents are less willing to innovate than entrants since they will be partly replacing
their own rents. Here this replacement refers to the rents that the incumbent is destroying
by increasing the likelihood that he will be replaced.
     To determine the parameter region where blocking happens, note that there can only
                               h         i         h                          i
                                   1                   1
be blocking when both P            2
                                       + µ and P       2
                                                           + γµ − (α − 1) are between 0 and 1, hence
                         1               1
respectively equal to    2
                             + µ and     2
                                             + γµ − (α − 1). Then from (10), it is immediate that
  10
     Notice that this is the opposite of the situation with µ = 0 when the incumbent innovated in order
to increase his chances of staying in power.




                                                       14
there will be blocking when
                                          3α−1
                                                  .
                                               γ >α+                            (11)
                                          2 µ
Hence as α → 1, provided that γ > 1, there will always be blocking. More generally, a
lower gain from innovation, i.e., a lower α, makes blocking more likely.
            It is also clear that a higher level of γ, i.e., higher erosion of the incumbency ad-
vantage, encourages blocking of technological and institutional change. This is intuitive:
the only reason why incumbents block change is the fear of replacement. In addition, in
(11) a higher µ makes blocking more likely. However, note that, as discussed above, the
eﬀect of µ on blocking is non-monotonic. As µ increases further, we reach the point where
    h                         i
        1
P       2
            + γµ − (α − 1) = 1, and then, further increases in µ make blocking less likely–and
                          h          i
                              1
eventually when P             2
                                  + µ = 1, there will never be blocking.
            Clearly, since the social planner always adopts new technologies, whenever the in-
cumbent ruler decides not to adopt, there is ineﬃcient blocking of beneficial technological
and institutional change.
            Finally, also note that condition (10) does not depend on A. Therefore, if an in-
cumbent finds it profitable to block change, all future incumbents will also do so. There
will still be increases in A, as incumbents are sometimes replaced and newcomers under-
take innovations, but there will never be a transition to a political equilibrium with no
blocking. This result will be relaxed in the extended model in the next section.
            We now summarize the main results of this analysis:

Proposition 2 When µ is suﬃciently small or large (political competition very high or
very low), the elites will always innovate. For intermediate values of µ, economic change
may be blocked.

            As emphasized above, elites will block change because of the political replacement
eﬀect: in the region where blocking is beneficial for the incumbent ruler, the probability
that he will be replaced increases when there is economic change. This implies that the
incumbent ruler fails to fully internalize future increases in output, making him oppose
change.
            Perhaps the most interesting results is the non-monotonic relationship between po-
litical institutions, as captured by µ, and economic change. Political competition is often
viewed as a guarantee for good political outcomes, and this view has motivated many


                                                       15
constitutions to create a level playing field (e.g. Madison, 1788, and the U.S. Constitu-
tion). In our model, this corresponds to a low value of µ, ensuring that new technologies
will be adopted, because citizens will remove incumbents who do not innovate. On the
other hand, our mechanism also emphasizes the fear of losing political power as a bar-
rier to innovation. So highly entrenched incumbents, i.e., high µ, will have little to fear
from innovation, and are likely to adopt beneficial economic change. It is therefore rulers
with intermediate values of µ, that is, those that are partially entrenched, but still fear
replacement, that are likely to resist change.11
       What does µ correspond to in practice? Since µ is the only measure of political
competition in our model, it corresponds to both incumbency advantage and lack of
political threats. For example, we think of a society like the U.S. in the nineteenth
century with weak political elites tightly constrained by institutions and high levels of
political participation as corresponding to low µ, while Germany and Britain where the
landed aristocracy, through the House of Lords and the Coalition of Iron and Rye, were
highly entrenched correspond to a high value of µ. Moreover, changes in domestic or
foreign situations can correspond to changes in µ. For example, the defeat of Russia in the
Crimean War is likely to have increased the political threat to the monarchy, consequently
reducing µ. In Section VI, we discuss how these comparative static results, and this
interpretation of incumbency advantage, help us interpret cross-country diﬀerences in the
experience of industrialization in Europe and North America.


IV.      Political Stakes and Development

       So far we have considered a model in which the only benefit of staying in power
was future tax revenues from the same technology that generated income for the citizens.
There are often other sources of (pecuniary and nonpecuniary) rents for political elites,
which will aﬀect the political equilibrium by creating greater “stakes” from staying in
power. This relates to an intuition dating back to Madison (1788) that emphasizes the
benefits of having limited political stakes. We now introduce these additional sources of
  11
    It is interesting at this point to note the parallel with the literature on the eﬀect of product market
competition on innovation. In this literature, low competition encourages innovation by increasing rents,
while high competition might encourage innovation so that incumbents can “escape competition”. Aghion,
Harris, Howitt and Vickers (2001) show that the interplay of these two forces can lead to a non-monotonic
eﬀect of product market competition on innovation, which is similar to the non-monotonic eﬀect of
political competition on economic change emphasized here.



                                                    16
rents for political elites, enabling us to formalize this intuition: when rents from political
power, “political stakes,” are large, for example because of rents from land and natural
resources, or because existing political institutions do not constrain extraction by rulers,
political elites will be more likely to block development. We will also use this extended
model to discuss the importance of human capital in aﬀecting the political equilibrium,
and show that high human capital will make blocking less likely.
    We model these issues in a simple way by allowing income at date t to be At h where h
represents the exogenous stock of human capital. We assume that the structure of taxation
is as before so that now the ruler gets tax income of τ At h and we additionally assume that
a rent of R accrues to the ruler in each period. The two important assumptions here are:
first, the political rent to the incumbent does not grow linearly with technology, A. This
implies that a higher A makes the political rent less important. Second, human capital is
more complementary to technology than to the political rent. Both of these assumptions
are plausible in this context.
    Let us now write the value function for the citizen, denoted Vb (Ah),

    Vb (Ah) = Ah(1 − T ) +                                                                                    (12)

      · Z h                                          ³                                                 ´i
    β x       (1 − pI (z 0 ))Vb (αAh) + pI (z 0 ) xbVb ((α − z 0 )Ah) + (1 − xb)Vb ((1 − z 0 )Ah)           dF I +

              Z h                                        ³                                              ´i          ¸
    (1 − x)         (1 − pN (z))Vb (Ah) + pN (z) xbVb ((α − z)Ah) + (1 − xb)Vb ((1 − z)Ah)                   dF N

                                                                         c (Ah, R), is
Equation (12) is very similar to (3). The value for the incumbent ruler, W

c (Ah, R) = T Ah + R
W
                        · Z                                                      Z                                      ¸
                    +β x      (1 − pI (z   0      c (αAh, R)dF I
                                               )) W                  + (1 − x)       (1 − pN        c (Ah, R)dF N
                                                                                               (z)) W                       .

whose interpretation is immediate from (4). A major diﬀerence from before is that whether
blocking is preferred by the incumbent ruler will now depend on the value of A.
    Again let us start with the decision of citizens. As before, Vb (Ah) is strictly increasing,
so the citizens will use the same replacement rules as before, (5) and (6). Then, with a
similar reasoning, the value to the incumbent ruler of innovating and not innovating at
time t are given by:
                                   h                 i                     ·          ¸
                                                 I       c (αA                1    c (αA h, R)
    Value from innovating = 1 − F (0)                    W        t h, R) = P   +µ W    t                    (13)
                                                                              2

                                                             17
and
                                                          h                     i
                 Value from not innovating =                              c (A h, R)
                                                          1 − F N (α − 1) W                              (14)
                                                                               t
                                                           ·                 ¸
                                                             1                 c (A h, R) ,
                                                       = P     + γµ − (α − 1) W    t
                                                             2
                                                                     c ’s, depend on time,
Notice that although, via the eﬀect of At , the value functions, the W
the probabilities of staying in power do not, since the decision rules of the citizens do not
depend on time.
                                           c is strictly increasing in both of its arguments.
         Next, again by standard arguments W
                              h               i                    h                    i
                                 c (αA h, R) > 1 − F N (α − 1) W
This implies that if 1 − F I (0) W                             c (A h, R), then it is
                                      t                            t
                    h                 i                    h                    i
                           c (αA0 h, R) > 1 − F N (α − 1) W
also true that 1 − F I (0) W                              c (A0 h, R), for all A0 ≥ A .
                                                                                     t

Since innovations increase At , this implies that once an incumbent starts innovating, both
that incumbent and all future incumbents will always innovate.
         This implies that we can characterize the condition for innovation as follows: first
determine the value function for the ruler under the hypothesis that there will always be
innovations in the future, and then check whether the one-step ahead deviation of not
innovating in this period is profitable. To do this, let us make the natural conjecture
that Vb (Ah) = vb (x) Ah and W
                             c (Ah, R) = w
                                         b (x) Ah + rb (x) R, where we have again explic-
itly allowed the coeﬃcients of these value functions to depend on whether there will be
innovation in the future.
         By a similar reasoning to that in Section III, the incumbent ruler innovates if
                                  ·       ¸
                              1
                          P     + µ (wb (x = 1) αAh + rb (x = 1) R)                                      (15)
                            ·
                              2                ¸
                              1
                        ≥ P     + γµ − (α − 1) (wb (x = 1) Ah + rb (x = 1) R) ,
                              2
where wb (x = 1) and rb (x = 1) are the coeﬃcients of the value functions when there will
always the innovation in the future and are simple functions of the underlying parameters
as shown in the Appendix.
         Let us first focus on the main comparative statics of interest. As before, condition (15)
                                          h                    i       h            i
                                              1                            1
can only be violated when P                   2
                                                  + γµ − (α − 1) > P       2
                                                                               + µ , that is, when innovation
reduces the likelihood that the ruler will remain in power. Then, in this relevant area of
the parameter space where blocking can occur, the coeﬃcient of R on the right-hand side,
    h                     i
     1
P        + γµ − (α − 1) , is greater than the corresponding coeﬃcient on the left-hand side,
    h2       i
     1
P    2
         + µ , so an increase in R makes blocking more likely (i.e., it makes it less likely that

                                                          18
(15) holds). Conversely, an increase in h, the human capital of the labor force, makes
blocking less likely. Intuitively, a higher level of R implies a greater loss of rents from
relinquishing oﬃce, increasing the strength of the political replacement eﬀect. In contrast,
the higher level of h increases the gains from technology adoption relative to R, making
technology adoption more likely.
       More explicitly, we show in the Appendix that condition (15) implies that, as long
       h         i       h                                     i
           1                 1
as P       2
               +µ α−P        2
                                 + γµ − (α − 1) > 0, the ruler will innovate at time t if
                                 ³       h                             i    h        i´             h   i
                                             1                                  1                  1
                                     P       2
                                                 + γµ − (α − 1) − P             2
                                                                                    +µ    1 − βαP  2
                                                                                                     +µ         R
  At ≥ A∗ (R/h) ≡ ³ h 1   i     h                 i´ ·                                          h       i   ·      .   (16)
                   P 2 + µ α − P 12 + γµ − (α − 1)     1 − βP                                     1
                                                                                                     + µ        τh
                                                                                                  2
                     h                   i           h                          i
                         1                               1
The inequality P         2
                             +µ α−P                      2
                                                             + γµ − (α − 1) > 0 is imposed because if it did not
hold, the incumbent would never innovate irrespective of the value of A, so in this case we
set A∗ (R/h) = ∞. Condition (16) states that the incumbent will innovate if the current
state of technology is greater than a threshold level A∗ . The greater is R/h, the higher is
this threshold level, implying that innovation is less likely (or will arrive later).
       Next suppose, instead, that the incumbent would like to block innovation. Then as
long as he remains in power At+1 = At . This enables a simple characterization of the
value functions, again using the natural linearity conjecture (see the Appendix). We then
obtain that the incumbent will block if
                                 ·                                 ¸
                             1
                         P     + γµ − (α − 1) (wb (x = 0) Ah + rb (x = 0) R) ≥                                         (17)
                           ·
                             2    ¸
                             1
                         P     + µ (wb (x = 1) αAh + rb (x = 1) R) ,
                             2
where the right-hand side features wb (x = 1) and rb (x = 1), since if the ruler finds it
profitable to innovate this period, he will also do so in the future. The Appendix also
shows that this condition will be satisfied if only if A ≤ A∗ (R/h) as given by (16), i.e.,
only if A is lower than the critical threshold characterized above. On reflection, this result
is not surprising since given the best responses of the citizens, the decision problem of the
ruler is characterized by a standard dynamic programming problem, and has a unique
solution.
       Overall, the ruler will innovate when At ≥ A∗ (R/h) and block whenever At <
A∗ (R/h). This result has another interesting implication. In Section III, the innova-
tion decision was independent of A, so an economy that had “adverse” parameters would
always experience blocking. While there would still be some improvements in technology

                                                                       19
as incumbents were replaced, incumbents would always block change whenever they could.
Here, since At tends to increase over time (even when there is blocking, because incum-
bents are being replaced and newcomers innovate), eventually At will reach the threshold
A∗ (R/h) as long as A∗ (R/h) < ∞, and then, the economy would no longer block innova-
tions. Therefore, a possible development path implied by this analysis is as follows: first,
incumbents block change, but as many of these incumbent rulers are replaced and some
economic and political change takes place, the society eventually undergoes a political
transition–it reaches the threshold where even incumbent rulers are no longer opposed
to change. Of course, the arrival of such a political transition may be very slow.
     Summarizing the main implication of this analysis:

Proposition 3 Political elites are more likely to block economic change when political
rents, R, are high and human capital of the workforce, h, is low.

     This proposition is important for our discussion below because it implies that elites
are more likely to block change when political stakes, as captured by R, are greater. As a
result, in this model we can think of two distinct roles of pre-existing political institutions:
first, they determine µ, the degree of political competition, and aﬀect the likelihood of
economic change via this channel; and second, they aﬀect the political stakes, R, and
determine the gains to the elites from staying in power and their willingness to block
development.
     Finally, it is interesting to note that although in this discussion we have treated h
as given, the same forces that determine whether incumbent rulers want to block change
will also determine whether they want to invest in the human capital of the population.
A greater human capital of the labor force is likely to increase output, but may make it
easier for the masses to organize against the ruler, and hence may erode the incumbency
advantage of the ruler. Therefore, the political replacement eﬀect may also serve to
discourage rulers from investing in human capital or even block initiatives to increase the
human capital of the masses.


V.    External Threats and Development

     Political elites’ attitudes towards industrialization changed dramatically in Russia
after the defeat in the Crimean war and in Austria-Hungary after the 1848 Revolution.


                                              20
Similarly, Japanese elites started the process of rapid industrialization after they felt
threatened by the European powers and the United States.12 One can also argue that the
potential threat of communism was an important influence on the elites’ attitudes towards
development in South Korea and Taiwan. It therefore appears that external threats may
be an important determinant of whether elites want to block technical and institutional
change. In this section, we extend our model to incorporate this possibility.
       To model these issues in the simplest possible way, suppose that at time t, rulers find
out that there is a one-period external threat at t + 1, which was unanticipated before.
In particular, another country (the perpetrator) with technology Bt may invade. If an
invasion takes place, the ruler is kicked out of power and gets zero utility from that point
on. Whether this invasion will take place or not depends on the state of technology in two
countries, and on a stochastic shock, qt . If qt φBt > At , the perpetrator will successfully
invade and if qt φB t ≤ At , there will be no invasion. Hence φ ≥ 0 parameterizes the
extent of the external threat: when φ is low, there will only be a limited threat. This
formulation also captures the notion that an economy that produces more output will
have an advantage in a conflict with a less productive economy.
       For simplicity, suppose that there will never be an invasion threat again in the future,
and assume that qt is uniformly distributed on [0, 1]. Suppose also that Bt = δAt−1 . This
implies that there will be an invasion if

                                               1 + xt (α − 1)
                                        qt >                  ,
                                                     φδ
where recall that xt is the decision of the incumbent to innovate. Using the fact that qt is
uniform over [0, 1], and the same definition of the function P [·], we have the probability
that the ruler will not be invaded at time t, conditional on xt , as
                                           "                #
                                          1 + xt (α − 1)
                                        P                .
                                                φδ

The important point here is that the probability of invasion is higher when xt = 0 because
output is lower.
  12
    Even China attempted a defensive modernization after its defeat in the Opium War of 1842 and
subsequent humiliations at the hands of European powers. Chan (1978, p. 418) notes “the Chinese
promotion of modern enterprise in the late nineteenth century was inspired by the political necessity of
quickly achieving respectable national strength. This fundamental goal united government oﬃcials of
various persuasions in a common commitment to industrialization.”



                                                  21
       Let us now return to the basic model of Sections II and III, with R = 0. The same
reasoning as before immediately establishes that at time t the ruler will innovate if
                               ·      ¸   "   #     ·                 ¸   "         #
                              1      α     1                  1
                           αP   +µ P    ≥P   + γµ − (α − 1) P    .                                   (18)
                              2      φδ    2                  φδ

       This condition diﬀers from the basic condition for innovation in Section III, (10),
                                                                           h        i
                                                                               1
because of the probability of invasion. In particular, when P                  φδ
                                                                                        ∈ (0, 1), external
threats make blocking less attractive, because a relatively backward technology increases
the probability of foreign invasion. Therefore, the emergence of an external threat might
induce innovation in a society that would otherwise block change. In fact, an increase in
δ or φ will typically make blocking less likely.13 For example, when δ → 0 or φ → 0, we
         h        i
             1
have P       φδ
                      → 1, so the threat of invasion disappears and we are back to condition (10).
For future reference, we state this result as a proposition:

Proposition 4 Political elites are less likely to block development when there is a severe
external threat (high φ) and when the perpetrator is more developed (high δ).

       The intuition for both comparative statics is straightforward. With a more power-
ful external threat or a more developed perpetrator, the ruler will be “forced” to allow
innovation so as to reduce the likelihood of an invasion.


VI.      Historical Evidence and Interpretation

       We now use our analysis so far to provide an “interpretation” of the diﬀerent in-
dustrialization experiences during the nineteenth century. As the data on output and
industrial production from Maddison (1995) and Bairoch (1982) show (Tabel 1 Panels A
and B) while some countries, including Britain, the United States, and Japan, industri-
alized rapidly, others, such as Russia, Spain and Austria-Hungary, lagged behind. Even
Germany, though a famous example of rapid industrial catch-up, did not really take-oﬀ
until after 1850. We provide historical evidence suggesting that the proximate cause of
  13
      The mathematical reasoning is similar to that of the results
                                                               £      ¤before. Consider an increase
in φ. This changes the left-hand side of (18) by − δφα2 P 12 + µ , and the right-hand side by
         £                 ¤                                                   £      ¤ h        i
− δφ1 2 P 12 + γµ − (α − 1) . Since at the point of indiﬀerence, i.e. when αP 12 + µ P 1 − φδ  α
                                                                                                    =
  £1                  ¤ h     1
                                i             £      ¤     £                 ¤
P 2 + γµ − (α − 1) P 1 − φδ       , we have αP 12 + µ < P 12 + γµ − (α − 1) , the left-hand side falls
by less, and innovation becomes more attractive.


                                                    22
this divergence is that in some countries political elites did not want to introduce the
economic institutions encouraging entrepreneurs to adopt new technology and innovate,
and in fact, actively tried to block industrialization.14 Our theory provides an interpre-
tation for why there were such adverse attitudes toward change in some countries, and
not in others. It suggests that the political elites–the landed aristocracy–in Britain
and subsequently Germany did not strongly oppose industrialization and the associated
institutional changes because they were suﬃciently entrenched and political rents were rel-
atively low. In Britain this was true throughout the nineteenth century, while in Germany
it was not until the second half of the century that political elites forged the coalition that
entrenched their political power. In turn, the high degree of political competition and low
stakes from politics in the United States implied that the adoption of new technologies
could not be blocked. We also suggest that external threats from the European powers
and the United States were important in changing the attitudes of the Japanese elites
towards industrialization and modernization, spurring rapid industrialization there.
       In contrast, in Russia and Austria-Hungary, the political elites were powerful enough
to block development, and because their political power was not totally secure, they feared
technological and institutional change. We also suggest that because of the more feudal
land/labor relations and the persistence of the absolutist monarchy into the nineteenth
century, political stakes in Russia and Austria-Hungary were substantial for the landed
aristocracy, encouraging them to oppose industrialization to protect their rents. Finally,
we discuss briefly why elites in highly hierarchical societies such as China or the Ottoman
Empire usually had adverse attitudes towards industrialization.

A.      Britain
       At the end of the eighteenth century the political system in Britain was controlled
by a rich, primarily landowning aristocracy.15 The British elites at the start of the next
century faced an ongoing process of industrialization which, by creating new groups of
wealthy businessmen and finally a powerful working class, forced the aristocracy to con-
cede political power.
       This process happened incrementally through the three Reform Acts, the first of
  14
   See Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001) for econometric evidence supporting this interpretation.
  15
   The seminal studies of aristocratic power in nineteenth century Britain are Guttsman (1963) and
Thompson (1963).



                                                 23
which was in 1832, the others in 1867 and 1884. A crucial policy change was the 1846
repeal of the Corn Laws. While the extension of the franchise that was also introduced
by these reforms was certainly fought for many years (for example, in the 1840s the
Chartist movement was successfully undermined), the political elites in Britain did not
actively oppose the processes set in force by the first industrial revolution.16 Indeed, as
Mokyr (1990, p.243) argues about Britain “the landowning elite, which controlled political
power before 1850, contributed little to the industrial revolution in terms of technology
or entrepreneurship. It did not, however, resist it.”
       British political elites were not always in support of industrialization. For example,
Christopher Hill (1981) describes the attitude of the landed aristocracy to industrialization
during the early seventeenth century as follows:

        “in general the oﬃcial attitude to industrial advance was hostile, or at best
        indiﬀerent. It was suspicious of social change and social mobility, of the rapid
        enrichment of capitalists, afraid of the fluctuations of the market and of unem-
        ployment, of vagabondage, and social unrest ....the Elizabethan Codes aimed
        at stabilizing the existing class structure, the location of industry and the flow
        of labor supply by granting privileges and by putting hindrances in the way
        of mobility and the freedom of contract.”

       However, the rise of parliament and the commercialization of British society during
the following centuries overcame these forces and paved the way for industrialization. The
Glorious Revolution of 1688, often emphasized as the final step in the rise of parliament
over the monarchy (North and Weingast, 1989), also represented the final step in a much
longer process of evolution (Clark, 1996). Not only were the political powers of the monar-
chy and traditional aristocracy relatively muted in Britain compared to other European
countries, economic institutions were much more modernized. Feudalism and servile labor
were almost completely gone and most of the landed elite had become commercial farmers
(see Moore, 1966).
  16
    See Rueschemeyer, Stephens and Stephens (1992) and Collier (1999) for overviews of political reform
in Europe during this period. The battle over the extension of the franchise was more relevant for
determining how much of the gains from industrialization would be redistributed to the poorer segments
of the society, rather than over whether industrialization should proceed or not. See Acemoglu and
Robinson (2000b).




                                                  24
       Why were British elites, on balance, not opposed to economic and institutional de-
velopment?17 Three reasons, highlighted by our model, may have been important. First,
the political settlement which had emerged from the Glorious Revolution meant that the
landed aristocracy in Britain was politically entrenched. In particular, the House of Lords
guaranteed the security of landed interests until the Liberal government of Asquith af-
ter 1906. Second, the transition from aristocratic to popular rule was a prolonged one.
While relatively universal male suﬀrage came after 1867, aristocratic power was strong in
government until well into the present century18 (see Reid 1992). Therefore the British
political elite, by adopting a strategy of gradual concessions, were able to control the
political equilibrium and maintain power for at least a century following the onset of the
political impact of industrialization. In terms of our model, both of these factors corre-
spond to a high value of µ, reducing the opposition of existing elites towards institutional
and technical change. In addition, the long history of Britain as a trading nation and
mercantile power meant that many aristocrats had relatively diversified wealth,19 and
many of the feudal land relations had long disappeared. Therefore, the elites could ben-
efit from industrialization, and had less to lose in terms of political rents. Moreover, the
political institutions which emerged following the Glorious Revolution not only restricted
predation by the monarchy against parliament, but also by parliament against commoners
(Thompson, 1975). These institutional characteristics of British society further reduced
political rents, R in our model, making the elites less likely to be oppose change.

B.      Germany
       Industrialization occurred in Germany in the context to the rise of the Prussian state
within the German federation of states and the creation of the Empire in 1871. The
resulting political institutions ensured the entrenchment of the elites, in particular the
landed aristocracy, the Junkers. For example, the Junkers forged the coalition of ‘Iron
and Rye’ with the rising industrial class to secure their economic interests. Gerschenkron
  17
      In fact, they eventually lost their political power during the second half of the nineteenth century.
So why did they not block development anticipating this outcome?
   18
      It took until the start of the present century until parliament produced a prime minister that was
not from a landed background (the Liberal, Asquith) and it was not until well into the 1920’s with the
rise of the Labour Party that a majority of Members of Parliament were not landed gentry.
   19
      Saville (1994), for example, argues that this was important in sealing the compromise between the
aristocracy and the rising industrial classes. The notion of ‘gentlemanly capitalism’ and the diversified
economic interest of the British political elite is central to many modern interpretaions of British history,
e.g. Cain and Hopkins (2000).


                                                     25
(1943, p. 49) describes this coalition as, “a compromise between modern industry and
the feudal aristocratic groups in the country.” And Eley (1984, p. 153-4) notes that

      “the option of the German bourgeoisie’s leading fractions for a politics of
      accommodation with the landowning interests ... was fully compatible with
      the pursuit of bourgeois interests ... The bourgeoisie entered the agrarian
      alliance...as the best means of securing certain political goals.”

    However, before the 1848 revolution and the emergence of this coalition, the landed
elites did not uniformly support industrialization. For example, Tracey (1989, p. 106)
writes:

      “there was relatively little industrial development in the east, because of lack
      of natural resources and also as a result of deliberate opposition to industri-
      alization by the Junkers and the Bund der Landwirte, who feared the spread
      of socialism and also did not want the Polish proletariat to participate in
      industrialization.”

    Tipton (1974, p. 962) argues that in the first half of the nineteenth century the
political elites “adamantly opposed plans for eastern industrialization on the grounds that
the danger of socialism would increase with the expansion of employment in factories”
(see also his 1976 book). Trebilcock (1981, p. 76) makes similar arguments noting “the
Prussian state...was attracted only to a particular type of industrial development, that
with military utility. Outside this area, the authorities contributed little in the way of
investment or encouragement to private entrepreneurs.” Indeed, “they expressed hostility
to major innovations in industry or transport, and they were notably suspicious of the
railways at the outset.” He continues that as late as the mid-century “the political
preferences of the Junker groups definitely restricted the scope for economic advance.”
    Yet things began to change in the 1850’s “a new alliance formed, combining author-
itarianism with bourgeois elements, against the menace of peasant and proletariat. By
modifying the vested interests of the previous four of five decades, it created a climate
more favorable to industrial advance” (Trebilcock, 1981, p. 76). The threat from the
rapidly industrializing Britain and France and from the 1848 wave of revolutions may
have also been important in the change in the attitudes towards industrialization, adding
some element of defensive modernization to the German case (see Hamerow, 1958).

                                             26
     Another factor facilitating the emergence of this more positive attitude towards
change may have been that, despite the important role of the Junker elite, the politi-
cal stakes were also relatively limited for the landed aristocracy. This was mostly because
of the reforms induced by the Napoleonic wars. Blackbourn (1998, p. 71) notes that in
the parts of Germany that they occupied, the French rule amounted to a “crash course
in modernization that removed the institutions of the old regime, separated church and
state, rebuilt the administrative bureaucracy on a new basis, and made possible the rel-
atively untrammeled accumulation and disposition of property that is one hallmark of a
modern civil society.” Where the French did not rule, as in Prussia, their impact was to
induce defensive reform and modernization (see Rosenberg, 1958). However, there is a
consensus that these reforms did not have the revolutionary eﬀects that they were once
claimed to have had. Although the serfs were freed in Prussia in 1807, Trebilcock (1981,
p. 34) notes “the small peasantry, immensely more numerous but holding only a fraction
of the peasant land, the rural masses between the Elbe and the Vistula, had to wait until
the 1850’s and 1860’s before the miraculous cloak of emancipation swept over them. ”
What is true is that labor relations were less feudal than in Russia or Austria-Hungary,
though they were probably less modernized than in Britain.
     Political reforms after the 1848 Revolution and the emergence of parliamentary in-
stitutions in Germany appear to have been strategically designed, as in Britain, to give a
suﬃcient degree of representation to the Junker elites. For example, the legislature was
bicameral with a federal council composed of delegates from the states (the Bundesrat)
and a national elected parliament (the Reichstag). Prussia had 17 of the Bundesrat’s
58 votes and “the conservative Prussian elite could essentially block proposed national
legislation that was contrary to its interests (Berman, 2001, p. 439). After the 1870s,
the Junkers were able to gain protection for their output, insulating themselves economi-
cally from the worst eﬀects of industrialization–such as falling land rents. Therefore, in
Germany the continued political power of the Junkers, once the coalition of Iron and Rye
had been formed, allowed them to compensate for the adverse direct economic eﬀects of
industrialization. So in terms of our model, we can see the German case as one where,
after the 1850s, the political elites were relatively entrenched, i.e., high µ, and the political
stakes, R, were limited. This combination of elite entrenchment and low political rents
made it unprofitable for the elites to block change. Rapid industrialization among its
main rivals may have also contributed to the favorable attitudes towards industrialization


                                               27
in Germany.

C.    The United States
     In the British and German cases political elites were able to forge institutions and
coalitions which consolidated their power. The United States embarked on rapid and very
successful industrialization with very diﬀerent political conditions. In particular, there is
widespread agreement that the U.S. political institutions were highly representative and
democratic. Both these representative institutions and the U.S. Constitution ensured
a highly competitive political environment. These institutions and the ensuing politi-
cal competition appear to have facilitated (or even caused?) industrialization economic
involvement in the United States.
     The relatively representative and democratic U.S. institutions evolved after 1607 and
finally emerged following The War of Independence. The development of these institutions
was most likely a consequence of the development of the U.S. as a settler colony with very
low population density, therefore providing good opportunities for the poorer segments
of the society. Galenson (1996) explains how early attempts to create oligarchic political
institutions and restrict the access of settlers to land quickly disintegrated, mostly as a
result of the very low population densities. Large land grants were made by Charles I to
encourage settlers to move to the Colony, and in 1632 Maryland was given to the second
Lord Baltimore (about 10 million acres). The charter also gave Baltimore “virtually
complete legal authority over his territory, with the power to establish a government in
whatever form he wished” (Galenson, p. 143). His idea was to attract tenants from
Britain and set up a huge manorial system. This approach to colonization was not so
diﬀerent to the one employed by the Portuguese in Brazil. However, things were diﬀerent
in North America because:

      “the manorial organization of Baltimore’s colony failed to materialize, as
      Maryland’s history during the 17th century witnesses the gradual breaking
      down of rigid proprietary control ... The extreme labor shortage...allowed
      many early settlers to gain their economic independence from the manorial
      lords, and establish separate farms ... Thus just as in Virginia, in Maryland
      the colonial labor problem undermined the initial plans for a rigid social hierar-
      chy, as Lord Baltimore’s blueprints for a manorial society were largely swept


                                             28
      away and early Maryland became an open and fluid society, which oﬀered
      considerable economic and social opportunity.” (Galenson, 1996, p. 143).

    The individual colonies were politically independent of one another, and though suf-
frage restrictions followed those in Britain, the far more equal pattern of landownership
implied that a much higher proportion of white adult males could vote. On the eve of
independence this proportion was between 50% to 80% while in Britain the corresponding
figure was between 10% and 15% (Williamson, 1960 p. 38). The War of Independence did
little to disrupt the social hierarchy in the United States, but the Southern planters not
withstanding, there was no real landed aristocracy in the same way as there was in Eu-
rope. As argued originally by de Toqueville in 1835 in his “Democracy in America,” the
relative lack of a landed elite and the relatively egalitarian distribution of assets appears
to be a key part of the explanation for early democratization in the U.S. (see Engerman
and Sokoloﬀ, 2000, Keyssar, 2000). In the absence of an industrial proletariat and great
disparities in the distribution of assets, and because white suﬀrage did not imply the
extension of voting rights to blacks, the political elites had little to fear from enfranchise-
ment. Most Northern States had universal white male suﬀrage by the 1820’s and even
Southern States had joined them by the late 1840’s. As early as the 1828 Presidential
election, 56% of the adult white males voted (Engerman and Sokoloﬀ, 2000, Table 2).
    Not only was wealth less concentrated in the United States, but also political in-
stitutions limiting the stakes from government by severely restricting the autonomy of
politicians evolved rapidly. While the design of the Constitution in 1787 is the most fa-
mous example of this (in particular, the separation of powers and an elaborate system
of checks and balances), the forces behind it date from an earlier period. Jones (1983,
p. 62) notes that after the War of Independence, the individual States wrote their own
Constitutions (under the Articles of Confederation) and the “deep suspicion of executive
authority which was one of the legacies of the colonial past resulted in state governors
being denied ... many of the powers enjoyed by their royal predecessors. Only in Massa-
chusetts and New York was the governor given a veto; elsewhere his powers were narrowly
restricted.”
    In an environment of relatively high and increasing enfranchisement and political in-
stitutions which institutionalized political competition and limited state authority intense
political competition and the world’s first real political parties emerged. After Washing-
ton’s basically unopposed Presidencies of 1789-93 and 1793-1797, Jeﬀerson turned the

                                              29
Republican party into an electoral machine to win the Presidency from Adams in 1800.20
After this, intense political competition between the Federalists and Republicans ensued.21
Although these parties collapsed in the early 1820’s they were succeeded by the Whigs
and Democrats after the victory of Jackson in 1828. Political competition led to policies
that voters wanted including the 1816 tariﬀ introduced explicitly for protection, not just
revenue, and from 1817 onwards, heavy subsidization of railways by both federal and state
governments.
       We therefore interpret the American experience as corresponding to a low value of
µ in terms of our model. For a variety of reasons, some stemming from the evolution
of the colony, some from the nature of the political settlement after independence, there
was intense political competition in the United States with voters determining who was
in power. This led to policies which promoted rather than impeded institutional change
and industrialization. According to our model, in such a competitive political environ-
ment, political elites have to encourage innovation, and this was typically the case in the
nineteenth-century United States.

D.      Japan
       Japan industrialized and modernized rapidly in the second half of the nineteenth
century. Although the seeds of industrialization could be traced back to the Tokugawa
era (e.g., Macpherson, 1987), rapid industrialization appears to have been related to the
emergence of a serious external threat. The overwhelming British victory against the
Chinese in the Opium War of 1842, the imposition of an “open door” to world trade on
Japan by European powers and the United States, and perhaps most importantly, the
arrival of the American fleet in Tokyo Bay in 1853 made it clear to the Japanese elites
that they were facing a serious external threat.
       Before the emergence of the external threat from the West, Japan was under the
control of the Tokugawa shogunate which was a coalition of large landowning interests.
Although Japan had been a relatively prosperous country since at least the fifteenth
century, it was not always open to trade, innovation and foreign trade. For example, the
  20
     In contrast, true political parties with national electioneering really only emerged in Britain after the
Second Reform Act of 1867. Before this parties were very lose coalitions of members of parliament who
did not campaign on a national platform at elections (see Cox, 1987).
  21
     The parties initially emerged during the split over Hamilton’s policies as Secretary of State under
Washington. Aldrich (1995) provides a seminal modern analysis of the early party system in the United
States.


                                                     30
elites did not welcome foreign missionaries, and foreign trade was seriously limited and
controlled, or in the words of Macpherson (1987, p. 38), “... [they] ... virtually prohibited
overseas trade”. In terms of our model, this makes sense as a calculated conservatism to
maximize the longevity of the regime. In fact the main aim of the Tokugawa shogunate
was to bring peace and stability to Japan following an era of prolonged infighting and civil
war, and many of the institutional changes needed to promote industry would have created
turbulence and strengthened competing groups. The main threat to peace, stability and
the Tokugawa regime was from the daimyo (the great lords), who were feudal lords with
their own armies, and especially the daimyo at the outskirts of the shogunate posed a
serious threat to the unity of Japan (e.g., Macpherson, 1987, p. 17-25).
    This equilibrium was shattered by the emergence of the external threat from the
West, culminating in the arrival of the American fleet in Tokyo Bay. These changes
eventually lead to the Meiji Restoration of 1868. Although the Restoration installed the
Meiji Emperor, this was purely symbolic, and the main aim was to “expel the barbarians,”
that is, the European traders, military and the diplomats. In fact, the important drive
to industrialization had already started before the Restoration, as an explicit strategy
of defensive modernization in response to the external threat. Curtin (2000, p. 163)
describes this as follows:

      “The two sides were so similar that the brief but crucial fighting that ended the
      Tokugawa era was a struggle between competing military oligarchies seeking
      to control a new centralizing government, which would probably have sought
      to carry out similar policies, no matter which side won.”

    It is interesting that the drive for modernization in Japan took a special form,
strengthening the centralized government and increasing the entrenchment of bureau-
cratic elites. In terms of our model, this can be viewed as a strategy to industrialize while
also minimizing the probability of replacement, somewhat reminiscent to the industri-
alization experience in Britain and Germany where the non-industrial elites maintained
their political power despite the process of industrialization. In Japan, the Restoration,
despite its emphasis on Japanese traditions, quickly wiped out the powers of the daimyo,
the main threat to the power of the centralized state. At the same time, much of industrial
activity was delegated to a core group of wealthy families, known as the Zaibatsu, which
was in close contact (under close supervision?) of the government, so the threat from

                                             31
economic change to the existing political regime was minimized. The choice of Japanese
constitution also reflected the same desires. They adopted the Prussian constitution,
which gave the appearance of representative government, but retained the oligarchy in
control via the bicameral system with the upper house reserved largely for the ruling elite.
The constitution also gave the military sweeping powers.
       Overall, the Japanese experience can be interpreted as an example of defensive mod-
ernization and industrialization in response to an external threat, as emphasized in Section
V, and the pattern of industrialization following the change of attitudes can be interpreted
as an example of adopting technological institutional change, while strengthening the con-
trol of the oligarchy on centralized power.

E.      Tzarist Russia
       Russia provides stark contrast to the cases we have examined so far. During the
reign of Nikolai I between 1825 and 1855 (in the wake of the Decembrist putsch) only one
railway line was built in Russia.22 Economic development was opposed since, as Mosse
(1992) puts it “it was understood that industrial development might lead to social and
political change.” In a similar vein, Gregory (1991) argues:

        “Prior to the about face in the 1850’s, the Russian state feared that industri-
        alization and modernization would concentrate revolution minded workers in
        cities, railways would give them mobility, and education would create opposi-
        tion to the monarchy.”

       It was only after the defeat in the Crimean War that Nikolai ’s successor, Alexsandr
II, initiated a large scale project of railway building and an attempt to modernize the
economy (among other things, by introducing a western legal system, decentralizing gov-
ernment, and freeing the serfs). The reason appears to be that Alexsandr II, most proba-
bly correctly, perceived that Russia’s technological inferiority left it vulnerable to foreign
threat. Alexsandr’s reforms led to rapid industrialization (Portal, 1965), supporting the
notion that state policies before the Crimean War were important in blocking develop-
ment. The sudden change of attitudes in the face of foreign threat is also consistent with
the emphasis in Section V on external threats inducing innovation.
  22
    Nikolai’s long serving finance minister Count Krankin rejected proposals to build railway lines on the
basis that they encouraged “frequent and useless travel, thus fostering the restless spirit of our age.”


                                                   32
       This period of industrialization also witnessed heightened political tensions, consis-
tent with the view that times of rapid change destabilize the system (McDaniel, 1988,
gives a detailed account of these events, see also Falkus, 1972, Mosse, 1958, and 1992, and
Pipes, 1992).23 Mosse (1992) argues:

        “early industrialization...resulted in an acceleration of change and an increased
        dynamism in a previously static society. Russia...was transformed from a
        backward (or underdeveloped) into a developing country. She had entered
        the railway age. Society experienced a gradual transformation. While the
        landed gentry was in a state of terminal decline, the bureaucracy recruited
        from various social strata, had begun to replace it as the ruling class. The
        liberal professions and the entrepreneurial bourgeoisie were gaining in num-
        bers and importance. Early industrialization had created a small but growing
        proletariat. By the turn of the century, the social changes set in motion by
        perestroika were beginning to have an impact on public aﬀairs.”

       The history of industrialization in nineteenth-century Russia therefore illustrates the
contradictions that political elites faced in promoting innovation. Until the impetus of the
Crimean War, industrialization was blocked. The defeat of the Crimean war is therefore
the turning point in the attitudes of the Russian state to economic development.
       Why was the Tzar so opposed to institutional and technological change in the period
before the Crimean war? One possibility suggested by our analysis is the high level of
the political rents, R, generated by the state of land/labor relations in Tzarist Russia.
The feudal social structure in nineteenth-century Russia generated high rents for political
elites, and implied that the landed aristocracy had few commercial interests, and was not
associated with industrial groups. So the primary beneficiaries of industrialization would
have been groups outside the landed aristocracy. Moreover, because land is relatively easy
to expropriate, the elites had a lot to lose from political changes. These factors increased
the political stakes for the elites, making them fear industrialization more than in Britain
or Germany. Furthermore, the poor level of human capital of most of the workforce (see
Lindert, 2000) also implied that the gains from industrialization were lower relative to
land rents that the elites obtained under the ancien regime. Another important factor
  23
    In fact, the burst of industrialization ended in the strike wave of 1902-1903 and, by creating a nascent
industrial proletariat, laid the foundations for the 1905 revolution.



                                                    33
was the tight control of the state by the Tzar,24 who had perhaps even more to lose from
political transition.

F.      The Habsburg Empire
       In the nineteenth century, the Habsburg Empire was known as “Europe’s China”
or the “sick man on the Danube” (see Good 1984, 1991) and was generally regarded as
having fallen far behind the other industrializing countries of Europe. Historians typically
argue that this was what led to the weakness and disintegration of the empire during and
after the First World War. The consensus view amongst historians now appears to be that
the main explanation for the slow growth of Austria-Hungary in the nineteenth century
is the opposition of the state. For instance Gross (1973) argues,

        “In domestic as well as foreign policy the Vormärz regime, from 1815 to 1848,
        was determined to prevent another French Revolution anywhere in Europe.
        From this principle Francis I derived not only his opposition to the growth of
        industry (and with it the Proletariat)...but his general reluctance to permit
        any change whatsoever.”

       The analysis of Fruedenberger (1967) is similar. He notes (p. 498-499)

        “In the 1790’s fear of the French Revolution added a new dimension to gov-
        ernment policy. High oﬃcials in the government, with the young Emperor
        Francis I in strong sympathy, felt that industrialization would create an in-
        dustrial proletariat which to them was the carrier of revolutionary ideas and
        for that reason ....opposed not only large-scale enterprises but favored a policy
        that kept the population agrarian.”

       As with the Tzar, the Habsburg emperors opposed the building of railways and
infrastructure and there was no attempt to develop an eﬀective educational system (see
Paulin, 1991, and Komlos, 1994). Blum (1943) pointed to the pre-modern institutional
inheritance as the major blockage to industrialization arguing (p. 26) that
  24
    No policy could be made without the Tzar’s agreement and all government ministers were personally
appointed by him. Here Russia was very diﬀerent from the European countries, such as Britain, where
the monarchy staged a long, carefully orchestrated withdrawal from political power. In line with this
McDaniel (1991 p. 32) notes that “The struggle between kings and burghers so characteristic of much of
western European history had few parallels in Russia.”

                                                 34
      “these living forces of the traditional economic system were the greatest barrier
      to development. Their chief supporter was ... Emperor Francis. He knew that
      the advances in the techniques of production threatened the life of the old order
      of which he was so determined a protector. Because of his unique position as
      final arbiter of all proposals for change he could stem the flood for a time.
      Thus when plans for the construction of a steam railroad were put before him,
      he refused to give consent to their execution ‘lest revolution might come into
      the country’.”

     The creation of the first railway line had to wait until Francis’ death in 1835, yet
even after that the government under Metternich kept to the same policies. It was the
revolution of 1848 that perturbed this stasis. Eduard Marz places “the beginning of the
industrial age in the 1850’s ... when the Ancien regime ceased to exist” (quoted in Good,
1984, p.40-41, see also Blum, 1948). As in Russia after the Crimean, the response of the
domestic elites was peasant emancipation and agrarian reform followed by a switch in
economic policy towards a rather vigorous promotion of industry (see Eddie, 1989).
     In addition, as in Russia, Austria-Hungarian elites received relatively high rents from
unreformed feudal land/labor relations. Furthermore, the fact that they were landowners
meant that they could be easily expropriated in the event of political transition.25 Poor
human capital (see Lindert, 2000) also again lowered the incentive to industrialize by
increasing the importance of land rents relative to income from industrial activity.

G.     Attitudes Towards Change in Hierarchical Societies
     The above discussion shows that our framework provides an interesting interpretation
of the diﬀerential industrialization experiences of Europe, the United States and Japan.
At the heart of our framework is the idea that blocking of technical and institutional
change will arise when elites can increase the likelihood that they remain in power by
preventing change. This poses the question of why institutional and technical innovation
was often blocked in highly hierarchical societies such as the Ottoman Empire and China.
After all, weren’t the elites highly entrenched in the societies? In fact, one of the most
popular explanations for why these hierarchical societies stagnated, originally developed
  25
     Another possibly important factor in the case of Austria-Hungary was the heterogeneity of the empire.
The Austrian aristocracy thought that modernization would destroy the social glue which kept the empire
together


                                                   35
by Wittfogel (1957), is that the elites were too entrenched for change to take place. If this
interpretation is correct, it sheds doubt on the applicability of our framework to these
societies, or may even be a challenge to the fundamental logic of our approach. However,
we believe that this interpretation is not necessarily correct.
     A full discussion of the experiences of the Ottoman Empire and China is beyond
the scope of this paper. In this subsection, we will briefly point out that despite the
hierarchical nature of the societies, the ruling elites were highly insecure, and there were
many powerful groups opposed to change.
     In the Ottoman case, although the Sultan was the ultimate ruler, many groups exerted
significant control over him, and the history of the Ottoman Empire is full of deposed
and beheaded Sultans. The main powerful groups, often opposed to change, included the
qadis (the judges), led by the chief judge, Seyl-ul-Islam, who was the supreme religious
authority with the power to depose the Sultan for a breach of religious law; the military, in
particular the janissaries, who were recruited as children by force, purchase or as tribute,
who were actively opposed to change during the latter centuries of the Empire; and the
big landholders, the ayan (see, for example, Curtin, 2000, pp. 175-176, Zurcher, 1993, p.
13-21, or Lewis, 1968).
     A number of attempts at modernization were crushed by these power centers. Perhaps
the most notable is that of Sultan Selim III (1789-1807) who wanted to undertake military,
fiscal and economic reform, and in 1792 and 1793, issued a set of regulations known as the
New Order, Nizam-i-Cedid.26 The New Order was immediately seen as a threat to the
established groups, who mounted significant resistance, and in 1807, they joined forces
and deposed Sultan Selim, with a fetva (religious opinion) from the Seyl-ul-Islam (see,
for example, Zurcher, 1993, pp. 23-32). Selim’s successor Muhammet II restarted the
reforms in 1826, but only after further Ottoman defeats, and could succeeded because he
was able to partially defeat the janissaries.
     Therefore, this and other similar experiences from Ottoman history suggest that
important institutional reforms often created turbulence and destabilize the power of the
ruler. Perhaps one diﬀerence between the Ottoman experience and those of European
countries is that the pre-industrial elites in the European context were afraid of losing
their power to industrial interests. In contrast, the main concern of the Ottoman rulers
  26
     Interestingly, in line with our approach, one of the main motivations of Sultan Selim was to strengthen
the army because of external threat from the Ottomans’ enemies, in particular Russia. This modernization
required greater tax collection, which motivated the economic and fiscal reforms.


                                                    36
may have been a challenge from other politically powerful groups, such as the ayan, the
Seyl-ul-Islam and the janissaries, who were likely to lose as a result of institutional change,
and therefore eﬀectively threatened to replace the rulers.
       We know even less about the Chinese case. It is well known that during the Song
dynasty until the takeover of the Ming in 1368, China led the world in technological cre-
ativity27 . Also well known is that during the 15th century China turned inward. The
most famous instance of this is the banning for almost 200 years of private trade abroad
(Fairbank, 1992, pp. 137-140). After this period, there was technological regress. Al-
though the population expanded massively with relatively unchanged living standards
thanks to frontier expansion and agricultural intensification, China completely failed to
industrialize or benefit from the adoption of Western technology. According to our the-
ory, this could be because Chinese political elites were afraid of losing their power to the
turbulence created by altering institutions in ways which would facilitate industry.
       There certainly is consensus amongst sinologists that the institutional system in
China was not conducive to modern capitalism. Brown (1979, p. 183) notes “in contrast
to the West, private enterprise in China received little support from such institutions and
ideologies as the ‘sanctity’ of private property, readily enforceable contracts, freedom of
enterprise and laissez faire.” The legal system functioned as a way of the government
to control society and Fairbank (1992, p. 180) discusses “the oﬃcial disregard for the
rights of private property.” Elsewhere Fairbank (1978, p. 13) states that “the state
system produced no eﬀective legal institutions to protect private property from oﬃcial
extractions or even seizure.”
       Why did China not move towards a set of institutions which would have promoted
capitalism? This is a complex question surrounded by much controversy and recent revi-
sionist accounts.28 Nevertheless, our mechanism is one of the factors often stressed in the
literature. Fairbank (1992, p. 186) argues that the lack of industrialization in nineteenth
century China was due to reasons that were “social and political as well as economic,”
emphasizing “the rulers’ concern always to maintain control.” He also argues (1978, p.
6) that “The Ch’ing regime was mainly concerned with preserving the agrarian social
order over which it presided, and from which it derived its main sustenance.” Similarly,
Jones (1988, p. 141) argues that the Chinese state “aimed at stability at the expense of
 27
      Mokyr (1990, Chapter 9) gives a good overview of the many inventions made during the Song period.
 28
      For example, Wong (1997) and Pomeranz (2000).



                                                   37
potentially productive change.” Brown’s evidence (1979, p. 197) leads to similar conclu-
sions. Her research suggests that “The transfer of technology to China in the nineteenth
century... was significantly impeded by the strength of the old regime and the tradi-
tional system of political economy. Foreigners were not allowed to engage in a number
of important economic activities... the salt trade, the soy bean trade... mining and the
construction of railroads. More importantly the government confined foreign enterprise
to the treaty ports.” She concludes, “China could have enjoyed a larger and growing use
of foreign technology. To have done so would have required an entirely diﬀerent attitude
on the part of the government–one akin to that of the Japanese. But in China the old
regime remained strong until 1895, and together with the traditional system of political
economy that it supported, was the major impediment to the transfer of technology.”29
       Overall, historical evidence suggests that the failure of China to industrialize was
intimately linked to the blocking of change by the political elites. There is also some
evidence that the elites’ attitudes were, at least in part, shaped by their concerns towards
stability and their regime’s continuity. In fact, contrary to some outside perceptions,
the elites in these societies were not highly entrenched. Ottoman Sultans were often
deposed and beheaded, and had to keep many diﬀerent constituencies happy to maintain
their power. The Manchu dynasty in China (also called the Qing or the Ch’ing) which
ruled from 1644 to 1911 were outside conquerors and lacked the legitimacy of being Han
Chinese. Moreover, they were faced with a persistent threat of domestic social disorder.
One implication of their fragile position in society was that tax rates and government
revenues were very low. Perkins (1967. p. 487) shows that government expenditure was
probably only 1-2% of GDP with 3/4 of this being spent on the military. The state
also engaged in extensive welfare schemes to keep social order, particularly the famous
granary system (see Will and Wong, 1991) where vast quantities of grain were stored and
distributed when harvests failed. This system was motivated by the desire to keep social
order.


VII.        Conclusion

       In this paper, we constructed a simple model where political elites may block techno-
logical and institutional development, because of a “political replacement eﬀect”. Inno-
vations often erode political elites’ incumbency advantage, increasing the likelihood that
 29
      See also Smith (1991, p. 313-318).


                                              38
they will be replaced. Fearing replacement, political elites are unwilling to initiate eco-
nomic and institutional change. We show that elites are unlikely to block developments
when there is a high degree of political competition, or when they are highly entrenched.
It is only when political competition is limited and also the elites’ power is threatened
that they will block development. We also show that such blocking is more likely to arise
when political stakes are higher, and in the absence of external threats. We argue that
this model provides an interpretation for why Britain and the U.S. industrialized first
during the nineteenth century, while the monarchy and the landed aristocracy in Russia
and Austria-Hungary blocked development.




                                            39
VIII.         Appendix

A.       Proof that The Social Planner Always Innovates
                                                                                                                                                                 ³     ´
     It is clear that the value function of the social planner takes the form S(A) = s xS A.
In particular, using the fact that the planner always innovates with a new ruler, i.e., xbS = 1
and the replacement rules discussed in the text, we can write (2) as
                                    ³       ´
                                s xS A = A +                                                                                                                           (19)

                                    "       Z µ+ 1                                            Z 0
                                                 2
                                                               ³       ´                                    ³        ´
                                        S                          S                 0
                                β x                       s x               αAdz +                     s xS (α − z 0 )Adz 0 +
                                                0                                              µ− 12

                                                     Z γµ+ 1                                    Z α−1                                              #
                                                           2
                                                                        ³       ´                                   ³        ´
                                                S                           S                                            S
                                (1 − x )                               s x          Adz +                       s x              (α − z)Adz ,
                                                         α−1                                        γµ− 12
                                ³       ´
which solves for s xS as:

     ³    ´                                                                                      1
  s xS =                            ³               R0                  ´                            µ
                                                                                                                                   R γµ+ 12            R α−1
                                                                                                                                                                       ¶
                 1−      βxS            α−          µ− 12   z 0 dz 0        − β (1 −          xS )      α − (α − 1)                 α−1       dz −      γµ− 12
                                                                                                                                                                 zdz

     Now to determine xS , we simply need to compare the second and the third lines of
(19). Making use of the uniformity assumptions, the condition for the social planner to
adopt the new technology can be written as
                                                            ÃZ                      !               ÃZ                                 !
                                                               µ+ 12                                   0
                                                    sαA                     dz 0 + sA                               (α − z 0 ) dz 0
                                                                   0                                    µ− 12
                                                         ÃZ                     !              ÃZ                                    !
                                                            γµ+ 12                                α−1
                                        ≥ sA                                dz + sA                                 (α − z) dz .
                                                               α−1                                     γµ− 12


Rearranging and simplifying, we have xS = 1 if and only if:
              Z 0                           ·                             Z α−1          ¸              ·                                     ¸
                        0       1
                                0                      1
         α−            z dz ≥ P   + γµ − (α − 1) α + P   − γµ + (α − 1) −         zdz.
               µ− 12            2                      2                   γµ− 12
                        h                                          i                h                                        i
                            1                                                            1
Clearly α ≥ P               2
                                + γµ − (α − 1) α + P                                     2
                                                                                             − γµ + (α − 1) since the two probabilities
must add to 1. Moreover,
                       Z α−1                             Z 0                    Z µ− 1                      Z α−1                        Z 0
                                                                                     2
                −                   zdz = −                        zdz −                      zdz −                      zdz < −                   zdz,
                        γµ− 12                            µ− 12                     γµ− 12                      0                          µ− 12

which proves the claim.

                                                                                         40
B.     Value Functions in Section III
      Here for completeness, we solve for the value functions of the citizens and incumbent
ruler in Section III. Using the conjecture, V (A) = v (x) A and xb = 1,

                      v (x) A = A(1 − τ ) +                                                                                                   (20)

                                                       " Ã            Z 0                       !
                                     βv (x) A x α −                       1
                                                                                    z 0 dz 0            +
                                                                          2
                                                                            −µ

                                                   ÃZ       1                    Z α−1                             !#
                                                            2
                                                              +γµ
                                     (1 − x)                         dz +           1
                                                                                                    (α − z) dz
                                                           α−1                      2
                                                                                      −γµ


The undetermined constant is found to be
                                                                 (1 − τ )
         v (x) =          ³                        ´                            µ 1                                                  ¶
                                R0                                               R 2 +γµ                    R α−1
                   1 − βx α −    1
                                   −µ   z 0 dz 0       − β (1 − x)                  α−1             dz +        1
                                                                                                                  −γµ
                                                                                                                        (α − z) dz
                                 2                                                                              2


For the ruler, the same type of argument leads to a value function,
                                                       "         Z   1                                      Z   1
                                                                                                                          #
                                                                     2
                                                                       +µ                                       2
                                                                                                                  +γµ
                   w (x) A = τ A + βw (x) A xα                              dz + (1 − x)                                dz .                  (21)
                                                                 0                                          α−1


Hence,
                                                                      τ
               w (x) =          ³       h              i                                h                                 i´
                                            1                                               1
                          1 − β xP          2
                                                + µ α + (1 − x) P                           2
                                                                                                + γµ − (α − 1)

C.     Value Functions in Section IV
      First consider the situation where there is always innovation in the future. Then, we
have the following recursion defining wb (x = 1) and rb (x = 1):
                                                                                                                               Z   1
                                                                                                                                     +µ
                                                                                                                                   2
   wb (x = 1) Ah + rb (x = 1) R = τ Ah + R + β (wb (x = 1) αAh + rb (x = 1) R)                                                            dz 0 .
                                                                                                                               0

The undetermined coeﬃcients are obtained as:
                                                                            τ
                                    wb (x = 1) =                                h                   i
                                                                                    1
                                                            1 − βαP                 2
                                                                                        +µ

and
                                                                            1
                                     rb (x = 1) =                           h                   i
                                                                                1
                                                            1 − βP              2
                                                                                    +µ

                                                             41
Now using these expressions, condition (15) can be rewritten as:

                                                                                                       
                             ·           ¸
                           1        τ αAh∗ (R/h)          R
                         P   +µ           h     i+        h    i =                                                                      (22)
                           2                 1
                                  1 − βαP 2 + µ              1
                                                    1 − βP 2 + µ
                                                                                                                   
                             ·                                  ¸
                           1                    τ Ah∗ (R/h)          R
                         P   + γµ − (α − 1)           h    i+        h     i ,
                           2                  1 − βαP 12 + µ   1 − βP 12 + µ
which defines A∗ (R/h). This solves for the critical threshold of the state of technology
as:                              ³       h                              i            h           i´             h   i
                                             1                                           1                     1
                                  P          2
                                                 + γµ − (α − 1) − P                      2
                                                                                             +µ       1 − βαP  2
                                                                                                                 +µ             R
              A∗ (R/h) = ³ h 1   i     h                 i´ ·                                               h       i       ·      ,
                          P 2 + µ α − P 12 + γµ − (α − 1)     1 − βP                                          1
                                                                                                                 + µ            τh
                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                    h                             i
                                                                                                                        1
which is the expression in (16) in the text. Note that in (22) we must have P                                           2
                                                                                                                            + γµ − (α − 1) >
    h           i        h           i               h                               i
        1                    1                           1
P       2
            + µ and P        2
                                 + µ α−P                 2
                                                             + γµ − (α − 1) > 0–if the first inequality did not hold,
the incumbent would strictly prefer to innovate, as discussed in the text, and if the second
inequality did not hold, the incumbent would strictly prefer to block. These inequalities
immediately imply that A∗ (R/h) is increasing in R/h as claimed in the text.
            Next, consider the situation where a ruler does not innovate. Then the recursion for
the value function can be written as
                                                                                                                        Z       1
                                                                                                                                  +γµ
                                                                                                                                2
        wb (x = 0) Ah + rb (x = 0) R = τ Ah + R + β (wb (x = 0) Ah + rb (x = 0) R)                                                      dz,
                                                                                                                            α−1
which is
                                                                                             τ
                                         wb (x = 0) =                        h                          i
                                                                                 1
                                                                    1 − βP       2
                                                                                     + γµ − (α − 1)
and
                                                                                         1
                                             rb (x = 0) =                    h                          i
                                                                                 1
                                                                    1 − βP       2
                                                                                     + γµ − (α − 1)
Now using these expressions and condition (17), we have

                                                                                                
               ·     ¸
              1          τ αAhN            R
            P   +µ          h    i+        h     i =                                                                                    (23)
              2                1
                     1 − βαP 2 + µ   1 − βP 12 + µ
                                                                                                                                             
               ·                             ¸
              1                            τ AhN                     R
            P   + γµ − (α − 1)        h                i+       h                i
              2                          1
                                 1 − βP 2 + γµ − (α − 1)           1
                                                           1 − βP 2 + γµ − (α − 1)
which solves for AN = A∗ (R/h), establishing the claim in the text that the incumbent
ruler will block whenever At < A∗ (R/h), and innovate whenever At ≥ A∗ (R/h).


                                                                            42
IX.        Bibliography

      Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2001) “Reversal
of Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Dis-
tribution,” NBER Working Paper #8460, forthcoming Quarterly Journal of Economics.
      Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2000a) “Political Losers as a
Barrier to Economic Development,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
90, 126-130.
      Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2000b) “Why Did the West Extend
the Franchise? Democracy, Inequality and Growth in Historical Perspective,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 115, 1167-1199.
      Aghion, Philippe, Alberto Alesina and Francesco Trebbi (2001) “Endoge-
nous Political Institutions,” Unpublished paper, Department of Economics, Harvard Uni-
versity.
      Aghion, Philippe, Christopher Harris, Peter W. Howitt and John Vickers
(2001) “Competition, Imitation and Growth with Step-by-Step Innovation,” Review of
Economic Studies, 68, 467-492.
      Aldrich, John H. (1995) Why Parties? The Origin and Transformation of Political
Parties in America, Chicago; University of Chicago Press.
      Alesina, Alberto and Roberto Perotti (1996) “Income Distribution, Political
Instability and Investment,” European Economic Review, 40, 1203-1225.
      Alesina, Alberto and Dani Rodrik (1994) “Distributive Politics and Economic
Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 465-490.
      Arrow, Kenneth J. (1962) “The Economic Implications of Learning-by-Doing,”
Review of Economic Studies, 29, 155-173.
      Bairoch, Paul (1982) “International Industrialization Levels from 1750 to 1980,”
Journal of Economic History, 11, 269-333.
      Bardhan, Pranab (1984) The Political Economy of Development in India, Basil
Blackwell, Oxford.
      Benhabib, Jess and Aldo Rustichini (1996) “Social Conflict and Growth”Journal
of Economic Growth, 1, 125-142.
      Berman, Sheri E. (2001) “Modernization in Historical Perspective: The Case of
Imperial Germany,” World Politics, 53, 431-462.

                                            43
    Blum, Jerome (1943) “Transportation and Industry in Austria, 1815-1848,” Jour-
nal of Modern History, 15, 24-38.
    Blum, Jerome (1948) Noble Landowners and Agriculture in Austria, 1815-1848;
A Study of the Origins of the Peasant Emancipation of 1848, Baltimore; Johns Hopkins
University Press.
    Bourguignon, Francois and Thierry Verdier (2000) “Oligarchy, Democracy,
Inequality and Growth,” Journal of Development Economics, 62, 285-313.
    Brown, Shannon R. (1979) “The Transfer of Technology to China in the Nine-
teenth Century,” Journal of Economic History, 39, 181-197.
    Cain, Philip J. and Anthony G. Hopkins (2000) British Imperialism, 2nd
Edition, New York; Longman.
    Chan, Wellington K.K. (1978) “Government, Merchants and Industry to 1911,”
in John King Fairbank ed. The Cambridge History of China, Volume 10: Late Ch’ing
1800-1911 Part I, New York; Cambridge University Press.
    Chaudhry, Azam and Philip Garner (2001a) “Do Government Suppress Growth?
Institutions, Rent-Seeking and Innovation Blocking in a Model of Schumpeterian Growth”
Brown University mimeo.
    Chaudhry, Azam and Philip Garner (2001b) “Political Competition between
Countries and Economic Growth,” Brown University mimeo.
    Clark, Gregory (1996) “The Political Foundations of Modern Economic Growth:
England, 1540-1800,” Journal of Interdisciplinary History, 26, 563-588.
    Collier, Ruth Berins (1999) Paths Towards Democracy: The Working Class and
Elites in Western Europe and South America, Cambridge University Press, New York.
    Cox, Gary W. (1987) The Eﬃcient Secret: The Cabinet and the Development of
Political Parties in Victorian England, New York; Cambridge University Press.
    Curtin Philip D. (2000) The World and the West: the European Challenge and
Overseas Response in the Age of Empire, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
    Eddie, Scott (1989) “Economic Policy and Economic Development in Austria-
Hungary, 1867-1913,” in Peter Mathias and Sidney Pollard eds. The Cambridge Economic
History of Europe, Volume 8, New York; Cambridge University Press.
    Eley, Geoﬀrey (1984) “The British Model and the German Road: Rethinking the
course of German History before 1914,” in David Blackbourn and Geoﬀery Eley eds. The


                                           44
Peculiarities of German History, Oxford; Oxford University Press.
    Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokoloﬀ (2000) “The Evolution of
Suﬀrage Institutions in the New World,” Unpublished Paper, Department of Economics,
UCLA.
    Fairbank, John King (1978) “Introduction: The Old Order,” in John King Fair-
bank ed. The Cambridge History of China, Volume 10: Late Ch’ing 1800-1911 Part I,
New York; Cambridge University Press.
    Fairbank, John King (1992) China: A New History, The Belknap Press; Cam-
bridge MA.
    Freudenberger, Herman (1967) “State Intervention as an Obstacle to Economic
Growth in the Habsburg Monarchy,” Journal of Economic History, 27, 493-509.
    Galenson, David W. (1996) “The Settlement and Growth of the Colonies: Popula-
tion, Labor and Economic Development,” in Stanley L. Engerman and Robert E. Gallman
eds. The Cambridge Economic History of the United States, Volume I, The Colonial Era,
Cambridge University Press, New York.
    Gerschenkron, Alexander (1943) Bread and Democracy in Germany, Berkeley
and Los Angeles; University of California Press.
    Gerschenkron, Alexander (1962) Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspec-
tive, Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA.
    Gerschenkron, Alexander (1970) Europe in the Russian Mirror: Four Lectures
in Economic History, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK.
    Gerschenkron, Alexander (1977) An Economic Spurt that Failed, Princeton Uni-
versity Press, Princeton NJ.
    Good, David F. (1984) The Economic Rise of the Habsburg Empire, 1750-1914,
University of California Press, Berkeley CA.
    Good, David F. (1991) “Austria-Hungary,” in Richard Sylla and Gianni Toniolo
eds, Patterns of European Industrialization: The Nineteenth Century, Routledge, New
York.
    Gregory, Paul R. (1991) “The Role of the State in Promoting Economic Devel-
opment: the Russian Case and its General Implications,” in Richard Sylla and Gianni
Toniolo eds, Patterns of European Industrialization: The Nineteenth Century, Routledge,
New York.


                                           45
    Gross, Nachaum (1973) “The Industrial Revolution in the Habsburg Monarchy,
1750-1914,” in Carlo M. Cipolla ed. The Fontana Economic History of Europe, Volume
4, Fontana Books, London.
    Guttsman, W.G. (1963) The British Political Elite, Oxford University Press,
Oxford UK.
    Hamerow, Theodore S. (1958) Restoration, Revolution, Reaction: Economics
and Politics in Germany, 1815-1971, Princeton University Press, Princeton NJ.
    Hill, Christopher (1981) The Century of Revolution, W.W. Norton & Co., New
York NY.
    Jones, Eric L. (1988) Growth Recurring: Economic Change in World History, New
York; Oxford University Press.
    Jones, Maldwyn A. (1983) The Limits of Liberty: American History 1607-1992,
New York; Oxford University Press.
    Keyssar, Alexander (2000) The Right to Vote:The Contested History of Democ-
racy in the United States, New York; Basic Books.
    Komlos, J. (1994) “Austria and European Economic Development,” in Charles W.
Ingrao ed. State and Society in Early Modern Austria, Purdue University Press, West
Lafayette IN.
    Krusell, Per and José-Victor Ríos-Rull (1996) “Vested Interests in a Theory
of Growth and Stagnation,” Review of Economic Studies, 63, 301-329.
    Kuznets, Simon (1968) Towards a Theory of Economic Growth, Yale University
Press, New Haven CT.
    Lancaster, Kelvin J. (1973) “The Dynamic Ineﬃciency of Capitalism,” Journal
of Political Economy, 81, 1092-1109.
    Lindert, Peter H. (2001) “Democracy, Decentralization, and Mass Schooling be-
fore 1914, Unpublished, UC Davis Department of Economics.
    Lewis, Bernard (1968) The Emergence of Modern Turkey, Oxford University press,
London.
    Madison, James (1788) The Federalist: A Collection of Essays Written in Favor
of the New Constitution, New York.
    Maddison, Angus (1995) Monitoring the World Economy 1820-1991, OECD;
Paris.


                                         46
    Macpherson, W. J. (1987) The Economic Development of Japan 1868-1941, Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge.
    McDaniel, Timothy (1988) Autocracy and Modernization in Russia, Princeton
University Press, Princeton NJ.
    McDaniel, Timothy (1991) Autocracy, Modernization and Revolution in Russia
and Iran, Princeton University Press, Princeton NJ.
    Mitchell, Brian R. (1993) International Historical Statistics, New York; Stockton.
    Mokyr, Joel (1990) The Lever of Riches, Oxford University Press, New York.
    Moore, Barrington Jr. (1966) The Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy,
Beacon Press, Boston MA.
    Mosse, W.E. (1958) Alexsandr II and the Modernization of Russia, University of
London Press, London UK.
    Mosse, W.E. (1992) An Economic History of Russia, 1856-1914, I.B. Taurus Press,
London, UK.
    North, Douglass C. and Richard P. Thomas (1973) The Rise of the Western
World: A New Economic History, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK.
    North, Douglass C. and Barry R. Weingast (1989) “Constitutions and Com-
mitment: The Evolution of Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century
England,” Journal of Economic History, 49, 803-832.
    Olson, Mancur C. (1982) The Rise and Decline of Nations, Yale University Press,
New Haven, CT.
    Olson, Mancur C. (1996) “Big Bills Left on the Sidewalk: Why Some Nations
are Rich, and Others Poor,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 10, 3-24.
    Parente, Stephen L. and Edward C. Prescott (1999) “Monopoly Rights: A
Barrier to Riches,” American Economic Review, 89, 1216-1233.
    Parente, Stephen L. and Edward C. Prescott (2000) Barriers to Riches, Cam-
bridge; MIT Press.
    Paulin, Robert (1991) “The Beinermeister Anomoly: Cultural Conservatism and
Technological Progress,” in Ritchie Robertson and Edward Timms eds. The Austrian
Enlightenment and its Aftermath, University of Edinburgh Press, Edinburgh.
    Perkins, Dwight H. (1967) “Government as an Obstacle to Industrialization: The
Case of Nineteenth-Century China, Journal of Economic History, 27, 478-492.


                                          47
      Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (1994) “Is Inequality Harmful for Growth?
Theory and Evidence,” American Economic Review, 84, 600-621.
      Pipes, Richard (1992) Russia under the Old Regime, Collier Books, New York
NY.
      Pomeranz, Kenneth (2000) The Great Divergence: Europe, China, and the Mak-
ing of the Modern World Economy, Princeton; Princeton University Press.
      Portal, Roger (1965) “The Industrialization of Russia,” in Peter Mathias and
M.M. Postan eds. The Cambridge Economic History of Europe, Volume 7, Part 2, New
York; Cambridge University Press.
      Reid, Anthony J. (1992) Social Classes and Social Relations in Britain, 1850-
1914, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK.
      Robinson, James A. (1997) “When is a State Predatory?” Unpublished, Depart-
ment of Political Science, University of California at Berkeley.
      Rosenberg, Hans (1958) Bureaucracy, Aristocracy and Autocracy: The Prussian
Experience, 1660-1815, Cambridge; Harvard University Press.
      Rostow, Walt W. (1960) The Stages of Economic Growth, New York; Cambridge
University Press.
      Rueschemeyer, Dietrich, Evelyn H. Stephens and John D. Stephens (1992)
Capitalist Development and Democracy, University of Chicago Press, Chicago IL.
      Saville, John (1994) The Consolidation of the Capitalist State: 1800-1850, Pluto
Press, London UK.
      Smith, Paul J. (1991) Taxing Heaven’s Storehouse: Horses, Bureaucrats, and the
Destruction of the Sichuan Tea Industry, Cambridge; Harvard University Press.
      Thompson, Edward P. (1975) Whigs and Hunters: The Origin of the Black Act,
London; Allen Lane.
      Thompson, Francis M.L. (1963) English Landed Society in the Nineteenth Cen-
tury, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK.
      Tilly, Charles (1990) Coercion, Capital and European States, AD 990 - 1992,
Blackwell, New York NY.
      Tipton, Francis B. (1974) “Farm Labour and Power Politics: Germany 1850-
1914,” Journal of Economic History, 34, 951-979.
      Tipton, Francis B. (1976) Regional Variations in the Economic Development of


                                            48
Germany during the Nineteenth Century, Wesleyan University Press, Middleton CT.
    Tornell, Aaron and Andres Velasco (1992) “The Tragedy of the Commons and
Economic Growth: Why Does Capital Flow from Poor to Rich Countries?” Journal of
Political Economy,100, 1208-31.
    Tracey, Michael (1989) Government and Agriculture in Western Europe, 1880-
1988, New York University Press, New York NY.
    Trebilcock, Clive (1981) The Industrialization of the Continental Powers, Long-
man, New York.
    Will, Pierre-Etienne and R. Bin Wong (1991) Nourish the People: the State
Civilian Granary System in China, 1650-1850, Ann Arbor, University of Michigan Press.
    Williamson, Chilton (1960) American Suﬀrage: From Property to Democracy
1760-1860, Princeton; Princeton University Press.
    Wittfogel, Karl A. Oriental Despotism: A Comparative Study of Total Power.
Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1957.
    Wong, R. Bin (1997) China Transformed: Historical Change and the Limits of
European Experience, Ithaca, Cornell University Press.
    Zurcher, Erik J. (1994) Turkey: a Modern History, Tauris, London.




                                            49
                                 Table 1
     Panel A: per-Capita Levels of Industrialization (UK 1900 is 100)1

                           1750                 1800                 1860                  1913

  Austria-                   7                     7                   11                   32
 Hungary
  France                     9                     9                   20                    59
 Germany                     8                     8                   15                    85
    Italy                    8                     8                   10                    26
  Russia                     6                     6                    8                    20
   Spain                     7                     7                   11                    22
  United                    10                    16                   64                   115
 Kingdom
United States                4                     9                   21                   126

     Japan                   7                     7                    7                   20
     China                   8                     6                    4                   3

                           Panel B: per-Capita GDP Levels2
                           1820          1870        1900                                 1913

  Austria                   28                    41                   63                  76
  France                    27                    40                   62                  75
 Germany                    25                    43                   68                   86
    Italy                   24                    32                   38                   55
  Russia                    16                    23                   27                  33
   Spain                    23                    28                   44                  49
  United                    38                    71                  100                  110
 Kingdom
United States               28                    53                   89                  115

     Japan                  16                    16                   25                   29
     China                  12                    12                   14                   15

1
  Source Bairoch (1982).
2
  Source Maddison (1995). Maddison’s data covers only Austria. Since Austria and Vienna was by far the
richest part of the Empire these numbers severely overstate the prosperity of Austria-Hungary.
