                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            CROSS-COUNTRY INEQUALITY TRENDS


                                            Daron Acemoglu


                                          Working Paper 8832
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8832


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2002




I thank Larry Katz and Timothy Smeeding, and seminar participants at Cornell and MIT for comments and
Alexis Leon for outstanding research assistance, and the NSF and the Russell Sage foundation for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Daron Acemoglu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Cross-Country Inequality Trends
Daron Acemoglu
NBER Working Paper No. 8832
March 2002
JEL No. J30, J31



                                             ABSTRACT

        The economics profession has made considerable progress in understanding the increase in wage
inequality in the U.S. and the UK over the past several decades, but currently lacks a consensus on why
inequality did not increase, or increased much less, in (continental) Europe over the same time period.
I review the two most popular explanations for these differential trends: that relative supply of skills
increased faster in Europe, and that European labor market institutions prevented inequality from
increasing. I argue that these two explanations go some way towards accounting for the differential
cross-country inequality trends, but do not provide an entirely satisfactory explanation. In addition, it
appears that relative demand for skills increased differentially across countries. Motivated by this
reasoning, I develop a simple theory where labor market institutions creating wage compression in Europe
also encourage more investment in technologies increasing the productivity of less-skilled workers, thus
implying less skill-biased technical change in Europe than in the U.S.




Daron Acemoglu
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Department of Economics
E52-380
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
daron@mit.edu
1     Introduction
While over the 1980s wage inequality and returns to education increased sharply in
the U.S. and the UK, there was less of an increase, or even no change, in continental
European economies (see, for example, Freeman and Katz, 1995, Nickell and Bell, 1996,
Blanchflower, Loveman, and Katz, 1995).
    Table 1 illustrates these trends by showing an estimate of the education premium
and the log diﬀerences of the 90th and the 10th percentiles of the wage distribution
for a number of countries from the Luxembourg Income Studies dataset (and for the
U.S. from the CPS, see Section 4 and the Appendix for data details). The table also
replicates the estimates of the 90-10 diﬀerential for a number of countries from Table
2 of the survey by Freeman and Katz (1995) for comparison. The numbers show that
U.S. inequality and skill premia were higher at the end of the 1970s than in most other
countries, and from there on, they increased faster than in these other cases (perhaps
with the exception of Israel).
    These cross-country trends are well known. There is also a fairly widespread consen-
sus that U.S. wage inequality rose because the relative demand for skills increased faster
than the relative supply (e.g., Katz and Murphy, 1992, Berman, Bound and Griliches,
1994, Katz and Autor, 2000, Acemoglu, 2002). So why haven’t the same technological
developments increased skill premia in much of continental Europe?
    There are three broad types of answers:

    1. The relative supply of skills increased faster in Europe.

    2. European wage-setting institutions prevented wage inequality from increasing.

    3. For exogenous or endogenous reasons, technical change has been less skill biased
       in Europe.

    The first two explanations have been the most popular among economists, and I refer
to them as the “traditional explanations”. Both of these explanations fit nicely into the
relative-supply-demand framework, which has been a very useful tool in understanding

                                             1
the U.S. wage inequality patterns. They both suggest that the lack of increase in in-
equality in Europe should have been associated with a relatively faster increase in the
employment of more skilled workers. Table 1 also shows that during the 1980s the rel-
ative employment of skilled workers increased faster in a number of European countries
than in the U.S. Is this more rapid increase in skilled employment suﬃcient to account
for the stability of the European wage structure?
    I use a version of the relative-supply-demand framework to investigate this question.
The evidence suggests that these explanations account for a significant component of
the diﬀerential inequality trends (in fact, for substantially more than the author had
originally conjectured!). Nevertheless, it also appears that the relative demand for skills
did not increase as much in many European economies as it did in the U.S. and the
UK. More specifically, I find that the relative-supply-demand framework, with the same
relative demand shifts across countries, does a reasonable job of explaining some of the
diﬀerences in the cross-country inequality trends, for example, for Finland and Norway.
Nevertheless, there are a number of cases, in particular, Belgium, Denmark, and Sweden,
and also to some degree Israel, where skill premia increased much less than predicted
by this approach. I therefore conclude that the traditional explanations do not seem to
provide an entirely satisfactory explanation for the diﬀerential inequality trends across
countries. Instead, it appears that the U.S. and European relative demand curves did
not shift in the same way over the past 20 years.1
    Given data quality and compatibility issues, this evidence has to be interpreted with
caution. Nevertheless, it suggests that we should be thinking of explanations featuring
diﬀerences in technical change or technology adoption across these countries. In the
last part of the paper, I propose a possible explanation for why relative demand for
skills may not have increased as much in Europe as in the U.S. The basic idea is that
institutional wage compression in Europe makes firms more willing to adopt technologies
   1
     Berman, Bound and Machin (1998) look at patterns of skill-upgrading in various industries and
conclude that there has been skill-biased technical change in all of the OECD countries in their sample.
However, their results do not imply that these shifts have occurred at the same rate or with the same
intensity across countries. In fact, to infer the overall rate of skill-biased technical change from industry
data would require a variety of strong assumptions.



                                                     2
complementary to unskilled workers, making technical change less skill biased there.
    The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, I review the three explanations
suggested above. In Section 3, I develop a simple framework to quantitatively investigate
whether cross-country inequality trends can be explained by the relative-supply-demand
framework assuming similar changes in relative demand for skills across countries. In
Section 4, I use data from the Luxembourg Income Studies and undertake such an
investigation. I find that although the diﬀerential behavior of relative supplies between
the U.S. and continental Europe explains much of the diﬀerences, there is also evidence
that the relative demand for skills did not increase as much in continental Europe. In
Section 5, I make a preliminary attempt at developing a simple theory where relative
demands change diﬀerentially across countries. Section 6 concludes.


2     Review of the Arguments
2.1    Traditional Explanations of Diﬀerential Inequality Trends
The traditional approaches explain the diﬀerential cross-country inequality trends by
diﬀerences in the behavior of relative supplies. The first explanation claims that the
more rapid increase in the relative supply of skills in Europe accounts for the lack of
increase in inequality there. The second explanation, on the other hand, emphasizes
the role of European wage-setting institutions. According to this explanation, it is
not the diﬀerential growth of skilled workers in the population, but the diﬀerential
behavior of skilled employment that is responsible for diﬀerences in inequality trends
across countries. More specifically, firms respond to wage compression by reducing
their demand for unskilled workers, and the employment of skilled workers (relative to
that of unskilled workers) increases in Europe compared to the U.S. As a result, the
market equilibriates with a lower employment of unskilled workers compensating for
their relatively higher wages in Europe.
    Figure 1 illustrates the first explanation using a standard relative-supply-demand
diagram, with relative supply on the horizontal axis and the relative wage of skilled
workers, ω, on the vertical axis. For simplicity, I drew the relative supply of skills

                                           3
as vertical. The diagram shows that an increase in the demand for skills, for a given
supply of skills, will lead to higher wage inequality. At a simple level, we can think
of this economy as corresponding to the U.S., where the consensus is that because of
skill-biased technical change or increased trade with less skill-abundant countries, the
relative demand for skills grew faster than the relative supply during the recent decades.
As a result of the increase in the relative demand for skills, the skill premium rises from
ω Pre to ω US-Post .
    Now imagine that continental Europe is also aﬀected by the same relative demand
shifts, but the relative supply of skills also increases. This captures the essence of the
first explanation, where the supply of skills increases faster in continental Europe than
in the U.S. Then the “European” equilibrium will be at a point like E which may not
exhibit greater inequality than before. In fact, Figure 1 depicts the case in which there
is no change in the skill premium in Europe.2
    Probably the more popular explanation among economists and commentators is the
second one above (e.g., Krugman, 1994, OECD, 1994, Blau and Kahn, 1996). To capture
this story, imagine that wage-setting institutions in Europe prevent wage inequality
from increasing–for example, because of union bargaining, unemployment benefits, or
minimum wages that keep the earnings of low-skill workers in line with those of high-
skill workers. This can be represented as an institutional wage-setting line diﬀerent from
the relative supply curve as drawn in Figure 2. (To make the story stark, I drew the
institutional wage-setting line as horizontal). The equilibrium now has to be along this
institutional wage-setting line, and consquently oﬀ the relative supply curve, causing
unemployment. Now, even in the absence of an increase in the relative supply of skills,
the skill premium might not increase; instead there will be equilibrium unemployment.
In the figure, relative unemployment caused by the increase in the demand for skills
is shown as the gap between the relative supply of skills and the intersection between
relative demand and institutional wage-setting line. Notice that in the simplest version
of the story, there is full employment of skilled workers, and the indicated gap simply
   2
     See, among others, Katz, Loveman and Blanchflower (1995), Murphy, Riddell and Romer (1998)
and Card and Lemieux (2001).



                                              4
reflects unskilled unemployment. The fact that unemployment increased in Europe
relative to the U.S. is often interpreted as evidence in favor of this explanation.3
       Notice that both of these explanations are “supply-side”. Firms are along their
relative demand curves, and diﬀerent supply behavior or institutional characteristics of
the European economies pick diﬀerent points along the relative demand curves.
       This relative-supply-demand framework is not only a parsimonious specification, but
also enables an empirical investigation of whether these two approaches can provide
a satisfactory explanation for the behavior of skill premia in continental Europe. If
we know the elasticity of substitution between skilled and unskilled workers, we can
investigate whether the observed diﬀerences in the growth of relative employment of
skilled workers are large enough to account for the diﬀerential behavior of wage inequality
in Europe. In Section 3, I develop a framework for undertaking such an investigation,
and in Section 4, I present some empirical results using this framework.

2.2        Diﬀerential Changes in the Relative Demand for Skills
An alternative to the traditional explanations involves diﬀerential changes in the relative
demand for skills across countries. These diﬀerential changes could reflect four distinct
forces:4

   1. Diﬀerent countries could develop their own technologies, with diﬀerent degrees of
   3
     But in contrast to the prediction of this simple story, unemployment in Europe increased for all
groups, not simply for the low-education workers. See, for example, Nickell and Bell (1994), Card,
Kramartz and Lemieux (1996) and Krueger and Pischke (1998). Nevertheless, some of the increase in
unemployment among the high-education workers in Europe may reflect the eﬀect of wage compression
within education groups on job creation (e.g., if firms are forced to pay the same wages to low-skill
college graduates as the high-skill college graduates, they may stop hiring the low-skill college graduates,
increasing unemployment among college graduates).
   4
     Yet another alternative is to introduce labor market imperfections that would also force firms to
function oﬀ their “relative demand curves” (the model of Section 5 features labor market imperfections,
but firms are still along their relative demand curves). An example would be eﬃcient-bargaining between
firms and unions. Nevertheless, even if firms are oﬀ their relative demand curves, they will be located
along some equilibrium locus, and in this case we have to explain why this equilibrium locus is shifting
diﬀerentially. I am not aware of any analysis of cross-country inequality trends using a model where
firms are oﬀ their relative demand curves. Here I will develop an explanation that keeps firms along their
relative demand curves, but suggest why the relative demand curves may have changed diﬀerentially
across countries.


                                                     5
         skill bias.

   2. Some countries could be lagging behind the world technology frontier, and may
         not have adopted the most recent skill-biased technologies.

   3. While all countries face the same technology frontier, some may have adopted more
         skill-biased technologies from this frontier.

   4. Diﬀerent countries have experienced diﬀerent degrees of trade opening, aﬀecting
         the demand for skills diﬀerentially.

       Although the fourth explanation is the simplest, the current consensus is that in-
creased international trade played a limited role in the increase in the relative demand
for skills of the recent decades (see the surveys by Katz and Autor, 2000, and Acemoglu,
2002). Therefore, I focus on the technological reasons for diﬀerential changes in the
relative demand for skills. Plausibly, many advanced economies develop some of their
own technologies. In Acemoglu (1999b), I analyzed a model where diﬀerences in local
conditions make it profitable for countries to develop some of their own technologies. In
this context, I showed that greater trade with skill-scarce LDCs may cause skill-biased
technical change in the U.S., while inducing the development of more skill-replacing
technologies in Europe. Nevertheless, it appears plausible that most OECD economies
have access, and even relatively rapid access, to the same set of technologies. This sug-
gests that the most likely reason for why the relative demand for skills may have behaved
diﬀerently in continental Europe is not diﬀerential development of new technologies or
slow technology diﬀusion, but diﬀerent incentives to adopt available technologies.
       In the last section of the paper, I make a preliminary attempt to develop such a
theory of diﬀerential adoption of available technologies.5 Here I briefly summarize the
main idea, leaving the details to that section. The basic idea of the theory I propose
   5
    An alternative theory of diﬀerential cross-country inequality trends is developed by Beaudry and
Green (2000). They construct a model in which capital scarcity is more harmful to unskilled workers.
The introduction of a new technology increases the demand for capital, and hurts unskilled workers.
In Europe, capital is relatively more abundant than in the U.S., so the relative earnings of unskilled
workers do not decline as much.



                                                  6
is to link the incentives to adopt new technologies to the degree of compression in the
wage structure, which is in part determined by labor market institutions. In particular,
institutional wage compression in Europe makes firms more willing to adopt technologies
complementary to unskilled workers, inducing less skill-biased technical change there.
This theory is based on three premises:

  1. There is some degree of rent-sharing between firms and workers, for example,
     because of bargaining over quasi-rents.

  2. The skill bias of technologies is determined by firms’ technology choices.

  3. A variety of labor market institutions tend to increase the wages of low-skill workers
     in Europe, especially relative to the wages of comparable workers in the U.S.

   All three premises are plausible. The finding of high correlation between wages and
firms’ profitability or investments both in union and non-union sectors (e.g., Katz and
Summers, 1989, Groshen, 1991, Blanchflower, Oswald, and Sanfey, 1997) support the
view that there is some amount of rent-sharing. That technology adoption is endogenous
is close to the heart of many economists, and in previous work (e.g., Acemoglu, 1998,
and especially,1999a, 2000), I developed this theme in detail and showed how it can help
us understand the behavior of the demand for skills and wage inequality in the U.S.
Finally, the view that minimum wages, unions and social insurance programs create
wage compression in Europe and increase the pay of low-skill workers is widely shared
by most economists, and supported by existing evidence (e.g., OECD, 1994, Blau and
Kahn, 1996).
   The new implication of combining these three premises is that firms in Europe may
find it more profitable to adopt new technologies with unskilled workers than their
American counterparts. This is because with wage compression, firms are forced to pay
higher wages to unskilled workers than they would otherwise do (that is, greater than the
“bargained” wage). This creates an additional incentive for these firms to increase the
productivity of unskilled workers: they are already paying high wages, and additional
investments will not necessarily translate into higher wages. Put diﬀerently, the labor

                                            7
market institutions that push the wages of these workers up make their employers the
residual claimant of the increase in productivity due to technology adoption, encouraging
the adoption of technologies complementary to unskilled workers in Europe.6
    A simple numerical example illustrates this point more clearly. Suppose that a
worker’s productivity is 10 without technology adoption, and 20 when the new technol-
ogy is adopted. Assume also that wages are equal to half of the worker’s productivity,
and technology adoption costs 6 (incurred solely by the firm). Now without technology
adoption, the firm’s profits are equal to 1/2 × 10 = 5, while with technology adoption,
they are 1/2 × 20 − 6 = 4. The firm, therefore, prefers not to adopt the new technology
because of the subsequent rent-sharing. Next suppose that a minimum wage legislation
requires the worker to be paid at least 9. This implies that the worker will be paid 9
unless his productivity is above 18. The firm’s profits without technology now change
to 10 − 9 = 1, since it has to pay 9 to the worker because of the minimum wage. In con-
trast, its profits with technology adoption are still 4. Therefore, the firm now prefers to
adopt the new technology. The reason for this change is clear: because of the minimum
wage laws, the firm was already forced to pay high wages to the worker, even when his
marginal product was low, so it became the eﬀective residual claimant of the increase in
productivity due to technology adoption.
    This reasoning implies that there may be greater incentives to invest in technologies
complementing workers whose wages are being pushed up by labor market institutions.
Since European labor market institutions increase the pay of low-skill workers, technol-
ogy may be endogenously less skill biased in Europe than in the U.S.
    An additional implicationn of this model is that institutional wage compression will
make job creation less profitable in Europe, thus as in the second explanation above,
we expect unemployment in Europe to increase relative to the U.S. Interestingly, in
this story, the rise in unemployment can be across the board rather than fall dispropor-
tionately on the unskilled, which is consistent with the evidence (see the references in
    6
      This reasoning is similar to the intuition for why firms find it profitable to invest in the training of
their employees in the presence of labor market imperfections in Acemoglu and Pischke (1999). It also
relies on the notion that firms obtain some “rents” from the employment relationship. In the absence
of such rents, firms would simply lay oﬀ workers when their wages are pushed up.


                                                      8
footnote 3).
    Therefore, the overall macro predictions of this approach are consistent with cross-
county trends. However, as yet there is no detailed evidence supporting this theory, and
an empirical investigation of these ideas may be an interesting area for future research.


3     Cross-Country Relative Demand Shifts
3.1    The Relative-Supply-Demand Framework
I now develop the relative-supply-demand framework in more detail for a quantitative
evaluation of the traditional explanations. Consider the following simple model (see,
e.g., Welch, 1970, Katz and Murphy, 1992, or Acemoglu, 2002): there are two types
of workers, unskilled (low-education) workers and skilled (high-education) workers. I
denote the employment of unskilled and skilled workers in country j at time t by Lj (t)
and H j (t). These employment levels may vary across countries and over time both
because of diﬀerences in the education levels of the population, and also because, in the
presence of labor market distortions, there may be unemployment.
    The aggregate production function for economy j takes the constant elasticity of
substitution (CES) form
                              £                                       ¤1/ρ
                     Y j (t) = (Ajl (t) Lj (t))ρ + (Ajh (t) H j (t))ρ      ,          (1)

where ρ ≤ 1, and Ajl (t) and Ajh (t) are factor-augmenting technology terms, which are,
for now, allowed to vary across countries. The elasticity of substitution between skilled
and unskilled workers in this production function is σ ≡ 1/ (1 − ρ).
    The marginal product of the two factors can be written as
                     ¡      ¢ρ h¡ j ¢ρ ¡ j ¢ρ j                   i(1−ρ)/ρ
          MPLj (t) = Ajl (t)     Al (t) + Ah (t) (H (t) /Lj (t))ρ          ,          (2)

and
                 ¡       ¢ρ h¡ j ¢ρ j                   ¡       ¢ρ i(1−ρ)/ρ
           MPHj = Ajh (t)     Al (t) (H (t) /Lj (t))−ρ + Ajh (t)            .
                                                                  j
    Suppose that wages are related linearly to marginal product: wH (t) = βMPHj (t)
and wLj (t) = βMPLj (t). The case where β = 1 corresponds to workers being paid their

                                               9
full marginal product, with no rent sharing. Irrespective of the value of β, we have
                                                    j
                                                   wH  (t)   MPHj (t)
                                    ω j (t) ≡              =          .
                                                   wLj (t)   MPLj (t)

That is, in this specification firms will be along their relative demand curves.
   Throughout the paper, I will think of ωj (t) both as a measure of skill premium (such
as returns to schooling) and as a measure of inequality. This is motivated by a reasoning
whereby even among observationally equivalent workers some will be more “skilled”,
and they will earn higher wages commensurate with their skills and the market price of
skills as reflected by ω j (t) (see Juhn, Murphy and Pierce, 1993, Acemoglu, 2002). In
practice, of course, there are many other factors, in addition to, or instead of, the skill
premium, determining wage dispersion among observationally identical workers.
   Alternatively, as long as firms are along their relative demand curve, the skill pre-
mium will be
                   Ã             !ρ µ             ¶−(1−ρ)       Ã             !(σ−1)/σ µ             ¶−1/σ
          j            Ajh (t)          H j (t)                     Ajh (t)                H j (t)
         ω (t) =                                            =                                                .   (3)
                       Ajl (t)          Lj (t)                      Ajl (t)                Lj (t)

Equation (3) can be rewritten in a more convenient form by taking logs,
                                        Ã         !      µ j ¶
                                           j
                       j      σ −  1      Ah  (t)    1    H (t)
                   ln ω (t) =        ln     j       − ln         .                                               (4)
                                σ         Al (t)     σ    Lj (t)

This equation shows that the skill premium is decreasing in the relative supply of skilled
workers, H j (t) /Lj (t), except in the special case where σ → ∞ (where skilled and
unskilled workers are perfect substitutes).
   Another important point to note from this equation is that as long as σ > 1, i.e., as
long as skilled and unskilled workers are gross substitutes, an increase in Ajh (t) /Ajl (t)
corresponds to skill-biased technical change and raises the skill premium and wage in-
equality. Interestingly, when σ < 1, it is a decline in Ajh (t) /Ajl (t) that corresponds to
skill-biased technical change (see Acemoglu, 2002). But the case with σ < 1 is not of
great empirical relevance in the context of skilled and unskilled workers, since almost all
existing estimates suggest that σ > 1 (e.g., Freeman, 1986).


                                                       10
   Let us start with a relatively weak form of the common technology assumption. In
particular, suppose that

                          Ajh (t) = η jh θj (t) Ah (t) and Ajl (t) = η jl θj (t) Al (t) .         (5)

This assumption can be interpreted as follows. There is a world technology represented
by Ah (t) and Al (t), which potentially becomes more or less skill-biased over time. Coun-
tries may diﬀer in their ability to use the world technology eﬃciently, and this is captured
by the term θj (t). Although the ability to use world technology is time varying, it is
symmetric between the two sectors. In addition, countries may have diﬀerent compara-
tive advantages in the two sectors as captured by the terms η jh and η jl (though these are
assumed to be time invariant).
   Substituting (5) into (4), we obtain
                                                              µ j ¶
                                     j         j          1    H (t)
                                 ln ω (t) = c + ln a (t) − ln         ,                           (6)
                                                          σ    Lj (t)
                        σ−1
where ln a (t) ≡         σ
                              ln (Ah (t) /Al (t)) is the measure of skill-biased technical change, and
       σ−1 j
cj ≡    σ
          η h /η jl .
   Then, using U.S. data we can construct an estimate for the change in ln a (t), denoted
by ∆ ln â (t), using an estimate for the elasticity of substitution, σ as:
                                                                µ 0 ¶
                                                     0    1      H (t)
                                ∆ ln â (t) = ∆ ln ω (t) + ∆ ln         ,
                                                          σ      L0 (t)
where j = 0 refers to the U.S. Although the elasticity of substitution between skilled and
unskilled workers, σ, is diﬃcult to pin down precisely, there is a fairly well-established
consensus that it is greater than 1, perhaps around 1.4, but possibly as large as 2 (see,
e.g., Freeman, 1986, Katz and Murphy, 1992, Angrist, 1995, Card and Lemieux, 2001).
Hence, in the empirical exercise I will use σ = 1.4 and σ = 2 as two reference values.
   Now define ∆k as the k-period diﬀerence operator, i.e.,

                                          ∆k x ≡ x (t) − x (t − k) .

Then, predicted changes in the skill premium for country j between between t − k and

                                                         11
t are given by:7                                               µ j ¶
                                     j                  1       H (t)
                           ∆k ln ω̂ (t) = ∆k ln â (t) − ∆k ln         .                                (7)
                                                        σ       Lj (t)
       The implicit assumption in this exercise is that there is no delay in the adoption of
new technologies across countries. Instead, it is quite possible that some of the new skill-
biased technologies developed or adopted in the U.S. are only introduced in continental
Europe with a lag. That is, instead of (5), we would have
                                          ¡       ¢                            ¡      ¢
                  Ajh (t) = η jh θj (t) Ah t − k j and Ajl (t) = η jl θj (t) Al t − kj ,                (8)

implying that there is a delay of k j periods for country j in the adoption of frontier
technologies.
       Motivated by the possibility of such delays, as an alternative method I use U.S. data
from 1974 to 1997 to recover estimates of ∆ ln â (t), and calculate the average annual
growth rate of ln â (t), denoted by g̃. I then construct an alternate estimate for the
predicted change in the skill premium in country j between dates t − k and t as:
                                                    µ j ¶
                                 j           1       H (t)
                         ∆k ln ω̃ (t) = g̃k − ∆k ln                                                     (9)
                                             σ        Lj (t)
In this exercise, I use 1974 as the starting point, since it is five years prior to the
earliest observation for any other country from the LIS data, and five years appears as a
reasonable time lag for diﬀusion of technologies among the OECD countries. I use 1997
as the final year, since this is the final year for which there is LIS data for a country in
my sample.
       Whether the relative-supply-demand framework provides a satisfactory explanation
for cross-country inequality trends can then be investigated by comparing the predicted
skill premium changes, the ∆k ln ω̂ j (t)’s from (7) and the ∆k ln ω̃j (t)’s from (9), to the
actual changes, the ∆k ln ω j (t)’s.
   7
       Equivalently, we can write:
                                                                   µ             ¶
                                         ¯ ln ω j (t) = − 1 ∆
                                                            ¯ ln       H j (t)
                                         ∆                                           .
                                                          σ            Lj (t)

where ∆¯ ln xj (t) ≡ ∆ ln xj (t) − ∆ ln x0 (t) with j = 0 as the U.S., and investigate whether this equation
provides a good fit to the data.


                                                         12
4     Can Diﬀerences in Relative Supplies Explain In-
      equality Diﬀerences?
4.1    Data
I now undertake a preliminary investigation of whether diﬀerences in the behavior rela-
tive supplies can explain the diﬀerential inequality trends across countries. More specifi-
cally, I investigate whether equations (7) and (9) provide a good description of the cross-
country inequality trends, I use data from Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) dataset (see,
for example, Gottschalk and Smeeding, 1997, for an investigation of cross-country in-
come inequality using this dataset, and Gottschalk and Joyce, 1998, for an investigation
of diﬀerences in wage inequality). Because LIS data for diﬀerent countries refer to dif-
ferent years, I combine these with the March Current Population Surveys (CPS) for the
corresponding years.
    There are a number of diﬃculties in using the LIS for this purpose. First, information
on years of schooling or education is missing for a number of countries. In particular,
there is no consistent education information for the UK and Sweden, and for the Nether-
lands, the education categories change over the sample period in a way that makes it
diﬃcult to construct comparable relative supply numbers. Second, for some countries,
for example, Belgium and France, incomes are reported after taxes. Third, because the
LIS sample is limited to household heads, relative supplies have to be constructed for
heads of households instead of the whole population. Finally, because weeks worked
information is missing for some countries, annual earnings have to be used to construct
skill (college) premia. These diﬃculties notwithstanding, the LIS provides a convenient
data set for a preliminary look at whether diﬀerences in relative supplies could account
for the diﬀerential inequality trends.
    The skill premia are obtained from a log-wage regression analysis using annual earn-
ings of full-time-full-year male household heads aged of 18-64. The “college premium” is
estimated as the coeﬃcient on the dummy for college education. Following other authors,
in the case where there is no education information, I use information on occupation
(this is the case for the UK and Sweden, see the Appendix). The regression also contains

                                            13
other education dummies, a quartic in age (since experience cannot be constructed for
every country), and a race or immigrant dummy when applicable (see the Appendix).
For the CPS calculations, when earnings are top coded, they are assigned the value of
1.5 times the tope code.8
       The 90-10 wage diﬀerential is simply the log diﬀerence between the earnings of the
household head at the 90th percentile and those of the household head at the 10th
percentile (again the sample is limited to full-time-full-year male heads of households).
       Relative supplies are constructed adapting the method of Autor, Katz and Krueger
(1998) to the data available here. In particular, it is the ratio of number of college-
equivalents divided by the number of noncollege-equivalents. Here, I define college and
noncollege equivalents as follows:
college equivalents=college graduates+0.5×workers with some college, and
noncollege equivalents=high school dropouts and graduates+0.5×workers with some col-
lege.
       When college information is not available, occupations are used for this calculation
(see the Appendix). Moreover, for the Netherlands and Germany, there is no separate
category for those with some college.9 Presumably, workers with some college are al-
ready included either with those with secondary education or among those with college
education. This may create problems with the relative supply estimates from these two
countries. For all these calculations, I use a sample of male heads of households rather
than the whole population, since the LIS only has information for heads of households.
To the extent that there are diﬀerential trends over the years across diﬀerent countries
in female labor force participation, this limitation of the LIS may create biases in the
analysis here.
   8
     Because the sample is narrower than usual (in particular, it excludes women), is not weighted by
weeks worked, and includes age instead of experience controls, the college premium for the U.S. is
estimated to be lower than usual.
   9
     For Germany, we only use data from 1989 and 1994. The survey also includes data for 1981 and
1984, but the 1981 survey is the first LIS survey, and data quality is low and LIS advises against the
use of this survey. The 1984 survey has a very diﬀerent classification of education, and implausibly few
people outside the categories of high school and high school and less. Although I report overall wage
inequality numbers from the survey in Table 1, I do not use it for calculating returns to schooling or
relative supplies.


                                                  14
   Because there are a number of problems with the French data (for example, incomes
are reported after taxes, there is no education variable for the first two surveys, and it
is not possible to limit the sample to full-time-full year workers), I exclude France from
the analysis. I also exclude Luxembourg since the sample size is small.

4.2    Empirical Results
Figures 3a-c and 4a-c show the results of the empirical exercise. Figures 3a-c depict the
estimates obtained from (7) for two values of the elasticity of substitution, σ = 1.4 and
σ = 2, while Figures 4a-c show the estimates from (9), again for the same two values
of the elasticity of substitution. In all cases, the change estimates, ∆k ln ω̂ j (t) and the
∆k ln ω̃ j (t), are translated into level estimates by choosing the first year estimate for
each country to be the same as the actual skill premium for that country.
   A number of patterns are apparent from the figures, irrespective of which method
and which estimate of the elasticity of substitution are used. First, for Australia and
and Canada, the predicted skill premia estimates are close to the actual estimates, while
for the UK, the college premium increases more than predicted. Therefore, there is no
evidence that the relative-supply-demand framework with common technology trends is
predicting too large an increase in the skill premia among the Anglo-Saxon countries.
This conclusion is consistent with the results of Katz, Loveman, and Blanchflower (1995),
Murphy, Riddell and Romer (1998) and Card and Lemieux (2001). The predicted skill
premia estimates are also close to the actual estimates for Finland and Norway.
   Second, for the Netherlands, the predicted skill premia decline, whereas the actual
skill premia remain approximately constant. This reflects substantial increase in the
relative supplies of skills in this country. Given the shortcomings of the LIS data for
the Netherlands noted above, increases in the relative supply of skills are likely to be
overstated, and these results need to be interpreted with caution. Next, for Germany,
Norway and Finland the predicted and actual skill premia move more or less in tandem.
Hence, the relative-supply-demand framework with common technology changes appears
to perform well for these countries, though it has to be borne in mind that German
relative supply changes may be overstated in the LIS data.

                                             15
    Finally, for Belgium, Denmark, and Sweden, the predicted skill premia estimates
increase substantially while actual skill premia are approximately constant or actually
declined. For Israel, the same result is obtained using the first method, but not the
second. Given the quality of the LIS data, these results have to be viewed as preliminary,
and more work using detailed microdata from these countries is necessary to reach
firmer conclusions. Nevertheless, the results suggest that for a significant fraction of the
continental European countries in the sample, the relative-supply-demand framework
with common technology trends does not provide an entirely satisfactory explanation
for the diﬀerential behavior of skill premia. Instead, it appears that relative demand for
skills increased substantially less in Belgium, Denmark and Sweden than in the U.S. or
other Anglo-Saxon countries.


5     A Model of Diﬀerential Technology Responses
I now develop a simple theory which links the adoption of skill-biased technologies
to labor market institutions, and provides an explanation for why technical change
may have been less skilled-biased in Europe than in the U.S. This theory builds on a
framework I developed in Acemoglu (1999a), and combines it with some of the insights
of the literature on training investments in the presence of labor market frictions (e.g.,
Acemoglu, 1997, Acemoglu and Pischke, 1998, 1999).
    The basic idea is that in a labor market with wage bargaining, the incentives of firms
to invest in new technologies is aﬀected by the degree of wage compression. In particular,
greater wage compression may increase firms’ incentives to raise the productivity of low-
skill workers. I then suggest that the greater institutional wage compression in Europe
may have encouraged firms to adopt certain technologies with low-skill workers that U.S.
firms did not adopt.
    Throughout, I will keep the presentation at a heuristic level. The reader is referred
to Acemoglu (1999a) for a fuller discussion of a similar model (but without an analysis
of the impact of diﬀerences in wage-setting institutions on technology choices).




                                            16
5.1    The Environment
There is a continuum 1 of workers that are infinitely lived and maximize the net present
value of income discounted at the rate r. A fraction φ of these workers are skilled, and
have human capital hs , while the remaining workers are unskilled with human capital
hu < hs .
   Jobs in this economy are created via costly search as in the models by Diamond
(1982), Mortensen (1982), and Pissarides (1990). When there are V vacancies and U
unemployed workers, there will be M(U, V ) new matches created. Notice that what
matters is the total number of unemployed workers (skilled plus unskilled), and as a
result, both skilled and unskilled workers will have the same matching rates. I assume
that the function M exhibits constant returns to scale, so matching rates are determined
                                                   V
simply by the tightness of the labor market, θ =   U
                                                     .   The probability of matching with a
worker for a vacancy is q(θ) where q is a decreasing function. The probability of matching
rate for an unemployed worker, in turn, is θq(θ), which is assumed to be increasing in θ.
I also assume that matches between firms and workers come to an end at the exogenous
probability s.
   Firms incur a setup cost γ t when they post a vacancy at time t. Once they match
with a worker, they decide what type of a job to create. In Acemoglu (1999a), I analyzed
the more realistic (and involved) case where firms decide the type of job before matching.
Here I focus on the case where this decision is made after matching in order to simplify
the analysis. Specifically, at time t, a firm matched with a worker of human capital h
can either produce
                                           At h                                        (10)

units of the final good, without incurring any additional costs, or it can undertake an
additional investment of cost kt and produce

                                      (1 + α) At h,                                    (11)

where α > 0.
   One possible interpretation of the choice between the two technologies is that firms

                                           17
can either use last period’s technology at no cost, or adopt the frontier technology by
incurring an additional cost every period.
       Notice that the multiplicative nature of the production function in (11) makes new
technology complementary to skills.
       Also in terms of the framework discussed in the previous section, the elasticity of
substitution between skilled and unskilled workers is infinity, and wage inequality is
unaﬀected by relative supplies. This is to simplify the discussion and focus on diﬀerential
technology responses of diﬀerent economies.

5.2       Analysis
The discounted net present value of a firm with technology adoption decision xt ∈ {0, 1}
and matched with a worker of skill h ∈ {hu , hs } can be written as
                                                          ·                                   ¸
                                                       1
Jt (xt , h) = At h + xt (αAt h − kt ) − wt (xt , h) +      sVt+1 + (1 − s) max Jt+1 (xt+1 , h)
                                                      1+r                  xt+1
                                                                                           (12)
where wt (xt , h) is the wage as a function of the technology decision and the skill level
of the worker, and Vt+1 is the value of a vacancy at time t + 1. The wage may depend
on the technology decision because of bargaining over the quasi-rents created by search
frictions. The term sVt+1 is added because with probability s, there is a separation,
and the firm becomes an unfilled vacancy. Finally, the last term is the continuation
value conditional on no separation, and I have imposed that there will be no voluntary
separations. This will be the case in steady state, and I will focus on the steady state
allocation for simplicity.10
       Next suppose that At and kt grow exogenously at a constant rate, g, i.e.,

                                         At = (1 + g)t A                                          (13)
                                         kt = (1 + g)t k.
  10
    Away from the steady state, workers may want to end the relationship with a firm that does not
adopt the new technology voluntarily, and I’m ignoring this case in writing equation (12). In any case,
such voluntary separations would never happen along the equilibrium path, since the technology adop-
tion decisions are taken every period, so the firm would never choose not to adopt the new technology
when it knows that this will result in a quit.


                                                  18
In addition, assume that wages are equal to a fraction β of the worker’s ex post product:11

                                    wt (xt , h) = β (1 + xt α) At h.                             (14)

The important assumption incorporated in this expression is that wage determination
takes place after the firm sinks the cost of new technology. This is reasonable in prac-
tice given the impossibility of writing binding wage contracts, and that, while wages
are negotiated throughout the duration of the employment relationship, many of the
technology-related decisions are made before or at the beginning of this relationship.
       Using (14) and the fact that both productivity and costs are growing at the rate g as
specified by (13), we can rewrite the steady-state value of a job that always adopts the
new technology (x = 1) and that of a job that never adopts the new technology (x = 0):

                               J (x, h) = δ [(1 − β) (1 + xα) Ah − xk]                           (15)

              (1−s)(1+g)
where δ ≡        1+r
                           is the eﬀective discount factor, taking into account time preference,
separation probability and productivity growth.
       Notice that the firm only receives a fraction 1 − β of the output, though it incurs the
full cost of investment. As a result, firms will tend to underinvest in technology. This
is a standard result, going back at least to Grout (1984), and also emphasized in the
context of search equilibrium by Acemoglu (1996).
       It is straightforward to see that, in steady state, firms will choose to adopt the new
technology with a worker of skill level h if and only if J (x = 1, h) > J (x = 0, h), or if

                                          (1 − β) αAh > k.                                       (16)

The fact that the left-hand side of this expression is increasing in h reiterates that new
technologies are complementary to skills, and therefore more likely to be adopted with
skilled workers.
       Next, consider the case:
                                         (1 − β) αAhu > k.                                       (17)
  11
     More formally, I’m assuming that wages are determined by outside-option bargaining as in Ruben-
stein (1982) and Shaked and Sutton (1984) (see Acemoglu, 1996, for a justification in the search equi-
librium context).

                                                  19
This condition ensures that firms are happy to adopt a new technology even with un-
skilled workers. Clearly (17) immediately implies that (1 − β) αAhs > k. So the new
technology will be adopted with skilled workers as well. Then, wages will be given by

                         wtu = β (1 + α) At hu and wts = β (1 + α) At hs ,                         (18)

so the skill premium (or the measure wage inequality) in each period is simply
                                                 wts  hs
                                          ωt ≡    u
                                                     = .
                                                 wt   hu
In this equilibrium, there is steady technical change, and wages are increasing at a
constant rate. But wage inequality remains stable, because all new technologies are
implemented both with skilled and unskilled workers, so technical change is “neutral”
towards skills.
       It is also straightforward to characterize the equilibrium tightness of the labor market
and the unemployment rate. In particular, given condition (18), the value of a vacancy
at time t can be written as:12
                        h
     Vt = −γ t + q (θt ) φ max {Jt (x = 1, hs ) ; Jt (x = 0, hs )}                         (19)
                             x
                                                           i
     +      (1 − φ) max {Jt (x = 1, hu ) ; Jt (x = 0, hu )} + (1 − q (θt )) max {Vt+1 ; 0}
                         x

Here γ t is the cost of opening a vacancy. With probability q (θt ), the vacancy matches
with a worker, and with probability φ, this worker is skilled, and with probability 1 − φ,
he is unskilled. The firm then decides whether to adopt the new technology or not as
captured by the “max” operators. With probability 1 − q (θt ), there is no match, and
then the firm decides whether to keep the vacancy, obtaining the value Vt+1 or shut
down.
       Assume that the cost of vacancy γ t also grows at the rate g, that is, γ t = (1 + g)t γ,
and impose free entry, which implies that Vt = Vt+1 = 0. Then, using (15), we obtain
that in steady state:
                       ¡    ¢
             V = −γ + q θPre [δ ((1 − β) (1 + α) A − k) (φhs + (1 − φ) hu )] = 0,                  (20)
  12
    Without loss of any generality, I’m using the timing convention that a vacancy that gets filled this
period can start production in this period.

                                                  20
where θPre is the steady-state tightness of the labor market, with the superscript “Pre”
denoting the fact that this refers to the case before the technology shock. This tightness
and the whole equilibrium allocation are defined uniquely.
  Next, the steady state unemployment rate for both skilled and unskilled workers is:13
                                             s
                                    u=              .                             (21)
                                         s + θq (θ)
The important point is that both skilled and unskilled workers have the same unemploy-
ment rate, and that this unemployment rate is a decreasing function of θ: unemployment
will be lower when the labor market is tighter.

5.3     Change in Technology Regime
Now imagine that the economy is hit by an adverse shock at time T , increasing kT to
kT0 > kT .14 From this point onwards, both k and A grow at at the same rate as before,
i.e., AT +t = (1+g)t AT and kT +t = (1+g)t kT0 . Assume also that following this technology
shock, we have:
                             (1 − β) αAT hs > kT0 > (1 − β) αAT hu .                               (22)
Condition (22) implies that firms, from this point onwards, will continue to adopt the
new technology with skilled workers, but not with unskilled workers. That is, the new
technology adoption condition (16) is now satisfied for skilled workers only. As a result,
wages at any time t ≥ T are now

                             wtu = βAt hu and wts = β (1 + α) At hs ,

so after this technology shock, wage inequality increases to
                                       ws            hs
                                 ω 0t ≡ ut = (1 + α) .
                                       wt            hu
  13
      This unemployment rate equation follows by equating to the flow out of unemployment, θq (θ) u, to
the flow into unemployment, (1 − s) u. The fact that both types of workers have the same unemployment
rate is a consequence of the simplifying assumption that all search is undirected, and no matches
are turned down. It is straightforward, but cumbersome to generalize the model by adding some
heterogeneity, or by allowing firms to turn down workers as in Acemoglu (1999a).
   14
      Notice that I am taking the technology shock to be an increase in the cost of new investment. This
is consistent with the fact that all the countries in question experienced a TFP slowdown over this time
period. Nevertheless, many other economists view the 1980s as a period of more rapid technological
change (e.g., Greenwood and Yorukoglu, 1997, Hornstein and Krusell, 1996). See Gordon (1998),
Jorgensen and Stiroh (2000) and the discussion in Acemoglu (2002).

                                                  21
In addition, unemployment for both types of workers increases. To see this note that
the free-entry condition now changes to
           ¡        ¢
 V = −γ + q θUS-Post [δ (φ ((1 − β) (1 + α) A − k) hs + (1 − φ) (1 − β) Ahu )] = 0, (23)

which incorporates the fact that now firms will not adopt the new technology with
unskilled workers. The steady-state labor market tightness is denoted by θUS-Post , since
it refers to the equilibrium after the change in technology in the model economy supposed
to approximate the U.S.
   Comparing this expression to (20) shows that, as a consequence of the technology
change, opening a vacancy is now less profitable (i.e. the term in square brackets has
fallen). So θ, the tightness of the labor market, has to decline to satisfy (23)–that
is, θUS-Post < θPre . This implies, from equation (21), that the unemployment rate will
increase.15
   So at a very simple level, this model illustrates how a technological shock might
increase wage inequality by changing the technology adoption decisions of firms. After
the change in technology, firms find it profitable to invest in new technologies only with
skilled workers, and as a result, the relative productivity of skilled workers and the skill
premium increase.

5.4     Change in the Technology Regime in the “European” Equi-
        librium
Now, consider a diﬀerent environment, meant to proxy at a very crude level the continen-
tal European labor market. In this environment, there is institutionally imposed wage
compression, for example because there is a minimum wage at a level that is binding
for unskilled workers. This contrast captures in a stylistic way the diﬀerences between
the American and continental European labor markets. For example, Blau and Kahn
(1996) provide evidence in favor of the hypothesis that labor market regulations com-
press wage diﬀerences at the bottom of the distribution in Europe. They show that
  15
     This is consistent with the fact that unemployment both among low and high education workers in
the U.S. increased during the 1980s (see Acemoglu, 1999a).


                                                22
although wage diﬀerentials between the 90th and the 50th wage percentiles are similar
across countries, the diﬀerential between the 50th and 10th percentiles is much larger in
the U.S. than Europe. Union wage setting, which extends wage floors across firms, or
relatively high minimum wages, as well as more generous social insurance programs, are
probably at the root of this wage compression.
       Denote the minimum wage in eﬀect at time t by wt . Since the economy is growing,
the minimum wage has to grow as well–otherwise, it would quickly become irrelevant.
So I assume wt = (1 + g)t w.
       Also to illustrate the main point, it is most convenient to assume that at time t = 0:

                          β (1 + α) Ahu > w > βAhu and βAhs > w.                                   (24)

That is, the minimum wage is binding for a firm that hires an unskilled worker and does
not adopt the new technology. In contrast, it is not binding for a firm that adopts the
new technology with an unskilled worker. And it is never binding for a firm employing a
skilled worker. Since both productivity and minimum wages grow at the same constant
rate, (24) ensures the same configuration at all t
       In the presence of the minimum wage law, the wage equation (14) cannot apply, since
(24) implies that some workers would be paid less than the minimum. Hence, consider
a straightforward generalization of this wage equation to:16

                             wt (xt , h) = max {β (1 + xt α) At h, wt } .                          (25)

So if the “equilibrium bargained wage” in the absence of the minimum wage is below
the minimum, the worker is simply paid the minimum. Since nothing has changed for
skilled workers, the condition for the new technology to be adopted is the same as in
the unregulated economy, i.e., (1 − β) (1 + α) Ahs > k.
       But the technology decision for unskilled workers has changed. In particular, now
the minimum wage will be binding for a firm employing an unskilled worker with the
old technology, so
                                  J (x = 0, hu ) = δ (Ahu − w) .                                   (26)
  16
    This wage rule follows from is straightforward application of the Rubinstein (1982) bargaining model
with outside options (see Shaked and Sutton, 1984).

                                                  23
In contrast, the value of the firm that adopts the new technology with an unskilled
worker is still given by

                            J (x = 1, hu ) = δ ((1 − β) (1 + α) Ahu − k) ,                     (27)

because, when the firm adopts the new technology, the minimum wage is not binding.
Comparing the expressions (26) and (27) shows that the firm will find it profitable to
introduce the new technology with an unskilled worker if

                                   (1 − β) αAhu − k > βAhu − w.                                (28)

Assumption (24), which meant that the minimum wage was binding for unskilled work-
ers, also immediately ensures that the right hand-side of (28) is negative. Consequently,
the condition for this economy to adopt new technologies with unskilled workers is less
restrictive than for the unregulated economy (recall the unregulated economy adopts the
new technology when (1 − β) αAhu − k > 0).
      The intuition is as follows: the institutions already force the firm to pay an unskilled
worker a higher wage than what the firm and the worker would have bargained to. This
implies that the firm can invest more and increase production, without this increased
productivity being translated into higher wages. Wage compression is therefore making
the firm the residual claimant of the increase in the productivity of the worker.
      This reasoning is similar to the intuition for why firms find it profitable to invest in
the general training of their employees in the presence of labor market imperfections in
Acemoglu and Pischke (1999). Also as in Acemoglu and Pischke (1999), labor market
rents for firms are crucial for this result. With β = 1, that is, when there are no rents
for firms, if institutions pushed the wages of unskilled workers up, firms would lay oﬀ all
unskilled workers.17
      Now imagine a situation in which firms invest in new technology with both skilled
and unskilled workers, even in the absence of the minimum wage. Then, a fortiori, firms
in the “European” equilibrium will also invest in new technology with both types of
workers. Next, as discussed in subsection 5.3, imagine a change in technology regime
 17
      Of course, in this case we also need γ = 0 for firms to break even in the first place.

                                                     24
at time T , increasing the cost of investment from kT to kT0 , such that in the absence of
the minimum wage, firms stop investing in the new technology with unskilled workers.
Because the minimum wage increases the incentives to invest in new technology with
unskilled workers, it is quite possible that the economy with wage compression will
continue to do so. In particular, if

                     (1 − β) αAT hu − βAT hu + w > kT0 > (1 − β) αAT hu ,                       (29)

the new technology will be adopted with unskilled workers in Europe, but not in the U.S.
Therefore, this model oﬀers a possible explanation for why technical change may have
been less skill biased in Europe than in the U.S. over the past 20 years. Interestingly,
in this simple model, not only is there less skill-biased technical change in Europe than
in the U.S., but in fact, there is none. As a result, while the skill premium increases in
the U.S., it remains unchanged in Europe.18
       In light of these results, it is interesting that the brief empirical investigation above
indicated similar relative demand shifts in other Anglo-Saxon countries. Since there is
little wage compression in these Anglo-Saxon countries, the analysis here suggests that
firms there should have no further incentives to adopt new technologies with unskilled
workers than U.S. firms. Relative demand shifts in favor of skilled workers should be
slower only in economies with significant institutional wage compression, such as the
continental European economies.
       What about unemployment in the “European” equilibrium after the change in the
technology regime? Since firms are now adopting the new technology with both skilled
and unskilled workers, the free-entry condition becomes
                 ¡       ¢
     V = −γ + q θE-Post [δ (((1 − β) (1 + α) A − k) (φhs + (1 − φ) hu ))] = 0.                  (30)

Recall that in the absence of the minimum wage, firms did not find it profitable to
adopt the new technology with unskilled workers, so the term in square brackets is lower
  18
    The reader might note that the assumption of rent-sharing in the U.S. economy is important for
these results. Without rent-sharing, whenever the European economy with wage compression finds
it profitable to adopt the new technology, so will U.S. firms. This is not essential for the overall
argument, however. It is possible to generalize (and complicate) the model such that wage compression
forces European firms to invest in new technologies with unskilled workers, even when the competitive
economy would not introduce these new technologies.

                                                 25
in (30) than the comparable term in expression (23). Therefore, θUS-Post implied by
(23) has to be higher than θE-Post implied by (30), and the technology shock will increase
unemployment more in Europe than in the U.S. The intuition for this result is that wage
compression is forcing firms to adopt new technologies with unskilled workers, while
without wage compression firms would have preferred not to adopt these technologies.
This implies that wage compression reduces profits from employing unskilled workers.
Since each vacancy may be matched with either a skilled or an unskilled worker, wage
compression discourages job creation in general, increasing both skilled and unskilled
unemployment. This pattern of high unemployment both among the skilled and the
unskilled in Europe is consistent with the broad facts.19
       As a result, the theory presented here is consistent with the diﬀerential inequality
trends across countries, the diﬀerential behavior of the relative demand for skills, as
documented in the first part of this paper, and with the fact that unemployment in
Europe increased relative to that in the U.S. over the 1980s. But as yet, there is no
micro evidence supporting the underlying mechanism of this story.


6        Concluding Remarks
Despite the social importance of inequality trends, and their prominence in academic
debates, the economics profession currently lacks a consensus on why, over the past
several decades, inequality increased in the U.S. and the UK, but not in continental
Europe.
       In this paper, I reviewed the two traditional explanations for these patterns, that rel-
ative supply of skills increased faster in Europe and European labor market institutions
prevented inequality from increasing, and I developed a simple framework to quanti-
tatively assess whether these explanations are satisfactory. I concluded that, although
these traditional explanations account for a large fraction of the diﬀerential cross-country
  19
    Notice that if the model is modified so that firms can open separate vacancies for skilled and
unskilled workers, only unskilled unemployment will increase. Nevertheless, it is important to see that
the model, under some assumptions, can generate increases in the unemployment rates for both types of
workers, contrasting with standard reasoning based on the Krugman hypothesis, which unambiguously
predicts that it is unskilled unemployment that should increase.


                                                  26
inequality trends, they do not provide an entirely satisfactory approach. Instead, it ap-
pears that relative demand for skills increased diﬀerentially across countries.
   Motivated by this fact, I developed a simple theory where labor market institutions
creating wage compression in Europe also encourage more investment in technologies in-
creasing the productivity of less-skilled workers. This may have led to a smaller increase
in the demand for skills over the past 20 years in Europe than in the U.S.
   I showed that this explanation based on the eﬀect of labor market institutions on
technology adoption is consistent with the diﬀerential inequality trends, the diﬀerential
behavior of the relative demand for skills documented in the first part of the paper, and
the diﬀerential behavior of unemployment rates in Europe and the U.S.
   These macro facts of course do not establish that this theory is along the correct
lines, and there can be many other potential theories explaining why relative demands
change diﬀerentially across countries. There are therefore both important theoretical and
empirical avenues to pursue. I hope that this paper will stimulate others to investigate
alternative approaches with diﬀerential degrees of skill-biased technology across countries
(resulting from diﬀerential adoption decisions).
   On the empirical front, work using microdata is necessary to investigate more care-
fully whether diﬀerences in relative supplies, with similar shifts in relative demands, can
account for the diﬀerences in these cross-country inequality trends. Future work could
also look at whether there is any direct evidence that technical change has been less skill
biased in Europe than in the U.S. One possibility is to look at the rates of technology
adoption and/or at rates of TFP growth and capital accumulation in unskill-intensive
industries in Europe relative to similar industries in the U.S. (using skill-intensive indus-
tries in both set of countries as a control group). Alternatively, one could undertake a
direct investigation of whether certain advanced technologies, such as personal comput-
ers, computer-assisted or numerically-controlled machines, used seldom with unskilled
workers in the U.S., were introduced with unskilled workers in Europe. Finally, it may
also be fruitful to use data on industry-level skill-upgrading across diﬀerent countries and
expand the approach used inn Berman, Bound and Machin (1998) to obtain alternative
estimates of relative demand shifts across countries.

                                             27
   On the theory front, it would be useful to investigate alternative explanations for
why relative demand for skills may have changed diﬀerentially in diﬀerent countries,
including theories where the economy may function oﬀ its relative demand curve.
   Finally, the current paper has focused on the causes of diﬀerential inequality trends
among OECD economies. Another important and potentially exciting area is the study
of inequality trends in middle-income and low-income nations. Berman and Machin
(2001) document rapid increase in the demand for skills in middle-income countries,
and a number of studies find increasing inequality in many developing countries (e.g.,
Freeman and Oostendorp, 2000, or Duryea and Szekely, 2000). An investigation of the
causes of the increase in inequality in developing countries over this same period is also
an important research area.




                                           28
7     Data Appendix
The samples come from the Luxembourg Income Studies Database (LIS). The LIS data
is a collection of micro datasets obtained from annual income surveys in various coun-
tries. While these surveys are similar in form to the Current Population Survey for
the United States and extensive eﬀort has been made to make information on income
and household characteristics comparable across countries, important problems of com-
parability remain. In order to maintain consistency across countries, several restrictive
criteria have been used when defining variables and samples. Following Gottschalk and
Joyce (1997), who also used LIS data, a simple count of the number of workers, not
weighted by weeks worked, is used as a measure of supply from each educational group.
Moreover, the data is restricted to male heads of households, since the earnings of other
individuals is not available for all survey years in all countries. Countries for which data
on gross wages were not available were discarded, as were data from countries with only
one survey in the LIS data base. In addition, for the reasons explained in the text, we
do not use the German surveys for 1981 and 1984. As a result, at the end this study
uses data from Australia (1985 and 89), Belgium (1985, 88, 92 and 96), Canada (1987,
91, 94 and 97), Denmark (1987, 92, 95 and 97), Finland (1987, 91 and 95), Germany
(1989 and 94), Israel (1979, 86 and 92), the Netherlands (1983, 87, 91 and 94), Norway
(1986, 91 and 95), Sweden (1981, 87, 92 and 95), the United Kingdom (1979, 86, 91 and
95). Data for the United States in all those years comes from the March CPSs.
    The college premium is, generally, the coeﬃcient on workers with a college degree
or more relative to high school graduates in a regression of log real annual gross wages.
Specifically, four education categories were constructed, conceptually corresponding to
less-than 12 years of education (high school dropouts), 12 years (high school gradu-
ates), 13 to 15 years (some college), and 16 or more years (college graduates) for the
U.S. The recoding into these groups is straightforward in countries and years where
the education variable is measured in years of schooling (these are: Israel, Canada and
Finland, at least for some years), but somewhat more problematic for countries where
the education variable is already grouped (all the rest, except Sweden and the United


                                            29
Kingdom). Since no education information is available in the LIS data base for Sweden
and the United Kingdom, returns to broad occupations are used rather than education.
Three occupation groups are constructed for those samples, roughly corresponding to
professional and managerial workers, blue collar workers and a residual category which
includes lower-level white-collar workers. The regression also includes dummies for the
remaining education/occupation cattegories and a quartic in age–since the exact num-
ber of years of schooling would have to be inputed for most surveys, a quartic in age,
and not experience, is used as a control in the wage regression. Only full-time, full-year
workers aged 18 to 64 are used in these computations. Full-time workers are defined
as those whose hours of work per week were no less than 35, and full-year workers are
defined as those who worked at least 48 weeks per year. The samples also leave out
those observations with the lowest 1 percent earnings. Finally, earnings for top coded
observations are calculated as the value of the top code times 1.5.
   The relative supply of skills is calculated from samples that include all wage and
salary workers between the ages of 18 and 64. It is defined as the ratio of college-
equivalents to non-college equivalents. Following, Autor, Katz and Krueger (1998),
these are: college equivalents = college graduates + 0.5×workers with some college, and
non-college equivalents = 0.5×workers with some college + high school graduates + high
school dropouts. For the Netherlands, it was impossible to distinguish between workers
with some college and workers with a college degree, so for this country, as for Sweden
and the UK where only occupational categories were available, only three groups were
used in the relative supply computations.




                                            30
8       References
Acemoglu, Daron, “A Microfoundation for Social Increasing Returns in Human Capital,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111 (1996), 779—804.
    Acemoglu, Daron, “Training and Innovation in an Imperfect Labor Market,” Review
of Economic Studies 64 (1997), 445-464.
    Acemoglu, Daron, “Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Tech-
nical Change and Wage Inequality” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113 (1998), 1055-
1090.
    Acemoglu, Daron “Changes in Unemployment and Wage Inequality: An Alternative
Theory and Some Evidence” American Economic Review, 89 (1999a), 1259-1278.
    Acemoglu, Daron, “Patterns of Skill Premia”, NBER Working Paper No. 7018,
(1999b).
    Acemoglu, Daron, “Technical Change, Inequality and the Labor Market”, NBER
Working Paper No. 7800, (2002), forthcoming Journal of Economic Literature, March
2002.
    Acemoglu, Daron and Jörn-Steﬀen Pischke, “Why Do Firms Train? Theory and
Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (1998), 79-119.
    Acemoglu, Daron and Jörn-Steﬀen Pischke “The Structure of Wages and Investment
in General Training” Journal of Political Economy, 107, (1999), 539-572.
    Angrist, Joshua, “The Economic Returns to Schooling in the West Bank and Gaza
Strip” American Economic Review, 85 (1995),1065-1087.
    Beaudry, Paul and David Green “The Changing Structure of Wages in the US and
Germany: What Explains the Diﬀerences?” NBER Working Paper No. 7697 (2000).
    Berman, Eli, John Bound and Stephen Machin “Implications of Skill-Biased Tech-
nological Change:    International Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXIII
(1998), 1245-1280.
    Berman, Eli, and Stephen Machin “SBTC Happens! Evidence on the Factor Bias of
Technological Change in Developing and Developed Countries”, mimeo (2000).
    Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn “International diﬀerences in male wage


                                          31
inequality: Institutions versus market forces,” Journal Political Economy 104, (1996)
791-837.
   Card, David, Francis Kramartz and Thomas Lemieux ;“Changes in the Relative
Structure of Wages and Employment: A Comparison of the United States, Canada and
France” Canadian Journal of Economics (1996).
   Card, David and Thomas Lemieux, “Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising Return
to College for Younger Men?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics (2001).
   Diamond, Peter, “Wage Determination and Eﬃciency in Search Equilibrium.” Re-
view of Economics Studies 49:2 (1982): 217-27.
   Duryea, Suzanne and Miguel Szekely “Labor Markets in Latin America: A Look at
the Supply-side” Emerging Markets Review, Vol 1, 199-228.
   Freeman, Richard “Demand For Education” Chapter 6 in Orley Ashenfelter and
Richard Layard (editors) Handbook of Labor Economics, North Holland, Vol I (1986),
357-386.
   Freeman, Richard and Lawrence F. Katz, “Introduction and Summary,” in R. Free-
man and L. Katz (eds.), Diﬀerences and Changes in Wage Structures, Chicago, IL: The
University of Chicago Press, pp. 1-22.
   Freeman, Richard and Remco Oostendorp “Wages Around the World: Pay Across
Occupations and Countries” NBER Working Paper No. 8058, (2000).
   Gottschalk, Peter and Timothy M. Smeeding, “Cross-National Comparisons of Earn-
ings and Income Inequality,” Journal of Economic Literature 35 (1997), 633-687.
   Gordon, Robert     “Current Productivity Puzzles from a Long-term Perspective”
Northwestern University mimeo, (1998).
   Gottschalk, Peter and Joyce, Mary, “Cross-National Diﬀerences in the Rise in Earn-
ings Inequality: Market and Institutional Factors” Review of Economics and Statistics
80, (1998): 489-502
   Gould, Eric D., Omer Moav, and Bruce A. Weinberg, “Precautionary Demand for
Education, Inequality, and Technological Progress,” Mimeo, Feb 2000.
   Greenwood, Jeremy and Mehmet Yorukoglu, “1974” Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy, XLVI (1997), 49-95.

                                         32
   Groshen, Erica, “Sources of Wage Dispersion: How Much Do Employers Matter,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106 (1991), 869—84.
   Grout, Paul, “Investment and Wages in the Absence of Binding Contracts: A Nash
Bargaining Approach,” Econometrica, 52 (1984), 449—460.
   Hornstein, Andres and Per Krusell (1996), “Can Technology Improvements Cause
Productivity Slowdowns?,” NBER Macroeconomic Annual, vol. 11, pp. 209-259.
   Jorgensen, Dale, W. and Kevin J. Stiroh, “Raising the Speed Limit: U.S. Economic
Growth in the Information Age” forthcoming in the Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity (2000).
   Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy and Brooks Pierce (1993);“Wage Inequality and
the Rise in Returns to Skill” Journal of Political Economy Vol 101, pp 410-442.
   Katz, Lawrence, and David Autor, “Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings
Inequality” in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds., The Handbook of Labor Economics
Volume III, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2000.
   Katz, Lawrence and Kevin Murphy, “Changes in Relative Wages: Supply and De-
mand Factors” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CVII (1992), 35-78.
   Katz, Lawrence, Gary W. Loveman and David G. Blanchflower “A Comparison of
Changes in the Structure of Wages in Four OECD Countries” in Richard Freeman and
Lawrence Katz op. cit.
   Katz, Lawrence and Summers, Lawrence “Industry Rents: Evidence and Implica-
tions” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Macroeconomics), (1989) 51, pp 209-90.
   Krueger, Alan B., and Jörn-Steﬀen Pischke “Observations and conjectures on the
U.S. employment miracle,” NBER Working Paper No. 6146, (1997).
   Krugman, Paul, “Part and Prospective Causes of High Unemployment” in Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City Reducing Unemployment: Current Issues and Policy Op-
tions (1994).
   Mortensen, Dale, “Property Rights and Eﬃciency in Mating, Racing and Related
Games.” American Economic Review 72 (1982): 968-79.
   Murphy, Kevin M. and W. Graig Riddell and Paul M. Romer, “Wages, Skills and
Technology in the United States and Canada,” in E. Helpman, ed., General Purpose

                                         33
Technologies Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, (1998).
   Nickell Stephen and Brian Bell “The Collapse in Demand For the Unskilled and
Unemployment Across the OECD” Oxford Review of Economic Policy Vol 11, (1996)
pp 40-62.
   OECD Jobs Study Volumes 1 and 2 (1994).
   Pissarides, Christopher, Equilibrium Unemployment Theory. Cambridge, MA: Basil
Blackwell, 1990.
   Rubinstein, Ariel “Perfect Equilibrium In a Bargaining Model” Econometrica, 50
(1982), 97-109.
   Shaked, Avner and John Sutton, “Involuntary Unemployment as a Perfect Equilib-
rium in a Bargaining Model” Econometrica, 52 (1984), 1341-1364.
   Welch, Finis, “Education in Production,” Journal of Political Economy 78 (1970),
312-327.




                                        34
                                                                        Table 1. Panel A
                                         Log 90th-10th wage differential for male workers, selected countries

                                              Estimates using LIS data                                        Estimates reported by Freeman and Katz, 1995
                      Early            Mid            Late          Early            Mid           Late          Early            Mid            Late       Early
                       80s             80s             80s           90s             90s            90s           80s             80s             80s        90s

Australia                             .834           .920                                                           .69            .76            .77          .80
Belgium                               .780           .773           .762            .697
Canada                                              1.116          1.182          1.160          1.254            1.25           1.39            1.34        1.38
Denmark                                              .913          1.307          1.096          1.059
Finland                                              .899           .893            .862
Germany                .819           .894          1.186                         1.043                                            .96            .91
Israel               1.280          1.481                          1.557
Netherlands            .876                          .907           .864            .843                          1.01                                       1.01
Norway                                .810                          .913          1.122
Sweden                 .867                          .920           .864            .880                            .77            .72            .72          .77
U.Kingdom              .930         1.093                          1.109          1.143                             .88          1.04            1.10        1.16
U. States            1.253          1.409           1.427          1.442          1.551          1.465            1.23           1.36            1.38        1.40
NOTE: The data for the left panel come from the Luxembourg Income Studies Database, a collection of micro datasets obtained from annual income surveys.
The log 90th-10th wage differential is the difference between the 90th and the 10th percentiles of the log wage distribution for male workers.
In the left half of the Panel, Early 80s refers to 1981, with the exception of Israel and the United Kingdom, where it refers to 1979 and the Netherlands, where it
refers to 1983. Mid 80s refers to 1985 for Austria, Belgium and the United States, and to 1986 for Israel, Norway and the UK. Late 80s refers to 1987 except for
Belgium and the US, where it refers to 1988, and for Austria and Germany, where it refers to 1989. Early 90s refers to 1991, except for Belgium, Denmark, Israel
and Sweden, where it refers to 1992. Mid 90s refers to 1995, except for Canada, Germany and the Netherlands, where it refers to 1994, and to Belgium, where it
refers to 1996. Late 90s refers to 1997.
The right half of the Panel uses data from Table 2 of Freeman and Katz (1995). Here, Early 80s refers to 1979, except for Canada and Sweden, where it refers to
1981. Mid 80s refers to 1984, except for Australia and Sweden, where it refers to 1985, and for Canada, where it refers to 1986. Late 80s refers to 1987, except
in Canada and Sweden, where it refers to 1988. Early 1990s refers to 1990, except in Sweden, where it refers to 1991.
                                                                          Table 1. Panel B
                                 Estimated skill premia and relative supplies for male workers, selected countries

                                            Skill wage premia                                                     Relative skill supplies
                     Early          Mid         Late        Early         Mid       Late      Early        Mid         Late       Early         Mid         Late
                      80s           80s          80s         90s          90s        90s       80s         80s          80s        90s          90s          90s

Australia                          .253        .286                                                        .520        .590
Belgium                            .350        .312         .350         .311                              .202        .217        .246        .264
Canada                                         .265         .359         .311      .321                                .449        .583        .664         .711
Denmark                                        .335         .336         .279      .247                                .225        .264        .247         .230
Finland                                        .347         .383         .373                                          .141        .156        .194
Germany                                        .290                      .301                                          .158                    .189
Israel                .267         .339                     .231                              .298         .366                    .496
Netherlands           .307                     .202         .254         .266                 .104                     .245        .334        .349
Norway                             .183                     .248         .179                              .213                    .271        .287
Sweden                .560                     .592         .363         .319                 .130                     .163        .181        .190
U.Kingdom             .250         .279                     .304         .354                 .457         .579                    .757        .902
U. States             .271         .362        .387         .454         .514      .518       .541         .594        .609        .634        .704         .743
NOTE: The data come from the Luxembourg Income Studies Database, a collection of micro datasets obtained from annual income surveys.
The skill wage premium is generally the coefficient on workers with a college degree or more relative to high school graduates in a regression of log real annual
gross wages on four education categories and a quartic in age for full-time, full-year workers aged 18 to 64 –except in Sweden and the United Kingdom, where
returns to broad occupations are used rather than education because no education information is available in the LIS data base for those countries. (See Appendix
for more detailed information).
The relative skill supply is the ratio of college-equivalents to non-college equivalents (where college equivalents = college graduates + 0.5*workers with some
college, and non-college equivalents = 0.5*workers with some college + high school graduates + high school dropouts). For the Netherlands, it was impossible to
distinguish between workers with some college and workers with a college degree, so for this country, as for Sweden and the UK where only occupational
categories were available, only three groups were used in the relative supply computations.

Early 80s, Mid 80s, etc. refer to the same years as in the left side of Panel A.
                          Relative supply
                          of skills
        Skill premium
                                             European
                                             supply
           ωUS-Post              U           shift


                                             E   Relative demand
    ωPre and ωE-Post
                                                 for skills

                                              Skill-biased tech. change
                                              or increased trade
                               H/L     H’/L’

Figure 1: Diﬀerential inequality trends due to diﬀerential relative supply changes.




                                        35
                           Relative supply
          Skill premium    of skills

        ωUS-Post               U

                                            Institutional wage-setting
                                          E line for Europe
  ωPre and ωE-Post
                                                Relative demand
                                                for skills
                                            Skill-biased tech. change
                              H/L           or increased trade

                             Relative
                             unemployment
                             in Europe
Figure 2: Diﬀerential inequality trends because of diﬀerences in labor market
                                institutions.




                                     36
                    logw                                         predicted logw, eos=2                  logw                                  predicted logw, eos=2
                    predicted logw, eos==1.4                                                            predicted logw, eos==1.4

      .6                                                                                         .6




      .4                                                                                         .4




      .2                                                                                         .2




      0                                                                                          0
                                       1985               1989                                                                     1987       1991         1994       1997
                                                      year                                                                             year
              Australia - observed vs. predicted skill premium                                        Canada - observed vs. predicted skill premium
                    logw                                         predicted logw, eos=2
                    predicted logw, eos==1.4

      .6




      .4




      .2




      0
             1979                              1986              1991             1995
                                                      year
           United Kingdom - observed vs. predicted skill premium




Figure 3a: Actual skill premia and predicted skill premia from equation (7) for σ = 1.4
                                                                                         and σ = 2.




                                                                                            37
             logw                                  predicted logw, eos=2                         logw                                  predicted logw, eos=2
             predicted logw, eos==1.4                                                            predicted logw, eos==1.4

      .6

                                                                                       .5




      .4



                                                                                        0

      .2




      0                                                                                -.5
                                1985       1988        1992                1996                             1983            1987       1991         1994
                                           year                                                                                 year
           Belgium - observed vs. predicted skill premium                                    Netherlands - observed vs. predicted skill premium
             logw                                  predicted logw, eos=2                         logw                                  predicted logw, eos=2
             predicted logw, eos==1.4                                                            predicted logw, eos==1.4

      .6                                                                               .8




                                                                                       .6
      .4


                                                                                       .4


      .2
                                                                                       .2




      0                                                                                 0
                                        1987       1991             1995                           1981                     1987           1992         1995
                                            year                                                                                year
           Finland - observed vs. predicted skill premium                                     Sweden - observed vs. predicted skill premium




Figure 3b: Actual skill premia and predicted skill premia from equation (7) for σ = 1.4
                                                                            and σ = 2.




                                                                                  38
                     logw                                     predicted logw, eos=2                          logw                                        predicted logw, eos=2
                     predicted logw, eos==1.4                                                                predicted logw, eos==1.4

      .6                                                                                             .6




      .4                                                                                             .4




      .2                                                                                             .2




      0                                                                                              0
                                                1987                1992              1995   1997                                                 1989                   1994
                                                       year                                                                                year
                  Denmark - observed vs. predicted skill premium                                          Germany - observed vs. predicted skill premium
                     logw                                     predicted logw, eos=2                          logw                                        predicted logw, eos=2
                     predicted logw, eos==1.4                                                                predicted logw, eos==1.4

      .6                                                                                             .6




      .4                                                                                             .4




      .2                                                                                             .2




      0                                                                                              0
           1979                             1986                    1992                                                            1986                  1991                   1995
                                                       year                                                                                year
                   Israel - observed vs. predicted skill premium                                          Norway - observed vs. predicted skill premium




Figure 3c: Actual skill premia and predicted skill premia from equation (7) for σ = 1.4
                                                                                        and σ = 2.




                                                                                                39
                    logw                                         predicted logw, eos=2                  logw                                  predicted logw, eos=2
                    predicted logw, eos==1.4                                                            predicted logw, eos==1.4

      .6                                                                                         .6




      .4                                                                                         .4




      .2                                                                                         .2




      0                                                                                          0
                                       1985               1989                                                                     1987       1991         1994       1997
                                                      year                                                                             year
              Australia - observed vs. predicted skill premium                                        Canada - observed vs. predicted skill premium
                    logw                                         predicted logw, eos=2
                    predicted logw, eos==1.4

      .6




      .4




      .2




      0
             1979                              1986              1991             1995
                                                      year
           United Kingdom - observed vs. predicted skill premium




Figure 4a: Actual skill premia and predicted skill premia from equation (9) for σ = 1.4
                                                                                         and σ = 2.




                                                                                            40
             logw                                  predicted logw, eos=2                         logw                                  predicted logw, eos=2
             predicted logw, eos==1.4                                                            predicted logw, eos==1.4

      .6

                                                                                       .5




      .4



                                                                                        0

      .2




      0                                                                                -.5
                                1985       1988        1992                1996                             1983            1987       1991         1994
                                           year                                                                                 year
           Belgium - observed vs. predicted skill premium                                    Netherlands - observed vs. predicted skill premium
             logw                                  predicted logw, eos=2                         logw                                  predicted logw, eos=2
             predicted logw, eos==1.4                                                            predicted logw, eos==1.4

      .6
                                                                                       .6




      .4
                                                                                       .4




      .2                                                                               .2




      0                                                                                 0
                                        1987       1991             1995                           1981                     1987           1992         1995
                                            year                                                                                year
           Finland - observed vs. predicted skill premium                                     Sweden - observed vs. predicted skill premium




Figure 4b: Actual skill premia and predicted skill premia from equation (9) for σ = 1.4
                                                                            and σ = 2.




                                                                                  41
                     logw                                     predicted logw, eos=2                          logw                                        predicted logw, eos=2
                     predicted logw, eos==1.4                                                                predicted logw, eos==1.4

      .6                                                                                             .6




      .4                                                                                             .4




      .2                                                                                             .2




      0                                                                                              0
                                                1987                1992              1995   1997                                                 1989                   1994
                                                       year                                                                                year
                  Denmark - observed vs. predicted skill premium                                          Germany - observed vs. predicted skill premium
                     logw                                     predicted logw, eos=2                          logw                                        predicted logw, eos=2
                     predicted logw, eos==1.4                                                                predicted logw, eos==1.4

      .6                                                                                             .6




      .4                                                                                             .4




      .2                                                                                             .2




      0                                                                                              0
           1979                             1986                    1992                                                            1986                  1991                   1995
                                                       year                                                                                year
                   Israel - observed vs. predicted skill premium                                          Norway - observed vs. predicted skill premium




Figure 4c: Actual skill premia and predicted skill premia from equation (9) for σ = 1.4
                                                                                        and σ = 2.




                                                                                                42
