                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DO BILATERAL TAX TREATIES PROMOTE FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT?


                                           Bruce A. Blonigen
                                           Ronald B. Davies


                                          Working Paper 8834
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8834


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2002




Chapter draft prepared for forthcoming Blackwell book, Trade, Laws and Institutions, edited by James
Hartigan. We thank James Hartigan for comments and Sarah Lawson for excellent research assistance. All
remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Bruce A. Blonigen and Ronald B. Davies. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Do Bilateral Tax Treaties Promote Foreign Direct Investment?
Bruce A. Blonigen and Ronald B. Davies
NBER Working Paper No. 8834
March 2002
JEL No. F21, F23, H25



                                             ABSTRACT

        We explore the impact of bilateral tax treaties on foreign direct investment using data from OECD
countries over the period 1982-1992. We find that recent treaty formation does not promote new
investment, contrary to the common expectation. For certain specifications we find that treaty formation
may actually reduce investment as predicted by arguments suggesting treaties are intended to reduce tax
evasion rather than promote foreign investment.




Bruce A. Blonigen                                               Ronald B. Davies
Department of Economics                                         Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon                                       1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285                                           Eugene, OR 97403-1285
and NBER                                                        541-346-4671
541-346-4680                                                    rdavies@oregon.uoregon.edu
bruceb@oregon.uoregon.edu
I. Introduction
         Economists have long been concerned over the effect of taxation on foreign direct

investment (FDI). A plethora of studies have examined whether and to what extent FDI

responds to tax incentives. While the specific results vary, the general consensus is that firms do
indeed respond to a variety of tax policies.1 This issue is of primary concern to economists
because it can result in an inefficient allocation of investment across countries. As governments
use their tax policies to affect the rates of return on capital, provide public goods, or simply

capture part of the profits that would otherwise be repatriated to other countries, this can divert
investment from its most productive locations. One potential method of relieving this
inefficiency is a bilateral tax treaty on FDI. These treaties adjust the tax environment for
investment between treaty partners by specifying the applicable tax base, the withholding taxes
that can be applied, and other measures affecting the taxation of FDI. Worldwide, over 2,000 of

these treaties are in force and they govern the taxation of the large majority of FDI (Radaelli,
1997).

         Since treaties indicate cooperative taxation by treaty partners, many economists assume
that treaties increase investment. However, it is by no means certain that treaties do so. In
particular, since treaties can reduce tax avoidance and other tax-saving strategies by firms, they
might actually have a dampening effect on FDI. Furthermore, legal researchers have questioned

whether FDI promotion is even a primary goal of treaty formation. In light of these conflicting

arguments, the effect of tax treaties on FDI is an open question. This chapter presents empirical

results on treaty formation by OECD members. Our findings suggest that, at least for recent
treaties, treaty formation most likely does not increase FDI activity between members and may
in fact decrease it. Thus, our results stand at odds with the FDI promotion rationale for treaty

formation.

1
  See Wilson (1999) and Gresik (2001) for surveys of the both the theory and empirical economic
literature regarding the effects of taxation on foreign investment.




                                                                                                      2
        Before delving into our data analysis, it is instructive to consider the conflicting opinions

about tax treaties. The FDI promotion view of treaties springs from the idea of a tax distortion to
investment. To illustrate this concept, consider the following simple model of FDI. An investor

in the parent country has an amount of capital K that she can invest either in her parent country, a
host country, or both. The amount of her exported capital is Z, thus Z represents the level of

FDI. The rate of return in the parent country is a decreasing function of capital invested in the

parent country r( K-Z), while rate of return in the host country is decreasing function of FDI
r*(Z). Efficiency requires that capital be allocated between the two countries such that the rates

of return are equal (or that all the capital is invested in the high-return country). However, the
investor is not concerned with the total return on capital, but rather her share of it. In other

words, the investor bases her decisions on the after-tax rate of return in each country, not the
gross rate of return. As a result, if t and t* are the marginal effective tax rates on investment in
the parent country and in the host, the investor will compare (1-t)r( K-Z) with (1-t*)r*(Z).2

Unless the marginal effective tax rates are equal, the equilibrium distribution of capital will be
inefficient because efficiency calls for capital export neutrality in which only real, that is non-

tax, variations govern capital flows. Therefore, as governments use their tax policies, it can quite
easily lead to differential tax rates across locations and inefficient levels of FDI. Note that
differential tax rates do not require different statutory taxes since the effective tax depends on
many factors, including the definition of the tax base, accelerated depreciation rules, research

and development tax credits, double taxation relief, and the like. It is generally believed that the

effective tax rate against host investment exceeds that on investment in the parent country,
implying that FDI is inefficiently low. Hines (1988) and Wilson (1993) support this concept by

illustrating how typical parent country tax policies such as accelerated depreciation for domestic
investments effectively result in tax rates that discriminate against overseas investment. Tax

2
 Since we are examining the marginal capital allocation, the appropriate tax rate is the marginal rate.
Identification of the marginal tax rate is notoriously difficult. Graham (1996) provides discussion of the
various proxies researchers have used for the marginal tax on corporate income.




                                                                                                             3
treaties can help to alleviate this problem by coordinating tax policies between treaty partners.

This idea is mirrored in the introduction of the OECD’s model tax treaty, which states that a
primary goal of treaty formation is “removing the obstacles that double taxation presents”, thus

reducing its “harmful effects on the exchange of goods and services and movements of capital,
technology, and persons” (OECD, 1997, p. I-1).3 If treaties do indeed reduce these tax barriers

to FDI, one would expect that FDI activity would rise after a treaty is enforced.
          Although individual treaties include a wide range of specific investment incentives,

overall treaties reduce the barriers to FDI in two ways.4 First, by harmonizing the tax definitions
and the tax jurisdictions of treaty partners, a treaty can reduce the double taxation of investment.
For example, income is typically taxed in a host country when it is generated through a

permanent establishment. However, without a treaty each country can form its own definition of
a permanent establishment. If this definition differs between countries, it can lead to double
taxation of overseas profits (Hamada, 1966). Janeba (1996) discusses how these definition
differences can then result in inefficient capital flows. This idea is confirmed empirically by
Hines (1988), who finds that the 1986 Tax Reform Act, which revised U.S. tax definitions, led

to an increase in U.S. outbound investment. Since treaties standardize tax definitions and
jurisdictions (often by matching them to those provided by the OECD’s model tax treaty (OECD,

1997)), they have a similar potential to increase FDI.
          Second, tax treaties affect the actual statutory taxation of multinationals. They do so

through the rules affecting double taxation relief and the withholding taxes levied on

repatriations by FDI. Following the OECD model treaty guidelines, most tax treaties specify that

both countries must either exempt foreign-earned profits from domestic taxation or offer foreign
tax credits when calculating the domestic tax bill.5 Although most countries already offer their

3
    For an excellent discussion of the workings of the OECD model tax treaty, see Baker (1994).
4
    For specifics of the treaties, see the treaties themselves as reprinted by Diamond and Diamond (1998).
5
 Under a tax credit, the domestic tax bill is calculated by applying the standard domestic tax rate to the
pre-foreign tax level of overseas profits. A credit against this amount is then applied up to the amount of



                                                                                                              4
investors credits or exemptions, certain treaties do alter the relief method applied by one or both

treaty partners.6 In addition to the provisions for double taxation relief, treaties usually reduce
maximum allowable withholding taxes on three types of remitted income: dividend payments,
interest payments, and royalty payments.7 Some treaties lower these withholding rates to as

low as zero. Most treaties specify that the same maximum rates apply to both treaty partners.8 If

these reductions in the withholding tax reduce the tax burden on overseas investment, equivalent
to reducing t* above, this should increase FDI.9 Note that even though withholding tax rates fall

under a treaty, this does not imply that tax receipts from inbound investment must decline. Since
withholding taxes can be tailored to the specific investment from a treaty partner, it may be

possible to set tax rates which encourage tax-sensitive inbound investment and actually raise
total tax receipts.10 In addition, treaties are accompanied by improved information exchange

the foreign taxes paid. If this credit exceeds the domestic tax liability, the firm is in an “excess credit”
position and pays no additional taxes on these overseas profits. If the parent country tax bill is greater
than the amount of the credit, the firm is in an “excess limit” position and pays the remaining amount to
the parent country’s government.
6
 For instance, Belgium applies a reduced domestic tax rate to the foreign-earned profits of its residents.
Under the U.S./Belgium treaty, however, income earned by Belgian firms in the U.S. is exempt from
Belgian taxation.
7
  Note that a lower foreign tax rate does not guarantee a reduction in the firm’s total tax bill. When a
parent country offers foreign tax credits, only firms in an excess credit position will benefit by a reduction
in host taxes (Altshuler and Newlon, 1991). Thus, a decrease in the overseas tax rate may not improve
capital flows.
8
 One exception is the U.S. treaty with Pakistan in which U.S. firms receive no tax break from Pakistan
while Pakistani firms do receive reduced tax rates from the U.S..
9
  Several researchers, including Altshuler and Newlon (1991), Hines (1992), Altshuler, Newlon, and
Randolph (1995), and Mutti and Grubert (1996) have found that firms do respond to changes in
withholding tax rates by changing both the timing and method of repatriation. However, this evidence
suggests that treaties can affect the profitability of overseas investment, and does not necessarily imply
that treaties will induce new FDI.
10
  As derived in Bond and Samuelson (1989) among others, the tax revenue maximizing tax rate on
inbound FDI is 1/(1+,), where , is the elasticity of inbound FDI supply. If , varies across countries, the
revenue maximizing tax rate will differ across countries. Since a treaty allows a country to lower its tax
rate, this can actually raise tax revenues if the current tax rate is greater than the optimal tax on FDI from
that particular country.




                                                                                                                 5
between partner governments.11 Because of this, tax evasion may fall under a treaty, leading to

increased tax revenue.12
          Combining these arguments, it is easy to understand the common expectation that tax
treaties serve to increase the amount of FDI activity between treaty partners. Nevertheless, there

exist several economic and legal arguments which suggest treaties may have no effect on FDI.
For instance, Dagan (2000) asserts that the use of treaties to promote foreign direct investment is

“a myth” (p. 939). He claims that since a parent country could unilaterally adjust its tax policy to
eliminate distortions caused by differing parent and host country tax policies, promotion of

efficiency plays little role in treaty formation. Instead, Dagan suggests that treaties are intended

to reduce administration costs, reduce tax evasion, and to extract tax concessions from treaty
partners. Radaelli (1997) also dismisses the double taxation objective in favor of the view that

tax treaties are geared towards reducing tax evasion. Furthermore, there is the concern that tax
treaties arise due to lobbying efforts by profit-seeking investors. If this is the case, then treaties
may be geared towards maximizing investor profits rather than promoting efficient investment.13

In addition to uncertainties about government objectives in treaty formation, it is by no means
clear that firms’ investment activities will necessarily respond to reductions in withholding tax
rates. Hartman (1985) and Sinn (1993) argue that withholding taxes are irrelevant for expanding

multinational firms since it is cheaper to expand an overseas affiliate through retained earnings
than through repatriated and re-exported funds. This is because retained earnings avoid the

withholding taxes applied to repatriated funds. As a result, they suggest that only mature, non-



11
  In addition to the bilateral treaties, the OECD has established the multilateral Convention on Mutual
Assistance in Tax Matters which provides for information exchange even between members without
bilateral treaties (OECD, 1989).
12
  Devereux, Griffith, and Klemm (2001) find that, even though corporate tax rates for the U.K. appear to
have declined since the mid-1960s, tax revenues from corporate income have not. They suggest that part
of this result may stem from a broadening of the incomes classified as corporate.
13
     According to Radaelli (1997), treaty formation by the U.S. is free of such business lobbying efforts.




                                                                                                             6
expanding foreign affiliates will repatriate earnings, implying no effect of withholding taxes on

FDI.
       Finally, it is even possible that tax treaties may actually increase the tax barriers for

certain kinds of investment. As noted above, through information exchange treaties can reduce
the firm’s ability to engage in transfer pricing. This is the practice by which, through

manipulation of the price of goods traded between their various subsidiaries, firms can shift

profits to low tax locations and minimize their global tax revenues. As argued by Casson (1979),
transfer pricing provides firms with an incentive to invest in those low tax locations in order to

shield profits from taxes.14 Since treaties streamline and promote the exchange of tax
information by governments, this reduces firms’ ability to avoid taxes through misrepresentation
of costs. As a result, treaties may reduce the incentive to engage in investment for tax
minimization reasons, leading to a decrease FDI activity. In addition, recent tax treaties have

sought to eliminate treaty shopping. Treaty shopping is a practice in which investments are
funneled through a treaty country by a third nation for the purpose of avoiding or reducing taxes.
According to Radaelli (1997), concerns over treaty shopping have been a primary focus of many

new treaties and have prompted the U.S. to renegotiate many of its older treaties. In addition,
certain so-called “tax haven” countries (particularly Aruba, Malta, and the Netherlands-Antilles)

have seen several of their treaties cancelled due to perceived insufficient efforts to prevent treaty
shopping. If a treaty is revised to close this possibility, then this could easily reduce the

investment activity between treaty partners as third nation investors choose to simply send their

capital directly to the ultimate host. While there are many variations in the regulations that
address treaty shopping, the most common rules restrict treaty benefits if more than 50 percent of

a corporation’s stock is held by a third, non-treaty country’s residents (Doernberg, 1997).




14
  Caves (1993) provides an explanation of transfer pricing. Graham and Krugman (1995) provide case
studies of firms prosecuted by the U.S. for engaging in transfer pricing.




                                                                                                        7
        With these conflicting arguments in mind, it is by no means certain that bilateral treaties

will increase the amount of FDI between partner countries. This issue is of importance because
of the sizable costs to treaty formation. For most countries, tax treaties are like any other

international agreement in that they must be drawn up and then ratified by the appropriate
governing body. Ratification is no mean feat since the treaty cannot conflict with other national

policies. For the U.S., this is not a severe problem since tax treaties are federal instruments and

thus supercede state or local laws.15 This is not always true elsewhere. Anders (1997), for
example, gives an in-depth discussion of the difficulties the U.S.-German treaty faces since it
may violate the anti-discrimination rules of the European Union. Even ignoring such possible

roadblocks, the simple conflicts of bilateral negotiation require much time and effort. Conflicts
over the terms of the treaty can lead to failure during the development stage or even during
ratification. For example, the U.S.-Cyprus treaty required three attempts before it was finally
ratified in 1988. Thus, in light of these large costs, it is important that we gauge the potential
gains from treaty formation. We seek to provide one possible measure of the gains from treaty

formation by estimating the impact of treaty formation on the FDI of OECD members.16
        Using recent models developed by Carr, Markusen, and Maskus (2001) and Markusen
and Maskus (2001), we test whether or not treaty formation by OECD members is associated

with changes in FDI activity. Using data from 1982 to 1992, we examine the behavior of FDI
stocks and FDI flows. Initial results indicate that treaties seem to increase FDI. However, this

result is suspect because the sample includes many older treaties which were enacted well before

our data series begins. Therefore, we also split our sample into “old” and “new” treaties. Here,

15
  Generally, the only limitation U.S. tax treaties place on state taxation is that a foreign corporation must
be treated the same as a firm incorporated in another state (White, 1991).
16
  Hines and Willard (1992) empirically examined the number of treaties a country signs as well as the tax
concessions dictated by a particular treaty. However, they do not include the amount of FDI activity as an
explanatory variable nor do they consider the effect of taxation on FDI. The United Nations (1998) has
studied the effects of bilateral treaties for the promotion and protection of FDI. These treaties are
generally geared towards increasing investment in developing nations by ensuring a favorable political
and economic climate and do not address tax concerns.




                                                                                                                8
we find that new treaty formation is not significantly correlated with FDI activity. In fact, when

we restrict ourselves to just those countries that enacted a treaty during our sample, we find that
FDI stocks are significantly decreased after treaty formation. These results are consistent with

Dagan (2000) and Radaelli (1997) who claim that recent treaties are not geared towards the
promotion of FDI but rather towards reductions in tax evasion. While these results do not mean

that treaties cannot be used to increase FDI they do suggest that the FDI promotion argument

seems suspect.
       The chapter proceeds as follows. In Section II, we present our empirical methodology.

We discuss our data in Section III. Section IV presents our results and Section V concludes.



II. Empirical framework for statistical analysis
       In order to examine how treaties affect FDI, we require a framework that describes the
determinants of FDI. Over the past couple decades, James Markusen and co-authors have
developed formal general equilibrium theory models of multinational enterprise (MNE)

activity.17 These theory models lead to predictions of equilibrium FDI activity across bilateral
pairs of countries in terms of a few observable factors. Recently, Carr, Markusen and Maskus
(2001) and Markusen and Maskus (2001) tested the “knowledge-capital” version of the

Markusen model of MNE activity using data on affiliate sales of U.S. firms in other countries
and foreign affiliate sales in the U.S. over the period 1986-1994. They find substantial empirical

fit of the knowledge-capital model to the data. The Carr, Markusen, Maskus (CMM) empirical

framework is specified by the following equation:

FDIij = f (SUMGDPij, GDPDIFSQij, SKDIFFij, SKDIFFij* GDPDIFFij,
                                            (SKDIFF ij)2*T_OPENj, Zij, TREATYij)                (1)




17
  For recent examples of this work, see Markusen, Venables, Eby-Konan, and Zhang (1996) or Markusen
and Venables (1997).




                                                                                                      9
        The dependent variable, FDIij is a measure of FDI activity from a parent country (i) to a

host country (j). CMM use affiliate sales data as their “FDI” measure, though Blonigen and
Davies (2000; 2001) find that the CMM empirical framework also fits U.S. FDI stock (and to

some extent, FDI flow) data reasonably well.
        The first five independent variables on the right hand side of equation (1) are the

variables specific to the CMM framework. The first two terms are relatively straightforward,

with SUMGDP defined as the sum of the two countries’ real gross domestic products (GDPs),
and GDPDIFSQ defined as the squared difference between the two countries’ real GDP. There

is an expected positive correlation between SUMGDP and FDI activity and an expected negative
correlation between GDPDIFSQ and FDI activity. The intuition is that with some positive level

of trade frictions, larger and more similar sized markets better support the higher fixed costs
associated with setting up production across countries (versus exporting) and lead to greater FDI
activity.
        The third, fourth, fifth terms on the right-hand side of equation (1) are more complicated

terms related to differences in the two countries relative endowments of skilled labor to unskilled
labor. Skilled labor is important in the theory of MNE activity because firms that have firm-
specific assets (which are developed using skilled labor) will have the greatest incentives to
expand their operations across borders. In some theories of MNE activity, MNE firms are
additionally attracted to place production activities in less-skilled countries because production

activity is less skill-intensive than the headquarter activities conducted in the parent country.

These are generally models which emphasize vertical reasons for MNE activity; i.e., to locate its

production activities in countries with lower wages for low-skill-intensive activities. These
models would suggest that FDI activity should be stronger between countries with greater

differences in skilled labor abundance. Other models that emphasize MNEs motives to locate
production in large markets to avoid tariffs and transport costs (horizontal MNE models) often

predict that FDI activity should increase with greater similarities in skilled labor abundance. In
equation (1) the SKDIFF variable is the parent country’s skilled labor abundance minus the host


                                                                                                      10
country’s skilled labor abundance. Given the vertical MNE motives that exist in the CMM

knowledge-capital model, CMM predict a positive correlation between SKDIFF with FDI
activity from the parent to the host country. The fourth term is an interaction term between

SKDIFF and GDPDIFF, the parent country’s GDP minus the host country’s GDP. CMM
suggest that the knowledge-capital model predicts a negative correlation between this variable

and FDI from the parent to the host country, since the theory predicts larger effects of SKDIFF

on FDI when the parent country is a lot smaller than the host country. Finally, CMM include a
fifth term that interacts the square of SKDIFF multiplied by trade openness in the host country.

The predicted sign from their model on this term is positive.18
         In addition to the variables just described, additional control variables (Zij) have typically
been included in the CMM empirical framework. First, distance (DISTANCEij) is included to
proxy for transport and other trade costs that may affect a firm’s decision about whether to
become an MNE. Second, trade openness for both the parent and host countries (T_OPENi and

T_OPENj ) affect the MNE’s ability to trade intermediates and final goods, which then affects
the location of MNEs. Greater openness in the host country should lower FDI activity because it
lowers trade frictions and makes exporting a relatively more attractive method of serving the host
market than FDI. Greater openness in the parent country should increase FDI, since it makes it

easier to ship goods back to the parent country from foreign affiliates. FDI openness of the host
country (F_OPENj) proxies for the costs of setting up an MNE, with greater openness expected

to increase FDI activity.

         The last independent variable on the right hand side of equation (1) is our focus variable:
a measure of bilateral investment tax treaty activity. There are substantial measurement issues

that determine how we define this variable. In particular, we can observe when countries make
bilateral investment tax treaties with each other, but these treaties certainly differ from each other

along many dimensions which are very difficult to quantify. In addition, the same treaty on
18
  In CMM (2001) they interact the skill difference term with host trade costs, the opposite of host trade openness.
Thus, we expect the opposite sign on this coefficient than they do. See CMM (2001) for further details on the
knowledge-capital model.



                                                                                                                      11
paper can have vastly different consequences for different pairs of countries depending on the

unilaterally-adopted tax practices of the countries before entering the treaty. There is little that
can be quantified across treaties with the exception of agreed-upon tax withholding rates.

Unfortunately, these withholding rates are typically maximum allowable rates and there is
evidence that countries sometimes set rates below these maximum allowable rates after the

treaty, making them uninformative for our purposes of analysis (Blonigen and Davies, 2000;

2001). Because of these difficulties, we primarily measure tax treaty activity in this chapter as a
binary variable taking the value of “1” if two countries have a bilateral tax treaty in place and “0”

if they do not. As a result, we will only be able to estimate an average total impact of tax treaties
across our sample of countries.

       While we only report results on the effect of bilateral tax treaties using the empirical
CMM framework described above, we note that we get qualitatively similar results for the
impact of tax treaties when using alternative empirical frameworks. This includes variations of
the CMM framework found in Markusen and Maskus (1999) and a “gravity-type” framework

which posits FDI activity as only a function of the size of the countries (proxied by real GDP)
and distance. In addition, Blonigen, Davies and Head (2002) show that the CMM framework
misspecifies the SKDIFF and GDPDIFF terms, which should be expressed in absolute values.
While this correction strongly affects the implications of the relationship between skill
differences and FDI activity, it has virtually zero quantitative effect on our estimates of treaty

effects. Although results from these alternative empirical specifications have been omitted for

space, they are available upon request from the authors.



III. Data
       One of the major hurdles in the analysis of the effect of bilateral tax treaties on FDI is
data constraints. As noted above, this begins with measuring the treaty activity. However, there

are also significant measurement issues with respect to the data on bilateral FDI activity as well.
For this study we use OECD data on bilateral FDI stocks and flows, as reported by OECD-


                                                                                                        12
member countries.19 Such data were not even compiled into a publicly-available form until 1993

with the first annual OECD International Direct Investment Statistics Yearbook.20 Since the
data are collected from national sources in each country, there is substantial variation in coverage
by country source and by year, and there is variation in measurement of FDI activity itself.

Almost all countries report inflows and outflows for at least some select bilateral pairings, with
about half also reporting measures of inward and outward stocks of FDI. The earliest data

available begin in 1982. Table 1 provides further details on data coverage across OECD
countries and years in our sample.

        There are definite comparability issues of FDI measures across countries. For example, a

number of OECD countries do not include reinvested earnings by firms in their measures of FDI.
Countries can also differ in what percentage of foreign-owned shares of a firm are necessary for

it to be classified as FDI rather than portfolio investment.21 However, with only a couple
exceptions, we note that FDI definitions are fairly consistent for the same country over time.
This is important because in our statistical analysis we will be able to use techniques that

estimate relationships between variables using only the sample data variation within individual
countries over time, avoiding cross-country data measurement consistency problems that arise
for other statistical techniques.
        Besides our FDI and tax treaty measures, our statistical analysis employs the additional
CMM empirical framework control variables. Our data on real GDP, which is used to construct

19
  As mentioned in the section above, Carr, Markusen and Maskus (2001) and Markusen and Maskus
(2001) use U.S. data on MNEs’ foreign affiliate sales, which is a theoretically preferable measure of
MNE activity. However, to our knowledge, there are very few countries that keep track of affiliate sales,
and there is no comprehensive cross-country database of foreign affiliate sales activity, even for OECD
countries.
20
  These data are available in print form in these annual yearbooks or in electronic form on the OECD
Statistical Compendium CD-ROM, available for purchase from the OECD.
21
  IMF and OECD guidelines specify investment as FDI when acquired shares are 10 percent or higher of
target firm’s outstanding stock, which many of the countries follow or eventually adopted. Graham and
Krugman (1993) find that the foreign parent of a MNE in the U.S. on average owns 77.5 percent of the
affiliates equity, suggesting that this problem may not be overwhelming.




                                                                                                            13
the SUMGDP and GDPDIFSQ variables, come from the well-known Penn World Tables, which

are described by Summers and Heston (1991) and are available online at
http://datacentre.chass.utoronto.ca:5680/pwt/. To construct our measure of differences in skilled

labor endowments, we use World Bank data on the average country-level education attainment
as a proxy for such endowments. Nehru and Dhareshwar (1993) provide further details on these

data. DISTANCE was measured as the distance between capital cities as reported by the Bali

Online Corporation. This distance calculator can be found at http://www.indo.com. Trade
openness measures of the two countries were obtained from the Penn World Tables and are

defined as a country’s total trade flows (exports plus imports) divided by its GDP. The F_OPENj
was constructed in a similar manner as a country’s total FDI flows divided by its GDP using the
United Nations’ World Investment Directory. Details on this variable construction can be found
in Blonigen and Davies (2001).

           The Penn World Tables run only through 1992, while our FDI data begin in 1982 at the
earliest. These data availability issues limit our sample and analysis to the period from 1982
through 1992.

           Table 2 provides descriptive statistics of our dependent and independent variables. We
have 3276 observations on FDI outflows by OECD countries, and 2235 observations on FDI

outbound stock. Average annual bilateral FDI outflows are almost $284 million with substantial
variation across observations (standard deviation of just more than $1 billion).22 Average FDI

outbound stock is $3.378 billion with a standard deviation of $8 billion.23 About 77 percent of
the sample observations are of bilateral country pairs with bilateral tax treaties in place. The

majority of these (74 percent) are what we term “old” treaties which were in place before our
sample begins, with three percent of the sample observations connected to “new” treaties that


22
     These figures are in 1995 U.S. dollars.
23
 We remind the reader that these are figures for those bilateral pairs reported by each OECD country,
which are typically skewed toward only reporting the countries with which it has the largest FDI activity.




                                                                                                             14
were enacted during our sample. We discuss the importance of this distinction for our statistical

analysis in more detail below.



IV. Statistical Analysis and Results
       Our statistical analysis will proceed in stages, beginning with a relatively naive

estimation of equation (1), and then proceeding with more sophisticated estimation procedures to

correct for potential statistical problems. We do this to show that it is not easy to estimate the
true effect of tax treaties on FDI, primarily because many treaties by OECD countries were in

place before our sample begins. Most of these “old” treaties are between OECD countries, with
many beginning in the decade after WWII. If we get a positive correlation between our tax

treaty variable and our dependent variable, FDI activity, it is not clear whether other
unobservable characteristics of the tax treaty country pairings may be leading to both increased
FDI activity and a tax treaty. This occurs because the tax treaty variable, a simple binary
variable, will pick up any residual effects on FDI that are not measured by the other control

regressors. This problem, known as simultaneity, makes identification of the treaty effect
difficult to measure. For example, there are likely a number of underlying reasons beyond their
bilateral tax treaty that explain why the U.S. and the U.K. have large FDI activity with each
other. These other reasons, however, may not be observable. Because of this, statistical analysis
will assign the influence of the unobserved factors to the observed existence of a treaty. As such,

while statistical analysis would indicate a strong positive relationship between the existence of a

treaty and FDI activity, one hesitates to say that the treaty causes the activity between the two

countries.
       However, our sample also includes a number of bilateral tax treaties completed by OECD

countries after our sample data begins. These “new” treaties afford a much better opportunity to
measure the impact of a tax treaty, as we have data on FDI activity both before and after the

treaty takes place. Presuming that there are no other changes occurring at the time of the treaty
that would affect FDI (besides those captured by our control regressors), we can estimate the


                                                                                                      15
effect of these new treaties on FDI more precisely by comparing the pre- and post-treaty

information. Table 3 lists new treaties that were completed by OECD countries after the first
year of our sample, 1983, through the last year of our sample, 1992.24 As we show below, the

estimated effects of old treaties versus new treaties on FDI activity are quite different. Given
this discussion, we give much more weight to the credibility of our evidence for new treaties.

        Column (1) of Table 4 provides statistical results when we use ordinary least squares
(OLS) regression techniques to estimate equation (1) on our full sample of countries and years

when FDI activity is measured as the parent country’s FDI stock in the host country. Column (2)
of Table 4 provides statistical results when we conduct the same procedure, but define our FDI
activity measure as the parent country’s FDI flow into the host country. With the exception of

SKDIFF and the trade openness measures, the control variables have their predicted signs and
are generally statistically significant in the FDI stock and FDI flow regressions. The SKDIFF

variable is estimated with an incorrect negative sign in both regressions, but is not statistically
significant at standard levels of statistical confidence. The general fit of the empirical
framework to the data is better for the FDI stock regression, where the control variables explain
about 34 percent of the variation in the dependent variable, as compared to the FDI flow

regression, where only about 10 percent of the variation in the dependent variable is explained by
the independent variables.
        Both statistical regressions provide strong evidence for a positive effect of tax treaties on

FDI activity. Everything else equal, the presence of a tax treaty means almost an extra $2.5

billion of parent FDI stock in the host country versus a situation where there was no bilateral tax

treaty. This is quite significant given an average of $3.4 billion in FDI stock in the sample. The
effect of treaties on FDI flows is estimated to be somewhat larger relative to its mean.
Everything else equal, the presence of a tax treaty means an extra $234 million of annual parent

24
  We note that because of missing data, some of the bilateral pairs completing treaties in Table 3, are not
covered by our sample. More specifically, nineteen of the new bilateral treaties in Table 3 are covered in
our sample in at least one of the two possible directions.




                                                                                                              16
FDI flows into the host country, compared to an average annual flow of $284 million. Even

setting issues of magnitude aside, these estimates suggest that we can be over 99 percent
confident that these coefficient estimates are not zero.

        As mentioned above, our sample includes both old treaties that occur before our sample
period begins and new treaties that occur during our sample’s time period. Because of this, it is

not clear whether the strongly positive treaty effects in columns (1) and (2) are the result of the

treaties themselves or some other unobserved factor. To deal with this, columns (3) and (4) of
Table 4 provide results when we estimate the same empirical framework as in columns (1) and

(2), but allow for separate effects for old and new treaties; i.e., separate binary variables
indicating whether an old or new treaty is present between the bilateral country pair in a given

year or not. The estimated effects of old and new treaties are quite different for both of our
specifications (FDI stock and FDI flows). Old treaties continue to show a positive effect on FDI
activity, and that effect continues to be highly statistically significant and of slightly larger
magnitude than our results in columns (1) and (2). Our estimates suggest that the presence of an

old treaty increases outbound FDI stock by $2.8 billion (compared to $2.5 billion in the column
(1) estimates) and increases outbound FDI flows by $258 million (compared to $242 million in
the column (2) estimates). In contrast, new treaties yield coefficient estimates that are negative
in sign. However, given high standard errors relative to the small coefficient estimates, we
cannot statistically reject the hypothesis that the new treaties have no impact on FDI activity.

        As mentioned above, it is difficult to assign causation to the old treaty effects because

they are in place before our sample period begins – the positive correlation may just suggest that

countries that would naturally have high FDI activity due to other (unobserved) factors also
make sure they have a bilateral tax treaty in place.25 This is particularly worrisome since our


25
  There is a similar, though milder, concern that the new treaties occur because FDI activity is increasing
or expected to increase between the countries due to unobserved factors. However, this would be
expected to bias us toward finding a positive correlation between new treaties and FDI activity. In
contrast, our results below find evidence for a negative correlation.




                                                                                                              17
(observed) control variables do not even account for half of the variation in the dependent

variables. A common way to control for unobserved characteristics that affect the FDI activity
between a bilateral pair of countries is to estimate what is known as a fixed effects specification.

This means that, in addition our control variables, we also include a binary variable for each
bilateral country pairing. These binary fixed-effect country-pair variables will estimate the

aggregate effect of time-invariant characteristics (both observed and unobserved) that raise or

lower the FDI activity for that bilateral pairing versus the average. In other words, it acts as an
intercept term that is specific to the bilateral country pair. With fixed effects, our estimates then

come only from the time series variation in our variables within each bilateral country pair, not
the variation across bilateral country pairs. Note that now the effects of our time-invariant

regressors, distance and old treaties, will be subsumed into these fixed effects. In other words,
we cannot identify the effects of old treaties separately from other time-invariant characteristics,
such as historical conditions, that affect the overall FDI activity between a bilateral country pair.
Because of this, we focus solely on the new treaties enacted at some point during the sample of

years. Estimation using only the variation within bilateral country pairs provides an additional
benefit since it can help to reduce the problems caused by different definitions of FDI activity
across the countries in our sample, providing more credible estimates.
       Columns (1) and (2) of Table 5 present our fixed effects empirical estimation results.
The fit of the equations increases dramatically: 94 percent of the variation in the dependent

variable is explained in the FDI stock regression and 38 percent of the variation is explained in

the FDI flow regression. Not surprisingly, statistical tests easily confirm that the fixed effect

variables are jointly statistically significant for explaining FDI activity. The main CMM
framework control variables still perform well. In fact, the skilled-labor difference variable

(SKDIFF), now has the correct sign and is statistically significant. However, the trade openness
measures generally have the wrong sign in these regressions.

       The surprising result in columns (1) and (2) of Table 5 is that the estimated effect of the
new treaties on FDI activity is now strongly negative. The estimated impact has increased


                                                                                                        18
substantially and the effects are much more statistically significant: A new treaty leads to a $2.6

billion decrease in FDI stock and $351 million decrease in annual FDI flows. In column (3), we
introduce a lagged dependent variable to control for dynamic adjustment in our FDI stock

equation as there is probably persistence in the FDI stock over time that can lead to statistical
problems with our estimates. The coefficient on the lagged dependent variable is statistically

significant, but does not seriously affect our other regressor coefficient estimates, including the

new treaty variable.26
           In summary, we estimate very different correlations between old treaties and FDI activity
versus new treaties and FDI activity. Given the simultaneity concerns described above, it is

difficult to assign much weight to our old treaty evidence for positive effects on FDI, even
though it is the best we can do given data constraints. Because consistent recording of FDI
activity began much later than the enactment of these old treaties, it is virtually impossible to
identify the effect of the treaties on FDI activity from other country-pair characteristics that
might affect both the inherent FDI activity and the incentives to have treaties. In contrast, we are

much more confident in our new treaty estimates from a statistical standpoint and these results
yield a very surprising conclusion: new treaties are not promoting FDI activity and the evidence

suggests that they may even be decreasing FDI activity.
           While this new treaty result is surprising, it is confirmed by Blonigen and Davies (2001)
using a completely different database on U.S.-only FDI activity. The U.S. data, collected by the

U.S. Bureau of Economic Activity (BEA), is arguably the best-measured and most

comprehensive data on FDI activity of any country in the world. The BEA has data on U.S.
bilateral FDI activity (both inbound and outbound) stretching back as far as 1966 for FDI flows
and stock and the early 1980s for affiliate sales.27 Using this U.S. database and U.S. bilateral tax

26
     A lagged dependent variable is not statistically significant in the FDI flow specifications.
27
  Of course, the disadvantage of the U.S. data versus the OECD data is that its observations are all tied to
one country, making it difficult to know whether the results from such a sample generalize to the rest of
the world.




                                                                                                               19
treaty activity, Blonigen and Davies (2001) also find evidence for substantial negative effects of

new treaties on FDI activity. In an earlier version of the paper, Blonigen and Davies (2000), had
similarly addressed the issue of old versus new treaties by estimating the U.S.-only sample

without observations connected with Canada, Japan and European countries. They found that
the remaining sample still displayed positive effects of tax treaties on FDI activity, but with a

very long lag. However, this result was driven by the fact that the reduced sample still contained

FDI activity with a few remaining old treaty partners, specifically Australia and New Zealand.
Once all of the old treaty partners are eliminated from the sample, as effectively done in
Blonigen and Davies (2001), results are consistent with this chapter’s results for OECD
countries: There is no credible evidence in the data that tax treaties have significant positive

effects on FDI activity.



V. Conclusion
       The majority of economic and legal texts stress the intuitive notion that bilateral tax
treaties should promote FDI activity. As discussed in the introduction, there are a number of

reasons why this may not be true in theory. This chapter adds to this debate by providing some
of the first evidence on the effect of bilateral tax treaties on FDI activity. Using OECD data we

find that new treaty activity (during the 1983-1992 period) suggests strong negative impacts on
FDI. While we find a positive correlation in the case of much older treaties, we cannot weight

this evidence very heavily as we cannot observe FDI activity before these treaties were in place.

These results are consistent with previous work by Blonigen and Davies (2001) using only U.S.

data. Thus, in conjunction with this earlier work, our results cast doubt upon the FDI promotion
rationale for treaty formation, which stands in contrast to the conventional wisdom among many
economists and lawyers.

       One possible reason for the non-promotion effect of treaties on FDI activity is that

treaties reduce firms’ abilities to evade taxes through transfer pricing or treaty shopping. Our

data on aggregate FDI activity are not well-suited to address whether these issues connected with


                                                                                                     20
firm-level behavior are behind the overall result. An additional possibility for non-promotion of

FDI activity by new treaties is that treaties may increase investment uncertainty, at least in the
short run. Since a new treaty has yet to be tested in the courts of the partner countries, it may

actually increase the perceived risk of investment between treaty partners until the legal
interpretation of the treaty has been resolved. Thus, in the short run, the treaty may lead to a

reduction in FDI activity. Over the long run, however, this uncertainty will be resolved, clearing

the way for the treaty to promote investment. However, when we alter our new treaty dummy
variable to only take the value of “1” a year (or even two years) after the treaty was enacted, we

get similar negative and statistically significant effects of new treaties on FDI activity. This
would argue that the uncertainty issue is not behind the effects we find unless it takes many years

to resolve such uncertainty. On the other hand, our work with U.S. data in Blonigen and Davies
(2001) found evidence that the negative drop in FDI activity seemed to occur mainly at the time
of the treaty. We leave these and other important issues for future work and hope that these
results serve as a guidepost for continued exploration of the relationship between tax treaties and

foreign investment.




                                                                                                      21
Table 1: FDI Data Coverage By OECD Country.
                                              Number of Partner
Country                Type of FDI Measure    Countries Reporteda   Years Coveredb
Australia              Inflows                          18               1982-
                       Outflows                         17               1982-
                       Inbound stock                    17               1982-
                       Outbound stock                   12               1982-
Austria                Inflows                          11               1982-
                       Outflows                         13               1982-
                       Inbound stock                    9            1982, 1986-
                       Outbound stock                   11           1982, 1986-
Belgium-Luxembourg     Inflows                          44               1982-
                       Outflows                         45               1982-
Canada                 Inflows                           3               1982-
                       Outflows                          3               1982-
                       Inbound stock                    29               1982-
                       Outbound stock                   30               1982-
Denmark                Inflows                          20               1982-
                       Outflows                         22               1982-
Finland                Inflows                          10               1982-
                       Outflows                         17               1982-
                       Inbound stock                    1                1989-
France                 Inflows                          23               1982-
                       Outflows                         23               1982-
                       Inbound stock                    43               1987-
                       Outbound stock                   34               1987-
Germany                Inflows                          19               1982-
                       Outflows                         18               1982-
Greece                 Inflows                          14               1987-
Iceland                Inflows                          0               1987-
Ireland                Inflows                          0               1983-
Italy                  Inflows                         20               1982-
                       Outflows                        20               1982-
                       Inbound stock                   22               1985-
                       Outbound stock                  23               1985-
Japan                  Inflows                          9               1982-
                       Outflows                        36               1982-
                       Inbound stock                    9               1982-
                       Outbound stock                  37               1982-
Netherlands            Inflows                          9               1982-
                       Outflows                         9               1982-
                       Inbound stock                   14               1984-
                       Outbound stock                  14               1984-




                                                                                     22
    New Zealand             Inflows                               4                  1984-
                            Outflows                              4                  1984-
    Norway                  Inflows                              14                  1986-
                            Outflows                             19                  1987-
                            Inbound stock                        18                  1987-
                            Outbound stock                       24                  1988-
    Portugal                Inflows                              18                  1982-
                            Outflows                             10                  1982-
    Spain                   Inflows                              20                  1982-
                            Outflows                             18                  1982-
    Sweden                  Inflows                              15                  1982-
                            Outflows                             36                  1982-
    Switzerland             Inflows                               0                  1983-
                            Outflows                              0                  1986-
                            Outbound stock                        0                  1986-
    Turkey                  Inflows                              18                  1982-
                            Outflows                             6                   1989-
    United Kingdom          Inflows                              18                  1982-
                            Outflows                             36                1984, 1987-
                            Inbound stock                        19                  1982-
                            Outbound stock                       35                1984, 1987-
    United States           Inflows                              39                  1982-
                            Outflows                             41                  1982-
                            Inbound stock                        28                  1982-
                            Outbound stock                       41                  1982-
a
  Figures for 1990.
b
  Not all reported countries are necessarily reported each year during range indicated. “0"
indicates that data available only by region, not specific countries.




                                                                                                 23
Table 2: Descriptive Statistics of Variables.
                          Number of                     Standard
 Variables                Observations       Mean       Deviation     Minimum       Maximum
 Dependent Variables

 FDI outbound stock            2235          3378.13       8002.59          0.00     92733.80
 FDI outflows                  3276            283.82      1056.61      -2550.56     42267.61

 Independent Variables

 SUMGDPij                      3276          1259.53       1260.96         61.79      6449.00
 GDPDIFSQij                    3276          1993241      4710473           0.11     2.06e+07
 SKDIFFij                      3276              1.21          2.54        -6.65          8.10
 SKDIFFij*GDPDIFFij            3276          2124.00       5374.54      -7494.69     31011.47
 (SKDIFFij)2*T_OPENj           3276            475.35       821.85          0.00      8850.60
 DISTANCEij                    3276          5695.07       5129.36        174.00     19007.00
 T_OPENi                       3276             56.38        31.01         17.62       156.45
 T_OPENj                       3276             68.22        55.26          8.96       386.23
 F_OPENj                       3276             12.42        14.20          0.15        93.69
 TREATYij                      3276              0.77          0.42         0.00          1.00
 OLD TREATYij                  3276              0.74          0.44         0.00          1.00
 NEW TREATYij                  3276              0.03          0.17         0.00          1.00
NOTES: FDI outbound stock, FDI outflows, SUMGDP, and GDPDIFSQ are measured in
millions of real U.S. dollars. Distance is measured in miles between capital cities. Skill
differences is measured in mean years of female and male education attainment. See text for
variable definitions.




                                                                                                 24
Table 3: New Treaties by OECD Countries from 1983-1992.
 Country                 Bilateral Tax Treaties (Year of Treaty in Parentheses)
 Australia                 Italy(1983), Korea(1983), Norway(1983), Ireland(1984),
                           Finland(1985), Austria (1987), China(1990), Thailand(1990),
                           Hungary(1992), Poland(1992).
 Austria                   Thailand(1986), Australia(1987).
 Belgium-Luxembourga       Korea(1985), Turkey(1988).
 Canada                    Bangladesh(1983), Brazil(1985), Cyprus(1986), India(1986),
                           China(1987), Kenya(1987), Poland(1989), Slovak Republic(1987).
 Denmark                   Cyprus(1984), Indonesia(1986), China(1987).
 Finland                   Australia(1985), New Zealand(1985), Turkey(1985),
                           Thailand(1986), China(1987), Yugoslavia(1987), Indonesia(1988).
 France                    Bangladesh(1988), Trinidad and Tobago(1988), Nigeria(1991).
 Germany                   Philippines(1984), Turkey(1986), Indonesia(1988).
 Greece                    Hungary(1984), Switzerland(1984), Czechoslovakia (1987),
                           Norway(1989).
 Iceland                   None.
 Ireland                   Australia(1984), New Zealand(1987).
 Italy                     China(1987), India(1987).
 Japan                     Indonesia(1983).
 Netherlands               Pakistan (1983), Romania(1983), China(1987), India (1989), Brazil
                           (1991).
 New Zealand               Norway(1983), Finland(1985), Ireland(1987), Indonesia(1988).
 Norway                    Australia(1983), New Zealand(1983), Yugoslavia(1984),
                           China(1987), Pakistan(1987), Philippines(1988), Greece (1989).
 Portugal                  None.
 Spain                     Yugoslavia(1983).
 Sweden                    Trinidad and Tobago(1985), China(1987), Cyprus(1989),
                           Indonesia(1989), Turkey(1989).
 Switzerland               Greece(1984), Egypt(1988), Indonesia(1989), China(1991).
 Turkey                    Finland(1985), Germany(1986), Belgium-Luxembourg(1988)
                           Sweden(1989).
 United Kingdom            India(1983), Thailand(1983), China(1985), India(1987).
 United States               Barbados(1984), China(1985), Tunisia(1986), Cyprus(1988),
                             Indonesia(1989), India(1990), Spain(1991).
a
  Includes only treaties made by Belgium, not Luxembourg.




                                                                                               25
Table 4: Estimates of treaty effects on OECD outbound FDI stock and flows using
Ordinary Least Squares.
                                        Empirical Models and Dependent Variables

                                  Ordinary Least Squares with       Ordinary Least Squares with
                                        Treaty Variable             Separate Old and New Treaty
                                                                             Variables
                                  FDI Stock         FDI Flows        FDI Stock       FDI Flows
 Regressors                          (1)               (2)              (3)             (4)
 Treaty Variables:

 TREATY                            2446.9**          233.81**
                                    (0.00)            (0.00)
 NEW TREATY                                                          - 263.06         - 20.586
                                                                        (0.74)           (0.86)
 OLD TREATY                                                            2782.8**         257.81**
                                                                        (0.00)           (0.00)
 CMM Controls:

 SUMGDPij                            4.368**           0.426**           4.426**          0.431**
                                     (0.00)            (0.00)            (0.00)           (0.00)
 GDPDIFSQij                      - 0.0001         - 0.00004**         - 0.0001       - 0.00004**
                                     (0.16)            (0.00)            (0.09)           (0.00)
 SKDIFFij                            2.948           - 5.747            65.085          - 1.017
                                     (0.97)            (0.51)            (0.41)           (0.91)
 SKDIFFij * GDPDIFFij              - 0.315**         - 0.020**         - 0.313**        - 0.020**
                                     (0.00)            (0.00)            (0.00)           (0.00)
 (SKDIFFij)2*T_OPENj               - 0.697**         - 0.049           - 0.623**        - 0.039
                                     (0.00)            (0.10)            (0.01)           (0.18)
 DISTANCEij                        - 0.396**         - 0.031**         - 0.392**        - 0.030**
                                     (0.00)            (0.00)            (0.00)           (0.00)
 T_OPENi                           - 7.567           - 0.430           - 4.767          - 0.335
                                     (0.42)            (0.54)            (0.61)           (0.63)
 T_OPENj                         - 26.184**          - 1.347*        - 27.754**         - 1.461**
                                     (0.00)            (0.02)            (0.00)           (0.01)
 F_OPENj                           220.58**          16.622**          226.06**         16.923**
                                     (0.00)            (0.00)            (0.00)           (0.00)

 R-squared                           0.34             0.11               0.34              0.11
 F Test                            112.14**          38.31**          113.21**           35.45**
 Sample Size                         2235             3276              2235              3276
NOTES: P-values are in parentheses, with ** and * denoting statistical confidence levels at the
99 and 95 percent levels, respectively. P-values indicate statistical probability (in decimal form)
that the true parameter value is zero (i.e., has no effect on the dependent variable). R-squared is
the ratio of the variation in the dependent variable explained by the regressors. F test is a
statistical test of whether we can reject the hypothesis that the coefficients of the regressors are
jointly zero.



                                                                                                       26
Table 5: Estimates of treaty effects on OECD outbound FDI stock and flows using a fixed
effects specification.
                                                Empirical Models and Dependent Variables
                                               Fixed Effects with New Treaty Variable Only
                                                                                   FDI Stock with
                                                                                      Lagged
                                                                                    Dependent
                                             FDI Stock           FDI Flows           Variable
 Regressors                                     (1)                 (2)                 (3)
 Treaty Variables:

 NEW TREATY                                 - 2597.6**           - 350.83            - 2212.3**
                                               (0.00)               (0.06)              (0.00)

 Control Regressors:

 LAGGED FDI STOCK                                                                         0.308**
                                                                                         (0.00)
 SUMGDPij                                        9.527**              1.379**            7.053**
                                                (0.00)               (0.00)              (0.00)
 GDPDIFSQij                                  - 0.0004**          - 0.0001**          - 0.0003**
                                                (0.00)               (0.00)              (0.00)
 SKDIFFij                                      2677.6**             67.116             1331.6**
                                                (0.00)               (0.63)              (0.00)
 SKDIFFij * GDPDIFFij                         - 0.819**            - 0.008             - 0.540**
                                                (0.00)               (0.89)              (0.00)
 (SKDIFFij)2*T_OPENj                            1.029*               0.010               0.610
                                                (0.01)               (0.94)              (0.09)
 T_OPENi                                      - 1.924              - 3.164             - 2.145
                                                (0.90)               (0.50)              (0.89)
 T_OPENj                                    - 47.163**             - 0.552           - 28.957**
                                                (0.00)               (0.85)              (0.00)
 F_OPENj                                      124.66**               7.596             79.207**
                                                (0.00)               (0.19)              (0.00)

 R-squared                                      0.94                0.38                0.96
 F Test                                       95.46**              12.94**            192.87**
 Sample Size                                   2235                3276                2041
NOTES: P-values are in parentheses, with ** and * denoting statistical confidence levels at the
99 and 95 percent levels, respectively. P-values indicate statistical probability (in decimal form)
that the true parameter value is zero (i.e., has no effect on the dependent variable). R-squared is
the ratio of the variation in the dependent variable explained by the regressors. F test is a
statistical test of whether we can reject the hypothesis that the coefficients of the regressors are
jointly zero.




                                                                                                       27
References

Altshuler, Rosanne and T. Scott Newlon (1991), “The effects of U.S. tax policy on the income
repatriation patterns of U.S. multinational corporations,” NBER Discussion Paper, No. 571.

Altshuler, Rosanne, T. Scott Newlon, and William Randolph (1995), “Do repatriation taxes
matter? Evidence from the tax returns of U.S. multinationals,” Effects of Taxation on
Multinational Corporations, eds. Martin Feldstein, James Hines, Jr. and R. Glenn Hubbard,
University of Chicago Press, pp. 253-272.

Anders, Dietmar (1997) “The limitation on benefit clause of the U.S.-German tax treaty and its
compatibility with European law.” Northwestern Journal of International Law and Business.

Baker, Philip, Double Taxation Conventions and International Tax Law: A Manual on the
OECD Model Tax Convention on Income and on Capital of 1992, 2nd Edition (London: Sweet &
Maxwell, 1994).

Blonigen, Bruce A. and Ronald B. Davies (2000), “The effects of bilateral tax treaties on U.S.
FDI activity,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 7929.

Blonigen, Bruce A. and Ronald B. Davies (2001), “The effects of bilateral tax treaties on U.S.
FDI activity,” Mimeo.

Blonigen, Bruce A., Ronald B. Davies, and Keith Head. (2002), “Estimating the knowledge-
capital model of the multinational enterprise: Comment,” Mimeo.

Bond, E. and L. Samuelson, 1989, "Strategic behaviour and the rules for international taxation of
capital," Economic Journal 99:1099-1111.

Carr, David, James R. Markusen, and Keith E. Maskus (2001), “Estimating the knowledge-
capital model of the multinational enterprise,” American Economic Review, 91:3, pp. 693-708.

Casson, Mark (1979), Alternatives to the Multinational Enterprise, Macmillan Press, London.

Caves, Richard E. (1993), Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis, Second Edition,
Cambridge Surveys of Economic Literature, Cambridge Press, New York, New York.

Dagan, Tsilly (2000), “The tax treaties myth,” New York University Journal of International Law
and Politics, Summer 2000, pp. 939-996.

Devereux, Michael, Rachel Griffith, and Alexander Klemm (2001) “Have taxes on mobile
capital declined?” Mimeo.

Diamond, Walter and Dorothy Diamond (1998), International Tax Treaties of All Nations,
Ocean Publications, Dobbs Ferry, New York.




                                                                                                    28
Doernberg, Richard (1997), International Taxation in a Nutshell, Third Edition, West Publishing
Co., St. Paul, Minnesota.

Graham, Edward and Paul Krugman (1995), Foreign Direct Investment in the United States,
Third Edition, Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C..

Graham, John R. (1996), “Proxies for the corporate marginal tax rate,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 42:2, pp. 187-221.

Gresik, Thomas A. “The taxing tax of taxing transnationals.” Journal of Economic Literature,
39:3, pp. 800-838.

Grubert, Harry, and John Mutti (1991), “Taxes, tariffs and transfer pricing in multinational
corporate decision making,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 73:2, pp. 285-293.

Hamada, Koichi (1966), "Strategic aspects of taxation on foreign investment income," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 80:361-75.

Hartman, David (1985), “Tax policy and foreign direct investment,” Journal of Public
Economics, pp. 107-121.

Hines, James R. Jr. (1988), “Taxation and U.S. multinational investment,” Tax Policy and the
Economy, 2, ed. Lawrence Summers, MIT Press, pp. 33-61.

Hines, James R. Jr. (1992), “Credit and deferral as international investment incentives,”National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 4191.

Hines, James R. and Kristen L. Willard (1992), “"Trick or treaty? Bargains and surprises in
international tax agreements," Mimeo.

Hufbauer, G., 1992, U.S. Taxation of International Income: Blueprint for Reform, Institute for
International Economics.

Janeba, Eckhard (1996), “Foreign direct investment under oligopoly: profit shifting or profit
capturing?” Journal of Public Economics, 60: 423-445.

Markusen, James R. and Anthony J. Venables (1997), “The role of multinational firms in the
wage-gap debate,” Review of International Economics, 5: 435-51.

Markusen, James R. and Keith E. Maskus (1999), “Discriminating among alternative theories of
the multinational enterprise,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No.
7164.

Markusen, James R. and Keith E. Maskus. (2001), “Multinational Firms: Reconciling Theory
and Evidence,” in M. Blomstrom and L.S. Goldberg (Eds.), Topics in Empirical International
Economics: A Festschrift in Honor of Robert E. Lipsey. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press for National Bureau of Economic Research.


                                                                                                    29
Markusen, James R, Anthony J. Venables, Denise Eby-Konan, and Kevin Honglin Zhang (1996)
“A unified treatment of horizontal direct investment, vertical direct investment, and the pattern
of trade in goods and services,” NBER Working Paper, No. 5696.

Nehru, Vikram, and Ashok Dhareshwar (1993), "A new database on physical capital stock:
sources, methodology and results." Rivista de Analisis Economico, 8:1, pp. 37-59.

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (1989), Explanatory report on the
convention on mutual administrative assistance in tax matters, OECD Committee on Fiscal
Affairs, Paris.

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (1997), Model tax convention on
income and on capital, OECD Committee on Fiscal Affairs, Paris.

Radaelli, Claudio M. (1997), The politics of corporate taxation in the European Union,
Routledge Research in European Public Policy, London.

Sinn, Hans-Werner (1993), “Taxation and the birth of foreign subsidiaries,” Trade, Welfare, and
Economic Policies, Essays in Honor of Murray C. Kemp, ed. H Heberg and N. Long, University
of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.

Summers, Robert and Alan Heston (1991), “The Penn-World Table (Mark 5): an expanded set of
international comparisons, 1950 - 1988,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106:327-368.

White, Fredrick (1991), “The United States Perspective,” Tax Treaties and Local Taxes,
International Fiscal Association, 16:15-24.

Wilson, G. P., 1993, "The role of taxes in location and sourcing decisions," in Studies in
International Taxation, A. Giovannini, R. G. Hubbard, and J. Slemrod eds., University of
Chicago Press.

Wilson, John D. “Theories of Tax Competition.” National Tax Journal, June 1999, 52(2), pp.
269-304.

United Nations (1998), Bilateral Investment Treaties in the Mid-1990s, United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, New York.




                                                                                                    30
