                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE FED AND INTEREST RATES: A HIGH-FREQUENCY IDENTIFICATION


                                           John H. Cochrane
                                            Monika Piazzesi


                                          Working Paper 8839
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8839


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2002




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.


© 2002 by John H. Cochrane and Monika Piazzesi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
The Fed and Interest Rates: A High-Frequency Identification
John H. Cochrane and Monika Piazzesi
NBER Working Paper No. 8839
March 2002
JEL No. E4, E5



                                             ABSTRACT

        We measure monetary policy shocks as changes in the Fed funds target rate that surprise bond
markets in daily data. These shock series avoid the omitted variable, time-varying parameter, and
orthogonalization problem of monthly VARs, and do not impose the expectations hypothesis. We find
surprisingly large and persistent responses of bond yields to these shocks. 10 year rates rise as much as
8/10 of a percent to a one percent target shock. The usual view that monetary policy only temporarily
raises long term rates and influences inflation would lead one to predict a negative long rate response.




John H. Cochrane                                            Monika Piazzesi
Graduate School of Business                                 Anderson Graduate School of Management
University of Chicago                                       UCLA
1101 E. 58th Street                                         110 Westwood Plaza
Chicago, IL 60637                                           Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER                                                    and NBER
john.cochrane@gsb.uchicago.edu                              piazzesi@ucla.edu
               The Fed and Interest Rates — a High-Frequency Identification

                          John H. Cochrane and Monika Piazzesi∗


   This paper studies monetary policy shocks, defined from Fed Funds target movements

relative to daily interest rate data. These shocks are nearly ideal measures of unexpected

movements in monetary policy. Market expectations can summarize the vast amount of

information used by the Fed in setting policy, and used by Fed watchers in guessing the

Fed’s actions, thus surmounting the omitted variables problem in estimated policy rules.

Interest rate forecasts can adapt to changes in the Fed’s reactions to the rest of the economy

— the time-varying parameter problem. If in one year the Fed worries about inflation, but in

another year it places more weight on unemployment, market forecasts will adapt, but VAR

regressions may not, and incorrectly interpret anticipated actions to be shocks.

   Finally, high frequency data surmount painlessly the pervasive orthogonalization prob-

lem. Interest rates all move together. Does this movement reflect Fed reaction to interest

rates, or interest rate reactions to the Fed? Neither recursive identification is plausible for

monthly data. Fed oﬃcials obviously look at interest rates just before the FOMC meeting,

and just as obviously, interest rates react immediately to any change in funds target. By con-

trast, the one-day correlation between a target change an interest rate changes is obviously

not a Fed reaction to intra-day interest rate news.

   Orthogonalization matters a lot in monthly data. If one orthogonalizes the funds rate

before other interest rates, one estimates that policy shocks have a strong, “level” eﬀect on

other interest rates. If one orthogonalizes with the funds rate after other interest rates, one

recovers an idiosyncratic funds rate movement that does not aﬀect other rates. The eﬀect of

the funds shock on long term interest rates is entirely determined by the orthogonalization.



                                              1
   Following this attractive intuition, Glenn Rudebusch (1998) and others have used Fed

funds futures data and the expectations hypothesis that the futures rate is equal to the

expected future spot rate to define an expected fed funds target, and thus a shock. Alas,

the institutional details of the funds rate and its futures market make this approach more

complex than it seems. Also, the expectations hypothesis is currently most famous for the

failure of the forward-spot spread to forecast interest rate changes. Finally, this approach is

limited to a sample since Fed funds futures were introduced in 1988.

   With these thoughts in mind, we follow Monika Piazzesi (2001) in defining shocks from

interest rates more generally, and without imposing the expectations hypothesis. We use two

approaches. First, we run a regression of target rate changes on interest rates just before

the target change. Second, we define the shock as the change in the 1 month Eurodollar

rate from just before to just after the target change. Both measures use the fact that there

has been a target rate change; they omit from the shocks all dates on which the funds rate

might have been expected to change, but it did not. Throwing out shocks need not bias

responses, and we suspect that the response to unexpected target changes is diﬀerent from

the response to target changes expected by some (usually overparameterized) regression that

did not happen.

   We are especially interested in the eﬀect of target changes on interest rates. Target

changes seem to be accompanied by large changes in long-term interest rates, and many

estimates support this correlation (Our own estimates include John Cochrane 1989 and

Piazzesi 2001, Figure 3). This eﬀect is puzzling. Why do 30 year bond yields not decline on

funds rate shocks? Tight monetary policy should lead to lower inflation, which should lower

long-term bond yields. Can the Fed really raise the real short rate 1% for 5 years or more,

without leading to 1% lower inflation that would cancel any eﬀect on longer yields?

                                              2
   Charles Evans and David Marshall (1998) look at interest rate responses to the shocks

identified by Lawrence Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans (1996). These

shocks are residuals in a carefully orthogonalized monthly VAR. They find that these CEE

shocks only have “slope” eﬀects on interest rates, and do not move long rates much. Since

“level” shocks dominate the variance of long rates, their view implies that the bulk of interest

rate movements is explained by the systematic component of policy. Evans and Marshall

impose that interest rates do not forecast the Federal funds rate either at lags or contempo-

raneously. Thus, their responses are the same as regressions of interest rates on unmodified

CEE shocks. One of our prime questions is whether allowing interest rates to forecast the

funds target changes their conclusions.

II. A revealing episode

   Figure 1 presents Federal funds target changes, the 1 month Eurodollar rate, and long

term treasury yields through 2001. (Our data are all taken from the New York Fed website,

release H.15, and target data augmented by Glenn Rudebusch. Eurodollar rates are recorded

at 9:30 am Eastern time, while the other data are recorded at the end of the day, so we assign

the Eurodollar rates to the previous day.) The top panel of Figure 1 instantly suggests which

target changes were anticipated and which were unanticipated. The changes on January 3,

April 18 and September 17 all took the 1 month Eurodollar rate by surprise. In fact, on

January 3 the 1 month rate fell more than the target. The market may have inferred that

another cut was coming soon. On the other hand, the changes on Jan 31, May 15 and Aug

21 were completely and exactly anticipated by the one month rate. On Mar 20 and Jun

27, the 1 month rate actually rose slightly on the target cut. Apparently, markets expected

a larger cut, so the “shock” was positive rather than negative. On Oct 2 and Nov 6, the

market had anticipated a good part but not all of the change. We could read these as some

                                               3
chance of a change, which then happened. In this graph, as in the larger sample, most target

changes seem completely expected by bond markets, suggesting that many conventionally

measured shocks (i.e. from monthly VARs) are anticipated.

   The bottom panel of Figure 1 strongly suggests that unexpected target moves aﬀect long

term rates. For example, around the 50 bp target rate change on Jan 3, the 1 and 3 year

rates fell 70 bp, and the 5 year rate about 50. The natural interpretation is that the cut

signaled a change of direction; in the place of further tightening, there would be further rate

cuts. If the average shock has a smaller impact on long term rates (as found by Evans and

Marshall 1998, for example), the average shock must be more transitory, or anticipated but

misclassified as a shock in a monthly regression.

   The response of yields to shocks is quite consistent over maturities. When the 1 month

rate in the top half of the figure is surprised, so are the long rates in the bottom half, and

conversely when the 1 month rate is not surprised, neither are the long rates.

   September 17 is a particularly interesting target change. The terrorist attack was on

Tuesday Sept 11. Bond markets reopened Thursday Sept 13. The one and three year rates

dropped 50 bp. The natural interpretation is that the markets correctly anticipated that on

Monday Sept 17, the Fed would lower the target 50 bp. That is exactly what the Fed did,

and yields did not move on that news. Now, is this a shock, or an expected movement? A

monthly VAR would count it as a shock. But the target move was clearly taken in response

to events, and to a threat that output will otherwise decline. It should not count as a shock,

and our measure does not do so.

III. Shocks from daily data

   Figure 1 naturally suggests that we use the change in the 1 month Eurodollar rate

surrounding the target change to measure its unexpected component. Detailed inspection

                                              4
of some of the target changes shows interest rate movements the day before target rate

changes, which may reflect dating errors. For this reason, we define the interest rate move

corresponding to the shock as the move from 2 days before to one day after the change, and

our regression forecast of target changes uses data 2 days before the change.

   Table 1 presents regressions of interest rates on these target shocks. The relation between

interest rates and unexpected target changes is clearly much stronger and more consistent

than the relation between interest rates and raw target changes. The size of the coeﬃcients

is particularly startling. A 1% unexpected target change aﬀects Treasury yields by 60-70 bp

all the way out to 5 years, and 52 bp at a 10 year maturity!

   We also measure policy shocks from a more conventional target forecasting regression.

We started with a regression of target changes on all yields, but with many similar coeﬃcients

and small t-statistics, we iteratively eliminated the variables with the smallest t-statistics

to end up with the simpler and more interpretable form given in the table. The R2 only

declines from 0.66 to 0.64 as we exclude yields. Table 2 presents our final regression.

   Table 2 gives a strong and appealing message. First, there is some slow mean reversion,

shown in the coeﬃcient on the target. Second, and interestingly given the visual appeal of

Figure 1, the long-term rates are far more important than the short-term rates in forecast-

ing Fed moves. (In the regression with all yields, the 1 month Eurodollar had a coeﬃcient

of -0.06 and a t-statistic of -0.8.) This finding contradicts expectations hypothesis logic,

which suggests that the shortest possible interest rate should be the best forecaster of tar-

get changes. It suggests instead that interest rates forecast target moves because the Fed

responds to expected inflation information embodied in long rates, as suggested by Taylor

rules, especially as specified by Richard Clarida, Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler (2000). Third,

the spread between the 2 and 5 year rate is the most important target forecasting variable

                                              5
of all. This spread is a potent forecaster of real activity, which naturally suggests the output

component of a Taylor rule. However, as in Piazzesi (2001), these interest rate regressions

far outperform conventional Taylor rules in forecasting the target.

IV. Monthly shocks and responses

   To construct monthly impulse-response functions, we sum up the daily shock series. For

comparison purposes, we construct monthly CEE shocks. The VAR consists of nonfarm

employment, the cpi, the commodity price index, and the fed funds rate. We orthogonalize

shocks recursively in that order, and estimate the VAR with 6 monthly lags.

   Our shock series is zero in a month with no target changes, and many target changes are

almost completely anticipated. As a result, and especially in the latter half of the sample,

we see few shocks. Inference from VAR shocks after about 1990 is dominated by expected

movements that don’t happen, rather than by unexpected movements that do. The two

high-frequency measures also see the early 1990s rate declines and the recovery after 1994

as largely positive shocks, while the CEE measure shows positive and negative shocks.

   To calculate the impulse response for horizon j, we run single regressions of the changes

in variables on the policy shocks, yt+j − yt on εt+1 . We follow this procedure since we

cannot include all the state variables (interest rates on the day before a target change) in

the autoregressive representation of the VAR. It also has a very nice intuition. The impulse

response function is after all a summary of the experience of the target variable following

a shock. This procedure is consistent, and gives results quite similar to the autoregressive

simulation when applied to the CEE VAR.

   Figure 2 contrasts responses of output and CPI to our shocks and to CEE VAR shocks.

Our shocks show employment rising following a target shock, while employment declines

slowly following a CEE shock. The diﬀerence results from a diﬀerent interpretation of interest

                                               6
rate movements as expected vs. unexpected, and thus a diﬀerent view of output episodes.

CEE shocks count months around the 1987 stock market crash as much larger negative shocks

than the daily measures. and the daily measures see larger negative shocks in early 1991.

Alas, neither set of responses is statistically significant, as found by CEE in this sample.

This is unfortunate — all of our information about the output eﬀects of monetary policy

comes from interpretation of the 1979-1982 experience.

   The two high-frequency shocks give quite diﬀerent answers about inflation. The one

month Eurodollar shock agrees with the CEE shock that monetary policy has nearly no eﬀect

on inflation. The regression shock shows a large, though dubiously significant, increase in

inflation following a shock. However, the standard errors are large enough that we basically

conclude that there is no inflation response. This is also troubling. Fed funds shocks should

lower inflation, but as in larger samples, there is no evidence that they do so.

   Figure 3 plots the instantaneous (one month) responses of yields to the target shock. Both

high frequency shocks produce flatter yield curve responses, and notably larger changes at

the long end of the yield curve. As we found in the daily data, the measure based on the one

month Euro rates produces a very large response. The 10 year rate rises by 0.8 percentage

points when the funds target rises one percent, in contrast to 0.2 percentage points for the

CEE shock. The fact that funds shocks do not lower inflation, and in fact seem to raise

inflation, is consistent with the finding that funds shocks raise long-term rates.

   Figure 4 presents the dynamic responses of yields to the regression shock and the CEE

shock. (The Eurodollar shock produces results quite similar to the regression shock.) Here

too, the high frequency shocks produce quite diﬀerent response functions. After a blip at 6

months, all interest rates keep rising following a shock. By contrast, the CEE VAR shock

produces a quite short lived response.

                                              7
VI. Concluding remarks

   We construct measures of monetary policy shocks from target rate changes that surprise

bond markets in daily data. The “rule” we estimate is sensible: the Fed responds to long

term interest rates, perhaps embodying inflation expectations, and to the slope of the term

structure, which forecasts real activity. Short-term interest rates do not help to forecast

target changes, suggesting that interest rate forecasts of target changes occur because the

Fed reacts to interest rates.

   As often happens, the purer the shock, the more unusual the response. Interest rates

move in the same direction as policy shocks, and by surprisingly large amounts. It is natural

to presume that policy shocks should lower long rates. Ellingsen and Söderström (2001) do

find such a negative response in a narrative classification, but at the cost that their shocks

must become predictable. Output and price responses are poorly measured, but there is no

evidence that inflation declines following a surprise increase in the target.

   It is tempting to interpret these responses by the “price puzzle” logic. Output might rise

following a tightening, if the Fed is tightening to oﬀset a foreseen output rise. However, the

Fed cannot systematically fool the markets, so this is a diﬃcult interpretation. One must

believe that the Fed has a consistent information advantage over the private sector, which

is a diﬃcult case to make. This puzzle and the Sept 17 episode challenge our notions of a

shock. The Fed always explains its actions as a response to economic events. It never says

“we added another half percent just for the heck of it.” Perhaps there are no shocks.




                                               8
                                      References


Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans. “The eﬀects of monetary

    policy shocks: evidence from the flow of funds.” Review of Economics and Statistics

    1996, 78, pp. 16-34.


Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler. “Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeco-

    nomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2000,

    115(1), pp. 147-80.


Cochrane, John H. “The Return of the Liquidity Eﬀect: A Study of the Short Run Relation

    Between Money Growth and Interest Rates.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics,

    January 1989, 7(1), pp. 75-83.


Ellingsen, Tore and Ulf Söderström. “Classifying monetary policy.” Working Paper No.

    56, Sveriges Riksbank (Revised), 2000.


Evans, Charles and David Marshall. “Monetary Policy and the Term Structure of Nominal

    Interest Rates: Evidence and Theory.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy,

    Fall 1998, 49, pp. 53-111.


Piazzesi, Monika. “An Econometric Model of the Yield Curve with Macroeconomic Jump

    Eﬀects.” National Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge, MA) Working Paper

    No. 8246, April 2001.


Rudebusch, Glenn D. “Do measures of monetary policy in a VAR make sense.”

    International Economic Review, November 1998, 39, pp. 907-31.




                                             9
                                         Footnote


   ∗
       Cochrane: University of Chicago and NBER. Graduate School of Business, University

of Chicago, 1101 E. 58th St. Chicago IL 60637. john.cochrane@gsb.uchicago.edu. Piazzesi:

UCLA and NBER. Anderson Graduate School of Management, 110 Westwood Plaza, Los

Angeles CA 90095. piazzesi@ucla.edu. We gratefully acknowledge research support from the

Graduate School of Business and from an NSF grant administered by the NBER. We thank

Mark Gertler and Martin Schneider for comments and suggestions.




                                            10
                                 Euro               Treasury

                               1m      3m    3m     1y    3y     10y

                                 Yield change on target change

                     b         0.52 0.46 0.37 0.37 0.29 0.19

                     t         9.1     8.0   7.6    6.7   5.0    3.5

                     R2        0.39 0.32 0.28 0.24 0.15 0.08

                                Yield change on 1m Euro change

                     b                 0.91 0.62 0.72 0.67 0.52

                     t                 22.1 6.8     10.8 8.8     5.2

                     R2                0.87 0.54 0.63 0.55 0.39

   Table 1. The left hand variable is the change in yield from 2 days before a

target rate change to 1 day after the change. The right hand variable is, in the

top panel, the target rate change itself, and in the bottom panel, the change in

the one month Eurodollar rate.



                         const target 3 mo 2 yr           5 yr    10 yr

                 b 0.29              -0.037 0.12    0.87 -0.87 0.24

                 t       3.1         -3.7    2.0    6.7   -3.5    1.57

   Table 2. Forecast regression of target rate changes. The left hand variable

is the change in the federal funds rate target. The right hand variables are the

target, and interest rate spreads over the target two days before the change. The

regression is only run on dates where there are target changes. The R2 is 0.64.

Sample 1984-2001.


                                               11
               7


                           Jan 3*
               6
                               Jan 31

                                        Mar 20
               5
                                             Apr 18*

                                                  May 15
               4                                        Jun 27
                                                                               Aug 21

                                                                                       Sep 17*
               3
                                                                                         Oct 2

                                                                                                    Nov 6
               2
                   D   J      F     M   A     M        J       J       A       S        O       N

               7



               6



               5



               4



               3



               2
                   D   J      F     M    A    M            J       J       A       S        O       N




   Figure 1. Interest rates and Federal funds target in 2001. Top panel: target and one

month Eurodollar rate. Bottom panel: target and 1, 3, 5, and 10 year treasury yields.

Changes outside regular FOMC meetings are marked with a *.

                                                  12
                2




                1




                0




               -1




               -2
                    0                         12                            24

                3




                2




                1




                0




               -1
                    0                         12                            24


   Figure 2. Response of employment (top) and CPI (bottom) to fed funds shocks. The

solid lines give the response to our shocks, calculated from daily interest rates. The larger

response in the bottom panel is to the regression shock. The dashed line gives the response

to the VAR shock.

                                             13
          1.5




           1
                                                              Euro


                Target     3 mo
                                                             Regression
          0.5
                                         2 yr

                                                             CEE

                                                      5 yr
                                                                          10 yr
           0


Figure 3. Impact (one month) response of yields to a funds target shock.




                                        14
               3




               2




               1




               0




              -1
                   0                         12                           24




               1




               0




              -1




              -2


                   0                         12                           24



   Figure 4. Dynamic response of yields to funds shocks. Top panel: response to daily

regression shock. Bottom panel: response to CEE VAR shock. The solid lines are the target

and 3 month Eurodollar yield. The dashed lines are the 2, 5, and 10 year Treasury yields.


                                            15
