                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   REMOVING THE VEIL OF IGNORANCE IN ASSESSING
                   THE DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF SOCIAL POLICIES


                                             Pedro Carneiro
                                           Karsten T. Hansen
                                           James J. Heckman


                                          Working Paper 8840
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8840


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2002



Carneiro, Hansen and Heckman are at the Department of Economics, University of Chicago, 1126 E. 59th
Street, Chicago, Ill 60637. Heckman is also affiliated with the American Bar Foundation. This paper is a
summary of some of the main ideas contained in our source paper “Educational Attainment and Labor
Market Outcomes: Estimating Distributions of The Return to Educational Interventions”. This research was
supported by the following grants: NSF 97-09-873, NSF SES-0079195, and NICHD-40-4043-000-85-261.
Heckman’s work was also supported by the American Bar Foundation and the Donner Foundation. We thank
Salvador Navarro-Lozano for assistance. The first draft of the source paper was presented at the Midwest
Econometrics Group Conference, October, 2000.The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Pedro Carneiro, Karsten T. Hansen and James J. Heckman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Removing the Veil of Ignorance in Assessing the Distributional Impacts of Social Policies
Pedro Carneiro, Karsten T. Hansen and James J. Heckman
NBER Working Paper No. 8840
March 2002
JEL No. I28, D33, H43



                                             ABSTRACT

        This paper summarizes our recent research on evaluating the distributional consequences of social
programs. This research advances the economic policy evaluation literature beyond estimating assorted
mean impacts to estimate distributions of outcomes generated by different policies and determine how
those policies shift persons across the distributions of potential outcomes produced by them. Our
approach enables analysts to evaluate the distributional effects of social programs without invoking the
“Veil of Ignorance” assumption often used in the literature in applied welfare economics. Our methods
determine which persons are affected by a given policy, where they come from in the ex-ante outcome
distribution and what their gains are. We apply our methods to analyze two proposed policy reforms in
American education. These reforms benefit the middle class and not the poor.




Pedro Carneiro                      Karsten T. Hansen                   James J. Heckman
Department of Economics             Department of Economics             Department of Economics
University of Chicago               University of Chicago               University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street                 1126 E. 59th Street                 1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637                   Chicago, IL 60637                   Chicago, IL 60637
                                                                        and NBER
                                                                        jjh@uchicago.edu
1      Introduction
Evaluating public policy is a central task of economics. Welfare economics presents dif-
ferent criteria. Research on program evaluation develops and applies a variety of di¤erent
econometric estimators. Traditional empirical methods focus on mean impacts. Yet mod-
ern welfare economics emphasizes the importance of accounting for the impact of public
policy on distributions of outcomes (Sen, 1997, 2000). A large body of empirical evidence
indicates that people di¤er in their responses to the same policy and act on those dif-
ferences, and that the representative agent paradigm is a poor approximation to reality
because the marginal entrant into a social program is often di¤erent from the average par-
ticipant. (Heckman, 2001a). This evidence highlights the importance of going beyond the
representative agent framework when evaluating public policies.
    This paper summarizes our recent research on evaluating the distributional consequences
of public policy.1 Our research advances the economic policy evaluation literature beyond
estimating assorted mean impacts to estimate the distributions of outcomes generated by
di¤erent policies and to determine how those policies shift persons across the distributions
of potential outcomes produced by them. We distinguish the average participant in a
program from the marginal entrant.
    Our research advances the existing literature on evaluating the distributional conse-
quences of alternative policies beyond the “Veil of Ignorance” assumption used in modern
welfare economics (See Atkinson 1970, Sen 1997, 2000). Approaches based on that assump-
tion compare two social states by assuming that the position of any particular individual
in one distribution should be treated as irrelevant. In this approach the overall distribution

    1 Carneiro,   Hansen and Heckman (2000, revised 2001).



                                                     1
of outcomes is all that matters. This is a consequence of the anonymity postulate that is
fundamental to that literature. Anonymity is the property that only the distribution of
outcomes matters and that reversing the positions of any two persons in the overall distrib-
ution does not a¤ect the evaluation placed on the policy (or state of a¤airs) that produces
the distribution.
   There are normative arguments that support this criterion. (See Harsanyi, 1955, Vick-
ery, 1960, and Roemer, 1996). As a positive description of actual social choice processes,
the “Veil of Ignorance” seems implausible. Participants in the political process are likely
to forecast their outcomes under alternative economic policies, and assess policies in this
light. (Heckman, 2001b). This paper extends current practice by developing and applying
methods that forecast how people fare under di¤erent policies. We link the literature in
modern welfare economics to the treatment e¤ect literature.
   This paper proceeds as follows. We brie‡y present the evaluation problem for an econ-
omy with two sectors (e.g. schooled and unschooled) where agents select or are selected into
“treatment” (one of the two sectors). We consider policies that a¤ect choices of treatment
(e.g. schooling) but not potential outcomes (the outcomes they experience under di¤er-
ent treatments). We compare outcomes across two policy regimes that a¤ect treatment
choices. This task is much easier when individuals respond in the same way to treatment
than when they di¤er in their response to treatment, and act on those di¤erences in making
treatment choice decisions. In the latter case, the marginal entrant into schooling is not
the same as the average participant in treatment and the representative agent paradigm
breaks down. In an appendix, we show how to generate the counterfactual distributions of
outcomes produced by alternative policies.
   We apply our analysis to estimate the distributional consequences of two proposed policy

                                             2
reforms in American education.     Even though the two policies barely a¤ect the overall
distribution of outcomes, and so would be judged to be equivalent to the pre-policy origin
state under the Veil of Ignorance criterion, they have substantial e¤ects on a small group
of people concentrated in the middle to the high end of the pre-policy wage distribution.
Marginal entrants attracted into college get smaller gains than average college students
suggesting diminishing returns to programs that encourage college enrollment. Marginal
entrants into junior college are about the same as average entrants, suggesting constant
returns for that schooling level. Since most of the people a¤ected by the policies come from
the middle to the high end of the original wage distribution, there is little impact of these
policies on the poor.



2    The Evaluation Problem for Means and Distribu-

     tions
In order to place our work in the context of the current literature on social program eval-
uation, and to link it to the economics of education, it is helpful to consider a simple
generalized Roy (1951) economy with two sectors. Let S = 1 denote college and S = 0
be high school. Persons (or their agents, such as their parents) can choose to be in either
sector. There are two potential outcomes for each person (Y0 ; Y1), only one of which is ob-
served, since it is assumed that only one option can be pursued at any time. For simplicity,




                                             3
we assume that the decision rule governing sectoral choices is
                                    8
                                    >
                                    >
                                    <1 if I = Y1 ¡ Y 0 ¡ C ¸ 0,
                             S=
                                    >
                                    >
                                    :0 otherwise.


Here C is the cost of choosing S = 1. In the context of a schooling model, C is tuition
or monetized psychic cost, while Y1 ¡ Y 0 is the net gain from schooling expressed, say, in
present value terms.
   We decompose Y 1 and Y0 in terms of their means ¹1and ¹0 and mean zero idiosyncratic
deviations (U1; U0) or residuals:


                                       Y1 = ¹1 + U1

                                       Y0 = ¹0 + U0 .


We condition on X variables, but for notational simplicity we keep this dependence implicit.
Decomposing C in a similar fashion, we may write:


                                        C = ¹C + UC ;


so that
                            I = ¹1 + ¹0 ¡ ¹C + (U1 ¡ U0 ¡ UC ):

   It is fruitful to distinguish two kinds of policies: (a) those that a¤ect potential out-
comes (Y0; Y1) through price and quality e¤ects and (b) those that a¤ect sectoral choices
(through C ) but do not a¤ect potential outcomes.       Tuition and access policies that do


                                              4
not have general equilibrium e¤ects fall into the second category of policy. Policies with
general equilibrium e¤ects and policies that directly a¤ect rewards to potential outcomes
and quality are examples of the …rst kind of policy. It is the second kind of policy that
receives the most attention in empirical work on estimating economic returns to schooling
(see e.g., the survey by Card (1999)) or in evaluating schooling policies (see e.g., Kane
(1994)).
   Consider two policy environments denoted A and B. These produce two social states
for outcomes that we wish to compare. In the general case, we may distinguish an economy
operating under policy A with associated cost and outcome vector (Y0A; Y1A; C A) for each
person, from an economy operating under policy B with associated cost and outcome vector
¡ B B B¢
 Y0 ; Y1 ; C . Policy interventions with no e¤ect on potential outcomes can be described
as producing two choice sets (Y0 ; Y1; C A ) and (Y0 ; Y1; C B ) for each person. In this paper
we focus on evaluating the second kind of policy that keeps invariant the distribution of
potential outcomes across policy states, but a¤ects the cost of choosing sector 1 within
each state.
   Our framework di¤ers in its emphasis from the standard model of modern welfare eco-
nomics. Analysts writing in that tradition focus on the distribution of outcomes produced
by each policy without inquiring how those outcomes are produced. All policies that pro-
duce the same aggregate outcome distributions are judged to be equally good. The details
of how the observed distribution is produced are deemed irrelevant. The distinctions we
make between policies that a¤ect potential outcomes and policies that a¤ect which poten-
tial outcomes are selected are also ignored in that literature. There is no explicit discussion
of sectoral choice within policy states. The literature starts, and stops, with an analysis
of distributions of the observed outcomes for each person in each policy state (Y A ; Y B )

                                              5
de…ned as


              Y A = SAY 1A + (1 ¡ SA)Y 0A; and Y B = SB Y1B + (1 ¡ SB )Y0B;


where SAand SB are schooling choice indicators under policies A and B respectively, without
inquiring more deeply into the sources of the di¤erences in the distributions of outcomes.
   The modern treatment e¤ect literature focuses on these details and distinguishes choice
of treatments from the treatment outcomes. However, it only inquires about certain mean
treatment e¤ects. The operating assumption in the literature is that policies do not a¤ect
potential outcomes (so (Y0A; Y1A) = (Y0B; Y1B)); but do a¤ect choices of sectors.

   This literature distinguishes three cases. Case I arises when everyone (with the same
X) gets the same e¤ect from treatment (Y1 ¡ Y 0 is the same for everyone). Case II occurs
when Y1 ¡ Y0 di¤ers among people of the same X but decisions to enroll in the program
are not a¤ected by these di¤erences:


                                Pr(S = 1jY1 ¡ Y0 ) = Pr(S = 1)

Case III occurs when Y1 ¡ Y0 di¤ers among people and people act on these di¤erences. In
cases I and II, the marginal entrant into a program is the same as the average entrant. In
case III, this is not so. People select in part on gains. If they select solely on gains, then the
marginal entrant gets a lower return than those participants (in 1) who are inframarginal;
that is, the marginal treatment e¤ect (MTE)


                            E(Y 1 ¡ Y0 jI = 0) < E(Y1 ¡ Y0jS = 1)


                                                6
        See Heckman 2001a for more discussion of the various treatment e¤ects.2



3         Comparing Two Policy States

        Consider two policies, A and B, that a¤ect sectoral choices without a¤ecting the dis-
tributions of potential outcomes. For concreteness, we can think of these as policies that
a¤ect C (e.g., tuition or access) by shifting its mean, changing its variance or changing the
covariance between C and (Y0; Y1 ). Each policy produces a distribution of outcomes. For
concreteness, think of the outcome as wages associated with di¤erent schooling levels.
        In the literature on evaluating inequality, comparisons of policies are made in terms of
comparisons of distributions. If policy B produces an aggregate distribution of wages that
stochastically dominates that produced from policy A, B is preferred.3 The details of who
bene…ts or loses from the policy are considered to be irrelevant as a consequence of the
anonymity postulate.
        The literature on evaluating inequality in modern welfare economics compares two
aggregate outcome distributions.         If policy A has been implemented, but policy B has
not, evaluation of B entails construction of a counterfactual aggregate outcome distribu-
tion. Under the assumptions used in the treatment e¤ect literature, all that is required is
determination of how policy B sorts persons into sectors “0” and “1”, and how such sort-
ing a¤ects observed outcome distributions in sectors “0” and “1”. In our example, what
is required is a schooling choice equation and a selection model to identify the invariant
potential outcome distributions. The selection model enables analysts to go from observed

    2
     Bjorklund and Mo¢tt (1987) introduced the marginal treatment e¤ect into the evaluation literature.
See Heckman (2001a) for a summary of extensions of this literature.
   3
     See Sen (1997).


                                                  7
(selected) distributions of Y0 and Y1 to the population potential distributions. With suf-
…cient individual variation in C within an economy governed by policy A, it is possible
to accurately forecast the e¤ect of policy B on the overall distribution without previously
observing it, as we demonstrate in this paper.
   Our approach to the evaluation of public policy is more ambitious in some respects than
the recent literature in welfare economics and is more in line with the objectives of modern
political economy.      (Persson and Tabellini, 2000).   We relax the anonymity postulate
and determine how individuals at di¤erent positions within the initial overall distribution
respond to policies in terms of their treatment choices and gains. We estimate the number
of people directly a¤ected by the policy, where they start, and where they end up in the
overall distribution.
   In the context of the treatment e¤ect framework, this task is broken down into two
sub-tasks. The …rst sub-task is to determine who shifts treatment state in response to the
policy and where they are located in the initial overall distribution. The second sub-task is
to determine where they end up in the overall distribution after taking the treatment, and
how much they gain. Since this approach assumes that potential outcome distributions
are not a¤ected by the policies, it is less ambitious, in this respect, than the approach
advocated in modern welfare economics which entertains that possibility.
   Under case I, this task is greatly simpli…ed. Everyone who shifts from “0" to \1" gets
the same gain ¢. The only problem is to …nd where in the initial overall distribution the
switchers are located. Under case II, ¢ varies among observationally identical people. The
gain is not necessarily the same for persons with di¤erent initial Y0 values. However, on
average, across all movers, the gain is the same as the mean di¤erence between the two
potential outcome distributions within policy regime A: Hence the marginal entrant has

                                              8
the same mean as the average person and the average participant:


                     E(Y1 ¡ Y0 jI = 0) = E(Y1 ¡ Y 0) = E(Y 1 ¡ Y0 jS = 1):


    Case III di¤ers from case II in that in general the gains to the average switcher are
not the same as the gains to the previous participants. If (Y1 ¡ Y0) is positively correlated
with I = (Y1 ¡ Y0 ¡ C ); the marginal entrant receives lower gains on average than does the
average participant. The details of constructing the transition densities for the switchers
are presented in our companion paper.



4        Identifying Counterfactual Distributions Under Treat-

         ment E¤ect Assumptions

     Identifying the joint distribution of potential outcomes under treatment e¤ect assump-
tions is more di¢cult than identifying the various mean treatment e¤ects.4 The fundamen-
tal problem is that we never observe both components of (Y0,Y1 ) for anyone.5 Thus we
cannot directly form the joint distribution of potential outcomes (Y0 ; Y1).
    In the Appendix, we review various approaches to estimating, or bounding, counterfac-
tual distributions that have appeared in the literature. In our source paper, we develop a
new method for identifying these distributions. It is based on an idea common in factor

    4A large econometric literature identi…es the mean impacts under a variety of assumptions. See Heck-
man, LaLonde and Smith (1999) for one survey. Heckman and Vytlacil (2000, 2001) consider identi…cation
of marginal treatment e¤ects and unify the treatment e¤ect literature.
   5
     Panel data estimators sometimes enable analysts to observe both components. See Heckman, LaLonde
and Smith (1999).




                                                   9
analysis but applied to model counterfactual distributions. If potential outcomes are gen-
erated by a low dimensional set of factors, then it is possible to estimate the distributions
of factors and generate distributions of the counterfactuals. Here, low dimensional refers
to the number of factors relative to the number of measured outcomes. See the Appendix
for the intuitive idea that motivates the analysis in our source paper. We next turn to an
application of our analysis to American data.



5         Some Evidence From America on Two Educational

          Reforms

        Our companion paper uses data on wages, schooling choices and covariates for white
males from the National Longitudinal Study of Youth (NLSY) to estimate a three factor
version of the model described in the Appendix using a Bayesian semiparametric mixture of
normals econometric framework. We consider four schooling levels: dropout, high school
graduate, junior college and four year college. We use local labor market variables, tuition
and family background information to identify the model. The estimated model …ts the
data well. Observed wage distributions are closely approximated. There is no need for more
than three factors to …t our data which includes panel data measurements on wages as well
as indicators of ability and motivation.6
        Our paper estimates models for a variety of schooling groups. Here, for the sake of
brevity, we focus only on certain key empirical results. We report the wages returns to
college and high school, and selection on levels and gains into those schooling categories.

    6
    The factor model is strongly overidenti…ed so that it would have been possible to estimate many more
than three factors.


                                                  10
We analyze two policies: (a) a full tuition subsidy for junior colleges and (b) a policy
promoting access to four year colleges which places an institution in the immediate vicinity
(the county of residence) of each American. We consider only partial equilibrium treatment
e¤ects and do not consider the full cost of …nancing the reforms.
   Our evidence shows considerable dispersion in terms of levels and returns (gains) to
various schooling categories. Indeed, ex post returns are negative for a substantial fraction
of people. There is little evidence of selection either on levels or gains for high school
graduates. There is a lot of evidence of selection on levels and gains for college graduates.
The marginal entrants into four year colleges induced by the access policy we consider have
wage outcomes below the average college participant both in terms of levels and gains.
This is not true for the junior college tuition subsidy policy we also analyze. For that case,
there is little impact on overall quality of junior college graduates.
   Figure 1 shows the potential high school wages for all four schooling groups– what
people who actually attend various schooling levels would have earned had they gone to
high school. The four densities are nearly the same suggesting that there is little evidence
of selection on levels into high school. Three of these four densities are counterfactual. The
density for high school graduates is factual. For college (Figure 2), there is strong evidence
of selection on levels. Persons who attend college do better in college than dropouts, high
school graduates or junior college graduates would do. This result contrasts sharply with
the corresponding result for the factual and counterfactual wage densities for high school
graduates.
   There is also little evidence of selection on gains (Y1 ¡Y0 ) to high school (high school vs.
dropout). See Figure 3 which plots the counterfactual returns to high school for all four
schooling groups. The returns (high school vs. four year college) are greater for persons

                                              11
who become college graduates than for the other schooling groups, although there is a lot
of overlap in the distributions. See Figure 4. Ex post many persons who actually stop their
schooling at the high school level would make …ne college graduates. Many college graduates
experience negative returns. The marginal treatment e¤ect comparing high school to college
(Figure 6) suggests that as the unobservables that lead to a higher likelihood of attending
college increase, (so P (S=1) increases) the return to college increases. People most likely to
attend college have the highest marginal returns. The corresponding …gure for the return
to high school is ‡at, suggesting that the marginal participant has the same return as the
average participant.
   Using the estimated model, we compare two policies: a full subsidy to community
college tuition and a policy that places a four year college in each county in America.
Table 1 shows the average log wages of participants before the policy change and their
average return. It compares these levels and returns with what the marginal participant
attracted into the indicated schooling by the policy would earn. Marginal and average log
wages and returns are about the same for the community college policy.          There is little
decline in quality among the entrants. For the access policy, there is a sharp di¤erence.
Average participants in four year colleges earn more and have higher returns than marginal
entrants. There is a sharp decline in the average quality of college graduates.
   Despite the substantial sizes of the policy changes we consider, the induced e¤ects on
participation are small. The four year access policy only raises four year graduation rates
by 1.3 percent. The junior college subsidy raises attendance at those institutions by 3.8
percent.
   The policies operate unevenly over the deciles of the initial outcome distribution. Mo-
bility is greatest at the center of the distribution for the community college policy. See

                                              12
Table 2 and Figure 6. Mobility is from the top of the initial wage distribution for the four
year college policy. See Table 3 and Figure 7. Neither policy bene…ts the poor.
    Our approach to the evaluation of social policy is much richer, and more informative,
than an analysis of aggregate outcomes of the sort contemplated in modern welfare theory.
The overall Gini coe¢cient does not change (to two decimal points) when we implement the
two policies. By the standards of that literature, the pre- and post-policy distributions are
the same. A focus on the aggregate outcome distribution masks important details which
our approach reveals. Only a small group of persons are directly a¤ected by the policy.
The vast majority of persons would be una¤ected by these policies, and presumably, would
be indi¤erent to the policy.7 Our approach to policy evaluation lifts the Veil of Ignorance
and provides a more complete interpretation of who bene…ts from the policy and where
bene…ciaries come from in the overall distribution of outcomes.



6      Summary and Conclusions

     This paper summarizes our recent research on evaluating the distributional conse-
quences of social programs. We move beyond the mean treatment e¤ects that dominate
discussion in the recent applied evaluation literature to analyze the impacts of policy on
distributions of outcomes. We develop and apply methods for determining which persons
are a¤ected by the policy, where they come from in the initial distribution, and what their
gains are.
    We contrast the outcomes of participants in schooling before the policy change with the
outcomes of marginal entrants induced into the treatment state by the policy. We compare

    7 Counting   their tax burden, they might even be hostile to these policies.


                                                       13
our approach to the approach advocated in modern welfare economics. That approach
focuses attention solely on the aggregate distribution and does not identify gainers and
losers from a policy. Our approach identi…es where gainers and losers are located in the
overall distribution. The output produced from our approach generates the information
required in positive political economy.
   Our analysis has been conducted for a partial equilibrium treatment e¤ect model that
assumes that policies do not a¤ect the distribution of potential outcomes, just the choice
probabilities of particular treatments. It would be desirable to extend our framework to
analyze the e¤ects of more general policies that a¤ect both outcome distributions and
choices using the general equilibrium framework described in Heckman (2001b). We leave
that task for another occasion.




                                           14
7     References
    1. Atkinson, Anthony (1970). “On The Measurement of Inequality,” Journal of Eco-
      nomic Theory.

    2. Björklund, A. and Mo¢tt, R. (1987). “The Estimation of Wage Gains and Welfare
      Gains in Self-Selection,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 69(1):42-9.

    3. Card, David (1999). “Estimating the Causal E¤ect of Education,”, in O. Ashenfelter
      and D. Card, editors, Handbook of Labor Econometrics, Chapter 10, 1801-1863.

    4. Carneiro, Pedro; Hansen, Karsten T.; and Heckman, James J. (2001). “Educational
      Attainment and Labor Market Outcomes: Estimating Distributions of The Returns to
      Educational Interventions,” unpublished paper presented as Klein Lecture, University
      of Pennsylvania, September 2001; First Draft presented at Midwest Econometrics
      Group (MEG), October, 2000, forthcoming, International Economic Review, 2002.

    5. Harsanyi, J. (1955). “Cardinal Welfare, Individualistic Ethics and Interpersonal Com-
      parisons of Utility,” Journal of Political Economy, 63(4) (August), 309-21.

    6. Heckman, James (1990). “Varieties of Selection Bias,” American Economic Review,
      80(2):313-318.

    7. Heckman, James J. (2001a). “Micro Data, Heterogeneity, and the Evaluation of
      Public Policy: Nobel Lecture (2001a),” Journal of Political Economy 109(4):673-748.

    8. Heckman, James J. (2001b). “Accounting For Heterogeneity, Diversity and General
      Equilibrium In Evaluating Social Programs,” Economic Journal, November, 2001


                                             15
 9. Heckman, J. and B. Honoré (1990). “The Empirical Content of the Roy Model,”
    Econometrica, 58(5):1121-1149.

10. Heckman, J., R. LaLonde and J. Smith (1999). “The Economics and Econometrics
    of Active Labor Market Programs,” in O. Ashenfelter and D. Cards, eds., Handbook
    of Labor Economics, Chapter 31, pp.

11. Heckman, J. and J. Smith (1993). “Assessing The Case for Randomized Evaluations
    of Social Programs,” in K. Hansen and P. Madsen, eds, Measuring Labor Market
    Outcomes, (Copenhagen: Ministry of Labor).

12. Heckman, J. and J. Smith (1998). “Evaluating The Welfare State,” in S. Strom (ed),
    Econometrics and Economic Theory in the 20th Century: The Ragnar Frisch Centen-
    nial Symposium, Econometic Society, Monograph Series, 16, (Cambridge University
    Press, 1998), Chapter 8, 241-318.

13. Heckman, J. and E. Vytlacil (2000). “Local Instrumental Variables,” in C. Hsiao, K.
    Morimune, and J. Powells, (eds.), Nonlinear Statistical Modeling: Proceedings of the
    Thirteenth International Symposium in Economic Theory and Econometrics: Essays
    in Honor of Takeshi Amemiya, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), 1-46.

14. Heckman, J. and Vytlacil, E. (2001). “Structural Equations, Treatment E¤ects
    and Econometric Policy Evaluation,” Fisher Schultz Lecture, World Meetings of the
    Econometric Society, Seattle, forthcoming in Econometrica.

15. Joreskog, K. and D. Sorbom (1979). Advances in Factor Analysis and Structural
    Equations Models. (Cambridge: Abt Associates).


                                          16
16. Kane, T. (1994). “College Entry by Blacks since 1970: The Role of College Costs,
    Family Background, and the Returns to Education,” Journal of Political Economy,
    102 (October 1994): 878-911.

17. Persson, T. and G. Tabellini (2000). Political Economics -Explaining Economic Pol-
    icy. (MIT Press: Cambridge, Massachusetts).

18. Rawls, J. (1971). A Theory of Justice. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press).

19. Roemer, J. (1996). Theories of Distributive Justice. (Cambridge: Harvard University
    Press).

20. Roy, A. (1951). “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings,” Oxford Economic
    Papers, 3:135-146.

21. Sen, A. K. (1997). On Economic Inequality. Second Edition; Oxford: Clarendon
    Press.

22. Sen, A. K. (2000). “Social Justice and the Distribution of Income,” in Handbook of
    Income Distribution (eds. A. B. Atkinson and F. Bourguignon). (Amsterdam: North
    Holland).

23. Vickery, W. (1960). “Utility, Strategy and Social Decision Rules.” Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, 74(4):507-35.




                                          17
                                          Appendix

Identifying Counterfactual Distributions Under Treatment E¤ect Assumptions


   Heckman and Honoré (1990) show that in the context of the original Roy (1951) model
under normality or exclusion restrictions, it is possible to identify the joint density of po-
tential outcomes. The original Roy model sets C = 0. Sectoral choices are then determined
solely by potential outcomes. This extra information identi…es the full model and lets ana-
lysts identify the joint distributions of outcomes across policy states. If there is variation in
C across persons, this method breaks down and it is only possible to identify g(Y0jS = 0)
and g(Y1jS = 1); the conditional densities of the potential outcomes, as well as Pr(S = 1);
but not the joint density, g(Y0; Y1) (Heckman (1990)). Another special case that is dis-
cussed in Heckman (1992), is case I where Y1 ´ Y0 + ¢, and ¢ is a constant. Then from
the marginal distribution of Y0 or Y1 it is possible to form the joint distribution (Y0; Y1 )
which is degenerate. Heckman and Smith (1993) and Heckman, Smith and Clements (1997)
generalize this case to assume that the persons at the qth percentile in the density of Y0 are
at the qth percentile of Y1. Even without imposing this information, from the marginals it
is also possible to bound the joint densities using classical results in probability theory. In
practice these bounds turn out to be rather wide (Heckman and Smith (1993); Heckman,
Smith and Clements (1997)).
   In our source paper (Carneiro, Hansen and Heckman (2001)), we generate the distrib-
utions of potential outcomes using a panel data factor structure model. For the details of
our method we refer the reader to our source paper. Here we present the intuitive idea
that underlies our method and in the text we report its application. We discuss the most

                                               18
elementary case, leaving a complete discussion of the more general case for our companion
paper.
      Suppose that the mean of C depends on shifter variables Z that do not a¤ect (are
independent of) potential outcomes (Y0; Y1 ). These are instruments. Suppose that for
some values of Z within available samples we observe


                                                 :
                                     Pr(S = 1jZ) = 1             Z 2 Z1

while for other values of Z


                                                     :
                                         Pr(S = 1jZ) = 0        Z 2 Z0:

Thus if Z is tuition, people who face a low tuition cost (possibly even a large subsidy) are
almost surely likely to go to college while those who face a very high tuition cost are almost
certainly likely not to go to school.8 We assume that the distribution of potential outcomes
is the same in these subsets as they are in the overall distribution. Thus we can identify
the marginal distribution of Y 1 from the …rst sample and the marginal distribution of Y 0
from the second sample.
      Within these samples, we observe post schooling outcomes


                                 Y0t ;      t = 1; : : : ; T;   for Z 2 Z0 ;

                                 Y1t ;      t = 1; : : : ; T;   for Z 2 Z1 :


From these data we can form the joint densities of each outcome over time on f(y01 ; :::; y0T )

  8
      This is the version of identi…cation at in…nity discussed in Heckman (1990).


                                                        19
and f (y11; :::; y1T ); but not the joint densities over time over both outcomes.
      Now suppose that Y0t and Y1t are both generated by a common factor f (e.g., ability,
motivation) so that


                                Y0t = ¹0t + ®0tf + "0t ;             t = 1; : : : ; T ;

                                Y1t = ¹1t + ®1tf + "1t ;             t = 1; : : : ; T ;


where the "0t and " 1t are mutually independent of each other, f, and all other " 0t0 ; " 0t 00 ; t 6=
t0 ; t00 .9 All of these error components are assumed to have mean zero. A common factor
generates both potential outcomes. If we can get our hands on the distribution of the
common factor, we can compute the joint distribution of counterfactuals.
      Within each regime we can compute the following covariances:


                 Cov(Y0t ; Y0t 0 ) = ®0t®0t0 ¾ 2f ; t 6= t0; t; t0 = 1; : : : ; T ;       for Z 2 Z0;

                 Cov(Y1t ; Y1t 0 ) = ®1t®1t0 ¾ 2f ; t 6= t0; t; t0 = 1; : : : ; T ; for Z 2 Z1


For concreteness suppose T = 3, so we have three panel wage observations. Then

                             Cov(Y01; Y02) = ® 01® 02¾ 2f ;
                             Cov(Y01; Y03) = ® 01® 03¾ 2f ,               for Z 2 Z0;
                             Cov(Y01; Y02) = ® 02® 03¾ 2f ;

      and

  9
      The means may depend on the covariates.




                                                         20
                               Cov(Y 11 ; Y12 ) = ®11 ®12 ¾2f ;
                               Cov(Y 11 ; Y13 ) = ®11 ®13 ¾2f ;            for Z 2 Z1;
                               Cov(Y 12 ; Y13 ) = a12 a13¾2f :

       If we assume ®01 = 1 or ¾2f = 1; we can identify all of the rest of the factor loadings.10
       With this information in hand, we can identify the variances of the uniquenesses, " 0t ; "1t
of the outcomes:


                          Var("0t) = Var(Y0t ) ¡ ®20t ¾2f                    t = 1; : : : ; T

                          Var("1t) = Var(Y1t ) ¡ ®1t ¾2f                     t = 1; : : : ; T


Suppose that f; "0t; " 12t ; t = 1; :::; T are normally distributed. Then from the information
just presented obtained from the subsamples associated with Z0 and Z1 we can identify
the density of f and hence the joint density of (Y01; Y11; :::; Y0T ; Y1T ). Using the outcome
data within schooling choices we can identify the distribution of f and hence estimate the

  10
       Proof:

                                              Cov(Y 01 ; Y 02 )   ® 02
                                                                =      :
                                              Cov(Y 01 ; Y 03 )   ® 03

  Given ¾ 2f = 1; we can use

                                             Cov(Y 02 ; Y 03 ) = ®02® 03 :

  to obtain

                                                        Cov(Y 02 ; Y 03 )
                                      (® 03 )2 =
                                                   Cov(Y01 ; Y02 )Cov(Y 02 ; Y 03 )
and we can identify ® 03 up to sign and hence can identify ®02 and ® 01 . If we normalize ® 01 = 1, we
can identify, ®02 ; ® 03 up to sign and ¾ 2f . Since the sign of f is unknown, the sign of the factor loadings
is unknown. Using the data on Y 1 ; under either normalization, we can identify ®11 ; ® 12 ; ® 13 since ¾ 2f is
known.


                                                           21
joint distribution of schooling choices across potential outcomes.
   In our companion paper we show that we can obtain this joint density without a normal-
ity assumption for f or " 0t ; "1t ; t = 1; :::; T . We extend our analysis to allow for vector f so
there may be many factors, not just one. We show that it is possible to nonparametrically
identify the joint density of potential outcomes provided that the number of panel data
wage measurements is large, in a sense we make precise in our companion paper, relative
to the number of factors.11 We do not need to invoke “identi…cation at in…nity” i.e. we can
dispense with the requirement that there are subsets of Z where there is no selection. We
also consider a model with multiple discrete choices (schooling levels) instead of just two.
With these counterfactual distributions determined, we can identify the impact of social
policy on the distributions of outcomes and returns.




 1 1 Inour companion paper, we show how indicators of f can be used to supplement, or replace, panel
data. This type of identi…cation is familiar to users of LISREL (see Joreskog and Sorbom, 1979).


                                                22
                                         Figure 1
                       Distributions of Wages, High School Graduates
                                  White Males, age 29 from NLSY
            0.05
                                                                        drop
                                                                        hs
           0.045                                                        2y
                                                                        4y

            0.04


           0.035
f(wages)




            0.03


           0.025


            0.02


           0.015


            0.01


           0.005


              0
                   1        1.5          2        2.5      3      3.5          4


                                              Wages
                                        Figure 2
                             Distributions of Wages, College
                                White Males, age 29 from NLSY
           0.045
                                                                      drop
                                                                      hs
            0.04                                                      2y
                                                                      4y


           0.035


            0.03
f(wages)




           0.025


            0.02


           0.015


            0.01


           0.005


              0
                   1   1.5         2        2.5       3         3.5          4


                                        Wages
                                      Figure 3
                      Distributions of Returns to High School
                            White Males, age 29 from NLSY
             0.06
                                                                drop
                                                                hs
                                                                2y
                                                                4y




             0.04
f(returns)




             0.02




                0
               -1.5   -1      -0.5       0        0.5       1          1.5


                                      Returns
                                      Figure 4
                    Distribution of Returns to College vs. High School
                             White Males, Age 29 from NLSY
           0.08
                                                                         drop
                                                                         hs
                                                                         2y
                                                                         4y



           0.06
f(wages)




           0.04




           0.02




              0
             -1.5    -1        -0.5       0         0.5        1                1.5

                                        wages
                                       Figure 5
                             Marginal Treatment Effect
                               High School - College
                                NLSY, White Males
       0.8




       0.6




       0.4




MTE    0.2




         0




      -0.2




      -0.4
         -5   -4   -3   -2        -1       0      1      2   3   4   5
                                           Us
                                                Figure 6
People affected by full subsidy to community college tuition by decile of initial overall wage distribution

0.14



0.12



 0.1



0.08



0.06



0.04



0.02



  0
       1         2         3         4           5            6             7        8   9     10
                                                     Decile
                                     Deciles   % of movers coming from each decile
                                                  Figure 7
   People affected by making distance to 4y college = 0 by decile of initial overall wage distribution

0.14



0.12



 0.1



0.08



0.06



0.04



0.02



  0
        1         2         3         4            5             6            7     8   9       10
                                                        Decile
                                    Deciles   % of movers coming from each decile
