                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          TESTING TRADE THEORY IN OHLIN’S TIME


                                         Antoni Estevadeordal
                                           Alan M. Taylor


                                          Working Paper 8842
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8842


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2002




This paper was prepared for the conference Bertil Ohlin: A Centennial Celebration 1899–1999 held October
14–16, 1999, at the Stockholm School of Economics, and is forthcoming in the MIT Press volume of the
same name edited by Ronald Findlay, Lars Jonung, and Mats Lundahl. For helpful comments we thank the
editors, the conference participants, especially our discussant Rikard Forslid, and workshop participants at
the Inter-American Development Bank and the University of California at Davis. For superb research
assistance we are indebted to Brian Frantz. All errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Antoni Estevadeordal and Alan M. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Testing Trade Theory in Ohlin’s Time
Antoni Estevadeordal and Alan M. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 8842
March 2002
JEL No. F11, N70



                                              ABSTRACT

        An empirical tradition in international trade seeks to establish whether the predictions of factor
abundance theory match present-day data. In the analysis of goods trade and factor endowments, mildly
encouraging results were found by Leamer et al. But ever since the appearance of Leontief’s paradox, the
measured factor content of trade has always been found to be far smaller than its predicted magnitude in
the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek framework, the so-called “missing trade” mystery. We wonder if this
problem was there in the theory from the beginning. This seems like a fairer test of its creators’ original
enterprise. We apply contemporary tests to historical data on goods and factor trade from Ohlin’s time.
Our analysis is set in a very different context than contemporary studies—an era with lower trade barriers,
higher transport costs, a more skewed global distribution of the relevant factors (especially land), and
comparably large productivity divergence. We find some support for the theory, but also encounter
common problems. Our work thus complements the tests applied to today’s data and informs our search
for improved models of trade.




Antoni Estevadeordal                                 Alan M. Taylor
Inter-American Development Bank                      Department of Economics
1300 New York Avenue NW                              University of California
Washington, DC 20577                                 One Shields Avenue
Tel: 202-623-2614                                    Davis, CA 95616-8578
Fax: 202-623-3030                                    and NBER
Email: antonie@iadb.org                              Tel: 530-752-1572
                                                     Fax: 530-752-9382
                                                     Email: amtaylor@ucdavis.edu
                                                     http://www.econ.ucdavis.edu/faculty/amtaylor/
Factor Abundance Theory in Historical Context
Some years ago scholars in the field of international trade, and perhaps especially
the empiricists, might have viewed an invitation to the Ohlin centennial with a
sense of unease. Most of us saw factor abundance trade theory as possibly
unparalleled in the realm of economic science in its elegance of form and powerful
statements on the sources of comparative advantage. At the same time the theory
was viewed as having been confounded by empirical contradictions in a series of
studies dating back to the paradox unearthed by Leontief.1 Given such an
environment, what kind of conference paper could one offer that would not mar
the spirit of celebration?
        Happily, at least for the legacy of Ohlin, perspectives do change. In recent
years new approaches and extensions to this landmark theory and its empirical
testing have attested to its durability and relevance for explaining modern-day
trade patterns.2 In one tradition of empirical research, following Leamer (1984),
scholars have constructed large datasets on national endowments and trade
patterns so as to measure the link between factors and trade. This is predicted by
the theory to be a linear relationship depending on technical coefficients,
suggesting that, say, an increase in capital endowment should spill over into trade
as an increase in the net export of capital-intensive goods. In another strand of
work, following the notation and methodology of Vanek (1968), scholars have
focused on the implicit factor trade alone and its relationship to factor abundance
(Leamer 1980; Bowen, Leamer, and Sveikauskas 1987). This approach seeks to
establish a pass through—in principle, a unit coefficient—relating increments in
relative factor endowment directly to net exports of the same factor, as production
shifts relative to a stable consumption pattern. Most recent empirical contributions
(e.g., Trefler 1993, 1995; Davis and Weinstein 2001) have used the Vanek
representation.
        These recent works point to a compromise position where the Heckscher-
Ohlin theory, augmented in various ways, might better account for the


    1
      Leontief (1953a) shocked everyone when he computed a U.S. input-output table for 1947
and discovered that the seemingly capital-abundant and labor-scarce United States was actually
engaging in net labor export via trade, with a capital-labor ratio in imports 60 percent higher than
exports.
    2
      We need not review the whole literature here, but direct the reader to the excellent survey by
Helpman (1999) on which we have drawn extensively in what follows.

                                                 1
contemporary pattern of factor trade. To deal with the Leontief paradox one can
allow for differences in cross-country productivities, as suggested by Leontief, and
implemented empirically by Trefler (1993, 1995). Still this modification alone
doesn’t get us very far toward narrowing the huge gap between measured and
predicted factor trade. Trefler (1995) coined the term “missing trade” to depict the
extent to which measured trade is still negligible compared to the prediction of the
pure theory.3 To get an even closer fit, other modifications have been suggested by
Trefler (1995) and Davis and Weinstein (2001) such as home bias in consumption,
an allowance for nontraded goods, and models without factor price equalization.
However, before basking in fresh optimism over how the factor abundance theory
has been thoroughly rehabilitated by these various devices, we should note that
lurking here is a danger. After so much ornamentation has been added to the
model, the skeptics might reasonably ask what is left of Heckscher and Ohlin’s
original design.
       One wonders what Ohlin would make of all these developments and
modifications to his theory given his original standpoint. Here was an economist
working in the early twentieth century who was inspired to explain the
international trade patterns previously witnessed in a largely free-trade
regime—the trade of mostly commodity goods and manufactures in the Greater
Atlantic economy during the first era of globalization before World War I.4 And,
when Heckscher and Ohlin made their seminal contributions, most observers still
hoped that this regime would soon be restored for the long run in the 1920s,
though that was not to be.
       Heckscher and Ohlin would not necessarily condone the use of their theory
in today’s very different global economic environment. Today we see numerous
barriers to trade (especially in agricultural commodities and simple manufactures),
trade in differentiated products and services, and significant intraindustry trade.5
However, the duo still might be impressed by the substantial technical apparatus
that we have developed to evaluate their theory, even as they might regret that
they never had easy access to the kinds of large datasets we now take for granted
as we implement our sophisticated tests. Given all this, we can imagine one

   3
      The same point has been forcefully repeated by Gabaix (1997)
   4
      For a study of the era, encompassing trade and factor flows, see O’Rourke and Williamson
(1999).
    5
      Still, in theories of differentiated products and intraindustry trade, the concepts of
Heckscher-Ohlin trade theory endure in basic textbook formulations (Dixit and Norman 1980;
Helpman and Krugman 1985).

                                              2
possible reaction from the fathers of factor abundance trade theory. Might they not
call on us to take our considerably refined empirical skills back in time and at least
give the theory—and its authors—some kind of a break by testing the model in the
historical context for which it was first designed?
        Imagining that we heard such a call at the time of Ohlin’s centennial, and
having a taste for economic history, we thought it would only be fair to him to do
just that. Not only does this idea appeal for sentimental reasons, but also, we will
argue, it helps resolve questions stimulated by the research on contemporary
global factor trade. Testing the model in an earlier historical epoch might help us
see the sources of difficulty in applying the model in the present. By bringing to
the discussion new datasets from a different economic and political era, we can
gain a new perspective. And in some ways, the pre-1914 period offers a better
testing ground for the pure Heckscher-Ohlin trade model, as economic historians
love to remind us. Indeed, a strand of the economic history literature has already
found strong support in that era for several features of standard theory, including
predictions of factor price convergence and the pattern of goods trade.6
        What are the features of the pre-1914 era that make it a better laboratory for
testing pure trade theory compared to today? And are there other aspects that favor
the present? We know, first, that there were much lower trade barriers then than
now, and this could be why the theory fails in the present. In Figure 1 we plot the
dispersion of the average applied tariff levels for 1913 and for the post–Uruguay
Round period (mid-1990s) for several country samples.7 Although the 1913 levels
are slightly higher than those for the recent period, we must remember that market
access negotiations under the Uruguay Round brought tariffs to their lowest point
in the entire postwar period, and the theory has usually been tested for earlier
periods (the mid-1960s, mid-1970s, or mid-1980s). In addition postwar tariff
reductions have been offset, in part or in whole, by an increasing presence of

    6
      On factor price equalization, see O’Rourke, Taylor, and Williamson (1996) and O’Rourke
and Williamson (1994). On goods trade and factor endowments, see Estevadeordal (1993). We
review the latter in the next section.
    7
      As a measure of relative dispersion we use box plots representing the interquartile ranges.
The line in the middle of the box represents the median or 50th percentile of the data. The box
extends from the 25th percentile (x[25]) to the 75th percentile (x[75]), the so-called interquartile range
(IQR). The lines emerging from the box are called the whiskers, and they extend to the upper and
lower adjacent values. The upper adjacent value is defined as the largest data point less than or
equal to x[75] + 1.5 IQR. The lower adjacent value is defined as the smallest data point greater than
or equal to x[25] + 1.5 IQR. Observed points more extreme than the adjacent values are
individually plotted.

                                                    3
NTMs (nontariff measures) and other distortionary trade instruments that were
practically non existent during the pre-WWI period. In the last three boxplots of
Figure 1, we include a measure of the incidence of NTMs based on the percentage
of tariff lines (in the tariff schedules) affected by any type of NTM for each
country in the sample. It is not a direct measure of the level of protection but
highlights the degree of importance of this new type of protectionism. Thus the
past epoch might more closely match the free-trade assumptions of the theory.
        Second, in the last century certain endowments were very skewed in their
distribution, most famously the agricultural land that differentiated the
endowments of the New World from the Old. Today, in contrast, many of the
countries in the samples studied have very similar endowment patterns, and this
leaves little data variation from which to get a strong fit.8 In the context of
standard econometric tests of predicted-versus-measured factor content of trade,
such variation would strengthen the test enormously by offering a wide range in
the independent variable. In Figure 2 we plot the relative shares of the
endowments of the three classical factors—capital, labor, and land—for 1913 and
for the late-1980s. Comparing the relative dispersion of the 1913 data with the
same sample of countries, or even with a developed country sample, for 1988
(representing then and now most of the world trade), we observe a higher degree
of dispersion and skewness in the earlier period. This could be another weak point
in tests using modern data.
        Third, we note that there was considerable divergence in productivity
across countries circa 1913, just as there is today. Over the course of the twentieth
century we have seen dramatic productivity convergence within a narrow club of
countries—mostly the OECD, and thus much of the Greater Atlantic economy.
Yet it is equally true that outside this subset, productivity convergence of the
unconditional variety has been weak or nonexistent.9 In Figure 3, again using


    8
      For example, Davis and Weinstein (2001) find inevitably that OECD countries are clustered
together with similar capital-labor ratios, a feature arising from those countries’ similar levels of
development and industrial structures. Their rest-of-the-world data point lies far away from the
OECD group, but this gives a great deal of leverage to one point, so much so that it is thought
prudent to exclude it from the tests as a sensitivity check. And in terms of data quality, the rest-
of-the-world point uses less consistent data, and the required measures have to be constructed by
a more fragile procedure.
    9
      The first studies of long-run convergence (Abramovitz 1986; Baumol 1986) used the 16-
country data of Maddison (1982). Baumol was the first to note the postwar failure of
unconditional convergence in wider samples that included less-developed countries. The origin of
this failure was first identified by Dowrick and Nguyen (1989); they found conditional

                                                 4
boxplots for different country samples, we report the relative levels of productivity
measured as real GDP per capita relative to the United States. The data for 1913
show a high variance of productivity levels when compared with a similar group
of countries in 1988 and not much difference if a larger sample is considered.
Thus, by doing our tests circa 1913, we are in no way making the problem simpler
for ourselves by avoiding an essential ingredient in the “missing trade” puzzle: the
possibility of international productivity differences.
       Raw differences in factor productivity were postulated by Leontief (1953a)
as a possible solution to his paradox for the United States, and his idea was
supported in international samples by Trefler (1993, 1995) and Davis and
Weinstein (2001). However, as Helpman (1999) notes, this way out just creates
another disturbing puzzle: namely where do these differences in productivity
originate? In historical work this same disturbing idea was brought to the fore by
the controversial work of Clark (1987). He found no comfort in any economic
explanation of international variations in the productivity of cotton mills in various
countries circa 1913. There seemed to be no compelling economic reason why one
New England cotton textile operative performed as much work as 1.5 British, 2.3
German, and nearly 6 Greek, Japanese, Indian, or Chinese workers. After
controlling for capital intensities, breakdowns, human capital, learning, and other
effects, Clark was forced to admit the possibility of a purely cultural origin of the
differences, quite possibly exogenous to the economic system. If Clark’s idea
holds in a wide range of sectors circa 1913, then, just as output would have been
affected by these raw productivity differences, so too would the levels of trade and
the factor content therein, with direct implications for our proposed tests.
       Finally, we should note a couple of characteristics that work against the
earlier period as a good testing ground. First, we must consider the higher
transport costs of the past. Like measuring true tariffs from actual import data,
measuring true transport costs from trade data is problematic. Comparing CIF and
FOB prices then and now might not lead to a big difference in the measured
transport cost premium on goods actually shipped: goods too expensive to ship
never make it into the sample, creating a serious selection problem.10 Data are

convergence controlling for investment and population growth, narrowing the problem to a
determination of these factor accumulation processes.
    10
       This caveat must be kept in mind, even though plenty of evidence attests to the fact that on
a wide range of goods shipped before 1914 transport costs in the Atlantic were collapsing over a
span of several decades, both on primary products and manufactures. See O’Rourke and
Willamson (1994); see also North (1958) and Harley (1988).

                                                5
scarce here, but it is a reasonable conjecture that many bulk goods shipped today
move at a fraction of their cost a hundred years ago, and surely many exotic goods
and services can now move more cheaply than they did in the past. Figure 4
illustrates the dramatic declines in transportation and communication costs that
have occurred throughout the past century. The second problem for the earlier
period—though it is by no means absent in the present—concerns factor mobility.
It is well known that the theory predicts that trade and factor mobility are
substitutes, and the late nineteenth century was a time of very fluid international
factor markets. International labor mobility facilitated the migration of millions of
people, especially in the great transatlantic waves from Europe to the New World
(Easterlin 1961; Hatton and Williamson 1994, 1998; Taylor and Williamson
1997). The first era of global capital markets functioned very efficiently,
reallocating vast sums of capital internationally (Taylor 1996; Obstfeld and Taylor
1998, 2002ab). The presence of endogenous factor movements could well interfere
with empirical tests that treat factor endowments as exogenous independent
variables. We will return to this issue in our conclusion.
        The rest of the chapter is organized around the steps we took to mount such
an attack. We focus on the two types of tests used, those based on goods trade and
those based on factor trade. We describe the historical data and their manipulation
for the test at hand. Results are presented in the usual form for each test and the
implications are discussed. A brief conclusion offers some broader interpretations
and directions for future research.


Factor Endowments and Product Trade circa 1913

Tests
Consider the standard Heckscher-Ohlin theory, in a world of C countries, I
industries, and F factors. Let the output in country c be Xc (I × 1). The factor
content of Xc is BXc, where B is a matrix (F × I) of factor content coefficients.11
Full employment implies that BXc = Vc, where Vc is the factor endowment of
country c. Consumption Cc (I × 1) in country c equals the country share of world
expenditure sc (assumed equal to world output in this study) times world


    11
       In detail, Bfi is the direct and indirect use of factor f per unit output of industry i. Direct use
refers to factors used as inputs in the given industry; indirect use refers to the factors embodied in
the intermediate products used as inputs in the given industry.

                                                    6
consumption CW. The latter, by world market clearing, equals world output,
CW = XW = ΣcXc. Hence Cc = sc XW, and the net goods trade Tc of country c equals
Tc = Xc – Cc = Xc – sc XW. If we denote world factor endowment by VW = BXW,
then
                                    Tc = B–1 (Vc – scVW).                                    (1)
This equation says that trade in each industry is linearly related to factor
endowments. We assume that B is invertible (i.e., square, with I = F). Leamer
(1984) argued that the equation need not be restricted to the square case, and he
proposed that it be tested by regressions for each industry i. Evaluation centers on
the fit and reasonableness of these equations, allowing for both statistical and
quantitative significance.12
        This methodology was used to study trade circa 1913 by Estevadeordal
(1993). The challenge was to construct new datasets on net trades (the left-hand
side) and endowments (the right-hand side) for the econometric study. A detailed
explanation of the data, coding, and aggregation is found in the appendix to
Estevadeordal (1997). We provide a brief overview here.

Data, Coding, and Aggregation
Data on net trade for the period circa 1913 were collected for C = 18 countries:
Argentina, Australia, Austria-Hungary, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland,
France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, United Kingdom, and United States. The sources used were official
national reports of trade statistics, originating from such agencies as the Board of
Trade (U.K.) or the Department of Commerce (U.S.). The principal problem in
ensuring consistency across countries was to set up a universal classification
scheme for industries, since, prior to World War II, no standards had been
developed and each country used its own classification. The solution was to
laboriously construct country-specific concordances that would map each
country’s sectors into selected sectors of the Standard International Trade
Classification (SITC, revised 1961) at the two-digit level. In this way the trade



    12
      A potential weakness here is that we do not measure the matrix B–1, but rather estimate it.
The specification is loose, and the estimated matrix has totally free parameters that may be
unrelated to the true technological coefficients. This weakness is avoided in the factor content
approach we use later.

                                               7
data Tc was rationalized into a database for C = 18 countries and I = 55 sectors
expressed in U.S. dollars at market exchange rates.13
       National product estimates were taken from Mitchell (1980, 1983) and
Maddison (1995) and expressed in U.S. dollars at market exchange rates,
providing the basis for expenditure shares sc.14
       Endowment data Vc for all countries were collected for F = 5 types of
factor: capital stock, skilled and unskilled labor force, agricultural land, and
mineral resources. In Estevadeordal (1993) a proxy for capital stock based on
energy consumption of solid fuels was used. The data on energy consumption
refer to apparent consumption of primary sources, including net imports of
secondary as well as primary energy forms. Because of data availability only solid
fuels had been considered (hard coal, brown coal, lignite, and coke). In order to
permit aggregation and comparison, data were expressed in thousands of hard-coal
equivalents. In this section of the paper we report results based on those of
Estevadeordal (1993) which use the original capital measure. However, in order to
carry out the subsequent factor content analysis in the next section, we made new
capital stock estimates for 1913 using a perpetual-inventory method applied to
pre-1913 annual investment rates and real outputs. The results gave capital-output
ratios for the terminal year 1913, and multiplying by national products yielded
capital stocks in U.S. dollars at market exchange rates. The labor force figures
originate in Maddison (1982) and Mitchell (1980, 1983), and we use interpolation
between census years as necessary. Agricultural land is measured in hectares, and
the data are largely from a study by the League of Nations (1927). Mineral
resources are estimated using as a proxy the U.S. dollar value of the annual
production of petroleum plus twelve other minerals and ores; quantities are drawn
principally from Mitchell (1980, 1983), and prices from Potter and Christy
(1962).15


    13
        For all the data described in this section, figures were collected for the year closest to 1913.
Exchange rates were taken from international compendia of exchange rates, where available, or
from national sources.
     14
        We do not calculate consumption or expenditure shares directly, but rather assume that they
are equal to income or output shares. That is, we set sc = GDPc/GDPw , and not, following the
trade-balance correction of Trefler (1995) as sc = Cc/C w . This correction makes no material
difference to our results.
     15
        The twelve ores are bauxite, copper, iron, lead, manganese, nickel, phosphate, potash,
pyrites, sulphur, tin, and zinc. Some data were also drawn from Rothwell (various issues) and
national sources of mineral production for various countries.

                                                   8
Results
The Heckscher-Ohlin equation (1) expresses trade in terms of excess endowments
(Vc – sc VW). For empirical purposes, following Leamer (1984), we can regress
trade on endowment supplies alone.16 We report results at two different levels of
aggregation (six and forty-six commodity groups).
        Table 1, Panel (a), reports the estimates for the following six commodity
groups: agricultural products, raw materials, capital-intensive goods, labor-
intensive goods, machinery, and chemicals. The R2 measures of fit are typically
very high, and most of the estimated coefficients are correctly signed and
statistically significant. The coefficients still depend on the units of the
explanatory variables. Since we are not only interested in the statistical
significance of a coefficient but also in knowing how important each of the
variables is in explaining the trade pattern, Panel (b) reports β values for each of
the five explanatory variables for each trade aggregate considered.17 If we select
arbitrarily, as in Leamer (1984), 1.0 to define a significant β value, then capital is
significant five times, land four times, and labor-skilled and minerals three times.



    16
        The Heckscher-Ohlin model of trade can express trade in terms of endowment supplies or
in terms of excess endowment supplies. In a 2 × 2 version the equations of the model are
                             T1 = β1L (L – Y Lw/Yw) + β1K (K – Y Kw/Yw);
                             T2 = β2L (L – Y Lw/Yw) + β2K (K – Y Kw/Yw);
                                           Y = wLL + wKK;
where T1 and T2 are net exports of the two commodities, Y is GNP, L is labor, K is capital, wL and
wK are factor returns, the w superscripts refer to the world, and the β are Rybczynski coefficients.
This form of the model expresses net trade as a linear function of excess supplies of factors.
However, excess factor endowments are a linear function of all factor supplies: that is,
L – Y Lw/Yw = L – (wLL + wKK) Lw/Yw. Thus, for almost all distributions of K and L, these excess
supplies are correlated, and a regression of trade on a subset of the excess supplies will yield
biased and inconsistent estimates. This problem will be compounded if there are measurement
errors. Because of this problem a reduced form of the model is preferred in empirical studies.
This reduced form is found inserting the GNP equation into the net exports equations:
                                         T1 = β1L L + β1K K;
                                         T2 = β2L L + β2K K;
                                           Y = wLL + wKK.
     17
        A β value is equal to the estimated coefficient times the ratio of the standard deviation of
the explanatory variable divided by the standard error of the dependent variable (Maddala 1977;
Leamer 1978). These β values are directly proportional to the contribution that each variable
makes to a prediction of net trade. These values indicate the amount of change in standard
deviation units of the net trade variable induced by a change of one standard deviation in the
factor endowment. A β value of 0.1 is small, since a change of one standard deviation in the
resource would have a hardly perceptible effect on net exports, but a value of one can be regarded
as large.

                                                 9
       Generally speaking, in the estimates of Table 1, comparative advantage in
agricultural products is associated with abundance of land and mineral resources
and is negatively related to capital. Trade in raw materials owes comparative
advantage to the availability of capital and unskilled labor; land and skilled labor
contribute to comparative disadvantage. The sources of comparative advantage in
manufacturing are, in general, as expected. Capital is a source of comparative
advantage for capital-intensive goods and machinery. Mineral resources are
important for labor-intensive and chemicals groups. Skilled labor also contributes
to comparative advantage in all manufacturing groups. The β values indicate,
again, that the contribution is most important in labor-intensive and chemicals
products, followed by capital-intensive goods and machinery. Net exports of all
manufacturing groups are negatively associated with the supply of land.18 We also
performed some sensitivity analysis on these results.19
       Table 2, Panel (a), reports results from Estevadeordal (1997) where a more
disaggregated Heckscher-Ohlin model was estimated with the goal of obtaining
measures of trade protection by sector. Based on the reported F-statistics, thirty-
seven out of the forty-six net trade regressions are significant. Moreover most of
the R2 measures of fit are very high. For individual factor endowments, out of
forty-six estimated equations, capital has significant coefficients (at the 10 percent
confidence level) in twenty-six cases, skilled labor in fourteen, unskilled labor in
only seven, land in twenty-nine, and mineral resources in twenty-seven. The β
values are reproduced in Panel (b).

    18
        Results such that agricultural land have a negative impact on the comparative advantage of
all manufacturing groups should not be surprising. Although the model used here appears to
require that all factors be used in all industries, this is not the case. The existence of industry-
specific factors implies that particular elements of the factor requirements matrix B may be zero.
For example, in a model with two inputs, labor (L) and land (M), and two goods, agricultural (X1)
and industrial (X2), if land is not used to produce the industrial commodity, the BM2 element of
matrix B will be zero. It can be easily shown that although both labor and land are used to
produce the agricultural good, the output of agricultural goods depends only on the endowment of
land. And although land is not used to produce industrial goods, the level of output of industrial
goods depends on both the endowment of labor and the endowment of land. This apparently
paradoxical result stems from the fact that full employment requires that land must be fully
utilized in the agricultural sector. This fact, together with the fixed input requirement BM1,
determines the level of agricultural output M /BM1. Since the labor residual left over for industrial
production is then dependent on the endowment of land (i.e., L – X1 BL1 = L – M BL1/BM1), it
becomes obvious that the level of industrial output is also dependent on the endowment of land.
     19
        To test for the robustness of these estimates, sensitivity analysis was performed. Influential
observations were identified using the extreme t-statistics of dummy variables that select a single
country and that are included in the equation one at a time. In general, however, the coefficients
in Table 1 with high t-statistics are insensitive to the omission of those observations.

                                                 10
       In general, capital and skilled labor are sources of comparative
disadvantage for primary product trade. Capital is a source of comparative
advantage in most capital-intensive goods; it is a source of disadvantage in labor-
intensive commodities, where skilled labor contributes to comparative advantage.
Agricultural land is consistently a source of advantage for primary products and
creates comparative disadvantage in manufacturing. Interestingly mineral
resources are a source of comparative advantage in the processed agricultural
products group and in almost all manufactures. Using the conventional 0.5 level to
define a significant β value, capital is significant in thirty-six out of forty-six net
trade equations. 20 Skilled labor is significant twenty-four times, unskilled labor
only four times, agricultural land thirty-eight times, and mineral resources thirty-
six times.

Summary
In this section we have shown how it is possible to implement a test circa 1913 of
the Heckscher-Ohlin prediction that there exists a linear relationship between
factor endowments and the net trade of goods. The results are very favorable to the
hypothesis. For most goods the fit is acceptably good, and many coefficients have
statistical significance. Moreover, once we compare the signs of the coefficients
for each type of good with what we expect—based on whether certain goods are
intensive in certain types of factor—we also find a reassuring correspondence
between the econometric results and our intuition. Finally, using the technique of
β coefficients to see how much the variation in factor endowments explains the
variation in net trade, we find that the quantitative significance of the model is also
very high. In short, having appealed to the 1980s vintage of empirical trade tests of
the form pioneered by Leamer (1984), we have found a good deal of
correspondence between the empirical results of the past and present. In both cases
the fit of the model is good, and it is quite a bit stronger in the historical data from
Ohlin’s time. Thus, viewed from a 1980s empirical perspective, the factor
abundance theory seems to work very well in its own time. We now ask whether
the same holds true from a 1990s perspective, where attention has shifted to tests
based on factor content.21


   20
       In highly disaggregated studies, 0.5 is usually used as a threshold for a β value to be
considered significant (see Leamer 1984; Saxonhouse 1986).
    21
       The next section draws on Estevadeordal and Taylor (2002).

                                             11
Factor Endowments and Factor Trade circa 1913

Tests
The factor content test is based on the immediate precursor of equation (1) which
does not depend on any assumptions about the dimensions or invertibility of the
matrix B, namely
                                  BTc = Vc – sc VW.                                (2)
Here the left-hand side vector is the measured factor content of trade (denoted
MFCTf) and the right-hand side is the predicted factor content of trade (denoted
PFCTf). In this methodology all parameters in equation (2) are measured, none are
estimated econometrically, and the test centers on whether the equation holds.
Thus the method is harder to implement because its data requirements are
considerably larger, which might explain why cross-country tests of this type have
only appeared relatively recently.
        Testing equation (2) can take a variety of forms, as outlined by Davis and
Weinstein (2001). Four tests have been deployed, usually one factor at a time and
using the set of countries c as the sample:
• The sign test focuses on whether, the direction of MFCTf matches that of
    PFCTf. In equation (2) this amounts to asking whether the sign of the left- and
    right-hand sides are equal. The results are displayed in terms of the fraction of
    correct predictions.
• The variance ratio test asks whether the variance of MFCT is as large as
    PFCT. Of course, if the theory were a perfect fit, the ratio of the variances of
    the left- and right-hand sides of equation (2) would be unity.
• The slope test depends on a regression of MFCT on PFCT. One can calculate
    the slope coefficient and its significance level from a regression of the left-
    hand side of equation (2) on the right-hand side. Again, if the theory were a
    perfect fit, the slope would be unity.
• The t-test reports the t-statistic for the slope test where the null is a zero slope.
    This test can detect a positive and significant relationship of endowments to
    trade, although the relationship need not be one for one.

Data, Coding, and Aggregation
As in the previous tests, we will still need each country’s trade and factor
endowment data (Tc and Vc), and for these we draw on the data described in the
previous section for C = 18 countries, I = 55 sectors, and F = 4 factors.

                                          12
        We also need a factor use matrix B. In general, when there are intermediate
goods, B depends on the direct factor use matrix Bd and the input-output matrix A.
Calculating B = Bd(I – A)–1 is straightforward if data on technology can be found
to construct Bd and A. In the pure version of the theory and empirics, it is assumed
that B is constant across countries. The objective can then be easily met if we can
construct B for just one country and, like Trefler (1993, 1995), we pick the United
States as the source of the B data.
        The direct factor use matrix Bd for the United States is taken from the study
of Eysenbach (1976), as employed by Wright (1990). She used the BLS-Leontief
1947 input-output table and a 165-industry classification. Her capital and labor
coefficients came from the census of 1899, and her natural resource coefficients,
via Vanek (1963), from the 1947 input-output table. Capital input is a stock
measure in U.S. dollars that we take as corresponding to our endowment
definition, up to a deflator. She measures nonrenewable resource inputs in the
same units (dollars) as our endowment measure of mineral resources, up to a
deflator.22 However, her renewable resources measure is not the same (neither in
definition nor in units) as our endowment category of agricultural land. This will
invalidate some of our tests for this case: consistent units are needed for a
meaningful benchmark of unity in the slope coefficient and variance ratio tests.
Thus in the construction of B from Bd we will have four factors, but not an exact
match to the structure of the endowment data.
        Our final data collection task was to find a suitable input-output matrix A.
We used Leontief’s input-output table for 1919 (Leontief 1953b), built around a
classification scheme of only 41 industries. Considering the extent of the overlap
and consistency between the various classifications, it was decided to settle finally
on a 25-industry aggregation scheme for the present exercise. Thus two sets of
concordance mappings were constructed, one from the 165-industry classification
to the 25 new industry classes, and one from the 41-industry classification to the
25 new classes. Our previously constructed vectors and matrices Tc and Bd were
converted to this I = 25 classification by some simple arithmetic aggregation, and
B = Bd (I – A)–1 was calculated.



   22
      Here we are careful to modify our endowment measures Vc to include coal, so as to match
Eysenbach’s data. This is a slight change from the original Estevadeordal data used in the
previous section where coal was a proxy for capital.

                                             13
Results
Table 3, upper panel, and Figure 5, show the results of applying the four basic
tests (sign, t, variance ratio, and slope) to the raw data for eighteen countries, for
four individual factor types plus a set of pooled factor types. In cases where the
factors are pooled, we need to worry about the commensurability not only on each
side of the equation but also from one type of factor to the next. Units of, say,
labor and capital, will never be commensurate in a physical sense, but econometric
adjustments are needed to permit valid estimation, specifically to ensure
homoskedasticity. Following Trefler (1995), we weight each observation by
ωfc = 1/(σf sc1/2), where the σf are the standard deviations of the pure Heckscher-
Ohlin-Vanek error MFCTfc–PFCTfc for each factor f, and where sc is an adjustment
for country size.23
        The results are, at best, mixed, and perhaps a little disappointing. They are,
in this regard, comparable with the mid-1990s empirical findings of Trefler (1993,
1995) and Gabaix (1997). For capital and labor all the tests offer almost no
support for the theory. The sign test reveals a predictive power no better than a
coin flip. The t-tests are insignificant and often of the wrong sign. The variance
ratio and slope tests confirm that the fit is very poor, the slope is almost a
horizontal line, and overall the model can explain maybe 1 percent of the overall
variance of the dependent variable.
        So far so bad, but our hopes pick up a little bit when resources are
considered. For renewable resources, the noncommensurability problem confines
us to the sign test and the t-test, but the results are more favorable. The sign test
rises to 67 percent, and the slope is significant and positive. For nonrenewable
resources, we can run the full battery of tests, and we find the best fit of all. The
sign test shows that we get the direction of trade right for this factor in almost four
out of every five cases, the t-ratio is a respectable 2.4, the variance ratio is 38
percent and the slope is 0.35. Finally, what the regressions are telling us can also
be shown graphically, and Figure 5 depicts the scatter plots for the five cases
(from Table 3, upper panel). The poor fit for labor and capital is immediately
apparent given the diffuse cloud of dots seen in each case. For resources, the basis
for a tighter fit is also clearly visible, and the pooling is a mélange of the two.



   23
       We also tried the Gabaix (1997) weights ωfc = 1/sc and the Davis-Weinstein (2001) weights
ωfc = 1/VWf and found little difference. See Estevadeordal and Taylor (2002).

                                              14
        Such results, though disappointing, are not too surprising given the equally
weak findings of the recent literature using the basic, unadorned specification of
the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek hypothesis. Accordingly various enhancements of the
basic specification have been proposed. These looser specifications appeal to
theory as a basis for adding additional parameters that allow for a better fit: for
example, adjustments for factor productivity differences and home bias in
consumption. We applied each of these refinements to the historical data
(Estevadeordal and Taylor 2002). Our research indicates that the home bias
adjustment makes no more sense in the historical context than it does in the recent
data, and we find very perverse parameters (e.g., Trefler 1995). The Leontief-style
productivity adjustment does find support, though, as we can see from the lower
panel of Table 3, it does not eliminate the missing trade problem for capital and
labor.24
        By our reading, these productivity adjustments do help the model fit better,
confirming the findings on contemporary data (Trefler 1993, 1995; Davis and
Weinstein 2001). The sign tests starts to rise well above the coin-flip level for
capital, and improves somewhat for renewable resources. The slope for
nonrenewable resources also rises, doubling to the level of about 0.6, and the
variance ratio rises to a favorable 0.51. However, the joy is short-lived, since the
slope and variance ratio tests are still demoralizingly low for both capital and
labor. The pooling of the results does not add a great deal to the analysis. With
pooling the tests come out somewhere in between the good results for
nonrenewable resources and the poor results for labor and capital, as expected.25
All in all, productivity adjustment appears to be a useful and necessary step, but it
is not a solution to the missing trade problem.



    24
        Trefler (1993, 1995) showed that a way to correct for this problem is to rescale the
endowment vector Vfc by some measure of relative productivity. If such a productivity correction
δc is common to all factors in one country, then we would arrive at a productivity-corrected
endowment vector of the form Ṽ fc = δ c V fc , and the analysis can then proceed as before. We use
two proxies for δc, the relative GDP per capita (following Trefler) and the relative real wage. In
each case we set U.S. equal to 1, since we are using the U.S. factor-use coefficients on the left
side. GDP per capita measures were taken from Maddison (1995) and real wages from
Williamson (1995). See Estevadeordal and Taylor (2002).
     25
        We have also repeated the exercise by estimating, rather than imposing, the implied
technology shift parameters. In this method the parameters δc are chosen to maximize the fit of
modified Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek equation, subject to the normalization that δUS = 1. See
Estevadeordal and Taylor (2002).

                                               15
Summary
In this section we have shown how it is possible to implement a test circa 1913 of
the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek prediction that there exists a linear relationship
between factor endowments and the net factor content of trade. The results are not
very favorable to the hypothesis. For labor and capital, the fit of the model is close
to nonexistent. For resources, there is evidence that the model fits—though we are
hampered by a units problem that prevents us from fully testing the predictions for
renewable resources. For all factors, the fit of the model is improved by a
Leontief-style productivity correction. In short, having appealed to the 1990s
vintage of empirical trade tests of the form pioneered by Trefler (1993, 1995), we
have found a good deal of correspondence between the empirical results of the
past and present. Missing trade is everywhere, though it is less absent in the case
of resources than in the cases of labor and capital (Gabaix 1997). It is also less
absent than in the present. Thus, the simple factor content approach seems to work
not much better in its own time than it does today—that is, not very well at all.
Our study brings us to a point that corresponds to the year 1995 in the
contemporary empirical literature—the year Trefler announced the mystery of the
“missing trade.” In the conclusion we ponder where we can go from here


Conclusion: Give Heckscher and Ohlin a Break!
This work has looked very broadly at the applicability of modern tests of the
Heckscher-Ohlin trade theory to the historical data for 1913, an earlier period of
relatively well-integrated goods markets and a time in history that inspired the
creators of the factor-abundance model. The results of this exercise have been
mixed. The relationship between factor endowments and goods trade appears
strong, even stronger than that found in contemporary data. But the factor content
tests perform as poorly as they do on recent data, although a Leontief-style
productivity correction can go some way toward correcting the problem. Even
then, the best fit in 1913 seems to be for resource endowments, rather than for
capital and labor.
       Though we are disappointed to find such weak evidence, is this cause to
dismiss the Heckscher-Ohlin model? We think not. First, on empirical grounds, we
are not fully satisfied with the methodology adopted here, and, compared to the
most recent advances in the field that have attained a close match between theory
and data, we have many gaps in our data. The Davis and Weinstein (2001)


                                         16
analysis goes further than any previous work in achieving a satisfactory fit, but
their OECD data allow them to investigate different factor-use matrices B for each
country. In contrast, we have been limited to only one factor-use matrix B for the
United States in 1913. It would be a very difficult, almost impossible, data
collection exercise to build full set of input-output tables and production-
consumption accounts for even just these 18 countries at a 25-sector level circa
1913. Still such an effort would be necessary to advance beyond the circa 1995
econometric approaches that we have employed here.
        Notwithstanding these methodological constraints, what can we say about
the interpretation of our results when they are taken at face value? Gabaix (1997)
protested that the good fit of the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek model on natural
resources today was cold comfort, since such endowments constitute such a paltry
share of world output in the modern, service-oriented, knowledge-based economy.
In today’s world the bulk of factor rewards accrue to capital and labor (mostly
skilled, i.e., human capital). Such objections are clearly less relevant in 1913,
when much of the basis of world trade, and still significant portions of world
output, were based on primary producing activities.
        The role of resources, and the good fit of the model there, also brings us
back to the point made in the introduction: the Heckscher-Ohlin theory supposes
that factors are not mobile and endowments are exogenous. Only then would
estimation be valid. Note that these shortcomings are econometric problems, not a
failure of the theory itself. Indeed, the theory very usefully predicts that trade and
factor migration can be substitutes. This brings us back to the nature of the world
economy in 1913. It was not just a world of relatively free trade; it was also a
world with a high degree of factor mobility. Capital mobility is potentially a
problem today for factor content tests, but in 1913 we have an even bigger
problem, for both labor and capital were highly mobile then. These are the factors
for which the fit of the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek model is weakest in our data—a
coincidence? We think not. The fit of our model is strongest for the immobile
factors that have long been considered the key source of comparative advantage in
the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.26

    26
       In a paper entitled “Give Heckscher and Ohlin a Chance!” Wood (1994a) raised this
concern in connection with contemporary tests of the theory that ignore the fact of considerable
international capital mobility that can equate rates of return across countries. Instead, he argues,
we must restrict attention only to the factors that are basically immobile, resting his case on the
theoretical work of Ethier and Svennson (1986). Land being problematic to measure, Wood’s
research agenda has focused on skilled and unskilled labor as the key contrast in his “North-

                                                17
        In summing up, we urge caution before interpreting poor static regression
results as providing evidence against the theory for this historical period. A large
literature in economic history has drawn attention to capital and labor flows in the
greater Atlantic economy of that era (Taylor and Williamson 1994, 1997; Hatton
and Williamson 1994, 1998; O’Rourke and Williamson 1999; Williamson 1995;
Edelstein 1982; Obstfeld and Taylor 1998, 2002ab). Until an econometric strategy
can be found that adapts the factor-content tests to cope with this simultaneity
problem we should, perhaps, give Heckscher and Ohlin a break.


References
Abramovitz, M. 1986. Catching Up, Forging Ahead, and Falling Behind. Journal of Economic
         History 46 (June): 385–406.
Baumol, W. 1986. Productivity Growth, Convergence and Welfare: What the Long-Run Data
         Show. American Economic Review 76 (December): 1072–85.
Bowen, H. P., E. E. Leamer, and L. Sveikauskas. 1987. Multicountry, Multifactor Tests of the
         Factor Abundance Theory. American Economic Review 77 (December): 791–809.
Clark, G. 1987. Why Isn’t the Whole World Developed? Lessons from the Cotton Mills. Journal
         of Economic History 47 (March): 141–73.
Davis, D. R., and D. Weinstein. 2001. An Account of Global Factor Trade. American Economic
         Review 91 (December): 1423–53.
Dixit, A. K., and V. Norman. 1980. Theory of International Trade. Cambridge: Cambridge
         University Press.
Dowrick, S., and D.-T,Nguyen. 1989. OECD Comparative Economic Growth 1950–85: Catch-Up
         and Convergence. American Economic Review 79 (December): 1010–30.
Easterlin, R. 1961. Influences in European Overseas Emigration Before World War One.
         Economic Development and Cultural Change 9 : 331–51.
Edelstein, M. 1982. Overseas Investment in the Age of High Imperialism. New York: Columbia
         University Press.
Estevadeordal, A. 1993. Historical Essays on Comparative Advantage, 1913–1938. Ph.D.
         dissertation, Harvard University.
Estevadeordal, A. 1997. Measuring Protection in the Early Twentieth Century. European Review
         of Economic History 1 (April): 89–125.
Estevadeordal, A. 1999. A Note on Comparative Advantage and Natural Resources in the Early
         Twentieth Century. In Doctor Jordi Nadal: La industrialización y el desarrollo
         económico de España., edited by A. Carreras, et al. Barcelona: University of Barcelona
         Press.
Estevadeordal, A., and A. M. Taylor. 2002. A Century of Missing Trade? American Economic
         Review 92 (March). Forthcoming.


South” view of the global economy (1994b). The same basic argument can be found in the study
of the United States by Wright (1990), but the recent analysis of Estevadeordal (1999) generalizes
the point to a much broader sample of countries using Wood’s approach applied to the 18-country
dataset we have used here.

                                               18
Ethier, W. J., and L. E. O. Svennson. 1986. The Theorems of International Trade when Factors
        are Mobile. Journal of International Economics 20 (February): 21–42.
Eysenbach, M. L. 1976. American Manufactured Exports, 1879–1914: A Study of Growth and
        Comparative Advantage. New York: Arno Press.
Gabaix, X. 1997. The Factor-Content of Trade: A Rejection of the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek-
        Leontief Hypothesis. Harvard University (May). Photocopy.
Harley, C. K. 1988. Ocean Freight Rates and Productivity, 1740–1913: The Primacy of
        Mechanical Invention Reaffirmed. Journal of Economic History 48 (December):
        851–876.
Hatton, T. J., and J. G. Williamson, eds. 1994. Migration and the International Labor Market,
        1850–1939. London: Routledge.
Hatton, T. J., and J. G. Williamson. 1998. The Age of Mass Migration. New York: Oxford
        University Press.
Helpman, E. 1999. The Structure of Foreign Trade. Journal of Economic Perspectives 13
        (Spring): 121–44.
Helpman, E., and P. R. Krugman. 1985. Market Structure and Foreign Trade. Cambridge, Mass.:
        MIT Press.
Hufbauer, G. 1991. World Economic Integration: The Long View. International Economic
        Insights 2 (May–June): 23–27.
League of Nations. 1927. Population and Natural Resources. Geneva: League of Nations.
Leamer, E. E. 1978. Specification Searches: Ad Hoc Inference with Nonexperimental Data. New
        York: Wiley.
Leamer, E. E. 1980. The Leontief Paradox Reconsidered. Journal of Political Economy 88 (June):
        495–503.
Leamer, E. E. 1984. Sources of International Comparative Advantage. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
        Press.
Leontief, W. W. 1953a. Domestic Production and Foreign Trade: The American Capital Position
        Re-Examined. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 97 (September):
        332–49.
Leontief, W. W. 1953b. The Structure of the American Economy 1919–1939. Oxford: Oxford
        University Press.
Maddala, G. S. Econometrics. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1977.
Maddison, A. 1982. Phases of Capitalist Development. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Maddison, A. 1995. Monitoring the World Economy. Paris: OECD.
Mitchell, B. R. 1980. European Historical Statistics, 1750–1975. 2nd ed. New York: Facts on
        File.
Mitchell, B. R. 1983. International Historical Statistics: The Americas and Australasia. Detroit:
        Gale Research.
North, D. C. 1958. Ocean Freight Rates and Economic Development, 1750–1913. Journal of
        Economic History 18 (December): 537–555.
O’Rourke, K. H., A. M. Taylor, and J. G. Williamson. 1996. Factor Price Convergence in the
        Late Nineteenth Century. International Economic Review 37 (August): 499–530.
O’Rourke, K. H., and J. G. Williamson. 1994. Late-Nineteenth Century Anglo-American Factor-
        Price Convergence: Were Heckscher and Ohlin Right? Journal of Economic History 54
        (December): 892–916.



                                               19
O’Rourke, K. H., and J. G. Williamson. 1999. Globalization and History: The Evolution of a
         Nineteenth-Century Atlantic Economy. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Obstfeld, M., and A. M. Taylor. 1998. The Great Depression as a Watershed: International
         Capital Mobility in the Long Run. In The Defining Moment: The Great Depression and
         the American Economy in the Twentieth Century, edited by M. D. Bordo, C. D. Goldin
         and E. N. White. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Obstfeld, M., and A. M. Taylor. 2002a. Globalization and Capital Markets. In Globalization in
         Historical Perspective, edited by M. D. Bordo, A. M. Taylor and J. G. Williamson.
         Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Obstfeld, M., and A. M. Taylor. 2002b. Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis, and Growth.
         Japan-U.S. Center Sanwa Monographs on International Financial Markets Cambridge:
         Cambridge University Press. Forthcoming.
Potter, N., and F. T. Christy, Jr. 1962. Trends in Natural Resource Commodities. Baltimore, Md.:
         Johns Hopkins University Press.
Rothwell, R. P. Various issues. The Mineral Industry, its Statistics, Technology, and Trade. New
         York: Scientific Publishing Company.
Saxonhouse, G. R. 1986. What’s Wrong with Japanese Trade Structure? Pacific Economic
         Papers 137 : 1–36.
Taylor, A. M. 1996. International Capital Mobility in History: The Saving-Investment
         Relationship. Working Paper Series no. 5743, National Bureau of Economic Research
         (September).
Taylor, A. M., and J. G. Williamson. 1994. Capital Flows to the New World as an
         Intergenerational Transfer. Journal of Political Economy 102 (April): 348–371.
Taylor, A. M., and J. G. Williamson. 1997. Convergence in the Age of Mass Migration.
         European Review of Economic History 1 (April): 27–63.
Trefler, D. 1993. International Factor Price Differences: Leontief Was Right! Journal of Political
         Economy 101 (December): 961–87.
Trefler, D. 1995. The Case of the Missing Trade and Other Mysteries. American Economic
         Review 85 (December): 1029–1046.
Vanek, J. 1963. The Natural Resource Content of United States Foreign Trade 1870–1955.
         Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Vanek, J. 1968. Factor Proportions Theory: The N-Factor Case. Kyklos 21 (October): 749–55.
Williamson, J. G. 1995. The Evolution of Global Labor Markets since 1830: Background
         Evidence and Hypotheses. Explorations in Economic History 32 (April): 141–96.
Wood, A. 1994a. Give Heckscher and Ohlin a Chance! Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 130 : 20–49.
Wood, A. 1994b. North-South Trade, Employment, and Inequality: Changing Fortunes in a Skill-
         Driven World. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Wright, G. 1990. The Origins of American Industrial Success, 1879–1940. American Economic
         Review 80 (September): 651–68.




                                               20
Table 1
Tests of Factor Endowments and Product Trade

                                            Labor-       Labor-        Agricultural                          Adjusted
(a) OLS estimates              Capital      skilled     unskilled         land          Minerals       R2       R2
Agricultural products          -7.6***       -26.3        -31.9          8.5**          4.5***        .81      .73
                               (-5.22)      (-1.74)      (-0.55)         (2.38)          (4.50)

Raw materials                  2.7***     -20.6***        41.6*          -3.0***           0.4        .78       .69
                               (5.22)      (-4.61)        (2.14)         (-4.91)          (1.67)

Capital-intensive goods        2.1***      18.4***         13.3          -6.5***          -0.7*       .83       .77
                               (5.98)       (4.21)        (0.66)         (-4.98)         (-2.08)

Labor-intensive goods          -0.9***     17.8***         -9.8          -4.0***          0.8**       .65       .51
                                (3.20)      (8.89)       (-1.24)         (-3.79)          (2.59)

Machinery                      1.1***        5.0*          -9.6          -3.1***           0.08       .91       .88
                               (4.73)       (2.12)       (-1.05)         (-5.87)          (0.54)

Chemicals                        -0.1       6.7***          -6.3         -2.3***           0.38        .69      .56
                               (-1.08)      (5.87)        (-1.62)         (-2.53)         (1.72)
                                            Labor-        Labor-       Agricultural
(b) β values                    Capital     skilled      unskilled          land        Minerals
Agricultural products              -1.83       -0.51           -0.11              0.72        1.64
Raw materials                       2.36       -1.45            0.50             -0.92        0.53
Capital-intensive goods             1.30        0.92            0.11             -1.42       -0.65
Labor-intensive goods              -1.10        1.76           -0.17             -1.73        1.48
Machinery                           1.22        0.45           -0.15             -1.22        0.13
Chemicals                          -0.24        1.29           -0.21             -1.93        1.37
Notes: t-ratios in parentheses. (***) denotes significant at the 1% level. (**) denotes significant at the 5% level. (*)
denotes significant at the 10% level. Commodity groups based on SITC rev. 1, 2-digit codes: Agricultural products
(Groups 0, 1, 2 except 27 & 28, 4); raw materials (Groups 27, 28, 3 & 68); capital-intensive goods (Groups 61, 62, 63,
64, 651-655, 67 & 69); labor-intensive goods (Groups 656, 66 & 8); machinery (Group 7); and chemicals (Group 5).
Source: Estevadeordal (1993).




                                                          21
Table 2
Tests of Factor Endowments and Product Trade (Disaggregated Data)

                                   Labor-       Labor-     Agricultural                     Adjusted
(a) OLS estimates   Capital        skilled    unskilled         land      Minerals   R2       R2       F(6,11)
SITC Group 0: Food and Live Animals
00                   0.06*        -0.67**        -0.25        0.80**      -0.21**    0.66     0.48       2.52
01                  -1.34**         0.60       -12.12*        1.88**      0.54**     0.79     0.69      7.30**
02                  -1.03**         0.18         -8.37        1.79**        0.20*    0.75     0.62      5.62**
03                  0.10**        -1.13**      -1.41**        0.33**       -0.10*    0.39     0.06       1.17
04                  -1.16**       -8.52**       -17.8*          5.2**       0.18     0.90     0.85      17.53**
05                  -0.42**         -0.74        7.21*          1.26        -0.20    0.68     0.50      3.90**
06                  -0.64**         1.11         -4.02          -0.29     0.45**     0.58     0.35       2.55
07                  -0.28**       -2.13**        1.50*        0.08**      0.06**     0.98     0.97     137.11**
08                   -0.00          0.09         0.07         0.43**      -0.06**    0.70     0.54      4.36**
09                  -0.28**         0.51*       -2.33*        0.16**      0.12**     0.73     0.59      5.08**
SITC Group 1: Beverages and Tobacco
11                   0.06*        -1.22**      6.45**         -0.24**     0.039*     0.70     0.54      4.41**
12                  -0.06**       -0.43**        -0.16          0.07      0.06**     0.78     0.66      6.70**
SITC Group 2: Crude Materials, Inedible (Except fuels)
21                  0.20**         -0.40*        -0.56        0.88**      -0.22**    0.96     0.94     46.34**
22                   0.13*        -5.80**        3.72         1.27**       -0.15     0.74     0.61     5.48**
23                  -0.59**       1.44**       -3.28**          0.08      0.16**     0.96     0.94     49.54**
24                    0.06        -3.83**        -3.0*        1.76**      -0.21**    0.72     0.57     4.83**
25                  -0.16**         0.27       -2.80**        0.16**      0.06**     0.58     0.35      2.55
26                  -1.27**      -17.24**        -4.11        5.64**       0.66*     0.79     0.68     7.25**
27                    0.00        -1.04**      2.02**           0.07        0.01     0.22     0.10      0.53
28                  -0.46**         -0.28      -4.29**        1.46**       -0.08     0.84     0.76     10.06**
29                   -0.02        -2.27**        2.87         0.66**      -0.06**    0.62     0.41      3.04
SITC Group 3: Mineral Fuels, Lubricants and Related Materials
32                  2.02**        -8.33**      22.71**        -2.64**     -0.21**    0.89     0.83     15.04**
33                  0.17**        -4.13**        2.15         0.88**        0.04     0.86     0.78     11.42**
SITC Group 4: Animal and Vegetable Oils and Fats
41                   -0.03          -0.44        -1.43        0.68**      -0.11**    0.70     0.53      4.31**
42                  -0.20**       0.73**         -0.46         -0.11*     0.12**     0.80     0.69      7.35**
43                  -0.03**         0.03         -0.21        0.02**      0.01**     0.74     0.60      5.40**
SITC Group 5: Chemicals
51+52+53+55+59        0.04          0.82*        -0.17        -0.54**      0.03*     0.74     0.59      5.23**
54+56+57+58         0.03**          -0.04        0.45         -0.24**     0.05**     0.66     0.47      3.58**
SITC Group 6: Manufactured Goods Classified Chiefly by Material
61                  -0.42**       2.49**       -5.08**         -0.20*     0.25**     0.82     0.73     8.71**
62                  -0.06**       1.04**        -0.61*        -0.19**     0.05**     0.80     0.69     7.35**
63                  -0.90**       2.24**        -6.96*          0.23      0.41**     0.77     0.64     6.14**
64                  -0.21**       1.08**       -2.18**        -0.39**     0.21**     0.70     0.54     4.42**
65                  2.25**       10.86**         17.1         -3.74**     -1.23**    0.86     0.79     12.22**
66                   -0.11          1.31       -8.69**        -0.80**     0.18**     0.69     0.52     4.12**
67                  0.73**          0.80         10.93        -3.28**     0.37**     0.83     0.74     9.15**
68                  -0.15**       -3.98**        1.60         0.94**        0.11     0.77     0.65     6.35**
69                  0.21**          1.16*        2.61         -1.95**     0.38**     0.84     0.76     10.23**
SITC Group 7: Machinery and Transport Equipment
71                  0.84**        -2.82**      5.18**         -1.50**     0.17**     0.94     0.91     29.85**
72                  0.08**          0.30         0.44         -0.75**     0.16**     0.87     0.80     12.49**
73                  0.24**        2.21**         -0.12        -0.48**     -0.06**    0.94     0.91     31.32**
SITC Group 8: Miscellaneous Manufactured Articles
81+83+85            0.11**          -0.08        1.19*        -0.40**     0.06**     0.88     0.82     14.65**
82                  0.02**          -0.04      0.52**         -0.05**      -0.00     0.59     0.38      2.72
84                   -0.04        4.29**         0.79         -1.17**      0.10*     0.80     0.69     7.39**
86                  -0.15**       0.73**       -3.26**          0.10      0.06**     0.49     0.22      1.82
89                  -0.41**       4.74**        -7.66*        -1.23**     0.24**     0.34     0.01      0.99
SITC Group 9: Commodities Not Classified According to Kind
95                  0.08**          0.16         0.35         -0.06**     -0.04**    0.83     0.73      8.96**




                                                        22
Table 2 (continued)
Tests of Factor Endowments and Product Trade (Disaggregated Data)

                                                    Labor-           Labor-          Agricultural
(b) β values                     Capital            skilled         unskilled             land            Minerals
SITC Group 0: Food and Live Animals
00                                  0.46             -0.41            -0.03               2.14              -2.41
01                                -2.26               0.08            -0.24               1.13               1.38
02                                -2.29               0.03            -0.25                1.4               0.67
03                                  1.04             -0.95             -0.2               1.21              -1.57
04                                -1.19              -0.68            -0.18               1.87               0.28
05                                -0.79              -0.11             0.22               0.83              -0.57
06                                -2.25               0.31             -0.2              -0.36               2.39
07                                -0.86              -0.53             0.06               0.09               0.28
08                                    0              0.09              0.01               1.82              -1.09
09                                -2.72                0.4             -0.3               0.55               1.76
SITC Group 1: Beverages and Tobacco
11                                  0.7              -1.15             1.03              -0.98              0.68
12                                -1.13              -0.65            -0.04               0.46              1.71
SITC Group 2: Crude Materials , Inedible (Except Fuels)
21                                  0.62              -0.1            -0.02               0.96              -1.03
22                                  0.47             -1.68             0.19               1.63              -0.82
23                                -2.32               0.46            -0.16               0.11               0.95
24                                  0.23             -1.19            -0.15               2.38              -1.22
25                                -2.31               0.32            -0.56               0.82               1.31
26                                -0.84              -0.86            -0.04                1.3               0.66
27                                    0              -1.01             0.34                0.3               0.18
28                                -1.56              -0.08            -0.21               1.75              -0.41
29                                -0.11              -1.04             0.23               1.32              -0.51
SITC Group 3: Mineral Fuels, Lubricants and Related Materials
32                                 3.37              -1.08            0.45               -1.56              -0.53
33                                 0.57              -1.12            0.11                1.03               0. 2
SITC Group 4: Animal and Vegetable Oils and Fats
41                                -0.28              -0.33            -0.19               2.26              -1.57
42                                -3.02               0.89            -0. 1              -0.59               2.74
43                                -2.35               0.19            -0.23               0.55               1.18
SITC Group 5: Chemicals
51+52+53+55+59                     0.43               0.71            -0.03              -2.06              0.49
54+56+57+58                        0.55              -0.06             0.11              -1.54              1.38
SITC Group 6: Manufactured Goods, Classified Chiefly by Material
61                                -2.81               1.34            -0.46              -0.47               2.52
62                                -1.09               1.53            -0.15              -1.22               1.38
63                                -3.04                0. 6           -0.35               0.27               2.09
64                                -1.62               0.67            -0.24              -1.06               2.45
65                                  1.73              0.65             0.17              -1.01              -1.43
66                                -0.52                0. 5           -0.52              -1.34               1.29
67                                  1.36              0.12             0.33              -2.16               1.04
68                                 -0. 6             -1.27             0.08               1.33               0.66
69                                  0.58              0.26             0. 1              -1.91               1.59
SITC Group 7: Machinery and Transport Equipment
71                                 1.75              -0.48             0.16               -1.1               0.53
72                                 0.56               0.17             0.04              -1.87               1. 7
73                                 1. 1               0.82            -0.01              -0.78              -0.42
SITC Group 8: Miscellaneous Manufactured Articles
81+83+85                            1.2              -0.07             0.18              -1.54              0.99
82                                  1.26              -0.2             0.45              -1.11                0
84                                -0.18               1.54             0.05              -1.85              0.68
86                                -2.09               0.82            -0.62               0.49              1.26
89                                -0.87               0.81            -0.23              -0.92              0.77
SITC Group 9: Commodities Not Classified According to Kind
95                                 1.93              0.31             0.12               -0.51              -1.46
Notes: t-ratios not reported. (***) denotes significant at the 1% level. (**) denotes significant at the 5% level. (*)
denotes significant at the 10% level.
Source: Estevadeordal (1997)



                                                         23
Table 3
Tests of Measured versus Predicted Factor Content of Trade

Factors in the sample                                                  sign               t    VR     slope
                                                 Productivity correction: None
K                 Capital                                              0.50              1.4   0.01   0.03
L                 Labor                                                0.44             -1.1   0.00   -0.02
Rr                Resources-Renewable                                  0.67              2.6    —      —
Rn                Resources-Nonrenewable                               0.78              2.4   0.38   0.35
K, L, Rn          Pooled                                               0.57              2.7   0.21   0.17
                                             Productivity correction: GDP per capita
K                 Capital                                              0.72              2.4   0.01   0.06
L                 Labor                                                0.44              0.2   0.18   0.02
Rr                Resources-Renewable                                  0.83              3.0    —      —
Rn                Resources-Nonrenewable                               0.78              3.6   0.51   0.52
K, L, Rn          Pooled                                               0.65              4.9   0.39   0.37
Notes: See text; sign = sign test; t = t test; VR = variance ratio test; slope = slope test.
Source: Estevadeordal and Taylor (2002).




                                                               24
                                                        Figure 1
                                             Tariffs and Non-Tariff Indices
                                                  1913 and Mid-1990s

                                                             Percentages
90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
N=           18          14                  18              37            92             18              37             92
                   a             b
          Duties       Tariffs          1990s – 1913      1990s –     1990s – world   1990s – 1913      1990s –     1990s – world
                                           sample        developed       sample          sample        developed       sample
                                                       country sample                                country sample


              1913 tariffs                             1990s tariffsc                                1990s NTMsd


     Notes and Sources: (a)          Duties as a percentage of total imports as reported in Estevadeordal (1997).
                        (b)          League of Nations tariff level indices as reported in Estevadeordal (1997).
                        (c)          Total charges from UNCTAD/TRAINS Database.
                        (d)          Non-tariff incidence measure from UNCTAD/TRAINS Database.
                                                   Figure 2
                                       Relative Shares of Endowments
                                                1913 and 1988

                                         Measured as (Vfi/Vfw) / (Yi/Yw)

10




8




6




4



                                                                                                                    1913 sample
2
                                                                                                                    1988 – 1913 sample
                                                                                                                    1988 – developed country sample

0                                                                                                                   1988 – all countries
 N=       18      16         23   33            18      16           23   33          18     16           23   33

                       Capital                               Labor                                 Land
                                                       Endowments

      Notes: “1988 – 1913 sample” does not include Argentina and Australia.
             Vfi is country i’s endowment of factor f; Vwi is the “world” endowment of factor f;
             Yi is country i’s GNP; Yw is “world” GNP. “World” is defined by the sample size.
      Sources: 1913 data come from Estevadeordal (1997), and 1988 data come from Trefler (1995).
                                              Figure 3
                                        Relative Productivity
                                           1913 and 1988

                            Measured as real GDP per capita, US=1
1.2



1.0


 .8



 .6



 .4



 .2


0.0
  N=                  18                    16                    23                    33

                     1913            1988 – 1913 sample     1988 – developed    1988 – world sample
                                                             country sample

      Note: “1988 - 1913 sample” does not include Argentina and Australia.
      Sources: 1913 data come from Maddison (1995), and 1988 data come from Trefler (1995).
                                          Figure 4
                           Transport and Communication Costs
                                       1920 - 1990

        100

          80

          60

          40

          20

           0
                  1920      1930   1940         1950         1960            1970       1980   1990

                                    Average ocean freight and port charges
                                    Average air transport revenues per passenger mile
                                    Cost of a 3-minute telephone call, New York to London

Source: Hufbauer (1991).
                                                               Figure 5
                                           Measured versus Predicted Factor Content of Trade


                                 Capital                                                                    Labor




                       Resources-Renewable                                                       Resources-Nonrenewable




                                                                 Pooled: K, L, Rn




Notes: MFCT on vertical axis, PFCT on horizontal. Trefler weights, no productivity correction. See text and Table 2. Units on each axis are
non-commensurate for renewable resources, hence 45-degree line is omitted.
