NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SUBSIDIZING THE STORK: NEW EVIDENCE ON TAX INCENTIVES AND FERTILITY

Kevin Milligan

Working Paper 8845
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8845

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2002

This research was financially supported in part by the Social Science and Humanities Research Council and
by the Canadian International Labour Network. I thank Michael Baker, Dwayne Benjamin, Jonathan Gruber,
Robert McMillan, Jack Mintz, Aloysius Siow, Michael Smart, and seminar participants at many institutions
for comments that have greatly improved the paper. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Kevin Milligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Subsidizing the Stork: New Evidence on Tax Incentives and Fertility
Kevin Milligan
NBER Working Paper No. 8845
March 2002
JEL No. H3, J1

ABSTRACT
Variation in tax policy presents an opportunity to estimate the responsiveness of fertility to prices.
This paper exploits the introduction of a pro-natalist transfer policy in the Canadian province of Quebec
that paid up to C$8,000 to families having a child. I implement a quasi-experimental strategy by forming
treatment and control groups defined by time, jurisdiction, and family type. This permits a tripledifference estimator to be implemented — both on the program’s introduction and cancellation.
Furthermore, the incentive was available broadly, rather than to a narrow subset of the population as
studied in the literature on AFDC and fertility. This provides a unique opportunity to investigate
heterogeneous responses. I find a strong effect of the policy on fertility, and some evidence of a
heterogeneous response that may help reconcile these results with the AFDC literature.

Kevin Milligan
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
#997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC
Canada V6T 1Z1
and NBER
kevinmil@interchange.ubc.ca

1

Introduction

Families with children receive special treatment under the tax and transfer provisions of
twenty-six of the twenty-nine OECD countries (OECD (2000)). These policies may be motivated by a concern for equity: the presence of children alters their parents’ ability to pay,
and so merits recognition in the tax liability assigned to the family.1 In addition to equity
considerations, family fiscal policy has efficiency consequences if fertility depends on the cost
of children.2 Economic models of fertility following Becker (1960) have studied the influence
of the cost of children on fertility decisions. In turn, empirical researchers have shown great
interest in trying to uncover evidence of a relationship between prices and fertility. The
endogeneity of key variables has frustrated this effort.3 Hotz et al. (1997) conclude their
survey on the economics of fertility by stating that “the crucial challenge is to find plausibly
exogenous variation in proxies for the price and income concepts appearing in the theories.”
Tax policy may present a solution to this problem. If families with children are treated
differently by tax and transfer policies than families without children, then the tax system
introduces variation in the after-tax price of children. If this variation is unrelated to individuals’ choices, then it can be used to test for evidence of a relationship between fertility
and prices.
Many researchers have studied the impact of fiscal incentives on fertility. In one strand of
the literature, researchers regress an aggregate time series of fertility on policy variables and
control variables.4 Three distinct problems arise in these aggregate time-series studies. First,
the identification of policy effects from these regressions relies solely on time-series variation.
This leaves the identification vulnerable to trends in unobserved variables. Specifically, if
different cohorts of mothers have different unobservable characteristics that are important
for their child-bearing decisions, then time-series variation in general is not sufficient to
1

See, for example, Pechman (1983) or Davies (1990) for the development of these arguments.
The cost of a child comprises both the direct cost of the child’s consumption and the opportunity cost of
the parents’ time used in raising the child. Nerlove et al. (1984) and Batina (1986) set out optimal taxation
frameworks in which the optimal child subsidy and income tax rates depend on the elasticity of the demand
for children, and how this elasticity varies with income.
3
Women may have unobserved proclivities for different family sizes. If differences in these proclivities
lead to different human capital accumulation and marital decisions, then the opportunity cost of time out of
the labor market will be jointly determined with fertility. See, for example, Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1980).
4
Examples include Whittington et al. (1990), Hyatt and Milne (1991), Zhang et al. (1994), and Gauthier
and Hatzius (1997).
2

2

identify fertility effects of policy. Second, the assumptions about the timing of the response
to policy are arbitrary. Reactions to changes in fertility policy will be delayed by a ninemonth gestational lag, as well as any time necessary for the diffusion of information about the
change in policy. This makes it unclear which year’s policy influences which year’s fertility.
Finally, many of these time-series studies suffer from the common problem of short series
and the resulting small sample size. This reduces the credibility of asymptotic inferences.
Another large set of studies uses microdata to study the effects of policy on fertility.
Whittington (1992) and Whittington (1993) find a fertility-enhancing effect of the dependent
exemption in the PSID. However, these studies are hampered by small sample sizes and
lack of substantial variation. The bulk of the recent literature, however, focuses on the
incentive effects of payments through Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC)
on female headship and fertility decisions.5 The surveys of this literature in Moffit (1998)
and Hoynes (1997b) both make a distinction between the findings of studies including state
fixed effects and those that do not. On the question of female headship, Moffitt (1994) and
Hoynes (1997a) provide evidence that the inclusion of state-level fixed effects wipes out the
explanatory power of welfare policy. If some unmeasured state-varying factor influences both
female headship and the determination of state AFDC rates, then excluding state fixed effects
from the regression will attribute to the policy what should be attributed to the excluded
variables. This leads Hoynes (1997b) to conclude that there is no compelling evidence of
a response to policy. For fertility, the Hoynes (1997b) survey reaches a similar conclusion.
Moffit (1998), on the other hand, interprets the evidence as being in favor of a relationship,
although without robustness. Harvey et al. (2000) survey the recent experimental literature
on welfare. They conclude that the “evaluations have produced inconsistent results” on the
relationship between family size and welfare benefits.
More recently, Rosenzweig (1999) brings a different approach to the estimation of AFDC
effects on behavior. In his paper, the marital and child-bearing decisions of the woman are
modelled jointly, and estimated as a multinomial logit. This differs from other models that
5

AFDC was a transfer program for single parents with low income. Hoynes (1997b) describes the features
of AFDC in more detail. There is also some work on welfare and behavior in Canada. Allen (1993) finds
some effect of welfare on fertility in a 1986 cross section of microdata. Dooley et al. (2000) study welfare
benefits and female headship in Canada using provincial variation through time, finding no evidence of a
relationship.

3

consider these decisions separately or sequentially. He uses differences in average welfare
benefit levels across cohorts within states to identify the effect of the benefits. Rosenzweig
finds a significant impact of AFDC in the decision of young women to be single mothers,
even with the inclusion of state-level fixed effects.
In this paper, I exploit the introduction of a pro-natalist tax policy in the Canadian
province of Quebec. The Allowance for Newborn Children paid up to C$8,000 to families
following the birth of a child. I implement a quasi-experimental empirical strategy using
microdata derived from the public-use files of the Canadian Census. The structure of the
Allowance for Newborn Children allows for the formation of treatment and control groups
defined by time, jurisdiction, and family type. This strategy overcomes the problems in
the time-series literature described above, and offers two improvements on findings from the
AFDC literature. First, the structure of the program allows for a triple difference estimator
that is robust to linear time-varying jurisdictional effects. This strengthens the credibility
of causal inferences. In contrast, Rosenzweig (1999) relies on state effects being constant to
identify the influence of AFDC. If changes through time in fertility patterns within states
have some influence on the decision to change AFDC rates, then estimates that rely on
across cohort variation will be biased. Second, because the program was available to all
families, the results are more general than those looking at AFDC payments alone. This
permits a broader examination of heterogeneity in the response to the program. Critically,
this provides an opportunity to find a potential reconciliation of the results presented here
with the AFDC literature.
Several interesting findings emerge. First, the estimates suggest a strong, positive, and
robust impact of the policy on fertility. In the model containing the full set of control
variables, the fertility of those eligible for the new program is estimated to have increased
by 12 per cent on average, and by 25 per cent for those eligible for the maximum benefit.
Second, I estimate the responsiveness of fertility to an extra $1,000 in benefits, finding an
increase of 16.9 percent. Finally, I find the response to the policy to be heterogeneous.
Subsamples of women similar to those used in AFDC studies show no statistically significant
response to the incentives, while families with higher income show a stronger response.
The paper proceeds as follows. First, I present a simple economic model of fertility to
develop the theoretical framework for the estimation that follows. I then provide details
4

on the relevant institutions and describe the empirical strategy used in the analysis. Next,
I document trends in aggregate fertility using data derived from vital statistics, and then
proceed to a rigorous empirical examination using different microdata sources, including
several checks for robustness of the result as well as an examination of heterogeneity in the
reaction to the program. The next section estimates the responsiveness of fertility to the
dollar value of benefits. This is followed by a reconciliation of these results with the AFDC
literature. Finally, a brief discussion closes the paper.

2

The Model

Becker’s (1960) seminal article on the economics of fertility posits that parents make decisions
about children as they do other consumer goods — maximizing utility subject to prices and a
budget constraint. Willis (1973) synthesizes this approach with the theory of time allocation
developed in Becker (1965) to formalize the relationships between labor supply and fertility.
In his model, the presence of young children leads women to take time out of the labor
market. Women facing a higher opportunity cost of being absent from the labor market face
a higher price for children, and so will have fewer children.6 Below, I present a simple static
model of fertility in the presence of a per-unit transfer to families with children. This model
predicts that family size is increasing in the amount of child subsidy, which is the basic result
to be taken to the data.
This model is based on Becker’s (1991) model of fertility. A family utility function is
defined over the consumption of two goods, the number of children Q, and a composite good
Z. The prices of the goods are pq for children, and 1 for the composite good, which is taken
as the numeraire. The family has income of I. The family receives a per-child subsidy of t,
meaning that the price faced by the family for the consumption of children is pq − t. The
problem solved by the family is to maximize utility subject to the budget constraint:
{Q, Z}max U = U (Q, Z)

s.t.
6

(pq − t) Q + Z = I

The development of both the theoretical and empirical literature is surveyed by Hotz et al. (1997).

5

The first-order conditions for the problem can be combined to give the standard condition
relating the marginal rate of substitution to relative prices.
UQ
= pq − t
UZ
This solution implicitly defines a demand function for Q which depends on pq , t, and I.
Q∗ = Q∗ (pq , t, I)
Holding income constant, an increase in the net price of children (pq − t) leads to substitution
away from children to more consumption of the composite good. The demand for children
will be decreasing in the net price (increasing in the subsidy) so long as the income effect is
not too negative (i.e. children are not Giffen goods):
dQ∗
> 0.
dt
Becker-type models of fertility are controversial among demographers. Olsen (1994) provides a discussion of the distinctions between this type of model and standard demographic
analysis, which places parents as actors within a system of exogenously given biological processes, reproductive technology, and cultural influences. These models predict no change
in fertility decisions in reaction to exogenous changes in prices or incomes. So, evidence in
favor of a fertility reaction to price changes can be taken as supporting the prediction that
prices do matter against the alternative that prices are not important.

3

Empirical Strategy

I employ a quasi-experimental estimation strategy to explore the effects of tax policy on
fertility. In this section, I first give some background on the Allowance for Newborn Children.
This is followed by a discussion of the identifying assumptions used in the estimation strategy.

3.1

The Allowance for Newborn Children

Demography plays a unique role in the history of Quebec.7 Following the ceding of New
France to the British in 1763, the flow of new French colonists ended. Very high birth rates
7

There is an historical precedent for the Allowance for Newborn Children. In 1669, King Louis XIV of
France ordered that an annual stipend of 300 livres be paid to families with ten or more children (Langlois
(1993)).

6

among French-Canadians allowed their numbers to grow from the original ten thousand
colonists to over one million by the time of the Canadian Census of 1871 (Langlois (1993)).
In 1959, fertility in Quebec fell below the Canadian average for the first time.8 This trend
heightened concern about the preservation of French-Canadian culture and political influence.9 These historical concerns contribute greatly to an explanation for the introduction of
the explicitly pro-natalist Allowance for Newborn Children.10
The Allowance for Newborn Children (ANC) paid non-taxable benefits when a child
joined a family between May 1, 1988 and September 30, 1997.11 All citizens and permanent
residents of Quebec were eligible for this provincial program. The size of the ANC payment
depended on the parity (birth rank) of the child within the family. Initially in 1988, a first
or second child entitled the family to a one-time $500 transfer. For a child of third or higher
parity, the government paid a series of eight quarterly payments of $375, totaling $3, 000.
Over the next 4 years, the benefit amounts increased. From 1992, the birth of a first or
second child brought a $500 immediate payment. Second children also entitled the family
to a second $500 payment on the child’s first birthday, and a third or higher parity child
brought twenty quarterly payments of $400, totaling $8, 000. The ANC was cancelled in
1997.12
The introduction of the ANC was announced in the Quebec provincial budget on May 12,
1988. In the months preceding the budget, both the main opposition party and the governing
party included in their fiscal proposals some changes to Quebec’s family policies (Montreal
Gazette (1988ab)). However, the provincial government released no hints about the structure
of the ANC prior to the budget speech. The day following the release of the budget, the
ANC was front page news in both English and French newspapers in Quebec (Montreal
Gazette (1988c), La Presse (1988)). This suggests that the ANC is unlikely to have been
anticipated, but that information about its surprise introduction was plausibly wide-spread.
8

Historical fertility rates for Quebec and Canada are presented and discussed in more detail in Section 4.
See, for example, Gosselin (1968). Similar concerns about the “danger of submersion” into the Englishspeaking population are expressed in Langlois (1933, p. 142).
10
If so, this raises the possibility that both the policy and any changes in fertility share a common origin
— changes within Quebec society. I return to this point in the discussion of identification that follows.
11
Children born to the mother, as well as children under age five joining a family through adoption, were
eligible for the transfer. The benefit did not depend on the mother’s marital status.
12
Children born after September 30, 1997 were not entitled to the benefit, although those born on or
before that date continued to receive the full stream of payments as scheduled until 2002.
9

7

This enhances the credibility of setting this episode in an experimental framework.
The ANC was cancelled for children born after September 30, 1997. The cancellation
was announced well in advance, and again was well-publicized. As quoted in the Montreal
Gazette (1996), the government justified the cancellation by saying they thought the ANC
didn’t work.13 As a candidate for a quasi-experimental analysis, the cancellation is less than
ideal. A large expansion of public subsidies for daycare was announced at the same time as
the cancellation of the ANC.14 If daycare incentives had impact on fertility decisions, then
it is not clear that the absence of the ANC would lead to a fall in fertility. This potentially
contaminates the experimental environment.
Was the subsidy provided by the ANC large or small? To gain insight into this question,
I employ equivalence scales estimated by Phipps (1998). These scales measure the cost of
children by the extra income necessary to return the household to its pre-child level of utility.
So, this measure excludes the opportunity cost generated by any decrease in family labor
supply. I apply these scales to an average level of family income and obtain costs of $7, 935
for a first child, $6, 348 for a second child, and $5, 324 for a third child.15 Evaluated over the
first five years of a child’s life, this implies that the ANC represented a percentage subsidy
to the direct costs of 1.3 per cent for a first child, 3.2 per cent for a second child, and 30.1
per cent for a third child.

3.2

Identification

Typically, quasi-experimental estimators compare the behavior of a treatment group and a
control group through a period in which an exogenous change affects the economic environment of the treatment group.16 Here, Quebec women act as the treatment group, with the
women in the rest of Canada outside Quebec acting as the control group. The introduction of
the ANC provides the exogenous change. The difference in the fertility of women in Quebec
13

The raw number of children born in Quebec in 1996 was almost unchanged from 1988 at about 85, 000,
a fact which might underlie the government’s claim. When the number of babies is appropriately normalized
for the number and ages of women, a different answer emerges. This is taken up further in Section 4.
14
See Baril et al. (2000) for a description and analysis of the pre-1997 and post-1997 Quebec family benefit
programs.
15
The average total family income among married couples in the Census data set for 1996 is $51,191. (The
construction of this data set is described below in Section 5.1.) The equivalence scales estimated by Phipps
(1998) for a two parent family are 1.155 for one child, 1.279 for two children, and 1.383 for three children.
16
See Meyer (1995) for a fuller description of this estimation strategy.

8

before and after the introduction of the ANC can be compared to the difference in fertility of
women outside Quebec during the same period to form the standard difference-in-differences
estimator. In the literature on AFDC and fertility, jurisdictional fixed effects weaken the
estimates of the impact of AFDC, raising questions about identification from cross-sectional
variation across jurisdictions. In contrast, the difference-in-differences estimator eliminates
any additive jurisdictional fixed effects, and consequently does not rely on cross-sectional
inter-jurisdictional variation for identification.
Heckman et al. (1999) describe the functional form assumptions necessary for the differencein-differences estimator to produce an unbiased estimate of the impact of a program. Specifically, the impact of the program, jurisdictional fixed effects, and period effects must be
additively separable in order for a differencing strategy to be unbiased. Furthermore, the
error terms must also be additively separable and their expected difference across groups
equal to zero. The assumption on the error terms will be violated if, for example, some
trend in a relevant unobserved characteristic affects the economic environment in one jurisdiction differently than the other. In this case, the influence of the unobserved trend on the
outcome variable will be incorrectly attributed to the program.
I take three approaches to meeting the challenge presented by trends in other variables.
First, I attempt to do the best job possible with observables. The regressions include several
control variables for observable family characteristics that may influence fertility choices, as
well as some provincial-level controls for aggregate trends that may differ across provinces.
Conditioning on these variables improves the credibility of causal inferences, but is not
sufficient in the presence of differing trends in unobservables. The second approach exploits
the structure of the ANC to further refine the empirical strategy. Because families giving
birth to higher parity children receive a larger allowance, their reaction to the program
should be stronger than the reaction of families contemplating the birth of a first child. This
permits the construction of a third difference — women facing a first-rank birth can act as
a control group for women considering a higher parity birth. This enhances the robustness
of the identification strategy relative to the basic difference-in-differences strategy. Finally, I
implement this triple-differencing strategy not only on the program’s introduction, but also
on its cancellation.
For families facing the birth of a first child, the incentives provided by the ANC may be
9

stronger than the benefit paid for that child alone. This arises because the birth of a first child
also gives the family an option to have a second child. In this way, the incentives for higher
parity births may influence families facing lower parity births. The use of families facing a
first birth as a control group for families facing a third or higher birth is still informative,
however, so long as the treatment for the two groups is different.17
This identification strategy may be compromised if other policy changes occurred contemporaneous with the introduction of the Allowance for Newborn Children. Two major
changes during this time period present themselves. First, abortions were removed from the
Criminal Code of Canada following the striking down of Section 251 by the Supreme Court
of Canada in 1991.18 To the extent that this increased the availability of abortions, it may
have influenced fertility. The rate of abortion per 100 live births, however, showed little
change between 1986 and 1992.19 Second, the Canada-Quebec Accord of 1991 gave to the
province of Quebec constitutional power over immigration.20 If this resulted in a change in
the fertility behavior of immigrants selected by Quebec compared to those selected by the
rest of Canada, then my estimates will attribute to the ANC what should be attributed to
the change in immigration laws. To investigate this hypothesis, I reproduced the results
appearing in Section 5 with a subsample that excluded immigrants. There was no significant
change to the point estimates.
The unique role of demography in Quebec society raises the question of policy endogeneity. Besley and Case (2000) argue that the source of policy variation must be considered
carefully. If some change in Quebec society lead to both the introduction of the program
and the change in fertility, then estimates of the effect of the policy will be confounded. The
empirical approach taken here addresses this important issue in two ways. First, even in the
presence of a different attitude to fertility among Quebecers, the identification will be robust
if this attitude is constant through this period. Any fixed Quebec-specific determinant of
17

I ran regressions attempting to account for this option value by including a measure of the incentives for
the births of all potential higher parity children. The higher parity incentives were weighted by the probability
that the family would have a child of a given parity, conditional on the family’s current structure. These
regressions produced results similar to those reported.
18
See the Supreme Court of Canada ruling R. v. Morgentaler (1991).
19
See Statistics Canada (1994). The rate per 100 live births increased from 17.0 to 17.7 in all of Canada,
and from 14.7 to 16.6 in Quebec. The rates per one thousand women exhibited a similar pattern.
20
See Young (1998) for details.

10

fertility is controlled for in this empirical strategy by comparing the fertility of Quebecers
before and after the introduction of the ANC. Second, if there was some change in unobservable determinants of fertility in Quebec contemporaneous with the introduction of the
ANC, the triple-difference comparison of first births to higher-order births permits inferences
about the effects of the policy. In other words, a social trend would have to have a differential
impact on families of different sizes in order to hinder inferences. Furthermore, an argument
relying on changes in social attitudes would not only have to explain the patterns of fertility
after the introduction of the policy, but also after its cancellation.
Bertrand et al. (2001) express concern about the possibility of a differencing identification
strategy to find effects where there are none. I do three things to alleviate these concerns.
First, I look for pre-existing trends in fertility in each of the data sources analyzed here.
Second, I look for effects in provinces where there was no incentive program. Finally, my
analysis with Census data will implement their suggestion to collapse data into one control
and one treatment period in order to avoid potential serial correlation of the policy variables.
I also explored the possibility of another control group, being non-residents (such as refugee
claimants) who were in Canada but not eligible for the ANC. However, the size of this group
was very small, and the comparability of unobservable characteristics for this group with
permanent residents is not likely to be adequate.

4

Evidence from Vital Statistics

This section examines aggregate measures of fertility taken from vital statistics.21 The
analysis aims to assess whether observed patterns of fertility are consistent with the ANC
having influenced fertility. The measure for fertility used here is the total fertility rate, which
takes the current cross-section of women and uses them to estimate the number of children
a typical woman will have during her lifetime.22 I first look at the historic path of the total
21

Vital statistics are collected by provincial governments. Statistics Canada collects some vital statistics
from the provincial offices to provide national aggregate statistics. Along with these national statistics, I use
data collected from unpublished tables provided by the Ontario Office of the Registrar General, Institut de
la Statistique du Québec, and Statistics Canada.
22
The total fertility rate is calculated by taking the proportion of women π of each age a who bear a child
in a given year. These ratios are summed across ages 15 to 49:
49
P
TFR =
πa .
a=15

11

fertility rate in order to provide context for the experimental period. I then focus on the
years from 1980 to 2000, comparing fertility across jurisdiction and by parity, before and
after its introduction and cancellation. Finally, I present some aggregate evidence of fertility
behavior by cohort in order to look at the dynamics of childbearing.
Figure 1 graphs the historic path of the total fertility rate of women in Quebec and
Canada before the ANC from 1922 to 1991.23 The fertility of women in Quebec exceeded
the Canadian average prior to 1959. From 1959 to 1974, fertility dropped sharply across
Canada, going from 3.94 to 1.88, while the decline in Quebec was slightly greater, going
from 3.93 to 1.61. From 1975 to 1979, Quebec fertility increased relative to the Canadian
average, then fell again through the 1980s. The 1970s relative increase in Quebec fertility
coincides with reforms to the federal family allowance in 1974 and 1978.24
In order to focus more closely on the period encompassing the introduction of the ANC,
I construct annual total fertility rates for Quebec and for the rest of Canada excluding
Quebec.25 For comparison, I also include the total fertility rate for the United States in each
year. These data are graphed in Figure 2. From 1980 to 1987, the total fertility rates in
Quebec and the rest of Canada diverged, reaching a maximum difference of 0.290 in 1987.
The period after the introduction of the ANC shows a quick narrowing of the gap between
the total fertility rates of Quebec and the rest of Canada. By 1991 this gap reached 0.082,
and then remained fairly constant through the duration of the program. This provides some
preliminary evidence consistent with the ANC having affected fertility.
Following the cancellation of the program in 1997, the total fertility rate in Quebec fell
(In practice, the total fertility rate is typically calculated using five-year age groups.) An alternative
measure, the completed fertility rate, measures the total number of children borne by women of cohorts
who have completed their fertile period. Since few women exposed to the ANC have completed their fertile
period, this measure is not useful for the present question. Campbell (1983) addresses the construction of
demographic measures. Hotz et al. (1997) provide a detailed discussion comparing period and completed
fertility measures.
23
The Canada total fertility rate does not include Newfoundland because data for Newfoundland is not
available for the whole period.
24
The federal family allowance, the structure of which varies by province, was expanded significantly in
1974. In Quebec, the federal entitlement depended on the number of children in the family, with third and
fourth children receiving 133 and 158 per cent more than the amount payable to a first child. In 1979, the
family allowance was partially replaced by an income-tested refundable tax credit. More detail is provided
in Appendix D.
25
The construction of these total fertility rates is discussed in Appendix A. Data for Quebec is available
up to 2000. National data is available currently only to 1998.

12

from 1.601 in 1996 to 1.429 in 2000. In the rest of Canada, there was also a downward
trend from 1996 to 1998, though not as sharp as in Quebec. While caution should be taken
in the interpretation of so few data points, it appears that fertility in Quebec and the rest
of Canada moved in directions consistent with the cancellation of the ANC having had an
effect.
Figure 3 breaks down the total fertility rate by parity. These fertility rates are analogous to the total fertility rate, but concentrate on specific births. The magnitudes can be
interpreted as the proportion of women who will have a birth of a specific parity during her
lifetime, using the behavior of the current cross-section of women. First, at the top of the
figure the fertility rates of women having their first child are graphed. The rate for women
in Quebec lies below the rate for women in the rest of Canada for the pre-reform period.
After the introduction of the ANC, the fertility rate of women in Quebec rises relative to
women in the rest of Canada until 1991, when it overtakes the rate for the rest of Canada.
For second children, the same pattern emerges: a persistent gap before the reform followed
by a period of convergence from the introduction of the ANC until 1991, and then finally a
period with little difference between the rates from 1991 to 1997. The bottom two lines in
Figure 3 compare the fertility rate for the two regions for births of third or higher parity.
The gap between the rates before the introduction of the ANC was substantial. The rate
was 0.217 in Quebec compared to 0.374 in the rest of Canada for 1987, for example. After
the introduction of the ANC, the fertility rate for third or higher births in Quebec increased
rapidly. In 1995, the Quebec rate reached 0.305, which was 41% above the rate observed in
1987. Over the same period, the fertility rate in the rest of Canada displayed a steady, slow
downward trend.
In the period following the cancellation of the ANC, the trends in the parity-specific
fertility rates again correspond with the hypothesis that the ANC affected fertility. Between
1996 (the last full year of the program) and 2000, the fertility rate for third or higher births
dropped from 0.303 to 0.248 — a drop of 18 per cent. In the rest of Canada between 1996
and 1998 there was a decrease of only three per cent.
Overall, this breakdown of the total fertility rate by parity provides two strong pieces of
evidence. First, the ANC appears to have had an effect on fertility rates in Quebec, both
on its introduction and its cancellation. Second, the movements in births of third or higher
13

parity appear to be larger than those for births of first or second parity, consistent with the
magnitude of the incentives.
Do these observed changes in fertility represent a permanent or a transitory shift in
fertility behavior?26 For example, if woman reacted to the ANC by having more children
earlier, followed by fewer children later in life, then there would be no effect of the ANC
on completed fertility. However, the measured total fertility rate would reflect this with a
transitory upward shift.27 When completed fertility rates for the cohorts exposed to the
ANC become available, this hypothesis may be testable. Still, with currently available data,
some evidence can be gathered on this question. If a cohort of women exposed to the ANC
is observed to shift births to earlier ages, then this would provide evidence of the observed
shift in the measured total fertility rate being transitory.
Table 1 reports the number of children born to each one thousand women in Quebec in
different age ranges by cohort. The data are presented at five-year intervals between 1962
and 1997. The rates from 1992 and 1997 are shaded to indicate the presence of the ANC
for those years. The top-left cell takes the women born between 1943 and 1947 for the year
1962, when members of this cohort were between the ages of 15 and 19. For these women,
there were 29.83 births per thousand women in 1962. The top row then follows this cohort
through to 1987, when they had 2.59 children per thousand. Looking down the first column
allows a comparison of different cohorts as they reach the 15 to 19 age range.
This table is informative when read along either dimension. First, looking down each
column, there is a downward trend in fertility in each age range among newer cohorts until
the introduction of the ANC. For example, women born between 1943 and 1947 had 68.13
children per thousand in 1977 when aged 30 to 34. The cohort of women born ten years later
had only 59.95. Following the introduction of the ANC, women in this age range show higher
fertility, at 80.89 in 1992 and 79.61 in 1997. Looking across different rows, any intertemporal
shifting of fertility can be seen. For example, the cohort of women born between 1963 and
1967 increased their fertility when exposed to the ANC between the ages of 25 and 29 relative
26

Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1980) and Rosenzweig and Schultz (1985) explore life cycle fertility behavior.
Dickert-Conlin and Chandra (1999) examine the role of taxes and the timing of birth within a pregnancy.
27
Hotz et al. (1997) demonstrate how shifts in the timing of births are exaggerated when a period fertility
measure such as the total fertility rate is used. Heckman and Walker (1990) estimate a model of the timing
and spacing of births using Swedish data. Merrigan and St.Pierre (1998) use a similar methodology on
Canadian data.

14

to earlier cohorts not exposed to the ANC. When this same cohort of women was between
the ages of 30 and 34 in 1997, they had 79.61 children per thousand, which exceeded the
fertility of older cohorts in that age range. So, increases in fertility observed in 1992 do not
appear to be offset by later decreases in fertility in 1997 when the same cohort of women
were older. This provides some evidence against a transitory reaction to the ANC.
To summarize this evidence, aggregate fertility rates in Quebec and the rest of Canada
move in a direction consistent with the ANC having an impact on women’s fertility decisions.
This reaction appears for births of all parities, but most noticeably for births of children
of third or higher parities. This is consistent with the incentive structure of the benefits
under the ANC. Finally, the pattern of increased fertility in Quebec during the reform
period appears persistently through all ages for the observed cohorts, which provides some
preliminary evidence against a transitory reaction to the program. These inferences, however,
may be contaminated by trends in other factors influencing fertility that differ between
Quebec and the rest of Canada. The next section expands the analysis to a framework
using microdata, in which controls for observable household characteristics and provincewide trends can be incorporated.

5

Evidence from Census Data

The primary data set employed for the analysis is selected from the Canadian 1991 and 1996
Census Public Use Microdata Files on Families.28 Combined in this way, the data set is
a repeated cross-section rather than a longitudinal sample.29 The Census microdata files
combine information on the family recorded on Census Day with income and labor force
information from the previous calendar year. The 1991 file describes each family as of June
4, 1991 and provides income details for 1990. Similarly, the 1996 file describes the families
as of May 14, 1996, and provides income details for the 1995 tax year.30
28

I also explored the Family Expenditure Survey, the Survey of Consumer Finance, and the General Social
Survey as possible data sources. In all cases, the sample size for women in Quebec of different family types
was insufficient to provide credible inferences.
29
Heckman et al. (1999) and Heckman and Robb (1985) show that under fairly general conditions repeated
cross sections estimate the same parameter as panel data.
30
Using the 1986 Census in place of the 1991 Census was explored as well. Implementing a difference-indifferences strategy over a longer period may contaminate the differences through trends in unobservables.
In particular, the 1986 Census covers a period of substantial population outflow from Quebec, which may

15

Two obvious weaknesses of the Census data used here are the frequency of the data and
the inability to examine the cancellation of the program. The Census is taken quinquennially,
and the 2001 Census files are not yet available. Both of these weaknesses, however, can be
addressed in part by examining data from the Labour Force Survey. I take up this analysis
in Section 6. For the main analysis, however, the Census is preferable because of the depth
of information about the demographic and income situation of each household.
For the analysis with the Census data in this section, I first outline the selection criteria
used to choose the families included in the analysis. Next, I describe the construction of
the variables used from those available in the Census. Finally, I present some descriptive
statistics for the full sample, as well as subsamples consisting of families from Quebec and
from the rest of Canada.

5.1

Data Set Construction

The 1991 and 1996 files report information on a sample of 345,351 and 342,231 families
respectively. Each is roughly a three per cent sample of the population. To create the data
set used in the analysis, I first select only families in which the female spouse or lone-parent
female is between age 15 and 34. Women older than 34 are increasingly likely to have children
who have left the household, which makes the family structure difficult to reconstruct. This
left 160,901 families in the data set. Additionally, there are 20,749 families who moved
between provinces in the five years prior to Census day. These families are removed to
improve accuracy in assigning the province of residence at the time the family had their
children.31 In some cases, the reported number of children is censored, so the exact family
structure could not be constructed. Three hundred and sixteen such families are identified
and removed from the data set. Finally, 2,951 families in the remaining sample are nonresidents, making them ineligible for the receipt of the ANC or other family tax benefits.
have affected fertility rates if those leaving had different fertility characteristics than those who stayed. (See
Lachapelle (1987) for a discussion of the effects of this migration.) Regressions using the 1986 Census in place
of the 1991 Census show similar results for the core difference-in-differences results, but weaker evidence for
the triple-difference results.
31
Mobile households are of course important if mobility was influenced by child benefit policy. Because the
Census does not report the previous province of residence nor the year when the move took place, this issue
is difficult to address with these data. In regressions with this sample of mobile households, no difference in
behavior relative to non-mobile households is observed.

16

The final data set contains 136,885 observations.
The timing of the Censuses and the ANC is critical to the interpretation of the empirical
results. The Census files do not provide the exact year of birth for each child, but do report
the number of children in different age ranges. The first category is for children under the
age of six. For the 1991 Census, a child born between June 5, 1985 and June 4, 1991 will
appear as a child under the age of six. These dates define what I refer to as the 1991 Census
window. Similarly, the 1996 Census window opens on May 15, 1990 and closes on May 14,
1996. The ANC was paid for children born between May 1, 1988 and September 30, 1997.
The ANC window thus partially overlaps the 1991 Census window, but completely spans
the 1996 Census window. Figure 4 displays the timing graphically.32
Because of gestation and information lags, it is difficult to know exactly when the first
births potentially influenced by the ANC took place. The degree to which births observed
in the 1991 Census were influenced by the ANC changes the interpretation of the results. If
no births observed in the 1991 Census were influenced by the ANC, then the research design
is standard — one pre-treatment period followed by one full treatment period. Because of
the overlap, however, the use of these two Censuses results in a comparison of fertility in a
period of partial exposure to the ANC (the 1991 Census window) with fertility in a period
with complete exposure to the ANC (the 1996 Census window).33
The “windows” methodology is similar to that of Rosenzweig (1999), who uses as an
incentive variable the average welfare rates faced by women over the years until turning
22. Rosenzweig argues that it is more reasonable to assume that women react to average
differences in policy rather than postulate that fertility moves exactly contemporaneously
with policy. Results using a smaller three-year window can be formed with the Labour Force
Survey, which reports the age of the youngest child in a category for children under age
three. Analysis on these data appears in section 6.
This experimental design requires knowledge of the family structure at the beginning of
32

From the ages of the mother and children reported in the 1995 General Social Survey, I constructed
yearly observations on the fertility behavior of each mother. Using this data set, I could exploit the year
to year changes in the ANC to identify the policy effects. Regressions on this data set showed positive and
significant effects of the ANC on fertility. However, reported household income in the GSS is unreliable.
This and the small sample size limit the usefulness of this data set for a deeper analysis.
33
In Appendix C, I report results from regressions using the dollar values of child benefits. This will
account for the intensity of treatment received by women through each Census window.

17

the Census window six years prior to Census day, as well as the exact number of children
born to the family over the Census window. The Census reports the number of children in
different age ranges residing with the family on Census day. The category for children under
age six is used to construct the binary variable Had a child, taking the value 1 when the
family has at least one child under six, and 0 if no children under age six are present. From
the other age categories, I construct three indicator variables to count the number of children
age six or older in the family. The variables Zero older children, One older child, and Two
or more older children take the value 1 when the corresponding number of children over six
are present in the household, and 0 otherwise. These variables enable the reconstruction of
the family structure at the beginning of the Census window. The number of older children
is the number of children the family had as it entered the Census window. The variable Had
a child captures whether or not the family responded to the incentives they faced, given the
number of children already in the family as it entered the Census window.
The reconstruction of the family structure is inexact. Children present at the beginning
of the Census window may not be with the family on Census day. Similarly, children present
on Census day may not have been present during the Census window. These discrepancies
may result from events such as the death of a child, divorce, remarriage, or the adoption of
an older child. The 1991 Census provides an opportunity to evaluate the accuracy of this
reconstruction, since the file in that year reports how many children had ever been born
to the female. Of the 74,400 families in the 1991 sample, 92.9 per cent show no difference
between the number of children ever born to the female and the number of children currently
in the household.34
Several other family characteristics observable in the data set may influence fertility.
Controls for the age, highest education level, mother tongue, and immigration status of both
the woman and her spouse are created from the reported categories in the Census.35 In
addition, three controls for province-wide factors are created and attached to each family
based on the province of residence. Controlling for the family’s income presents several difficulties. A great amount of evidence documents a drop in female labor market activity upon
34

The family reconstruction for the excluded women in the age range 35 to 44 was successful in only 76.4
per cent of the cases.
35
Further detail on the construction of all variables is provided in Appendix A.

18

the birth of a child.36 Furthermore, transfers from government through family allowances
and unemployment insurance payments may rise with the birth of a child, creating a similar
endogeneity problem through the tax and transfer system. To overcome these problems, I
construct a measure of family income that includes only male labor market earnings and
family non-labor income. The body of empirical evidence suggests that these components
of income are not responsive to family size. Ideally, I would include the annual income for
each year of the Census window. The Census, however, reports only the income for the
year preceding the year of the Census (1995 for the 1996 Census; 1990 for the 1991 Census).
Therefore, the family income variable I create acts as a proxy for the income received by the
family during the Census window.
Table 2 presents some descriptive statistics for the sample. For each of 1991 and 1996,
the mean values for variables are reported for all observations, for those residing in Quebec,
and for those residing in the rest of Canada. If assignment to treatment were randomized,
the expected value of all characteristics would be equal across the treatment and control
groups.37 Because treatment was assigned by geography rather than by randomization, it
is important to examine the differences between the treatment and control groups. The
number of observations fell from 1991 to 1996, reflecting the smaller share of the population
in the 15 to 34 age range in the later Census. The proportion of women with a child under
six rose from 0.428 in 1991 to 0.444 in 1996. The increase in Quebec, however, was greater
— from 0.418 to 0.451 compared to an increase of 0.432 to 0.441 in the rest of Canada.
These comparisons are given a more thorough examination in the next section.
Changes in other observable characteristics may explain some of the changes in fertility
in Quebec and the rest of Canada. For example, families in the 1996 sample attained higher
education levels than families in the 1991 sample. The proportion of women with a university
degree increased by 48.8 per cent in Quebec and 27.1 per cent in the rest of Canada. If women
with more education have a higher opportunity cost of an absence from the labor force, then
controlling for this difference between Quebec and the rest of Canada may become important.
The proportion of married women in the sample decreased from 0.713 in 1991 to 0.683 in
36

See, for example, Angrist and Evans (1998), or Gunderson (1998) for Canadian evidence.
Randomized experiments do not necessarily eliminate bias. Heckman and Smith (1995) argue that both
experimental and non-experimental evaluations face the same challenge — making inferences about the
intrinsically unobservable behavior of the treatment group had it not received treatment.
37

19

1996, but this drop occurs almost equally in Quebec and the rest of Canada. Average family
incomes dropped sharply from $24,749 in the 1991 sample to $21,593 in the 1996 sample,
although once again there is not a large difference between Quebec and the rest of Canada.
The change in the average provincial GDP growth does not differ greatly between Quebec
and the rest of Canada. The net migration rate doubles between 1991 and 1996 in both
Quebec and the rest of Canada, reflecting the increase in immigration through this period.
Average provincial education spending per student grew by eight per cent in the rest of
Canada, but only by one per cent in Quebec. Because changes in GDP growth, migration,
and education spending occur simultaneously with the ANC, including these variables as
controls will remove any effect of these provincial-level shocks on fertility from the measured
impact of the ANC.

5.2

Differences in Means

Table 3 presents a comparison of the means of the indicator variable Had a child across time,
jurisdiction, and parity. The standard deviations appear below the corresponding means.
The table first compares the means using the full sample, then breaks down the sample by
parity. The first two columns report the means from the 1991 and the 1996 sample. The
third column takes the difference between these means across time to calculate the trend in
the means, while the fourth column takes the difference in the trend differences. The fifth
column then reports the percentage increase in fertility in Quebec from 1991 to 1996. This
is calculated by comparing the observed difference-in-differences to a counterfactual case in
which the Quebec trend was equal to the rest of Canada trend. The difference-in-differences
is divided by the sum of the 1991 Quebec mean and the 1996 rest of Canada trend. Finally,
the last column takes the difference between the result for first and third children to form
the triple-difference.
Panel A analyzes the full sample. In Quebec, the proportion of women with a child
under six increased by 0.033 from 1991 to 1996. The trend in the rest of Canada was 0.009.
The difference in these differences is a significant 2.4 percentage points, which represents
a 5.5 per cent increase over the counterfactual assumption that Quebec fertility followed
the same trend as the rest of Canada. Panels B through D repeat these calculations for
subsamples of women having zero, one, and two or more other children respectively. This
20

approach leads to the triple-difference strategy described earlier. In panel B, the percentage
increase in the proportion of women with zero older children who had a child is 4.0 per
cent. For those with one, and two or more older children, this rises to 9.7 per cent and 17.2
per cent. These percentage increases change monotonically with parity, which is consistent
with the benefit structure of the ANC. A more formal test of the triple-difference result is
presented in the sixth column of the table. The difference-in-differences for families with no
other children is subtracted from the difference-in-differences for families with two or more
other children. This tests whether the percentage point change in the probability of having
a child is equal across parities. Because the base probabilities are very different, the same
percentage point change represents a different percentage change in the probability of having
a first child versus the probability of having a third child. The calculated triple-difference
is 0.036 percentage points. The corresponding p-value from the test of the hypothesis that
this triple-difference mean is different from zero is 0.076.
The differences in means present compelling initial evidence of the effect of the ANC on
fertility. These statistics show that fertility increased in Quebec between 1991 and 1996,
and that this increase was stronger for births of higher parity. While this is consistent with
the ANC having an effect on fertility, this preliminary evidence is insufficient to suggest
causation. For example, other variables important for a family’s fertility decisions may
vary systematically across time, place, and parity. A multivariate framework that features
controls for observable characteristics therefore improves the credibility of causal inferences.

5.3

Basic Regressions

The sample statistics presented in Table 2 revealed several differences between Quebec and
the rest of Canada for variables potentially affecting fertility. In this section, I report results
from regressions controlling linearly for demographic and provincial variables. This improves
on the simple mean differences of the previous section by removing from the estimated program effect the influence of other observable variables affecting fertility. I first run regressions
looking for the existence of a differential fertility rate in Quebec in 1996. Following this, I
explore how this response changes among families facing the birth of children of different
parities. The estimates reveal that the statistical significance of the increase in fertility in
Quebec persists with the inclusion of linear controls for observable characteristics.
21

The equation to be estimated takes the following form:
Had a childi = β0 + β1 Quebeci ∗ 1996 dummyi + β2 Quebeci + β3 1996 dummyi + β40 Xi + ei
All specifications share the same independent variable (Had a child ), and include controls
for 1996 and Quebec fixed effects, as well as a constant. This corresponds to a typical
difference-in-differences empirical specification by controlling for both Quebec and temporal
fixed effects. The variable of interest is the interaction between Quebec and 1996 dummy.
This interaction picks up any differential trends in fertility among residents of Quebec relative to those in the rest of Canada. The variables included in Xi vary by specification. All
models are estimated as probits, with standard errors derived from the Huber-White robust
estimator for the variance-covariance matrix. The reported estimates are marginal probabilities for each of the included independent variables. These estimates can be interpreted
as the marginal change in the probability of having a child during the Census window for a
change in the corresponding independent variable.
Table 4 presents regression results including different combinations of regressors. The
first column displays the results from a regression including only Quebec, 1996 dummy, and
their interaction. Without other control variables, the interaction term provides a measure of
the unconditional average difference in fertility in Quebec in 1996. The marginal probability
implied by the estimated coefficient on the interaction term is 0.024. As expected, this is
the same as the difference-in-differences estimate of the treatment effect reported in Table 3.
Given that the proportion of women with a child under six in Quebec in 1991 was 0.418, and
the estimated marginal probability from the 1996 trend variable is 0.009, the 0.024 estimate
therefore implies a 5.6 per cent increase in the probability of having a child for women in
Quebec in 1996.
The second column expands the set of regressors to include controls for several characteristics of the mother. With these variables included, the implied percentage increase in the
probability of having a child is 7.8 per cent. These estimates suggest that the increase in
fertility in Quebec in the previous specifications was not due to differences in family structure, age, immigrant status, mother tongue, or education level of the women in the sample.
I control for the number of children at the beginning of the Census window with dummy
variables. Also included are controls for the age, immigrant status, mother tongue, and ed22

ucation level of the woman. The marginal probability of 0.205 reported for One older child
suggests that families who have already had one child have a 20.5 percentage point higher
probability of having another child, relative to families with no older children. (The dummy
variable No older children is the excluded variable.) Families with two or more children
already, however, are less likely to have another child, as indicated by the negative marginal
probability reported for the corresponding indicator variable. Taken together, this reveals
an average preference for two child families.
The demographic controls reveal no surprises. The excluded age category is for ages 15
to 24. Relative to the excluded category, the estimates suggest that females age 25 to 34
are 18.7 percentage points more likely to have a child. I include a dummy for immigrant
status as well as dummies for the mother tongue spoken by the woman. These variables
may capture cultural elements that vary across native-born and immigrant women, and
across women of different language groups. The significant coefficient on being anglophone
or francophone suggests that, relative to allophones, both anglophones and francophones are
less likely to give birth in the Census window. Finally, three dummy variables indicate the
effect of different levels of female education on fertility. The estimates decline monotonically
with education. For a women with a university degree, the estimated coefficient implies a
19.2 percentage point drop in the probability of having a child. Women with more education
have better labor market prospects, so this pattern is consistent with the predictions of the
Willis (1973) framework in which women with a higher opportunity cost of time choose to
have fewer children.
Rosenzweig and Schultz (1985) and Rosenzweig (1999) have argued that human capital
accumulation decisions are made jointly with fertility decisions. For example, if a young
woman has little desire to bear children, then this may increase her propensity to make
investments in human capital. In addition, this may increase her desire to get married. This
suggests caution in interpreting the coefficients on these potentially endogenous variables.
How might this effect the estimate of the program’s impact on fertility? If women changed
their human capital and marital decisions in response to the introduction of the ANC, then
interpreting these variables separately from the Quebec - 1996 dummy interaction becomes
difficult. However, because many of the women in this data set were older when the program
was introduced, it seems plausible to assume their marital and education choices were fixed
23

before they were exposed to the program.38
The third column adds further control variables for the male partners of the women in
the sample. The estimated coefficient on the Quebec - 1996 dummy interaction increases
to 3.9 percentage points with the male controls included. The estimated coefficients on
the education variables show a distinctly opposite pattern for the males. If males do not
take time out of the labor force upon the birth of a child, then male earning potential has
an income effect on fertility. Therefore, these estimates suggest a positive income effect
on fertility. Additional evidence on the income effect on fertility is found in the estimated
coefficient on Family income, a measure which excludes the labor market earnings of the
female. This coefficient is positive, suggesting that a ten thousand dollar increase in family
income increases the probability of having a child by 1.75 percentage points. In the Becker
and Lewis (1973) quality-quantity model, more income leads to a higher demand for both
child quality and child quantity, which leaves the sign of the overall income effect theoretically
ambiguous.39 In these data, the estimates suggest that, on average, the direct effect of higher
income on the quantity of children dominates the indirect effect through child quality.
The fourth column of Table 4 supplements the controls from column 3 with three additional provincial control variables, as well as provincial fixed effects. The interpretation of
the Quebec and 1996 dummy interaction as a program effect relies on the assumed absence
of other provincial trends in variables affecting fertility. Provincial GDP growth, Provincial migration rate, and Provincial education spending attempt to control for province-level
macroeconomic, demographic, or fiscal shocks that may confound the measurement of the
effect of the ANC. While only one of these estimates is statistically significant in itself, the
three are strongly significant when tested jointly, with a calculated chi-squared test statistic of 15.51 for the exclusion of these three variables. These controls have a large impact
on the estimate of the Quebec - 1996 dummy interaction term, which rises from 3.9 to 5.3
percentage points.
In the discussion of identification in Section 3, the possibility of finding “false” treatment
38

Regressions on the subsample of women between the ages of 25 and 34, for whom this assumption may
be more reasonable, show similar results to the full sample.
39
The increase in desired child quality induced by the increase in income leads to an increase in the
expenditure per child. This increases the cost of a child, which leads to a decreases in the desired quantity.
Thus, higher income has a positive direct effect on quantity, but a negative indirect effect on quantity through
child quality.

24

effects was raised. To investigate this issue, I conducted a number of falsification checks by
looking for fertility effects in provinces and in time periods when there was no ANC program.
These results are presented in Appendix B. Overall, no other situations arise with fertility
patterns similar to those experienced by Quebec during this period.

5.4

Results for Different Family Structures

The evidence presented in Table 4 shows a strong increase in fertility in Quebec following
the introduction of the ANC. In order to provide more convincing evidence of a causal link,
I present results that compare the fertility of families facing the birth of children of different
parities. With the higher payment made to births of third or higher parity, a stronger
response by these families is expected.
Table 5 reports the results of regressions on three subsamples comprised of families with
zero, one, and two or more older children. These results appear in the first three columns
of the table. These regressions use the empirical specification from Table 4 including the
full set of control variables. For families who entered the Census window with no children,
the estimated increase in the probability of having a child is 4.1 percentage points, which
implies a 9.8 per cent increase in probability over the counterfactual assumption that Quebec
followed the same trend as the rest of Canada. For second children, the percentage increase
in probability is 13.1 per cent, and for third or higher parity children, the probability is
estimated to increase by 24.7 per cent over its counterfactual level. All three estimates are
statistically significant at conventional levels. This larger increase in the fertility of families
facing the birth of a higher-parity child is consistent with the pattern of the incentives of
the ANC.
Families facing the birth of a third child may differ systematically from other families in
other observable ways. For example, women who already have at least two children are older
and have higher family income. To see if it is these differences rather than the ANC that
underlie the stronger response among families facing higher-parity births, I pool together all
family types, but now interact the Quebec and 1996 dummy variable with each of Zero older
children, One older child, and Two or more older children. As well, I include interactions of
Quebec with each family type, and interactions of 1996 dummy with each family type. This
controls for any Quebec-specific effects for children of different parities, and common trends
25

in fertility for families with children of different parities. This specification frees different
family types to have different responses to the program, while controlling for observable
differences across family types. The resulting estimates are quite similar to those from the
regressions on family-type subsamples. The implied percentage increase in the probability
ranges from 10.7 per cent for families with zero older children to 25.0 per cent for families
with two or more older children. This again follows the pattern predicted by the incentive
structure of the ANC.

5.5

Results Using Dollar Value of ANC Benefits

This section discusses results from regressions that replace the Quebec - 1996 dummy interaction with the dollar values of ANC benefits received by families. Such a specification
accounts for the intensity of treatment received by different families. The analysis is made
difficult, however, by the frequency of receipt of payments. Estimates from the existing literature tend to use annual benefit flows rather than lump-sum payments. For this reason, to
try and maintain comparability I report results from regressions using two measures of the
benefit — the flow of benefits over the first year of the child’s life and the flow of benefits
over the first five years of the child’s life. More detail on the calculations can be found in
Appendix C and Appendix D.
Table 6 presents the coefficients from regressions using the same control variables as
Table 4 column (d) along with the first-year and the five-year ANC benefit amounts. The
first column contains the results for the first-year benefit regression. This regression provides
a useful comparison with results from the literature which focus on annual benefits. The
estimated coefficient on the benefit variable is 0.073. This coefficient implies that a $1,000
increase in the benefits received in the first year would increase the probability of having
a child by 16.9 per cent. When this responsiveness is combined with the average benefit
received by Quebecers, the benefit elasticity of fertility can be calculated. The elasticity
here is 0.107, which is similar to the range of estimates in time-series studies.40
The second column of the table displays the five-year benefit results. This measure
40

Gauthier and Hatzius (1997) find a long run benefit elasticity of 0.16 for family allowances across countries. Zhang et al. (1994) find elasticities of 0.05 to 0.11 for child benefits in Canada. Whittington et al.
(1990) find elasticities between 0.127 and 0.248 for the personal exemption in the United States.

26

better captures the change in the family’s financial position because of the differing number
of periods over which payments were made for the ANC. Here, the estimate suggests that a
$1,000 increase in the total five-year sum of the benefits would increase fertility by 2.6 per
cent. This is only slightly less than one fifth of the first-year benefit result, which suggests
that using the first-year benefits proxies satisfactorily for future benefit flows.
Families in Quebec and in the rest of Canada were eligible for many other benefits through
the tax system in addition to the ANC. Appendix C explores the total tax benefits received
by families with children, finding results very similar to those presented above using only
the ANC.

6

Evidence from the Labour Force Survey

The Labour Force Survey (LFS) overcomes two weaknesses of the Census data — its frequency and the inability to examine the cancellation of the ANC. This section provides a
brief supplementary analysis using the LFS to address each of these questions.41
The LFS is a monthly survey of around 50,000 households, similar in many respects to
the U.S. Current Population Survey. It combines questions on labor market activities with
demographic characteristics of the household.42 Three key variables permit the construction
of family structure. First, information on the marital status of the household is reported.
Second, the number of members in the family is provided. Finally, the data include the age
of the youngest child (if there is a child). The first category for the youngest child is for ages
less than three, so the window used for analysis here is only three years, compared to the
six year window used in the analysis of the Census.43 Married families and lone-parent or
unattached females are included in the sample if the female is between the ages of 15 and
34. The average sample size for each year is around 260,059, of which about 42,022 are from
Quebec.
41

The motivation for this section borrows from an Honours research paper by Andrea Wenham.
The survey is a nationally representative sample of the population of the ten provinces aged 15 and
higher. Residents of the territories, inmates of institutions, residents living on Indian Reserves, and military
personnel are excluded. I use the sample weights provided.
43
The marital status is taken from the variable reporting the type of economic family rather than the
marital status variable, as the marital status variable appeared inconsistent through time. Families classified
as “other family types” were excluded because of the difficulty in assigning family structure.
42

27

One weakness compared to the Census is that the LFS reports only the age of the
youngest child, rather than the number of children in the under age three category. This
means that families who had multiple children during the three year window will erroneously
be assigned too large a family structure at the beginning of the window.44 This will affect any
inferences made about the parity-specific patterns of fertility in the LFS, as more families
will be assumed to have faced the higher incentive levels than was actually the case. This
will bias down the results for those with one and those with two or more children. As with
the Census data, a variable Had a child is constructed that takes the value 1 if the family
has a child age three or less, and 0 otherwise.
Figure 5 displays the mean of the LFS Had a child variable both for all families and for
families who had two or more older children at the beginning of the window. Separate lines
are drawn for residents of Quebec and those in the Rest of Canada. Note that this variable
represents a three year moving average of fertility, rather than a true indicator of fertility
for each year. For example, the 1996 value for Had a child will reflect children born in 1993
through 1996, and possibly conceived as far back as 1992. Again, a line is drawn in at 1988
and at 1997 to indicate the beginning and the end of the ANC incentives.
The trends in fertility evident in Figure 5 are broadly consistent with the patterns expected with the introduction and cancellation of the ANC. For the results with all families,
there is a clear increase in fertility following 1988 which is sustained until 1997. Following
1997, there is a drop in both Quebec and the Rest of Canada, but the drop in Quebec is
steeper. For families with two or more older children, there is also a strong increase following
1988, and a decrease after 1997. As a percentage, these increases are large — between 1987
and 1994 the rate in Quebec moved from 0.073 to 0.084 for a change of 15 per cent. Because
of the error in the construction of the family structure noted above, however, this may be
biased down.
44

For example, take a family with five members, two of whom were born in the past three years. Because
we only observe the presence of one child under three, the procedure I use assigns the family four members at
the beginning of the window rather than the correct number of three. In the Census sample used in section
5, 21.3 per cent of families had more than one child under age six.

28

7

Reconciliation with AFDC Findings

Aggregate time series studies mostly find some responsiveness of fertility to tax incentives.
In contrast, the American AFDC literature has found inconsistent results. In this section,
I attempt to reconcile the strong fertility effects of the ANC found here with findings from
the rest of the literature. I do this by selecting subsamples from my Census data set that
resemble the samples used in other studies. This permits some insight into the differences
between the results found here and those from other studies.
I focus on three recent papers that study AFDC payments and fertility.45 First, Rosenzweig (1999) employs the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) on young women
through the age range 14 to 22. I replicate this data set by selecting women who are under
age 25. Second, Fairlie and London (1997) use a sample of single mothers with at least one
child from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). I replicate their data
set by using the same selection criteria. Finally, Acs (1996) uses the NLSY on a sample of
single women under age 23. I replicate this data set by selecting single women under age 25.
The results from these regressions appear in Table 7. The regression specification used
is the same as Table 4 column (d). The point estimates from the first and third regression
show a very small and statistically insignificant effect. The second specification shows a large
effect, but it is imprecisely estimated and so it is also statistically indistinguishable from zero.
These results suggest that, in general, women who are single and who are younger may be less
responsive to the ANC than other women. These types of systematic differences between
women likely to collect AFDC and all women may explain the different results found in
AFDC studies and the ANC results presented above.
To look more closely at heterogeneity in the response to the ANC, I present in Table 8
results from regressions incorporating interactions of Quebec and 1996 dummy with several
characteristics.46 Column (a) shows the coefficient on the interaction of Quebec and 1996
dummy with Married. This interaction term is not significant, which suggests that any
differences in the responsiveness of single and married women to the policy is not attributable
45

Many other papers in the AFDC literature (for example, Hoynes (1997a)) focus on the female headship
decision, which combines marital and fertility choices. The studies chosen here for replication focus more
directly on the fertility decision.
46
In each case separate interactions of the characteristic with both Quebec and 1996 dummy are included
in order to isolate the response of the policy from Quebec and period specific effects.

29

to their marital status, but to other characteristics that differ between the two groups of
women.47 Column (b) reports the results from a regression including an interaction of Quebec
and 1996 dummy with Female age 25-34. The coefficient is positive, but not significant.
Again, this provides no evidence that age alone leads older women in the sample to be more
responsive to the policy than younger women. The next column shows the results from
a regression with interactions between Quebec and 1996 dummy and the female education
variables. The excluded category is women with less than high school education. Again,
none of the coefficients is significant.
Column (d) displays the estimated coefficient for a regression that includes an interaction
between Quebec and 1996 dummy and Family income. The estimate of 0.078 implies that
an increase in family income of $100,000 increases the policy responsiveness from 0.036 to
0.114 percentage points. This suggests a strong income effect in policy responsiveness. The
final column in the table includes all the interaction terms from the first four specifications.
This specification also shows a strong income effect in the responsiveness of policy. Women
with access to less non-labor income are not as responsive to the ANC as women with more
non-labor income. This effect persists on the subsample of women with positive non-labor
income, suggesting that this result is not driven by difference between women with no nonlabor income and those with positive non-labor income.48
In contrast, Rosenzweig (1999) finds that the responsiveness of fertility to AFDC benefits
is much smaller among women who may have had access to more resources.49 This is most
likely due to a decreasing likelihood that AFDC benefits are an important part of expected
income as the woman’s resources grow. So, it is not clear whether Rosenzweig’s finding
reflects a decreasing expected benefit or a decreasing responsiveness to benefits.
There are many possible interpretations of the observed increase in responsiveness with
income. For example, this could be evidence of unobserved heterogeneity in the responsive47

It is conceivable that these results are driven not by differences in responsiveness across groups of
women, but by differences in the incentives they faced under the parity-based structure of the ANC. I
also ran regressions interacting the same set of characteristics with the ANC benefit amounts, rather than
the Quebec - 1996 dummy interaction. These regressions account for the intensity of the incentive faced
by different families, and showed similar results to the regressions using the simple Quebec - 1996 dummy
interaction.
48
I thank Hilary Hoynes for this suggestion.
49
Rosenzweig selects subsamples based on the income of the young woman’s parents. Those with parental
income over ten thousand dollars were much less responsive to AFDC benefits.

30

ness of women to these incentives. If high income women differ in some unobserved way from
low income women, then the higher responsiveness of high income women may be reflecting
this unobserved characteristic. As well, the income measure used here may not be exogenous.
If there is positive assortative matching among spouses, then the income measure may be
related to wife’s earnings capacity, and so be related to the cost of children. This would
complicate the interpretation of any income effects using this measure of family income.
Another potential explanation can be drawn from the model developed by Becker and
Tomes (1976). Their model implies a U-shaped path for the desired number of children
as income rises.50 This means that at low income levels, the overall income elasticity of
demand for children is negative, whereas at high income levels it is positive. This produces
a useful prediction that may help in understanding the effect of an exogenous change in the
price of children. At low income levels, this model predicts that the substitution and the
income effects work in opposite directions, while at high income levels the income effect will
reinforce the substitution effect. This occurs in the model because low income women given
more income prefer to spend more on the children they already have rather than increasing
the size of the family. This may explain the weak price response among low income women.
This section has looked at the responsiveness of subsamples of women chosen to resemble
the data sets constructed in the AFDC literature. Among these women, the hypothesis
that the policy response is zero cannot be rejected. This is consistent with researchers who
have found only insignificant effects of welfare on fertility. Furthermore, this suggests that
the results from the AFDC literature do not generalize to all women. In regressions using
interactions of the policy variable with different characteristics, the responsiveness of women
increases with non-wife income.
50

They generate this result by adding heritable endowments of child quality to the Becker and Lewis
(1973) model. With heritable quality endowments, the income elasticity of the own-contribution to quality
is relatively large at low levels of income, and declines as income rises. This means that, at low levels
of income, the child quality income effect will dominate but at higher levels of income the child quantity
income effect will dominate. So, at low levels of income the overall income effect is negative, but then
becomes positive at higher levels of income.

31

8

Conclusion

This paper has presented new evidence on the relationship between tax incentives and fertility. There are two major findings. First, the responsiveness of fertility to a birth subsidy
is estimated to be large — up to a 25 per cent increase in fertility for families eligible for the
full amount. A C$1,000 increase in first-year benefits is estimated to increase the probability
of having a child by 16.9 per cent. Second, there is evidence of heterogeneity in the response
to the policy. This heterogeneity may help to reconcile the results with evidence on AFDC
and fertility, and suggests that findings about AFDC and fertility do not generalize to all
women.
This evidence supports the hypothesis that prices matter for family fertility decisions.
This, in turn, carries implications for the interpretation of the optimal tax models of Nerlove
et al. (1984) and Batina (1986). Their models suggest that the design of tax and transfer systems should take into account the response of fertility to tax measures. Specifically Nerlove
et al. assume that the most disadvantaged individual has the most children, while the results
in Batina’s model hinge critically on assumptions about the differences in fertility elasticities
across income groups. The estimates presented in this paper help the interpretation of the
models by providing evidence on the signs and magnitudes of the relevant elasticities.

32

A

Variable Definitions

Total Fertility Rate: For each year in a given jurisdiction the number of births for women in
seven five-year age groups covering women from age 15 to 49 is divided by the population of
women in the corresponding age group. These seven birth rates are summed, then multiplied
by five to get the total fertility rate. The birth data come from Statistics Canada catalogues
84-204 and 84-210. The population data come from CANSIM series C894142 and C892552.
Had a child : Takes the value 1 if at least one child under age six in the family on Census
day; otherwise equal to 0.
Zero older children: Takes the value 1 if no children age six or older in the family on
Census day; otherwise equal to 0.
One older child : Takes the value 1 if one child age six or older in the family on Census
day; otherwise equal to 0.
Two or more older children: Takes the value 1 if two or more children age six or older in
the family on Census day; otherwise equal to 0.
Male / Female less than high school : Takes the value 1 if did not receive high school
diploma; otherwise equal to 0. For single females, the male variable takes the value 0.
Male / Female high school : Takes the value 1 if received high school diploma, but no
further education; otherwise equal to 0. For single females, the male variable takes the value
0.
Male / Female post high school : Takes the value 1 if pursued further education past high
school, but did not receive university degree; otherwise equal to 0. For single females, the
male variable takes the value 0.
Male / Female university degree: Takes the value 1 if received university degree; otherwise
equal to 0. For single females, the male variable takes the value 0.
Married : Takes the value 1 if female is legally married or in common-law relationship;
otherwise equal to 0.
Live in urban area: Takes the value 1 if family lives in a community of population 100,000
or greater; otherwise equal to 0.
Male / Female immigrant: Takes the value 1 if an immigrant; otherwise equal to 0. For
single females, the male variable takes the value 0.
Male / Female allophone: Takes the value 1 if mother tongue is neither French nor
English; 0 otherwise. For single females, the male variable takes the value 0.
Male / Female anglophone: Takes the value 1 if mother tongue is English; 0 otherwise.
For single females, the male variable takes the value 0.
Male / Female francophone: Takes the value 1 if mother tongue is French; 0 otherwise.
For single females, the male variable takes the value 0.
Family income: The sum of male wages and salaries, male self-employment income, male
investment income, and female investment income; in 1995 Canadian dollars.
Provincial GDP growth: Constructed as the average rate of real provincial GDP growth
over the six years in the Census window; data from CANSIM, various series.
Provincial migration rate: Constructed as the net number of inter-provincial migrants
divided by provincial population, averaged over the six years in the Census window; data
from CANSIM, various series.
33

Provincial education spending: Constructed as the total provincial government spending
on elementary and secondary education divided by the population in the age range 0 to 17;
data from CANSIM, various series; in 1995 Canadian dollars.

B

Falsification Checks

This appendix reports results from regressions where no effect is expected in order to enhance
the credibility of the causal link drawn from the evidence. The regressions reported in
section 5 identify a differential trend in the fertility of women in Quebec versus the rest of
Canada. As well, this trend is shown to be increasing in the parity of the next child to be
born. The control variables included in the regressions account for the effects of observable
characteristics on fertility, and leave any remaining trend to be explained by the existence
of the ANC program. The credibility of this interpretation as causal becomes weaker to the
extent that strong trends in fertility exist in other provinces where none are expected. For
example, in a comparison of the fertility of families observed in the 1986 Census to those in
the 1991 Census, no persistent differences between Quebec and the rest of Canada should
be observed, since the ANC had no material effect on families during either of these periods.
Similarly, a comparison of any particular province (other than Quebec) with the rest of the
country should not produce significant program effects, since no families outside Quebec
were eligible for the ANC. I next explore these falsification strategies to try and find an
effect where there should be none.
Table 9 displays results from regressions using the strategies outlined above. The first
column reports the estimates for regressions based on the full set of control variables, using
the interaction of Quebec and the dummy for the later Census year as the variable of interest.
In columns 2 through 4 I report the estimates from a pooled regression like that in Table
5. The results for the 1986 and 1991 Census comparison in panel A of the table show no
statistically significant difference between the trends in fertility in Quebec versus the rest of
Canada over this period. When the Quebec and Census year interaction is further interacted
with the family types in a pooled regression, no obvious pattern in the estimates is evident.
This suggests that, in the period preceding the introduction of the ANC, there were no
strong differences in fertility trends in Quebec and the rest of Canada.
The balance of the table in panel B reports results from regressions comparing each of
the ten jurisdictions outside Quebec in turn with the other nine. (In all cases, Quebec
observations are deleted for these regressions.) In the first column, both Newfoundland and

34

Saskatchewan show significant declines in fertility from 1991 to 1996.51 From this evidence,
it seems that Quebec is not alone in experiencing a statistically significant shock to its
fertility over these years. However, the pooled regression results for neither Newfoundland
nor Saskatchewan in columns 2 through 4 show a consistent pattern of significant effects by
family type. Thus, the results in Table 5 for Quebec are unique in exhibiting a consistent
pattern of significant effects for different family types.

C

Analysis Using Total Child Benefits

In this appendix I examine regressions that use benefit levels rather than dummy variables
as the key explanatory variables. Regressions on benefit levels can be interpreted as a Local
Average Treatment Effect (LATE) in the sense of Imbens and Angrist (1994).52 Consider the
determination of benefits as a ‘first stage’ regression, with family type, province of residence,
and year as regressors. The estimated effect of this benefit on fertility in the ‘second stage’
could be interpreted as a LATE that measures the increment to fertility caused by the change
in benefits resulting from moving from not being a resident of Quebec during the ANC period
to being a resident of Quebec during the ANC period.
Below I present some descriptive statistics for total child benefits across jurisdictions,
years, and family types. This is followed by the results of regressions on the dollar value
of benefits, including results that attempt to account for the endogeneity of income-tested
benefits to fertility.

C.1

Descriptive Statistics

In addition to the ANC, families receive several other tax benefits related to children. For
example, a family residing in Quebec in 1989 with a new child may have received the ANC,
the Allowance for Young Children, the Quebec and the Federal Family Allowance, as well
as refundable and non-refundable child tax credits. By combining the impact of these fiscal
measures, the total tax incentives to have a child for each family in the data set can be
calculated. In this section, I present summary statistics for the magnitude of the fiscal
51

Saskatchewan and Newfoundland had the largest out-migration rates among the provinces for this period.
Different fertility behavior among migrants and non-migrants may have contributed to the drop in fertility
in these provinces.
52
Meyer (1995) makes a similar point about the causal interpretation of this type of parameter, but does
not relate it to the LATE.

35

incentives followed by regression results using these variables to estimate the influence of tax
incentives on fertility.
The main incentive variables used in the analysis are calculated over two time horizons,
one year and five years. This distinction may be informative because some of the family
benefits are paid continuously from the year of birth until the child becomes an adult, while
others are one-time payments or of limited duration. Because the year of birth of a child
within the Census window is unknown, the incentives facing each family to have another
child are calculated for each year in the Census window. The one-year benefit is then formed
as an average of these six benefit calculations. For benefits over a five year horizon, the
annual fiscal flow over the first five years of the child’s life is discounted by a three per cent
rate of time preference and summed. This calculation is repeated for each of the six potential
years of birth in Census window, and averaged. Further details on the methodology and the
child benefit programs are included in Appendix C.
Table 10 displays the means and standard deviations of the incentive variables for subsamples consisting of residents of Quebec and the rest of Canada. Panel A of the table pools
together all family types, with panels B through D breaking down the sample into subsets
defined by the number of children in the family at the beginning of the Census window. All
statistics are reported separately for data derived from the 1991 and 1996 Censuses, and all
values are in 1995 Canadian dollars. The first column reports the statistics for the ANC for
residents of Quebec. Across all family types, the average family would have received $191
from the ANC in the years prior to the 1991 Census, and $635 in the years before the 1996
Census. Women in the 1991 Census had some exposure to the ANC during the Census window, while women in the 1996 Census were exposed to the full force of the program. In the
1996 sample, families with no other children would have received on average $528 through
the ANC. The benefit for families with one other child is identical because a child of second
parity receives only one payment in the first year, with the second payment coming on the
child’s first birthday. The ANC benefit rises to $1,646 for families for whom the additional
child would be of third or higher parity.53
The second column shows the sum of all the benefits payable to a family with a new
child, but excluding the ANC. The third column reports the total benefit levels for each of
the family types, which is the sum of the first two columns. The fourth column contains the
same total benefit statistics for residents of the rest of Canada outside Quebec, who were
53

The standard deviations for these benefits is each zero because all families of each type receive the
identical benefit.

36

ineligible for the ANC. Between 1991 and 1996, there were many changes to federal child
benefits.54 The family allowance, refundable and non-refundable tax credits ended in 1992
and were replaced by a new income-tested child tax benefit. However, the total of the other
benefits for families in Quebec shows little change on average from the 1991 to the 1996
sample. On average, the change is $60, which is only 3.6 per cent of the 1991 total. Thus,
most of the variation in average benefits for Quebec residents across time is driven by the
ANC. For residents of the rest of Canada, total benefits do not change much on average —
only $9 between 1991 and 1996 — which suggests that the net mean impact of changes to
federal family policy on incentives is negligible.
I again draw on the equivalence scales estimated by Phipps (1998) to assess the magnitude
of these incentives. Using these scales in Section 3, I calculated the average annual cost of
a first child to be $7935, a second child $6348, and a third child $5324. Taking the total
one-year child benefits in the 1996 sample in Table 10, this implies that the child benefits
represent a subsidy of 24.9 per cent, 34.2 per cent, and 80.4 per cent for first, second, and
third children respectively in Quebec. In the rest of Canada, the subsidies as a percentage
of the cost of children are 13.0, 17.4, and 27.0 per cent for first, second, and third children
respectively. These calculations indicate that the subsidies in the tax system are large, and
especially so for families in Quebec.
The last four columns of the table repeat the analysis with the five-year incentive measure.
During the first five years of a child’s life, the only benefit that pays different amounts at
different ages is the ANC. Accordingly, the ANC totals differ relative to the other benefits in
the five-year horizon calculations. For families having their second child, the five-year total
is now higher than for families having their first child, since the five-year total also includes
the second $500 payment made on the child’s first birthday. For families residing in Quebec
facing the birth of a third child, the discounted sum of the total benefits received over the
first five years of the child’s life is $19,363. This is more than double the total for Quebec
families with a first child, or for any type of family in the rest of Canada.

C.2

Correcting for Endogeneity

The ANC was a non-taxable transfer, but many of the other child benefits depend on the
level of family income. For example, the federal Child Tax Credit was reduced by a rate of
five per cent for every dollar of family income over a certain threshold ($25,921 in 1993). This
54

For further detail, see Appendix D.

37

raises the possibility that these benefits are endogenous to the decision to bear a child. This
potential endogeneity arises because a higher benefit provides an incentive for a woman to
have a child, but the birth of a child may also cause a decrease in the woman’s labor market
activity. Lower labor market earnings leads mechanically to an increase in her income-tested
child benefits. This may lead to an upward bias in the estimate of the response of fertility
to incentives.
A solution to this problem lies in finding an instrument that is correlated with child
benefits, yet exogenous to the decision to bear a child. The changes in child benefits between 1991 and 1996 provide an opportunity to form such an instrument. The changes in
government policy are plausibly exogenous to the decision of an individual woman to have a
child. By exploiting the exogeneity of these reforms, I can construct an instrument that has
predictive power for the level of benefits, yet is not related to individual fertility decisions.55
The calculation is made as follows. I construct simulated instruments in the spirit of Currie
and Gruber (1996) for cells defined by province, year, and number of older children.56 I then
assign these simulated benefits to the women in my data set. The simulated benefits should
have predictive power for the actual level of benefits received by women, but by construction
will be unrelated to their labor force decisions, thus avoiding the endogeneity that may bias
estimates using their actual benefits.57
Table 11 reports the results from the regressions using the first-year and the five-year
benefit entitlement of the family if it had another child (measured in $1,000) as the policy
variable of interest. The full set of control variables is included in the regression. The
dependent variable for the regressions remains the same — the binary variable Had a child.
I depart from the previous regressions by estimating the models as a linear probability model
using OLS instead of as a probit. This facilitates the estimation of two-stage least squares
(2SLS) models using the instrument.58 For all regressions, the coefficient on the level of
the benefit entitlement is reported, along with the corresponding percentage increase in
the fertility rate implied by the estimate for a $1,000 increase in annual child benefits. I
provide an elasticity calculation along with the reported coefficients. The benefit elasticity
is calculated as the percentage change in the probability of having a child divided by the
55

This instrumental variables strategy is similar to that used by, for example, Currie and Gruber (1996)
to estimate the effect of health insurance for children on health outcomes.
56
For each simulated individual I assigned the sample average labor market earnings for the husband and
the wife. The simulated individuals were assumed to be married.
57
The F -statistic for the first stage regression is 11, 435. The t-statistic on the simulated instrument is
142.98.
58
The fit of the probit model and the linear probability model with the data is quite similar.

38

percentage change in the child benefit at the mean.
Panel A of the table uses the first-year benefits incentive variable. The first and second
columns of the table present the OLS and 2SLS estimates using the total child benefit
entitlement, including all programs. The OLS estimate is 0.129, which implies a 29.7 per
cent increase in fertility for an increase of $1,000 in total benefits. This is almost twice the
magnitude of the estimate obtained using the ANC alone in table 6. The 2SLS estimate,
however, is 0.077, which implies a 17.6 per cent increase in fertility for a $1,000 increase in
annual benefits. The benefit elasticity is also lower in the 2SLS results, at 0.236. The lower
panel of the table repeats the regressions for the five-year benefits incentive variable. The
estimates are slightly less than one fifth of the results using first-year benefits, suggesting
that the response does not depend on the timing of the receipt of benefits.
In summary, the total fiscal incentives to have children in Canada during this period
were large, especially in Quebec. I find that accounting for the endogeneity of income-tested
benefits to fertility is important, but that the impact of fiscal incentives on fertility is still
large.

D

Institutions and Methodologies for the Benefit Calculator

This appendix provides more detail about transfers to families with children, and then describes the methodology used for the incentive variable calculations.

D.1

Transfers to Families with Children in Canada

During the period spanned by the Census window for the 1991 and the 1996 Censuses,
Canadian families were potentially eligible for eleven distinct fiscal measures through the
tax and transfer system. Each is described below. Further detail on these measures can be
found in Canadian Tax Foundation (various years), Québec (1992), and HRDC (1999).
D.1.1

The Quebec Allowance for Newborn Children

The Allowance for Newborn Children was introduced on May 1st, 1988 and was cancelled
on October 1, 1997. This non-taxable benefit was paid upon the birth of a child, or upon
the adoption of a child under age five according to the rank of the child among the children
under age 18 currently residing with the family. The initial rates were $500 immediately

39

for a first or second child, and eight quarterly $375 payments for each child of rank three
or higher. In May 1989, the rates changed so that a second child received a second $500
payment on his or her first birthday. For births of children of rank three or more, the $375
quarterly payments now continued for twelve quarters. As of May 1990, the $375 payments
for children of rank three or more was extended to a length of 16 quarters. As of May 1991,
the $375 payments for children of rank three or more was extended to a length of 20 quarters.
As of May 1992, the 20 quarterly payments for children of rank three or more were increased
to $400 per quarter.
D.1.2

Quebec Dependent Deduction / Credit

Through agreements with the Federal Government, Quebec sets its own base for taxation. In
1986 and 1987 a deduction for dependents under 21 could be claimed, which differed by the
rank of the child. From 1988, these deductions were transformed into non-refundable credits.
A person living alone, a married person, and a person heading a single-parent family receive
additional credits as well. In 1995, the dependent child credit was $520 for the first child
and $450 for each subsequent child. The person living alone credit was $210, the married
person credit was $1,180, and the single parent family credit was $1,300.
D.1.3

Quebec Family Allowance

In Quebec, families received a family allowance from the provincial government during the
period 1974 to 1997. This family allowance was paid monthly, and differed according to
the rank of the child. It was not treated as taxable income. In 1995, the Quebec Family
Allowance paid $130 annually for first children, $174 for second children, $218 for third
children, and $261 for children of fourth or higher rank.
D.1.4

Quebec Availability Allowance

From 1981 to 1988, Quebec mothers were eligible for a transfer for children under age six
if the mother was out of the labor force. The Availability Allowance differed by the rank
of the child. When it was cancelled, it was replaced by the Quebec Allowance for Young
Children. In its final year, the Availability Allowance paid $100 for one child under six, $200
for a second child under six, and $500 for a third child under six.

40

D.1.5

Quebec Allowance for Young Children

The Allowance for Young Children made monthly payments to families with children under
age six according to the rank of each child. This benefit was paid from 1989 to 1997. In
1995, a family with one child under six received an annual payment of $117. For a second
child under six, the family received an additional $234, and for a third an additional $585.
D.1.6

The Federal Child Tax Credit

The Child Tax Credit was introduced in 1978 and was cancelled in 1992. The non-taxable
benefit consisted of an annual flat amount per child, which was gradually reduced for family
incomes over a certain threshold. In 1988, a supplementary benefit for children under seven
was introduced. This benefit was replaced by the Federal Child Tax Benefit (described
below) in 1993. In its final year in 1992, the Child Tax Credit paid $601 per child with a
supplement of $213 for each child under seven. The threshold level of income was $25,921.
D.1.7

The Federal Dependent Deduction / Credit

Until 1987, a deduction from taxable income could be claimed for each dependent under
eighteen in the family. Following the income tax reform taking effect in 1988, this deduction
was transformed into a non-refundable tax credit. From 1990, the size of the credit was
doubled for children of third rank or higher within the family. In 1993, this credit was folded
into the new Child Tax Benefit. In 1992, the credit was $399 for the first two children and
$798 for children of third and higher rank.
D.1.8

The Federal Sales Tax Credit

The Sales Tax Credit was introduced in 1986. The benefit consists of a flat rate for each
parent, plus a flat amount per child. The benefit is reduced for family incomes above a
threshold, but is treated as taxable income. A supplement for single adults and parents was
introduced in 1991, and is phased in for incomes over a certain threshold. In 1995, the credit
paid $199 per adult, $105 per child, and a supplement single-headed households was phased
in at two per cent for incomes over $6,456, to a maximum of $105. The reduction rate for
the benefit in 1995 was five per cent for incomes over $25,921.

41

D.1.9

The Federal Family Allowance

The Family Allowance was reformed substantially in 1974, and maintained the same structure
until it was replaced by the Child Tax Benefit in 1993. The benefit took the form of a monthly,
taxable benefit for each child under eighteen in the family. With two exceptions, the benefit
was paid at a flat rate per child. In Alberta, the benefit depended on the age of the child. In
Quebec, the benefit depended on the rank of the child within the family, with higher-rank
children earning a larger benefit. From 1989, the federal Family Allowance was subject to
a claw back of 15% of income over a certain threshold. In 1992, the Family Allowance paid
benefits at an annual rate of $418. In Quebec, the benefit was $267 for first children, $399 for
second, and $996 for children of third or higher rank. The clawback threshold was $53,215.
D.1.10

The Federal Child Tax Benefit

In 1993, the Child Tax Credit, federal dependent non-refundable credit, and the Family
Allowance were replaced with the Child Tax Benefit. Similar to the Family Allowance, the
Child Tax Benefit pays benefits according to the child’s age in Alberta and rank in Quebec.
The base Child Tax Benefit in 1995 paid an annual benefit of $1,020 in most of the country,
but in Quebec the rates were $868 for the first child, $1,023 for the second, and $1,596 for a
third or higher ranked child. A supplement for third and additional children ($75 in 1995)
is paid. A second supplement for children under seven ($213 in 1995) is also paid. On top
of this benefit, a working income supplement for families with children is paid for incomes
surpassing one threshold, and then reduced for incomes over another threshold. For 1995,
the working income supplement increased at eight per cent for incomes over $3,750 until
reaching $500, then was decreased by ten per cent of income over $20,921. The total sum of
this benefit is reduced for family income above a certain threshold ($25,921 in 1995). The
reduction rate is 2.5 per cent of income over the threshold for only children, and five per
cent for families with more than one child.

D.2

Methodology for the Benefit Calculations

The benefit calculator was constructed as follows. I start with the family structure at the
beginning of the Census window. For each year, I calculate the child benefits owed to
the family based on the number of children it had at the beginning of the window. This
calculation is repeated with an additional child added to the family. The difference in these
two calculations represents the extra child benefits payable to the family upon the birth
42

of another child in that year. This calculation is repeated for the first five years of the
child’s life (discounting by 3% per year time preference) and summed to find the five-year
benefits. The whole calculation is repeated for the six years in the Census window, with the
final one-year and five-year benefit measures calculated as the average over the years in the
Census window. Gross income was calculated as the sum of male and female salaries and
wages, self-employment earnings, and investment income in the Census year, deflated by the
Consumer Price Index back to the relevant year.

43

References
Acs, Gregory (1996) ‘The impact of welfare on young mothers’ subsequent childbearing
decisions.’ Journal of Human Resources 31(4), 898–915
Allen, Douglas W. (1993) ‘Welfare and the family: the Canadian experience.’ Journal of
Labor Economics 11(1), S201–S223
Angrist, Joshua D., and William N. Evans (1998) ‘Children and their parents’ labour supply:
Evidence from exogenous variation in family size.’ American Economic Review 88(3), 450–
477
Baril, Robert, Pierre Lefebvre, and Philip Merrigan (2000) ‘Quebec family policy: Impact
and options.’ Choices 6 (January), Institute for Research on Public Policy, Montreal
Batina, Raymond G. (1986) ‘The optimal linear income tax with tax credits contingent on
fertility.’ Journal of Public Economics 30(2), 219–235
Becker, Gary S. (1960) ‘An economic analysis of fertility.’ In ‘Demographic and economic
change in developed countries’ Universities-National Bureau Conference Series Princteon
University Press Princeton
(1965) ‘A theory of the allocation of time.’ Economic Journal 75, 493–517
Becker, Gary S., and H. Gregg Lewis (1973) ‘On the interaction between the quantity and
quality of children.’ Journal of Political Economy 81(2), S279–S288
Becker, Gary S., and Nigel Tomes (1976) ‘Child endowments and the quantity and quality
of children.’ Journal of Political Economy 84(4), S143–S162
Bélanger, Alain, and Jean Dumas (1998) ‘Report on the demographic situation in Canada
1997.’ Catalogue No. 91-209-XPE, Statistics Canada, Ottawa
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2001) ‘How much should we
trust differences-in-differences estimates?’ Working Paper 01–34, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, October
Besley, Timothy, and Anne Case (2000) ‘Unnatural experiments? Estimating the incidence
of endogenous policies.’ Economic Journal 110(467), F672–F694
44

Campbell, Arthur A. (1983) Manual of Fertility Analysis (New York: Churchill Livingstone)
Canadian Tax Foundation (various years) The National Finances (Toronto: The Canadian
Tax Foundation)
Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber (1996) ‘Health insurance eligibility, utilization of medical care, and child health.’ Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2), 431–466
Davies, James B. (1990) ‘The tax treatment of the family.’ In taxation to 2000 and beyond,
ed. Richard M. Bird and Jack M. Mintz (Toronto: Canadian Tax Foundation)
Dickert-Conlin, Stacey, and Amitabh Chandra (1999) ‘Taxes and the timing of birth.’ Journal
of Political Economy 107(1), 161–177
Dooley, Martin D. et al. (2000) ‘Lone female headship and welfare policy in Canada.’ Journal
of Human Resources 35(3), 587–602
Fairlie, Robert W., and Rebecca A. London (1997) ‘The effect of incremental benefit levels
on births to AFDC recipients.’ Journal of Human Resources 16(4), 575–597
Gauthier, Anne Helene, and Jan Hatzius (1997) ‘Family benefits and fertility: an econometric
analysis.’ Population Studies 51(3), 295–306
Gosselin, Paul-É. (1968) La crise de la natalité au Québec (Québec: Les Éditions Ferland)
Gunderson, Morley (1998) Women and the Canadian labour market: Transitions towards
the future (Toronto: Nelson)
Harvey, Carol, Michael J. Camasso, and Radha Jagannathan (2000) ‘Evaluating welfare
reform waivers under section 1115.’ Journal of Economic Perspectives 14(4), 165–188
Heckman, James J., and James R. Walker (1990) ‘The relationship between wages and
income and the timing and spacing of births: evidence from Swedish longitudinal data.’
Econometrica 58(6), 1411–1441
Heckman, James J., and Jeffrey A. Smith (1995) ‘Assessing the case for social experiments.’
Journal of Economic Perspectives 9(2), 85–110
Heckman, James J., and Richard Robb (1985) ‘Alternative methods for evaluating the impact
of interventions.’ In Longitudinal analysis of labor market data, ed. James J. Heckman and
Burton Singer (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)
45

Heckman, James J., Robert J Lalonde, and Jeffrey A. Smith (1999) ‘The economics and
econometrics of active labor market programs.’ In Handbook of Labor Economics, ed.
Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, vol. 3 (Amsterdam: Elsevier Science)
Hotz, V. Joseph, Jacob Alex Klerman, and Robert J. Willis (1997) ‘The econometrics of
fertility in developed countries.’ In The handbook of population economics, ed. Mark R.
Rosenzweig and O. Stark (Amsterdam: Elsevier Science)
Hoynes, Hilary M. (1997a) ‘Does welfare play any role in female headship decisions?’ Journal
of Public Economics 65(2), 89–117
(1997b) ‘Work, welfare, and family structure.’ In Fiscal Policy: lessons from economic
research, ed. Alan J. Auerbach (Cambridge MA: MIT Press)
HRDC (1999) ‘Statistics related to income security programs.’ Technical Report, Human
Resources Development Canada, Ottawa
Hyatt, Douglas E., and William J. Milne (1991) ‘Can public policy affect fertility?’ Canadian
Public Policy 17(1), 77–85
Imbens, Guido W., and Joshua D. Angrist (1994) ‘Identification and estimation of local
average treatment effects.’ Econometrica 62(2), 467–475
Lachapelle, Réjean (1987) ‘The strengthening of majority positions.’ In Report on the demographic situation in Canada 1986, ed. Jean Dumas Statistics Canada Ottawa. Catalogue
No. 91-209E
La Presse (1988) ‘Baisse d’impôts pour tous.’ May 13, p. A-1
Langlois, Georges (1993) Histoire de la population Canadienne-française (Montreal: Éditions
Albert Lésvesque)
Merrigan, Philip, and Yvan St.Pierre (1998) ‘An econometric and neoclassical analysis of
the timing and spacing of births in Canada from 1950 to 1990.’ Journal of Population
Economics 11(1), 29–51
Meyer, Bruce D. (1995) ‘Natural and quasi-experiments in economics.’ Journal of Business
and Economics Statistics 13(2), 151–161

46

Moffit, Robert A. (1998) ‘The effect of welfare on marriage and fertility.’ In Welfare, the
family, and reproductive behavior, ed. Robert A. Moffit (Washington, D.C.: National
Academy Press)
Moffitt, Robert (1994) ‘Welfare effects on female headship with area effects.’ Journal of
Human Resources 29(2), 621–636
Montreal Gazette (1988a) ‘Budget a real baby booster.’ May 13, p. A-1
(1988b) ‘Have more babies, Liberals say.’ February 28, p. A-1
(1988c) ‘Parizeau’s family plan: triple baby bonus.’ March 15, p. A-1
(1996) ‘Child benefits reworked.’ November 1, p. A-1
Nerlove, Marc, Assaf Razin, and Efraim Sadka (1984) ‘Income distribution policies with
endogenous fertility.’ Journal of Public Economics 24(2), 221–230
OECD (2000) Taxing Wages: 1999 edition (Paris: Organization for Economic Co-operation
and Development)
Olsen, Randall J. (1994) ‘Fertility and the size of the U.S. labor force.’ Journal of Economic
Literature 32(1), 60–100
Ontario (1998) ‘Annual report 1997.’ Office of the Registrar General, Toronto
Pechman, Joseph A. (1983) Federal Tax Policy: 4th edition (Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution)
Phipps, Shelley A. (1998) ‘What is the income ‘cost of a child’ ? exact equivalence scales for
Canadian two-parent families.’ Review of Economics and Statistics 80(1), 157–164
Québec (1992) ‘Un million de familles.’ Régie des Rentes du Québec, Québec
(1999) ‘La situation démographique au Québec.’ édition 1999, Bureau de la Statistique du
Québec, Québec
Rosenzweig, Mark R. (1999) ‘Welfare, marital prospects, and nonmarital childbearing.’ Journal of Political Economy 107(6), S3–S32

47

Rosenzweig, Mark R., and Kenneth I. Wolpin (1980) ‘Life cycle labor supply and fertility:
causal inferences from household models.’ Journal of Political Economy 88(2), 328–348
Rosenzweig, Mark R., and T. Paul Schultz (1985) ‘The demand and supply of births: fertility
and its life cycle consequences.’ American Economic Review 75(5), 992–1015
Statistics Canada (1994) ‘Therapeutic abortions, 1992.’ Catalogue No. 82-219, Statistics
Canada, Ottawa
(various years) ‘Births.’ Catalogue No. 84-210, Statistics Canada, Ottawa
Statistics Canada (various years) ‘Vital statistics.’ Catalogue No. 84-204, Statistics Canada,
Ottawa
Whittington, Leslie A. (1992) ‘Taxes and the family: the impact of the tax exemption for
dependents on marital fertility.’ Demography 29(2), 215–226
(1993) ‘State income tax policy and family size: fertility and the dependent exemption.’
Public Finance Quarterly 21(4), 378–398
Whittington, Leslie A., James Alm, and H. Elizabeth Peters (1990) ‘Fertility and the personal
exemption: implicit pronatalist policy in the United States.’ American Economic Review
80(3), 545–556
Willis, Robert J. (1973) ‘A new approach to the economic analysis of fertility behaviour.’
Journal of Political Economy 81(2), S14–S64
Young, Margaret (1998) ‘Immigration: the Canada-Quebec accord.’ Publication BP-252E,
Parliamentary Research Branch, Library of Parliament, Ottawa
Zhang, Junsen, Jason Quan, and Peter van Meerbergen (1994) ‘The effect of tax-transfer
policies on fertility in Canada 1921–1988.’ Journal of Human Resources 29(1), 181–201

48

Years

49
19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

89

86

83

80

77

74

71

68

65

62

59

56

53

50

47

44

41

38

35

32

29

26

0.5

19

19

19

19

19

Total Fertility Rate

Figure 1: Total Fertility Rates: Historical

5

4.5

4

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

Quebec
Canada

0

Figure 2: Total Fertility Rates: Quebec, Rest of Canada, and the United States

2.500

1.500

1.000

0.500

Quebec
Rest of Canada
United States

0.000
19
80
19
81
19
82
19
83
19
84
19
85
19
86
19
87
19
88
19
89
19
90
19
91
19
92
19
93
19
94
19
95
19
96
19
97
19
98
19
99
20
00

Total Fertility Rate

2.000

Years

50

Figure 3: Fertility Rates: By Parity

0.900
0.800
0.700

0.500
0.400
0.300
0.200
0.100

Quebec - 1st
Quebec - 2nd
Quebec - 3rd or higher

Rest of Canada - 1st
Rest of Canada - 2nd
Rest of Canada - 3rd or higher

0.000
19
80
19
81
19
82
19
83
19
84
19
85
19
86
19
87
19
88
19
89
19
90
19
91
19
92
19
93
19
94
19
95
19
96
19
97
19
98
19
99
20
00

Fertility Rate

0.600

Years

51

Figure 4: Timing

1996 Census Window
1991 Census Window
Allowance for Newborn Children Window
1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998
May 1, 1988
June 5, 1985

September 30,
May 14, 1996
1997

May 15, 1990
June 4, 1991

52

Figure 5: Proportion of families with child under age three in the Labour Force Survey

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

Quebec - all families
ROC - all families
Quebec - 2 or more older children
ROC - 2 or more older children

19
76
19
77
19
78
19
79
19
80
19
81
19
82
19
83
19
84
19
85
19
86
19
87
19
88
19
89
19
90
19
91
19
92
19
93
19
94
19
95
19
96
19
97
19
98
19
99
20
00

0

53

Table 1: Cohort Fertility Rates

Years of
Age Groups
Birth
age 15-19 age 20-24 age 25-29 age 30-34 age 35-39 age 40-44
1943-1947
29.83
139.20 119.14
68.13
17.56
2.59
1948-1952
23.27
92.29
132.26
62.06
17.01
3.33
1953-1957
17.47
92.20
119.07
59.95
23.94
3.88
1958-1962
19.06
81.43
110.12
80.89
26.58
1963-1967
15.05
69.07
129.71
79.61
1968-1972
15.67
77.60
111.72
1973-1977
17.89
66.95
1978-1982
15.60
Note: Reported is the average rate of births per one thousand women in Quebec.
Years in which the ANC is active are shaded.

54

Table 2: Sample Characteristics
1991
All
Observations Quebec

1996
Rest
of
Canada

All
Observations Quebec

Rest
of
Canada

Observations

74400

20285

54115

62485

16453

46302

Had a child
Zero older children
One older child
Two or more older children
Quebec

0.428
0.723
0.154
0.123
0.273

0.418
0.740
0.158
0.102
1.000

0.432
0.716
0.153
0.131
0.000

0.444
0.732
0.153
0.115
0.263

0.451
0.754
0.150
0.096
1.000

0.441
0.724
0.154
0.122
0.000

Rest of Canada
Female age 15-24
Female age 25-34
Male age 15-24
Male age 25-34

0.727
0.224
0.776
0.084
0.656

0.000
0.215
0.785
0.086
0.658

1.000
0.227
0.773
0.083
0.655

0.737
0.218
0.782
0.083
0.625

0.000
0.218
0.782
0.088
0.628

1.000
0.218
0.782
0.081
0.624

Male age 35-44
Male age 45+
Female less than high school
Female high school
Female post high school

0.239
0.021
0.238
0.184
0.455

0.233
0.022
0.237
0.183
0.463

0.242
0.020
0.238
0.184
0.453

0.269
0.024
0.200
0.155
0.489

0.260
0.024
0.195
0.154
0.485

0.272
0.023
0.202
0.155
0.491

Female university degree
Male less than high school
Male high school
Male post high school
Male university degree

0.172
0.260
0.153
0.459
0.128

0.160
0.260
0.163
0.451
0.126

0.177
0.260
0.149
0.462
0.128

0.229
0.226
0.148
0.484
0.143

0.238
0.227
0.148
0.473
0.153

0.225
0.225
0.148
0.488
0.139

Married
Live in urban area
Female immigrant
Male immigrant
Female allophone

0.713
0.598
0.095
0.119
0.096

0.735
0.626
0.046
0.064
0.055

0.705
0.588
0.113
0.140
0.111

0.683
0.602
0.110
0.127
0.111

0.697
0.649
0.054
0.068
0.070

0.678
0.585
0.130
0.148
0.125

Female anglophone
Female francophone
Male allophone
Male anglophone
Male francophone

0.630
0.274
0.114
0.605
0.281

0.070
0.875
0.069
0.063
0.869

0.839
0.049
0.132
0.817
0.052

0.630
0.260
0.125
0.611
0.264

0.066
0.864
0.080
0.066
0.854

0.831
0.043
0.142
0.811
0.047

Family income
24749
23242
25314
21593
20196
22092
Provincial GDP growth
3.22
2.85
3.36
1.25
0.91
1.37
Provincial net migration rate
0.34
0.17
0.40
0.64
0.35
0.74
Provincial education spending
6306
6142
6367
6689
6183
6870
Note: Reported are means over all observations in the relevant subsample. Male variables are averaged over
families with a husband.

55

Table 3: Comparing Fertility by Time, Jurisdiction, and Parity

Mean

Trend
difference
in means
(2) - (1) =
(3)

1991
(1)

1996
(2)

0.418
(0.003)
20,285
0.432
(0.002)
54,115

0.451
(0.004)
16,453
0.441
(0.002)
46,032

0.033
(0.005)

0.393
(0.004)
15,017
0.398
(0.002)
38,754

0.418
(0.004)
12,399
0.407
(0.003)
33,338

0.025
(0.006)

0.627
(0.009)
3,207
0.691
(0.005)
8,262

0.677
(0.009)
2,475
0.681
(0.006)
7,088

0.050
(0.013)

Difference
in
differences
(4)

Percentage
increase
(5)

Triple
difference
(6)

A. All Parities
Quebec
n
Rest of Canada
n

0.009
(0.003)

0.024
(0.006)

5.5%

0.016
(0.007)

4.0%

0.060
(0.015)

9.7%

B. Zero older children
Quebec
n
Rest of Canada
n

0.009
(0.003)

C. One older child
Quebec
n
Rest of Canada
n

-0.010
(0.008)

D. Two or more older children
Quebec

0.278
0.353
0.075
(0.010)
(0.012)
(0.015)
n
2,061
1,579
Rest of Canada 0.321
0.344
0.023
0.052
17.2%
0.036
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.008)
(0.018)
(0.020)
n
7,099
5,606
Notes : Reported in the first two columns are the means of the variable Had a child . Standard deviations appear below in
parentheses. The percentage increase is calculated by dividing the difference-in-differences by the sum of the 1991 Quebec mean and the 1991 to 1996 rest of Canada trend.

56

Table 4: Regression Results

Dependent Variable: Had a Child
Independent Variables

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Pseudo R-squared

0.0003

0.058

0.131

0.132

1996 dummy x Quebec

0.024 *
(0.006)
0.009 *
(0.003)

1996 dummy
Implied percentage increase in
probability of having a child
Quebec
One older child

0.034 *
(0.006)
0.013 *
(0.003)

5.6%

7.8%

-0.014 *
(0.004)
-

-0.021 *
(0.006)
0.205 *
(0.004)
-0.163 *
(0.004)
0.187 *
(0.003)
0.032 *
(0.005)
-0.047 *
(0.007)
-0.049 *
(0.005)
-0.015 *
(0.004)
-0.086 *
(0.004)
-0.192 *
(0.004)
-

Two or more older children

-

Female age 25-34

-

Female immigrant

-

Female francophone

-

Female anglophone

-

Female high school

-

Female post high school

-

Female university degree

-

Male age 25-34

-

Male age 35-44

-

-

Male age 45+

-

-

Table continues on next page.

57

0.039 *
(0.006)
0.031 *
(0.003)
8.7%
-0.005
(0.007)
0.193 *
(0.004)
-0.203 *
(0.004)
0.107 *
(0.004)
0.052 *
(0.006)
-0.037 *
(0.008)
-0.009
(0.006)
-0.055 *
(0.005)
-0.118 *
(0.004)
-0.235 *
(0.004)
0.148 *
(0.007)
0.089 *
(0.008)
-0.114 *
(0.012)

0.053 *
(0.010)
0.028 *
(0.010)
12.0%
0.023
(0.024)
0.192
(0.004)
-0.205
(0.004)
0.107
(0.004)
0.055
(0.006)
-0.035
(0.008)
-0.007
(0.006)
-0.054
(0.005)
-0.118
(0.004)
-0.236
(0.004)
0.148
(0.007)
0.090
(0.008)
-0.114
(0.012)

*
*
*
*
*

*
*
*
*
*
*

Table 4 (continued)

Independent Variables
Male immigrant

(a)

(b)

-

-

(c)

0.017 *
(0.007)
Male francophone
-0.051 *
(0.008)
Male anglophone
-0.0642 *
(0.007)
Male high school
0.004
(0.006)
Male post high school
0.016 *
(0.004)
Male university degree
0.032 *
(0.007)
Married
0.202 *
(0.009)
lives in urban area
-0.073 *
(0.003)
Family income (C$10,000)
0.177 *
(0.008)
Provincial GDP growth
0.005
(0.008)
Provincial migration rate
-0.015
(0.008)
Provincial education spending
0.037 *
(0.018)
Notes: Reported coefficients are marginal probabilities from probit regressions using the full sample of 136,885 observations. A constant term was included but is not reported. Robust standard errors are reported below the corresponding
estimates. Coefficients significant at the five per cent level are indicated with an asterisk. The implied percentage
increase in the probability of having a child is calculated as described in the text.

58

0.014 *
(0.007)
-0.054 *
(0.008)
-0.066 *
(0.004)
0.004
(0.006)
0.015 *
(0.004)
0.031 *
(0.006)
0.206 *
(0.009)
-0.068 *
(0.003)
0.175 *
(0.008)
-

(d)

Table 5: Impact of Allowance for Newborn Children on Different Family Types

Dependent Variable: Had a Child
Older Children

Observations
Pseudo R-Squared
Zero older children x
Quebec x 1996 dummy
Implied percentage increase in
probability of having a child

Zero

One

Two or
more

Pooled

99508
0.1361

21032
0.083

16345
0.028

136885
0.132

-

-

0.045 *
(0.011)

-

-

10.7%

0.041 *
(0.012)
9.8%

One older child x
Quebec x 1996 dummy

-

0.080 *
(0.020)

-

0.080 *
(0.019)

Implied percentage increase in
probability of having a child

-

13.1%

-

12.6%

Two or more older children x
Quebec x 1996 dummy

-

-

0.082 *
(0.028)

0.082 *
(0.022)

Implied percentage increase in
probability of having a child

-

-

24.7%

25.0%

0.080
(0.059)
0.054 *
(0.025)
-

0.035
(0.024)
0.027
(0.011)
0.209
(0.007)
-0.212
(0.006)
-0.054
(0.012)
-0.026
(0.014)
-0.013
(0.010)
0.023
(0.011)

Quebec
1996 dummy
One older child

0.009
(0.028)
0.027 *
(0.012)
-

0.036
(0.049)
-0.015
(0.022)
-

Two or more older children

-

-

-

One older child x Quebec

-

-

-

Two or more other children x Quebec

-

-

-

One other child x 1996 dummy

-

-

-

Two or more other children x 1996 dummy

-

-

-

*
*
*
*
*

*

Other control variables
yes
yes
yes
yes
Notes: Reported coefficients are marginal probabilities from probit regressions on the relevant subsample. Control
variables as in Table 4 specification (d) are included, but not reported. Robust standard errors are reported below the
corresponding estimates. Coefficients significant at the five per cent level are indicated with an asterisk. The implied
percentage increase in the probability of having a child is calculated as described in the text.

59

Table 6: Regressions Using the Dollar Value of Allowance for Newborn Children Benefits

Dependent Variable: Had a Child
First-year Benefits
ANC
0.073 *
(0.015)

Five-Year Benefits
ANC
0.011 *
(0.003)

Implied percentage increase in fertility
rate for $1000 increase in benefits

16.9%

2.6%

Benefit elasticity

0.107

--

Coefficient on benefit

Notes: Control variables as in Table 4 specification (d) are included, but not reported.
Coefficients significant at the five per cent level are indicated with an asterisk.

60

Table 7: Results Using Replications of AFDC Data Sets

Dependent Variable: Had a Child

(a)

(b)

(c)

Rosenzweig (1999)

Fairlie and London (1997)

Acs (1996)

Age 15-24

Single
At least one child

Single
Age 15-24

Observations

30271

7102

14292

Pseudo R-squared

0.131

0.044

0.114

0.003
(0.018)

0.077
(0.043)

0.004
(0.022)

AFDC Study
Selection Criteria

Quebec x 1996 Dummy

Notes: Reported coefficients are marginal probabilities from probit regressions. Control variables as in Table 4
specification (d) are included, but not reported. Robust standard errors are reported below the corresponding
estimates. Coefficients significant at the five per cent level are indicated with an asterisk.

61

Table 8: Heterogeneity in Response to Allowance for Newborn Children
Dependent Variable: Had a Child

(a)
Quebec x 1996 dummy

0.034 *
(0.015)

(b)
0.036
(0.017)

(c)
0.074 *
(0.017)

(d)
0.036 *
(0.012)

(e)
0.061 *
(0.017)

Interactions of Quebec x 1996 dummy with:
Married

Female age 25-34

0.028
(0.015)

0.003
(0.018)
0.025
(0.016)

0.017
(0.017)

Female high school

-0.030
(0.021)

-0.040
(0.021)

Female post high school

-0.027
(0.017)

-0.039 *
(0.017)

Female university degree

-0.013
(0.022)

-0.035
(0.022)

Family Income

0.078 *
0.074 *
(0.028)
(0.036)
Notes: Reported coefficients are marginal probabilities from probit regressions. Control variables
as in Table 4 specification (d) are included, but not reported. Also included are main effect
interactions of each characteristic (Married , Female age 25-34 etc.) with Quebec and with 1996
dummy . Robust standard errors are reported below the corresponding estimates. Coefficients
significant at the five per cent level are indicated with an asterisk.

62

Table 9: Falsification Regressions

Dependent Variable: Had a Child
(b)
Two or
more

(a)

Zero

One

0.003
(0.009)

0.013
(0.011)

-0.001
(0.022)

-0.056 *
(0.026)

Newfoundland

-0.048 *
(0.020)

-0.045
(0.024)

-0.050
(0.041)

-0.056
(0.051)

New Brunswick

-0.038
(0.033)

-0.040
(0.035)

-0.052
(0.048)

-0.012
(0.059)

Nova Scotia

0.029
(0.018)

0.022
(0.021)

0.039
(0.040)

0.049
(0.048)

Prince Edward Island

0.011
(0.045)

-0.019
(0.053)

-0.016
(0.099)

0.167
(0.114)

Ontario

0.008
(0.014)

0.010
(0.014)

0.020
(0.021)

-0.018
(0.023)

Manitoba

0.027
(0.016)

0.015
(0.018)

0.049
(0.040)

0.065
(0.042)

Saskatchewan

-0.040 *
(0.016)

-0.287
(0.019)

-0.087 *
(0.038)

-0.043
(0.037)

Alberta

0.010
(0.015)

0.015
(0.016)

-0.015
(0.028)

0.012
(0.029)

British Columbia

0.001
(0.019)

-0.003
(0.019)

0.008
(0.030)

0.019
(0.032)

A. 1986 vs 1991
Quebec x 1991 dummy

B. 1991 vs 1996

Territories

0.014
-0.041
0.359 *
-0.050
(0.054)
(0.062)
(0.107)
(0.117)
Notes: Reported coefficients are marginal probabilities from probit regressions on the relevant subsample. Control
variables as in Table 4 specification (d) are included, but not reported. Robust standard errors are reported below
the corresponding estimates. Coefficients significant at the five per cent level are indicated with an asterisk.

63

Table 10: Total Child Benefits

First-year Benefits

Quebec
Other Total
ANC Benefits Benefits
A. All Parities
1991

1996
B. Zero older children
1991

1996
C. One older child
1991

1996
D. Two or more older children
1991

Five-year Sum of Benefits
Rest
of
Canada
Total
Benefits

Quebec
Other Total
ANC Benefits Benefits

Rest
of
Canada
Total
Benefits

191
(96)

1651
(382)

1843
(457)

1101
(319)

305
(359)

7701
(1805)

8006
(2086)

5196
(1507)

635
(329)

1591
(523)

2226
(779)

1092
(484)

1217
(1866)

7507
(2468)

8723
(3957)

5154
(2281)

159
(0)

1527
(249)

1686
(249)

1045
(312)

159
(0)

7111
(1176)

7270
(1176)

4932
(1472)

528
(0)

1448
(407)

1976
(407)

1031
(498)

528
(0)

6832
(1921)

7360
(1921)

4864
(2348)

159
(0)

1704
(267)

1863
(267)

1212
(302)

308
(0)

7959
(1258)

8267
(1258)

5717
(1422)

528
(0)

1641
(345)

2169
(345)

1107
(424)

1029
(0)

7741
(1628)

8770
(1628)

5222
(2002)

478
(0)

2476
(276)

2954
(276)

1279
(278)

1361
(0)

11600
(1302)

12961
(1302)

6035
(1313)

1996

1646
2637
4283
1439
6918 12437 19355
6789
(0)
(327)
(327)
(276)
(0)
(1542) (1542)
(1304)
Notes: Reported is the mean child benefit for each subsample. The standard deviation appears below in parentheses.

64

Table 11: Results for Benefit Regressions
Dependent Variable: Had a Child

OLS
A. First Year Benefits
Coefficient on benefit

Total Benefits
2SLS

0.129 *
(0.004)

0.077
(0.016)

Implied percentage increase in fertility
rate for $1000 increase in benefits

29.7%

17.6%

Benefit elasticity

0.399

0.236

B. Five Year Benefits
Coefficient on benefit

0.027 *
(0.001)

Implied percentage increase in fertility
rate for $1000 increase in benefits

6.2%

0.011
(0.003)
2.5%

Notes: Control variables as in Table 4 specification (d) are included, but not reported.
Coefficients significant at the five per cent level are indicated with an asterisk.

65

*

*

