NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GLOBALIZATION AND CAPITAL MARKETS

Maurice Obstfeld
Alan M. Taylor

Working Paper 8846
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8846

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2002
This paper was prepared for the NBER conference “Globalization in Historical Perspective” held in Santa
Barbara, May 4–5, 2001, and is forthcoming in the NBER conference volume of the same name edited by
Michael D. Bordo, Alan M. Taylor, and Jeffrey G. Williamson. Jay Shambaugh and Julian di Giovanni
provided superb research assistance. For assistance with data we thank Michael Bordo, Gregory Clark,
Stephen Haber, Ian McLean, Satyen Mehta, Chris Meissner, and Michael Twomey. For editorial suggestions
we thank Michael Bordo. We received helpful comments from our discussant Richard Portes; from Marc
Flandreau and other conference participants at Santa Barbara; from Michael Jansson, Lawrence Officer, and
Rolf vom Dorp; and from participants in seminars at Stanford Graduate School of Business, University of
Southern California, King’s College, Cambridge, and Universidad Argentina de la Empresa, Buenos Aires.
Obstfeld acknowledges the financial support of the National Science Foundation, through a grant
administered by the National Bureau of Economic Research. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Maurice Obstfeld and Alan M. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Globalization and Capital Markets
Maurice Obstfeld and Alan M. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 8846
March 2002
JEL No. F2, F33, F36, F41, N10, N20

ABSTRACT
The ebb and flow of international capital since the nineteenth century illustrates recurring
difficulties, as well as the alternative perspectives from which policymakers have tried to confront them.
This paper is devoted to documenting these vicissitudes quantitatively and explaining them. Economic
theory and economic history together can provide useful insights into events of the past and deliver
relevant lessons for today. We argue that theories of how international capital mobility has evolved must
be understood within the framework of the basic policy trilemma constraining an open economy's choice
of monetary regime.

Maurice Obstfeld
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall #3880
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
Tel: 510-643-9646
Fax: 510-642-6615
Email: obstfeld@econ.berkeley.edu
http://emlab.berkeley.edu/users/obstfeld/

Alan M. Taylor
Department of Economics
University of California
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616-8578
and NBER
Tel: 530-752-1572
Fax: 530-752-9382
Email: amtaylor@ucdavis.edu
http://www.econ.ucdavis.edu/faculty/amtaylor/

1 Global Capital Markets: Overview and Origins
At the turn of the twenty-first century, the merits of international financial integration are under more forceful attack than at any time since the 1940s. Even
mainstream academic proponents of free multilateral commodity trade, such as
Bhagwati, argue that the risks of global financial integration outweigh the benefits
it affords. Critics from the left such as Eatwell, more skeptical even of the case
for free trade on current account, suggest that since the 1960s “free international
capital flows” have been “associated with a deterioration in economic efficiency
(as measured by growth and unemployment).”1
The resurgence of concerns over international financial integration is understandable in light of the financial crises in Latin America in 1994–95, East Asia
and Russia in 1997–98, and Argentina in 2001–02. Proponents of free trade in
tangible goods have long recognized that its net benefits to countries typically
are distributed unevenly, creating domestic winners and losers. But recent international financial crises have submerged entire economies and threatened their
trading partners, inflicting losses all around. International financial transactions
rely intrinsically on the expectation that counterparties will fulfill future contractual
commitments; they therefore place confidence and possibly volatile expectations
at center stage.2 These same factors are present in purely domestic financial trades,
of course. But oversight, adjudication, and enforcement all are orders of magnitude more difficult among sovereign nations with distinct national currencies than
within a single national jurisdiction. And there is no natural world lender of last
resort, so international crises are intrinsically harder to head off and contain. Factors other than the threat of crises, such as the power of capital markets to constrain
domestically-oriented economic policies, also have sparked concerns over greater
financial openness.
The ebb and flow of international capital since the nineteenth century illustrates
recurring difficulties, as well as the alternative perspectives from which policymakers have tried to confront them. The subsequent sections of this paper are devoted
to documenting these vicissitudes quantitatively and explaining them. Economic
theory and economic history together can provide useful insights into events of
the past and deliver relevant lessons for today. We argue that theories of how in1 See Bhagwati (1998); Eatwell (1997, p.

2). For a skeptical perspective on the future prospects
of economic integration in general, see Rodrik (2000).
2 The vast majority of commodity trades also involve an element of intertemporal exchange, via
deferred or advance payment for goods, but the unwinding of the resulting cross-border obligations
tends to be predictable.

1

ternational capital mobility has evolved must be understood within the framework
of the basic policy trilemma constraining an open economy’s choice of monetary
regime.

1.1 The Emergence of World Capital Markets
Prior to the nineteenth century, the geographical scope for international finance was
relatively limited compared to what was to come. Italian banks of the Renaissance
financed trade and government around the Mediterranean, and, as trade expanded
within Europe, financial innovations spread farther north through the letters of
credit developed at the Champagne Fairs and the new banks in North Sea ports
such as Bruges and Antwerp. Later, London and Amsterdam became the key
centers, and their currencies and financial instruments were the principal focus of
market players. As the industrial revolution gathered force and radiated out from
Britain, the importance of international financial markets became more apparent
in both the public and private spheres.3
In due course, the scope for such trades extended to other centers that developed the markets and institutions capable of supporting international financial
transactions, and whose governments were not hostile to such developments. In
the Eastern U.S., a broad range of centers including Boston, Philadelphia, and Baltimore gave way to what became the dominant center of national and international
finance, New York. By the late nineteenth century both France and the Germany
had developed sophisticated and expanding international markets, well integrated
into the networks of global finance. Elsewhere in Europe and the New World
similar markets began from an embryonic stage, and eventually financial trading
spread to places as far afield as Melbourne and Buenos Aires.4
As we shall discuss later, after 1870 these developments were to progress even
further. With the world starting to converge on the gold standard as a monetary system, and with technological developments in shipping (for example, steamships replacing sail, the Panama Canal) and communications (the telegraph, trans-oceanic
cables), the first global marketplace in capital, as well as in goods and labor, took
shape in an era of undisputed liberalism and virtual laisser faire.
3 See

Cameron (1993); Neal (1990, 2000); Oppers (1993); Brezis (1995).
On Europe see Kindleberger (1984). For
a comprehensive discussion of the historical and institutional developments in some key countries
where international financial markets made an impact at this time—the United Kingdom, the
United States, Australia, Argentina, and Canada—see Davis and Gallman (2001). On comparative
financial deepening and sophistication see Goldsmith (1985).
4 On the U.S. see Davis (1965) and Sylla (1975; 1998).

2

Within finance, the technological and institutional developments were many:
the use of modern communications to transmit prices; the development of a very
broad array of private debt and equity instruments, and the widening scope for
insurance activities; the expanding role of government bond markets internationally; and the more widespread use of forward and futures contracts, and derivative
securities. By 1900, the use of such instruments permeated the major economic
centers of dozens of countries around the world, stretching from Europe, east and
west, north to south, to the Americas, Asia, and Africa. The key currencies and
instruments were known everywhere, and formed the basis for an expanding world
commercial network, whose rise was equally meteoric. Bills of exchange, bond
finance, equity issues, foreign direct investments, and many other types of transactions were by then quite common among the core countries, and among a growing
number of nations at the periphery.
Aside from haute finance, more and more day-to-day activities came into the
orbit of finance via the growth and development of banking systems in many
countries, offering checking and saving accounts as time passed. This in turn
raised the question of whether banking supervision would be done by the banks
themselves or the government authorities, with solutions including free banking
and “wildcat” banks (as in the United States), and changing over time to include
supervisory functions as part of a broader central monetary authority, the central
bank. From what was once an esoteric sector of the economy, the financial sector
grew locally and globally to touch an ever-expanding range of activity.5
Thus, the scope for capital markets to do good—or do harm—loomed larger
as time went by. As an ever-greater part of national and international economies
became monetized and sensitive to financial markets, agents in all spheres—public
and private, labor and capital, domestic and foreign—were affected. Who stood
to gain or lose? What policies would emerge as government objectives evolved?
Would global capital markets proceed unfettered or not? From the turn of the
twentieth century, the unfolding history of the international capital market has
been of enormous import. At various times the market has shaped the course of
national and international economic development and swayed political interests in
all manner of directions. In terms of distribution and equality, it has made winners
and losers, though so often is the process misunderstood that the winners and losers
are often unclear, at the national and the global level. An aim of this paper is to tell
the history of what became a truly global capital market on the eve of the twentieth
century, and explore how it has influenced the course of events ever since.
5 On

financial development see the chapter by Rousseau and Sylla in this volume.

3

1.2 Stylized Facts for the Nineteenth and Twentieth Century
Notwithstanding the undisputed record of technological advancement and economic growth over the long run, we must reject the temptations of a simple linear
history as we examine international capital markets and their evolution. It has not
been a record of ever-more-perfectly-functioning markets with ever-lower transaction costs and ever-expanding scope. The mid-twentieth century, on the contrary,
was marked by an enormous reaction against markets, international as well as domestic, and against financial markets in particular.6 Muted echoes of these same
themes could be heard once again at the end of the twentieth century.
What do we already know about the evolution of global capital mobility in
the last century or more? Very few previous studies exist for the entire period
and covering a sufficiently comprehensive cross-section of countries; but many
authors have focused on individual countries and particular epochs, and from their
work we can piece together a working set of hypotheses that might be termed the
conventional wisdom concerning the evolution of international capital mobility in
the post-1870 era. The story comes in four parts, and not coincidentally these echo
the division of the twentieth century into distinct international monetary regimes.7
The first period runs up to 1914. After 1870 an increasing share of the world
economy came into the orbit of the classical gold standard, and a global capital
market centered on London. By 1880, quite a few countries were on gold, and by
1900 a large number. This fixed exchange-rate system was for most countries a
stable and credible regime, and functioned as a disciplining or commitment device.
Accordingly, interest rates across countries tended to converge, and capital flows
surged. Many peripheral countries, not to mention the New World offshoots of
Western Europe, took part in an increasingly globalized economy in not only the
capital market, but also goods and labor markets.8
In the second period, from 1914 to 1945, this global economy was destroyed.
Two world wars and a Great Depression accompanied a rise in nationalism and
increasingly non-cooperative economic policymaking. With gold-standard cred6 See

Polanyi (1944).
this division of history see, in particular, Eichengreen (1996). Earlier surveys of the
progress of financial-market globalization since the nineteenth century include Obstfeld and Taylor
(1998), Bordo, Eichengreen, and Kim (1999), and Flandreau and Rivière (1999).
8 On the gold-standard regime and late-nineteenth-century capital markets see, inter alia, Eichengreen (1996); Eichengreen and Flandreau (1996); Bordo and Kydland (1995); Bordo and Rockoff
(1996); Edelstein (1982). On this first era of globalization in goods and factor markets see Sachs
and Warner (1993); Williamson (1996); O’Rourke and Williamson (1999); and chapters by Findlay
and O’Rourke, and Chiswick and Hatton, in this volume.
7 On

4

ibility broken by World War One, monetary policy became subject to domestic
political goals, first as a way to help finance wartime deficits. Later, monetary policy was a tool to engineer beggar-thy-neighbor devaluations under floating rates.
As a guard against currency crises and to protect gold, capital controls became
widespread. The world economy went from globalized to almost autarkic in the
space of a few decades. Capital flows were minimal, international investment
was regarded with suspicion, and international prices and interest rates fell completely out of synchronization. Global capital (along with finance in general) was
demonized, and seen as a principal cause of the world depression of the 1930s.9
In the third period, the Bretton Woods era (1945–71), an attempt to rebuild
the global economy took shape. Trade flows began a remarkable expansion, and
economic growth began its most rapid spurt in history worldwide. Yet fears formed
in the interwar period concerning global capital were not easily dispelled. The
IMF initially sanctioned capital controls as a means to prevent currency crises and
runs, and this lent some autonomy to governments by providing more power to
activist monetary policy. For twenty years, this prevailing philosophy held firm;
and although capital markets recovered, they did so slowly. But by the late 1960s
global capital could not be held back so easily, and its workings eventually broke
the compromise that had sustained the fixed exchange-rate system.10
In the fourth and final period, the post-Bretton Woods floating-rate era, a different trend has been evident. Although fixed-rate regimes were reluctantly given
up, and though some countries still attempt to maintain or create such regimes
anew, the years from the 1970s to the 1990s have been characterized by a seeming
increase in capital mobility. Generally speaking, industrial-country governments
no longer needed capital controls as a tool to help preserve a fixed exchange-rate
peg, since the peg was gone. As a floating rate could accommodate market developments, controls could be lifted. This was encouraging to the flow of capital in
all countries. In peripheral countries, economic reforms reduced the transactions
costs and risks of foreign investment, and capital flows grew there too—at least until the crises of the latter 1990s reminded investors of the fragility of the fixed-rate
regimes that tended to persist in the developing world. Increasingly the smaller
peripheral countries that desire fixed exchange rates seek credibly to give up domestic monetary policy autonomy through currency boards or even dollarization,
whereas larger developing countries such as Mexico, Chile, and Brazil have opted
9 See Eichengreen (1992; 1996) and Temin (1989).

In labor markets migrations collapsed and in
goods markets trade barriers multiplied (Kindleberger 1986, 1989; Williamson 1995; James 2001).
10 On Bretton Woods see, for example, Bordo and Eichengreen eds. (1993); Eichengreen (1996).

5

Figure 1: Conjecture? A Stylized View of Capital Mobility in Modern History
High
2000

Gold Standard
1880–1914
1914

1900
Float
1971–2000

1929
1880

Bretton Woods
1945–71

1860
1925

1918

1971
1960

Interwar
1914–45

1945

Low
1860

1880

1900

1980

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

Source: Introspection.

for exchange-rate flexibility coupled with inflation targeting.
In the 1990s, the term “globalization” has became a catch-all to describe the
phenomenon of an increasingly integrated and interdependent world economy, one
that exhibits supposedly free flows of goods, services, and capital, albeit not of
labor. Yet for all the hype, economic history suggests that we be a little cautious in
assessing how amazing this development really is. We will show that a period of
impressive global integration has been witnessed before, at least for capital markets,
at the turn of the twentieth century, just about a hundred years ago. Of course, that
earlier epoch of globalization did not endure. As the above discussion suggests,
if we were roughly to sketch out the implied movements in capital mobility, we
would chart an upswing from 1880 to 1914; this would be followed by a collapse
to 1945, though perhaps with a minor recovery during the brief reconstruction
of the gold standard in the 1920s, between the autarky of World War One and the
Depression; we would then think of a gradual rise in mobility after 1945, becoming
faster after the demise of Bretton Woods in the early 1970s.
For illustrative purposes, let us make the tenuous assumption that international
capital mobility or global capital market integration could be measured in a single
parameter. Suppose we could plot that parameter over time for the last century or so.
6

We would then expect to see a time path something like Figure 1, where the vertical
axis carries the mobility or integration measure. It is reasonable, given the specific
histories of various sub-periods or certain countries, as contained in numerous
fragments of the historical literature, to speak of capital mobility increasing or
decreasing at the times we have noted. Thus, the overall ∪-shaped trend line
indicated by the figure is probably correct.
However, without further quantification the usefulness of the stylized view
remains unclear. For one thing, we do not know if it accords with empirical
measures of capital mobility. Moreover, even if we know the direction of changes
in the mobility of capital at various times, we cannot measure the extent of those
changes. Without such evidence, we cannot assess whether the ∪-shaped trend
path is complete: that is, have we now reached a degree of capital mobility that is
above, or still below, that seen in the years before 1914? To address these questions
requires more formal empirical testing, and that is one of the motivations for the
quantitative analysis that follows.

1.3 The Trilemma: Capital Mobility, the Exchange Rate, and
Monetary Policy
We seek in this paper not only to offer evidence in support of the stylized view of
global capital market evolution, but also to provide an organizing framework for
understanding that evolution and the forces that shaped the international economy
of the late-nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Given the stylized description, we
must address the question: what explains the long stretch of high capital mobility
that prevailed before 1914, the subsequent breakdown in the interwar period, and
the very slow postwar reconstruction of the world financial system? The answer
is tied up with one of the central and most visible areas in which openness to the
world capital market constrains government power: the choice of an exchange rate
regime.11
The macroeconomic policy trilemma for open economies (also known as the
“inconsistent trinity” proposition) follows from a basic fact: An open capital market
deprives a country’s government of the ability simultaneously to target its exchange
rate and to use monetary policy in pursuit of other economic objectives. The
trilemma arises because a macroeconomic policy regime can include at most two
elements of the “inconsistent trinity” of three policy goals:
11 This

section draws on Obstfeld and Taylor (1998), who invoked the term “trilemma,” and
Obstfeld (1998).

7

(i) full freedom of cross-border capital movements;
(ii) a fixed exchange rate; and
(iii) an independent monetary policy oriented toward domestic objectives.
If capital movements are prohibited, in the case where element (i) is ruled
out, a country on a fixed exchange rate can break ranks with foreign interest rates
and thereby run an independent monetary policy. Similarly a floating exchange
rate, in the case where element (ii) is ruled out, reconciles freedom of international
capital movements with monetary-policy effectiveness (at least when some nominal
domestic prices are sticky). But monetary policy is powerless to achieve domestic
goals when the exchange rate is fixed and capital movements free, the case where
element (iii) is ruled out, since intervention in support of the exchange parity then
entails capital flows that exactly offset any monetary-policy action threatening to
alter domestic interest rates.12
Our central proposition is that secular movements in the scope of international
lending and borrowing may be understood in terms of this trilemma. Capital
mobility has prevailed and expanded under circumstances of widespread political
support either for an exchange-rate-subordinated monetary regime (for example,
the gold standard), or for a monetary regime geared mainly toward domestic objectives at the expense of exchange-rate stability (for example, the recent float).
The middle ground in which countries attempt simultaneously to hit exchange-rate
targets and domestic policy goals has, almost as a logical consequence, entailed
exchange controls or other harsh constraints on international transactions.
It is this conflict among rival policy choices, the trilemma, that informs our
discussion of the historical evolution of world capital markets in the pages that
follow, and helps make sense of the ebb and flow of capital mobility in the long
run and in the broader political-economy context.
Of course, the trilemma is only a proximate explanation, in the sense that deeper
socio-political forces explain the relative dominance of some policy targets over
12 The

choice between fixed and floating exchange rates should not be viewed as dichotomous;
nor should it be assumed that the choice of a floating-rate regime necessarily leads to a useful
degree of monetary-policy flexibility. In reality, the degree of exchange-rate flexibility lies on a
continuum, with exchange-rate target zones, crawling pegs, crawling zones, and managed floats
of various other kinds residing between the extremes of irrevocably fixed and freely floating. The
greater the attention given to the exchange rate, the more constrained monetary policy is in pursuing
other objectives. Indeed, the notion of a “free” float is an abstraction with little empirical content, as
few governments are willing to set monetary policy without some consideration of its exchange-rate
effects. Even under a free float autonomy could be compromised. If floating exchange rates are
subject to persistent speculative shocks unrelated to economic fundamentals, and if policy makers
are concerned to counter these movements, then monetary control will be compromised.

8

others. Cohen (1996, pp. 274–5) usefully distinguishes four potential categories
of explanation concerning the evolution of international financial integration. We
paraphrase his categories by distinguishing explanations based upon:
(i) technological innovation, including resulting increases in market competition;
(ii) policy competition among governments seeking to advance “state interest,”
somehow defined;
(iii) domestic politics, including partisan rivalry and interest-group lobbying;
(iv) ideology and advances in economic knowledge.
We view explanations based on technology as secondary for the period of
interest to us (starting in the latter nineteenth century), as it follows the deployment
of trans-oceanic cable technology.13 The precise definition of “state interest” may
well reflect the domestic political power structure, so explanations of class (ii)
and (iii) need not be disjoint. Yet there may be situations in which there is a
broad domestic consensus regarding certain policies as in the national interest.
Similarly, ideology and the state of knowledge can determine the policies that
states pursue in seeking a given perceived national interest. As will become clear
in what follows, we regard explanations along the lines of (ii) and especially (iii)
as the “deep factors” behind movements in international financial integration, with
a supporting role for (iv) as well.14 The central role of the trilemma is to constrain
the choice set within which the deep factors play their roles.

1.4 A Brief Narrative
The broad trends and cycles in the world capital market that we will document
reflect changing responses to the fundamental trilemma. Before 1914, each of the
world’s major economies pegged its currency’s price in terms of gold, and thus,
implicitly, maintained a fixed rate of exchange against every other major country’s
currency. Financial interests ruled the world of the classical gold standard and
13 We

recognize, however, that technologically-driven changes in the extent of goods-market
integration might affect aspects of financial integration, as in the analysis of Obstfeld and Rogoff
(2000).
14 Rajan and Zingales (2001) place interest-group politics at center stage in their theory of domestic financial-market liberalization. They find a ∪-shaped evolution of domestic financial evolution
reminiscent of the pattern for international integration that we document in this paper. While
they seem to view international capital mobility as basically exogenous to the process of domestic
liberalization, we would view the two as jointly determined by the deeper factors.

9

financial orthodoxy saw no alternative mode of sound finance.15 Thus, the gold
standard system met the trilemma by opting for fixed exchange rates and capital
mobility, sometimes at the expense of domestic macroeconomic health. Between
1891 and 1897, for example, the United States Treasury put the country through
a harsh deflation in the face of persistent speculation on the dollar’s departure
from gold. These policies were hotly debated; the Populist movement agitated
forcefully against gold, but lost.16
The balance of political power began to shift only with the First World War,
which brought a sea change in the social contract underlying the industrial democracies. For a sample of industrial countries, Figure 2 shows the Polity IV coding for
“institutional democracy” as it evolved over the period bracketing the First World
War (the coding ranges from 0 to 11; see Marshall and Jaggers n.d. for details).
Other than for the United States (which has a constant score of 10 throughout the
sample period, and is omitted from the figure) there is clear evidence of a discrete
increase in political openness in the decade or so after 1918.17 Organized labor
emerged as a political power, a counterweight to the interests of capital, as seen
in the British labor unrest of the 1920s, which culminated in a General Strike.
Britain’s return to gold in 1925 led the way to a restored international gold standard and a limited resurgence of international finance, but weaknesses in the rebuilt
system helped propagate a global depression after the 1929 U.S. downturn.
Following (and in some cases anticipating) Britain’s example, many countries
abandoned the gold standard in the early 1930s and depreciated their currencies;
many also resorted to trade and capital controls in order to manage independently
their exchange rates and domestic policies. Those countries in the “gold bloc,”
which stubbornly clung to gold through the mid-1930s, showed the steepest output
and price-level declines. James’s (2001, pp. 189–97) account of French policymakers’ vacillation between controls and devaluation well illustrates the interaction
between political pressures and the trilemma. Eventually in the 1930s, all countries jettisoned rigid exchange-rate targets and/or open capital markets in favor of
15 See

Bordo and Schwartz (1984); Eichengreen (1996).

16 Frieden’s (1997) econometric evidence shows how financial interests promoted U.S. adherence

to gold, whereas those who would have gained from currency depreciation favored silver.
17 The variable is composed of separate codings for the “competitiveness of political participation,” the “openness and competitiveness of executive recruitment,” and “constraints on the chief
executive.” We do not plot the variable during periods of political interruption or transition. This
data is comparable to the Polity III source used to construct the index of global democratization
presented by Niall Ferguson in the panel discussion that concludes this volume.

10

Figure 2: Institutional Democracy, Polity IV Scores
France

Belgium

10

10

8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2

0

0

1890

1900

1910

1920

1930

1890

1900

Britain

10

8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2

0

0
1900

1910

1920

1930

1890

1900

Sweden

1930

1910

1920

1930

Germany

10

10

8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2

0
1890

1920

Netherlands

10

1890

1910

0
1900

1910

1920

1930

1890

1900

Source: Marshall and Jaggers (n.d.).

11

1910

1920

1930

domestic macroeconomic goals.18
These decisions reflected the shift in political power solidified by the First
World War. They also signaled the beginnings of a new consensus on the role
of economic policy that would endure through the inflationary 1970s. As an
immediate consequence, however, the Great Depression discredited gold-standard
orthodoxy and brought Keynesian ideas about macroeconomic management to
the fore. It also made financial markets and financial practitioners unpopular.
Their supposed excesses and attachment to gold became identified in the public
mind as causes of the economic calamity. In the United States, the New Deal
brought a Jacksonian hostility toward Eastern (read: New York) high finance back
to Washington. Financial markets were more closely regulated, and the Federal
Reserve was brought under heavier Treasury influence. Similar reactions occurred
in other countries.
Changed attitudes toward financial activities and economic management underlay the new postwar economic order negotiated at Bretton Woods, New Hampshire,
in July 1944. Forty-four allied countries set up a system based on fixed, but adjustable, exchange parities, in the belief that floating exchange rates would exhibit
instability and damage international trade. At the center of the system was the
International Monetary Fund (IMF). The IMF’s prime function was as a source of
hard-currency loans to governments that might otherwise have to temporarily put
their economies into recession to maintain a fixed exchange rate. Countries experiencing permanent balance-of-payments problems had the option of realigning
their currencies, subject to IMF approval.19
Importantly, the IMF’s founders viewed its lending capability as primarily a
substitute for, not a complement to, private capital inflows. Interwar experience had
given the latter a reputation as unreliable at best and, at worst, a dangerous source
of disturbances. Broad, encompassing controls over private capital movement,
perfected in wartime, were expected to continue. The IMF’s Articles of Agreement
explicitly empowered countries to impose new capital controls. Articles VIII and
XIV of the IMF agreement did demand that countries’ currencies eventually be
made convertible—in effect, freely saleable to the issuing central bank, at the
official exchange parity, for dollars or gold. But this privilege was to be extended
only if the country’s currency had been earned through current account transactions.
Convertibility on capital account, as opposed to current-account convertibility, was
18 See

Eichengreen and Sachs (1985); Temin (1989); Eichengreen (1992); Bernanke and Carey
(1996); Obstfeld and Taylor (1998).
19 On the Bretton Woods system, see Bordo and Eichengreen (1993).

12

not viewed as mandatory or desirable.
Unfortunately, a wide extent even of current-account convertibility took many
years to achieve, and even then it was often restricted to nonresidents. In the
interim, countries resorted to bilateral trade deals that required balanced or nearly
balanced trade between every pair of trading partners. If France had an export
surplus with Britain, and Britain a surplus with Germany, Britain could not use
its excess marks to obtain dollars with which to pay France. Germany had very
few dollars and guarded them jealously for critical imports from the Americas.
Instead, each country would try to divert import demand toward countries with
high demand for its goods, and to direct its exports toward countries whose goods
were favored domestically.
Convertibility gridlock in Europe and its dependencies was ended through
a regional multilateral clearing scheme, the European Payments Union (EPU).
The clearing scheme was set up in 1950 and some countries reached de facto
convertibility by mid-decade. But it was not until December 27, 1958 that Europe
officially embraced convertibility and ended the EPU. Although most European
countries still chose to retain extensive capital controls (Germany being the main
exception), the return to convertibility, important as it was in promoting multilateral
trade growth, also increased the opportunities for disguised capital movements.
These might take the form, for example, of misinvoicing, or of accelerated or
delayed merchandise payments. Buoyant growth encouraged some countries in
further financial liberalization, although the U.S., worried about its gold losses,
raised progressively higher barriers to capital outflow over the 1960s. Eventually,
the Bretton Woods system’s very successes hastened its collapse by resurrecting
the trilemma.20
Key countries in the system, notably the U.S. (fearful of slower growth) and
Germany (fearful of higher inflation), proved unwilling to accept the domestic
policy implications of maintaining fixed rates. Even the limited capital mobility
of the early 1970s proved sufficient to allow furious speculative attacks on the
major currencies, and after vain attempts to restore fixed dollar exchange rates, the
industrial countries retreated to floating rates early in 1973. Although viewed at
the time as a temporary emergency measure, the floating-dollar-rate regime is still
with us thirty years later.
Floating exchange rates have allowed the explosion in international financial
markets experienced over the same three decades. Freed from one element of the
trilemma—fixed exchange rates—countries have been able to open their capital
20 See

Triffin (1957), Einzig (1968), and Eichengreen and Bordo (2001).

13

markets while still retaining the flexibility to deploy monetary policy in pursuit of
national objectives. No doubt the experience gained after the inflationary 1970s in
anchoring monetary policy to avoid price instability has helped to promote ongoing
financial integration. Perhaps for the first time in history, countries have learned
how to keep inflation in check under fiat monies and floating exchange rates.
There are several potentially valid reasons, however, for countries to still fix
their exchange rates—for example, to keep a better lid on inflation or to counter
exchange-rate instability due to financial-market shocks. Such arguments may find
particular resonance, of course, in developing countries. However, few countries
that have tried to fix have succeeded for long; eventually, exchange-rate stability
tends to come into conflict with other policy objectives, the capital markets catch
on to the government’s predicament, and a crisis adds enough economic pain to
make the authorities give in. In recent years only a very few major countries have
observed the discipline of fixed exchange rates for at least five years, and most of
those were rather special cases.21
The European Union members that maintained mutually fixed rates prior to
January 1999 were aided by market confidence in their own planned solution to
the trilemma, a near-term currency merger. Developing countries have generally
not fared so well. Even Hong Kong, which operates a currency board supposedly
subordinated to maintaining the Hong Kong-U.S. dollar peg, suffered repeated
speculative attacks in the Asian crisis period. Another currency-board experiment,
Argentina, held to its 1:1 dollar exchange rate from April 1991 for a remarkable
stint of more than ten years. To accomplish that feat, the country relied on IMF and
private credit and, despite episodes of growth, endured levels of unemployment
higher than many countries could tolerate. It suffered especially acutely after
Brazil moved to a float in January 1999. Three years later Argentina’s political
and economic arrangements disintegrated in the face of external default (December
2001) and currency collapse (January–February 2002).
For most larger countries, the trend toward greater financial openness has been
accompanied—inevitably, we would argue—by a declining reliance on pegged
exchange rates in favor of greater exchange-rate flexibility. Some countries have
opted for a different solution, however, adopting extreme straitjackets for monetary
policy in order to peg an exchange rate. If monetary policy is geared toward
domestic considerations, capital mobility or the exchange-rate target must go. If,
instead, fixed exchange rates and integration into the global capital market are the
primary desiderata, monetary policy must be subjugated to those ends.
21 See

Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995).

14

Table 1: The Trilemma and Major Phases of Capital Mobility

Era

Resolution of trilemma –
Countries choose to sacrifice:
Activist Capital
Fixed
policies mobility exchange rate

Notes

Gold standard

Most

Few

Few

Broad consensus.

Interwar
(when off gold)

Few

Several

Most

Capital controls especially in
Central Europe, Latin America.

Bretton Woods

Few

Most

Few

Broad consensus.

Float

Few

Few

Many

Some consensus; except currency
boards, dollarization, etc.

The details of this argument require a book-length discourse (Obstfeld and
Taylor 2002), which allows a full survey of the empirical evidence and the historical
record, but we can already pinpoint the key turning points (see Table 1). The
Great Depression stands as the watershed here, in that it was caused by an illadvised subordination of monetary policy to an exchange-rate constraint (the gold
standard), which led to a chaotic time of troubles in which countries experimented,
typically non-cooperatively, with alternative modes of addressing the fundamental
trilemma. Interwar experience, in turn, discredited the gold standard and led to a
new and fairly universal policy consensus. The new consensus shaped the more
cooperative postwar international economic order fashioned by Harry Dexter White
and John Maynard Keynes, but implanted within that order the seeds of its own
eventual destruction a quarter-century later. The global financial nexus that has
evolved since rests on a solution to the basic open-economy trilemma quite different
than that envisioned by Keynes or White—one that allows considerable freedom
for capital movements, gives the major currency areas freedom to pursue internal
goals, but largely leaves their mutual exchange rates as the equilibrating residual.

1.5 Summary
As always, we have to consider the potential costs and benefits of international
capital mobility for the national participants. Clearly, the ability to lend or borrow represents, trivially, a loosening of constraints relative to a perfectly closed
15

economy. In this dimension, at least, open trade in financial markets offers unambiguous gains relative to a closed economy. Such trades permit insurance, the
smoothing of shocks, and allow capital to seek out its highest rewards, implying
the usual gains-from-trade results.
However, in other ways, international financial mobility raises concerns, particularly for policymakers attached to certain policy goals that may be inconsistent
with the free flow of capital across international boundaries. In addition, the risks
of financial and balance of payments crises—some of them self-fulfilling crises
unrelated to “fundamentals”—may represent further obstacles to the adoption of
free capital markets.
Although these are very much contemporary issues in world capital markets,
the questions they raise can be traced back to the very founding of international
financial markets centuries ago during the Renaissance. Then too, advanced forms
of financial asset trades developed very quickly, sometimes as a response to Churchimposed constraints such as usury proscriptions. Financial innovation was subject
to suspicion from various quarters, both public and private. Thus, calls for the
regulation and restriction of financial-market activity have been with us since the
earliest days.
Despite these fears, by the late nineteenth century a succession of technological
breakthroughs, and a gradual institutional evolution, had positioned many nations
in a newly forming international capital market. This network of nations embraced
modern financial instruments and operated virtually free of controls on the part of
governments. Under the gold standard monetary regime, this flourishing global
market for capital reached at least a local peak in the decades just prior to World
War One.
The subsequent history of the twentieth century showed that this seemingly
linear path toward ever more technological progress and institutional sophistication
in a liberal world order could indeed be upset. Two global wars and a depression led
the world down an autarkic path. Conflicting policy goals and democratic tensions
often put the interests of global capital at a low premium relative to other objectives.
Activist governments appealed to capital controls to sidestep the discipline of
external markets, invoking monetary policy as a tool of macroeconomic control.
These events demonstrate the power of the macroeconomic policy trilemma to
account for many of the ups and downs in global capital market evolution in the
twentieth century. In the next section, we match up these stylized facts with some
of the quantitative and institutional record, so as to better document the course
of events. It is a remarkable history without which today’s economic, financial,
political, and institutional landscape cannot be fully understood.
16

2 Evidence
In theory and practice, the extent of international capital mobility can have profound
implications for the operation of individual and global economies. With respect
to theory, the applicability of various classes of macroeconomic models rests on
many assumptions, and not the least important of these are axioms linked to the
closure of the model in the capital market. The predictions of a theory and its
usefulness for policy debates can revolve critically on this part of the structure.
The importance of these issues for policy is not surprising at all: a moment’s
reflection on practical aspects of macroeconomic policy choice underscores the impact that capital mobility can have on the efficacy of various interventions: trivially,
if capital is perfectly mobile, this dooms to failure any attempts to manipulate local
asset prices to make them deviate from global prices, including the most critical
macroeconomic asset price, the interest rate. Thus, the feasibility and relevance of
key policy actions cannot be judged absent some informed position on the extent to
which local economic conditions are in any way separable from global conditions.
This means an empirical measure of market integration is implicitly, though rarely
explicitly, a necessary adjunct to any policy discussion. Although recent globalization trends have brought this issue to the fore, this paper shows how the experience
of longer-run macroeconomic history can clarify and inform these debates.
In attacking the problem of measuring market integration, economists have no
universally recognized criterion to turn to. For example, imagine the simple expedient of examining price differentials: prices would be identical in two identical
neighboring economies, being determined in each by the identical structures of
tastes, technologies, and endowments; but if the two markets were physically separated by an infinitely high transaction-cost barrier one could hardly describe them
as being integrated in a single market, as the equality of prices was merely a chance
event. Or consider looking at the size of flows between two markets as a gauge
of mobility; this is an equally flawed criterion, for suppose we now destroyed the
barrier between the two economies just mentioned, and reduced transaction costs
to zero; we would then truly have a single integrated market, but, since on either
side of the barrier prices were identical in autarky, there would be no incentive for
any good or factor to move after the barrier disappeared.
Thus, convergence of prices and movements of goods are not unambiguous
indicators of market integration. One could run through any number of other
putative criteria for market integration, examining perhaps the levels or correlations
of prices or quantities, and find essentially the same kind of weakness: all such
tests may be able to evaluate market integration, but only as a joint hypothesis test
17

where some auxiliary assumptions are needed to make the test meaningful.
Given this impasse, an historical study such as the present paper is potentially
valuable in two respects. First, we can use a very large array of data sources
covering different aspects of international capital mobility over the last one hundred
years or more. Without being wedded to a single criterion, we can attempt to make
inferences about the path of global capital mobility with a battery of tests, using
both quantity and price criteria of various kinds. As long as important caveats
are kept in mind about each method, especially the auxiliary assumptions required
for meaningful inference, we can essay a broad-based approach to the evidence.
Should the different methods all lead to a similar conclusion we would be in a
stronger position than if we simply relied on a single test.
Historical work offers a second benefit in that it provides a natural set of benchmarks for our understanding of today’s situation. In addition to the many competing
tests for capital mobility, we also face the problem that almost every test is usually
a matter of degree, of interpreting a parameter or a measure of dispersion or some
other variable or coefficient. We face the typical empirical conundrums (how big
is big? or how fast is fast?) in placing an absolute meaning on these measures.
An historical perspective allows a more nuanced view, and places all such
inferences in a relative context: when we say that a parameter for capital mobility
is big, this is easier to interpret if we can say that by this we mean bigger than
a decade or a century ago. The historical focus of this paper will be directed
at addressing just such concerns.22 We examine the broadest range of data over
the last one-hundred-plus years to see what has happened to the degree of capital
mobility in a cross section of countries.23
The empirical work begins by looking at quantity data, focusing on changes
in the stocks of foreign capital over a century or more.24 Subsequent empirical
sketches focus on price-based criteria for capital market integration, looking at
nominal interest arbitrage, real interest rate convergence, and equity returns.
22 But note that, again, auxiliary assumptions will be necessary, and the caveats will be considered

along the way; for example, what if neighboring economies became exogenously more or less
identical over time, but no more or less integrated in terms of transaction costs?
23 Given the limitations of the data, we will frequently be restricted to looking at between a
dozen and twenty countries for which long-run macroeconomic statistics are available, and this
sample will be dominated by today’s developed countries, including most of the OECD countries.
However, we also have long data series for some developing countries such as Argentina, Brazil,
and Mexico; and in some criteria, such as our opening look at the evolution of the stock of foreign
investments, we can examine a much broader sample.
24 Elsewhere we have examined flows of foreign capital, and more refined quantity criteria using
the correlations of saving and investment over the long run (Obstfeld and Taylor 1998; 2002).

18

2.1 Gross Stocks of Foreign Capital
In this section we examine the extant data on foreign capital stocks to get some
sense of the evolution of the global market. We seek some measure of the size of
foreign investment globally that is appropriately scaled and consistent over time.
Although the concept is simple, the measurement is not. Perhaps the simplest
measure of the activity in the global capital market is obtained by looking at the
total stock of overseas investment at a point in time. Suppose that the total asset
stock in country or region i, owned by country or region j, at time t is Aijt . Included
in here is the domestically owned capital stock Aiit . Of interest are two concepts:
what assets of country j reside overseas? and what liabilities of country i are held
overseas?
A relatively easy hurdle to surmount concerns normalization of the data; foreign
investment stocks are commonly measured at a point in time in current nominal
terms, in most cases U.S. dollars. Obviously, both the growth of the national and
international economies might be associated with an increase in such a nominal
quantity, as would any long run inflation. These trends would have nothing to do
with market integration per se. To overcome this problem, we elected to normalize
foreign capital at each point in time by some measure of the size of the world
economy, dividing through by a denominator in the form of a nominal size index.
A seemingly ideal denominator, given that the numerator is the stock of foreignowned capital, would probably be the total stock of capital, whether financial or
real. The problem with using financial capital measures is that they have greatly
multiplied over the long run as financial development has expanded the number of
balance sheets in the economy, thanks to the rise of numerous financial intermediaries.25 This trend, in principle, could happen at any point in time without any
underlying change in the extent of foreign asset holdings. The problem with using
real capital stocks is that data construction is fraught with difficulty.26
Given these problems we chose a simpler and more readily available measure
of the size of an economy, namely the level of output Y measured in current prices
25 See

Goldsmith (1985).
a few countries have reliable data from which to estimate capital stocks. Most of these
estimates are accurate only at benchmark censuses, and in between census dates they rely on
combinations of interpolation and estimation based on investment flow data and depreciation assumptions. Most of these estimates are calculated in real (constant price) rather than nominal
(current price) terms, which makes them incommensurate with the nominally measured foreign
capital data. At the end of the day, we would be unlikely to find more than a handful of countries
for which this technique would be feasible for the entire twentieth century, and certainly nothing
like global coverage would be possible even for recent years.
26 Only

19

in a common currency unit.27 Over short horizons, unless the capital-output ratio
were to move dramatically, the ratio of foreign capital to output should be adequate
as a proxy measure of the penetration of foreign capital in any economy. Over the
long run, difficulties might arise if the capital-output ratio has changed significantly
over time—but we have little firm evidence to suggest that it has.28 Thus, as a result
of these long-run data constraints, our analysis focuses on capital-to-GDP ratios
of the form
Foreign Assets-to-GDP Ratioit =



Ajit /Yit ;

(1)

Aijt /Yit .

(2)

j=i

Foreign Liabilities-to-GDP Ratioit =


j=i

However, even with the concept established, measurement is still problematic
in the case of the numerator. It is in fact very difficult to discover the extent of
foreign capital in an economy using both contemporary and historical data. For
example, the IMF has always reported balance-of-payments flow transactions in
its International Financial Statistics. It is straightforward for most of the recent
postwar period to discover the annual flows of equity, debt, or other forms of capital
account transactions from these accounts. Conversely, it was only in 1997 that
the IMF began reporting the corresponding stock data, namely, the international
investment position of each country. These data are also more sparse, beginning
in 1980 for less than a dozen countries, and expanding to about 30 countries by
the mid-1990s.
The paucity of data is understandable, since the collection burden for these data
is much more significant: knowing the size of a bond issue in a single year reveals
the flow transaction size; knowing the implications for future stocks requires, for
example, tracking each debt and equity item, and its fluctuating market value over
27 For

the GDP data we rely on Maddison’s (1995) constant price 1990 U.S. dollar estimates of
output for the period from 1820. These figures are then “reflated” using a U.S. price deflator to
obtain estimates of nominal U.S. dollar “World” GDP at each benchmark date. This approach is
crude, since, in particular, it relies on a PPP assumption. Ideally we would want historical series
on nominal GDP and exchange rates, to estimate a common (U.S. dollar) GDP figure at various
historical dates.
28 But for exactly the reasons just mentioned, since we have no capital stock data for many
countries, it is hard to form a sample of capital-output ratios to see how these differ across time and
space. The conventional wisdom, is that the capital-output ranges from 3 to 4 for most countries,
although perhaps lower in capital-scarce developing countries.

20

time, and maintaining an aggregate of these data. The stock data are not simply
a temporal aggregate of flows: the stock value depends on past flows, capital
gains and losses, any retirements of principal or buybacks of equity, defaults and
reschedulings, and a host of other factors. Not surprisingly accurate data of this
type are hard to assemble.29 Just as the IMF has had difficulty doing so, so too have
economic historians. Looking back over the nineteenth and twentieth centuries an
exhaustive search across many different sources yields only a handful of benchmark
years in which estimates have been made, an effort that draws on the work of dozens
of scholars in official institutions and numerous other individual efforts.30
It is based on these efforts that we can put together a fragmentary, but still
potentially illuminating, historical description in Table 2 and Figure 3. Displayed
here are nominal foreign investment and output data for major countries and regions, grouped according to assets and liabilities. Many cells are empty because
data are unavailable, but where possible summary data have been derived to illustrate the ratio of foreign capital to output, and the share of various countries in
foreign investment activity.
What do the data show? On the asset side it is immediately apparent that
for all of the nineteenth century, and until the interwar period, the British were
rightly termed the “bankers to the world”; at its peak, the British share of total
global foreign investment was almost 80 percent. This is far above the recent U.S.
share of global foreign assets, a mere 22 percent in 1995, and still higher than the
maximum U.S. share of 50 percent circa 1960. The only rivals to the British in
the early nineteenth century were the Dutch, who according to these figures held
perhaps 30 percent of global assets in 1825. This comes as no surprise given what
we know of Amsterdam’s early preeminence as the first global financial center
before London’s rise to dominance in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
By the late nineteenth century both Paris and Berlin had also emerged as major
financial centers, and, as their economies grew and industrialized, French and
German holdings of foreign capital rose significantly, each eclipsing the Dutch
position.
In this era the United States was a debtor rather than a creditor nation, and
was only starting to emerge as a major lender and foreign asset holder after 1900.
European borrowing from the United States in World War One then suddenly
made the United States a big creditor. This came at a time when she was ready,
29 An

important new source, however, is Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001). See below.
for example, Paish (1914), Feis (1931), Lewis (1938), Rippy (1959), Woodruff (1967),
and Twomey (2000). Twomey, following Feinstein (1990), favors the estimates of Paish et al.,
versus the downward revisions to pre-1914 British overseas investment proposed by Platt (1986).
30 See,

21

Table 2: Foreign Capital Stocks
Assets
United Kingdom
France
Germany
Netherlands
United States
Canada
Japan
Other Europe
Other
All

1825

1855

0.5a
0.1a
—
0.3a
0.0a
—
—
—
—
0.9a

0.7a
—
—
0.2a
0.0a
—
—
—
—
0.9a

1870

1900

1914

1930

1938

1945

4.9a 12.1a 19.5a 18.2a 22.9c 14.2a
2.5a 5.2a 8.6a 3.5a 3.9c
—
— 4.8a 6.7a 1.1a 0.7c
—
0.3a 1.1a 1.2a 2.3a 4.8c 3.7a
0.0a 0.5a 2.5a 14.7a 11.5c 15.3a
— 0.1a 0.2a 1.3a 1.9c
—
—
—
—
— 1.2c
—
—
—
—
— 4.6c
—
—
—
—
— 6.0c 2.0a
7.7a 23.8a 38.7a 41.1a 52.8c 35.2a

World GDP
Sample GDP
Sample size

—
—
—

— 111b 128b 221b 491b 491b 722b
—
16f
43f
76f 149f 182f 273f
—
4f
7f
7f
7f
7f
7f

Assets/Sample GDP
Assets/World GDP

—
—

—
—

0.47
0.07

0.55
0.19

0.51
0.18

0.28
0.08

0.26
0.11

0.12
0.05

0.56
0.00

0.78
0.00

0.64
0.00

0.51
0.02

0.50
0.06

0.44
0.36

0.43
0.22

0.40
0.43

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

— 5.4a
— 2.6a
— 1.6a
— 0.1a
— 2.9g
— 2.4g
— 3.0g
— 6.0g
— 18.0a

12.0a
11.1a
2.0a
1.0a
8.9g
6.8g
4.1g
13.0g
45.5a

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

10.3a
13.7a
4.5a
0.6a
11.3g
10.6g
4.0g
25.9g
55.0a

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

World GDP
Sample GDP
Sample size

—
—
—

—
—
—

Liabilities/Sample GDP
Liabilities/World GDP

—
—

—
—

—
—

—
0.14

—
0.21

—
—

—
0.11

—
—

Developing Countries/All

—

—

—

0.33

0.29

—

0.47

—

UK/All
US/All
Liabilities
Europe
North America
Australia & N.Z.
Japan
Latin America
Asia (excl. Japan)
Africa
Developing Countries
All

22

111b 128b 221b 491b 491b 722b
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

Table 2. (Continued)
1960

1971

1980

1985

1990

1995

Assets
United Kingdom
France
Germany
Netherlands
United States
Canada
Japan
Other Europe
Other
All

26.4a
—
1.2a
27.6a
63.6a
—
—
—
5.9a
124.7a

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

551d
268d
257d
99d
775d
92d
160d
503d
94d
2,800d

857d
428d
342d
178d
1,300d
129d
437d
715d
123d
4,508d

1,760d
736d
1,100d
418d
2,180d
227d
1,860d
1,777d
214d
10,272d

2,490d
1,100d
1,670d
712d
3,350d
302d
2,720d
2,855d
337d
15,536d

World GDP
Sample GDP
Sample size

1,942b
671f
7f

4,733b
—
—

11,118e
7,806d
25d

Assets/Sample GDP
Assets/World GDP

0.18
0.06

—
—

0.36
0.25

0.46
0.36

0.60
0.49

0.71
0.62

UK/All
US/All
Liabilities
Europe
North America
Australia & N.Z.
Japan
Latin America
Asia (excl. Japan)
Africa
Developing Countries
All

0.21
0.51

—
—

0.20
0.28

0.19
0.29

0.17
0.21

0.16
0.22

7.6a
12.5a
2.2a
0.3a
9.2a
2.7a
2.2a
14.1a
39.9a

—
—
—
—
57g
29g
19g
107g
—

1,457d
684d
71d
147d
250g
129g
124g
506g
3,368dg

2,248d
5,406d
8,592d
1,412d
2,830d
4,681d
118d
216d
318d
307d
1,530d
1,970d
—
505g
768g
—
524g
960g
—
306g
353g
—
1,338g
2,086g
— 12,655dg 19,728dg

1,942b
—
—

4,733b
—
—

11,118e
9,508d
65dg

12,455e 21,141e 25,110e
— 19,294d 25,043d
—
65dg
65dg

—
0.02

—
—

0.35
0.30

World GDP
Sample GDP
Sample size
Liabilities/Sample GDP
Liabilities/World GDP

12,455e 21,141e 25,110e
9,705d 17,250d 21,956d
25d
25d
25d

—
—

0.66
0.60

0.79
0.79

Developing Countries/All
0.35
—
0.15
—
0.11
0.11
Notes and Sources:
Units for foreign investment and GDP are billions of current U.S. dollars.
a = from Woodruff(1967, 150–159).
b = from Maddison (1995); sample of 199 countries; 1990 US dollars converted to
current dollars using US GDP deflator; some interpolation.
c = from Lewis (1945, 292–97).
d = from IFS (9/97). Up to 26 countries, fixed sample, trend interpolation on missing data.
e = from World Bank (1994).
f = excludes "Other Europe" and "Other"; GDP data from appendix.
g = from Twomey (1998; unpublished worksheets).

23

Figure 3: Foreign Capital Stocks
1.0
Assets/Sample GDP
Assets/World GDP
UK share of all assets
US share of all assets

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
1820

1840

1860

1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

1.0
Liabilities/Sample GDP
Liabilities/World GDP
LDC share of all liabilities

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
1820

1840

1860

1880

1900

Source: Table 2.

24

if not altogether willing, to assume the mantle of “banker to the world,” following
Britain’s abdication of this position under the burden of war and recovery in the
1910s and 1920s.31 But the dislocations of the interwar years were to postpone the
United States’ rise as a foreign creditor, and New York’s pivotal role as a financial
center. After 1945, however, the United States decisively surpassed Britain as the
major international asset holder, a position that has never been challenged.32
How big were nineteenth century holdings of foreign assets? In 1870 we
estimate that foreign assets were just 7 percent of World GDP; but this figure rose
quickly, to just below 20 percent in the years 1900–14 at the zenith of the classical
gold standard. During the interwar period, the collapse was swift, and foreign
assets were only 8 percent of world output by 1930, 11 percent in 1938, and just 5
percent in 1945. Since this low point, the ratio has climbed, to 6 percent in 1960,
25 percent in 1980, and then climbing dramatically to 62 percent in 1995. Thus,
the 1900–14 ratio of foreign investment to output in the world economy was not
equaled again until 1980, but has now been approximately doubled.
An alternative measure recognizes the incompleteness of the data sources: for
many countries we have no information on foreign investments at all, so a zero has
been placed in the numerator, although that country’s output has been included in
the denominator as part of the World GDP estimate. This is an unfortunate aspect
of our estimation procedure, and makes the above ratio a likely an underestimate, or
lower bound, for the true ratio of foreign assets to output. One way to correct this is
to only include in the denominator the countries for which we actually have data on
foreign investment in the numerator.33 This procedure yields an estimate we term
the ratio of foreign assets to sample GDP. This is likely an overestimate, or upper
bound, for the true ratio, largely because in historical data, if not in contemporary
sources, attention in the collection of foreign investment data has usually focused
on the principal players, that is, the countries which have significant foreign asset
holdings.34
31 This

Anglo-American transfer of hegemonic power is discussed by Kindleberger (1986) and
by Bordo, Edelstein, and Rockoff (1999). Gallarotti (1995) challenges the view that Britain acted
as a monetary hegemon up to 1914.
32 Of course, this is the gross foreign investment position, not the net position. The United States
is also now the world’s number one debtor nation, in both gross and net terms, having become a
net debtor for the first time since the First World War in the late 1980s.
33 That sample of countries is much less than the entire world, as we have noted. Until 1960, it
includes only the seven major creditor countries noted in Table 2; after 1980, we rely on the IMF
sample from which we can identify up to 30 countries with foreign investment and GDP data.
34 That is, we are probably restricted in these samples to countries with individually high ratios of
foreign assets to GDP. For example, in the rest of Europe circa 1914, we would be unlikely to find

25

Given all these concerns, does the ratio to sample GDP evolve in a very different
way? No, but the recent upswing is not as pronounced using this alternative
measure. The two ratios are very close after 1980. But before 1945 they are quite
far apart: from 1870 to 1914, the sample of seven countries has a foreign asset
to GDP ratio of over 50 percent, far above the “world” figure of 7 to 20 percent.
By this measure we only surpassed the 1914 ratio as recently as 1990, and only
narrowly even then.
Clearly, these seven major creditors were exceptionally internationally diversified in the late nineteenth century in a way that no group of countries is today.
By this reckoning, in countries like today’s United States, we still have yet to see
a return to the extremely high degree of international portfolio diversification seen
in, say, Britain in the 1900–14 period, an historical finding that places in historical
perspective the ongoing international diversification puzzle.35
Is the picture similar for liabilities as well as assets? Essentially, yes. The
data are much more fragmentary here, with none in the nineteenth century, when
the information for the key creditor nations was simpler to collect than data for
a multitude of debtors, perhaps. Even so, we have some estimates running from
1900 to the present at a few key dates. The ratio of liabilities to world GDP follows
a path very much like that of the asset ratio, which is reassuring: they are each
approximations built from different data sources at certain time points, though, in
principle, they should be equal. Again, the ratio reaches a local maximum in 1914
of 21 percent, collapsing in the interwar period to 11 percent in 1938, and just 2
percent in 1960. By 1980 it had exceeded the 1914 level and stood at 30 percent.
By 1995, the ratio was 79 percent.
To summarize, data on gross international asset positions seem broadly consistent with the idea of a ∪-shape in the evolution of international capital mobility
since the late nineteenth century, though it is less clear how we should compare the
degree of diversification attained by some countries then with today’s apparently
significant, albeit declining, home bias in foreign asset holdings. Figuring whether
too much or too little diversification existed at any point must remain conjectural,
and conclusions would hinge on a calibrated and estimated portfolio model applied
historically. This is certainly an object for future research. However, unless the
global economy has dramatically changed in terms of the risk-return profile of
countries with portfolios as diversified internationally as the British, French, Germans, and Dutch.
If we included those other countries it would probably bring our estimated ratio down. However,
in the 1980s and 1990s IMF data the problem is much less severe since we observe many more
countries, and both large and small asset holders.
35 On the international diversification puzzle see K. Lewis (1999).

26

assets and their global distribution, we have no prior reason to expect the efficient
degree of diversification to have changed. For the present we can just say that,
unless a massive such change did occur in the 1914–45 period, and unless it was
then promptly reversed in the 1945–90 period, we cannot explain the time path of
foreign capital stocks seen in Table 2 and Figure 3 except as a result of a dramatic
decline in capital mobility in the interwar period, and a very slow recovery of
capital mobility thereafter.
There is another important dimension of international asset stock data that we
have not yet discussed: the evolution of net stocks, that is, the behavior of longerterm development flows, as distinct from diversification flows. The literature on
the Feldstein-Horioka (1980) paradox alerts us to the possibility that gross flows
are orders of magnitude above net flows. We postpone discussion of that issue
until later.

2.2 Real Interest Rate Convergence
A fundamental property of fully integrated international capital markets is that
investors are indifferent on the margin between any two activities to which they
allocate capital, regardless of national location. International real interest rate
equality would hold in the long run in a world where capital moves freely across
borders and technological diffusion tends to drive a convergence process for national production possibilities.36
One basic indication of internationally integrated financial markets therefore
would be the statistical stationarity of long-term real interest differentials. We
investigate this property using long-term real interest rate data constructed from
the Global Financial Data database. For a nominal interest rate it we use the
monthly series on long-term government bond yields, which apply to bonds of
maturities of seven years or longer. For inflation πt = (Pt+12 − Pt )/Pt we use
the ex post 12-month forward rate of change of the consumer price index. The ex
post real interest rate is then calculated as rt = it − πt , and for now we make the
standard assumption that this is equal to the ex ante real rate plus a white-noise
stationary forecast error. We focus on real long-term bond yields because these are
most directly related to financing costs for capital investments, and, hence, to the
36 We focus on long-term real interest rates here because these rates are most closely linked to
the cost of long-lived capital, because the slow mean reversion in real exchange rates makes it
difficult to discern expected exchange rate changes in short-term data, and because risk premia can
be reduced over long horizons if long-run purchasing power parity holds.

27

expected marginal yield on investment. It is the latter variable we would like to be
able to measure directly in order to evaluate the international mobility of capital.37
We consider three countries in our sample, relative to the United States as a
base country. They are Britain, France, and Germany. We should note that the
series are as consistent as they can be given the changing types of domestic bonds
issued by the various countries over the last century, although maturities do change
at several points for some countries. There are a few exceptions, such as the British
consol, which has a continuous time series. We also note that prior to 1914 most
countries have only annual price indices meaning that our derived inflation series
will also consist of annual observations, the exceptions being the United States and
Britain. For the other two countries, we construct monthly series of ex post real
interest rates by matching monthly nominal interest rates within a year t with the
realized inflation rate between years t + 1 and t. Of course, in measuring long-term
real interest rates, we would like to proxy long-term inflation expectations but that
cannot be done reliably. Thus we follow earlier empirical studies in utilizing a
relatively short-horizon inflation measure notwithstanding the longer term of the
corresponding nominal interest rates.
The real interest rate differential for each of our seven countries is shown in
Figure 4. This differential is calculated as r̃t = rt − rUS,t . This is the first time
real interest rates over more than a century have been analyzed for this set of
countries at such high frequency, so it is of interest to start by evaluating some
general features of the data. The most striking impression conveyed by the figure
is that differentials have varied widely over time, but have stayed relatively close
to a zero mean. That is, the series appear to have been stationary over the very
long run, and even in shorter sub-periods.
The figures also reveal some of the changing coherence of real interest rates in
the sub-periods. To avoid noisy data from non-market periods, the wartime years
(1914–18, 1939–45) have been omitted, as has the German hyperinflation period
(1919–23). Again we can focus on the four different subperiods that correspond
to the four different monetary regimes: the gold standard (1890–1914), the interwar period (1921–38), Bretton Woods and the brief transitional period prior to
generalized floating (1950–73), and the float (1974–2000).38
37 For

recent data, there is substantial evidence that international real interest rate differentials
on short-term bonds are I(0); see, for example, Meese and Rogoff (1988) and Edison and Melick
(1999).
38 For the purpose of the present empirical analysis we begin our floating rate period in early 1974
to be consistent with other empirical literature on the real interest rate-real exchange rate nexus.
However, most historians would place the end of the Bretton Woods system in August 1971, the

28

Figure 4: Long-Term Real Interest Differentials
Britain–U.S.
1870
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

1950

1970

1990

1950

1970

1990

France–U.S.
1870
40

1890

1910

1930

20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80

Germany–U.S
1870
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20

1890

1910

1930

Notes: See text. The differential is calculated relative to the U.S. as r̃t = rt − rUS,t .

29

Allowing for the annual inflation data used before 1914, we can see that real
interest differentials became somewhat more volatile in the interwar period, with a
larger variance (this is less obvious in the German case because the hyperinflation
period has been omitted). There is a decline in this volatility after 1950, and
perhaps very little change between the pre-1974 period and the float. The latter
observation may seem surprising, except that it is consistent with observations that,
aside from nominal and real exchange rate volatility, there is little difference in the
behavior of macro fundamentals between fixed and floating rate regimes, at least
for developed countries (for example, Baxter and Stockman 1989).
With no real interest rate divergence apparent, these figures provide prima facie
evidence that real interest rates in developed countries have been cointegrated over
time, where the differentials between countries appear stationary. A formal test
of this hypothesis appears in Table 3, where we apply two stationarity tests to the
data for the period as a whole, as well as in various sub-periods. The first test is
the traditional augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) unit root test, and the second is
the DF-GLSu test, one of a family of enhanced point-optimal and asymptotically
efficient unit root tests recently proposed.39 This table also reports a broader set
of tests for the recent float, for an expanded sample including the G7 plus the
Netherlands, for comparison with the contemporary literature.
Where the null is rejected at the 1 percent level, the results show conclusively
that the real interest differential has no unit root over the long run. Changes in
the variances of series over time, of the kind evident in the preceding figures, may
distort unit root tests (Hamori and Tokihisa 1997). However, the hypothesis of a
unit root can be rejected in almost all cases at the 1 percent level in all periods
except for the recent float. With respect to the recent float, the evidence against
a unit root is stronger over the second sub-period (1986–2000) than over the first
(1974–86). The above findings refer to the more powerful DFGLSu test, which
rejects the null more frequently than the standard ADF test.
This indication of a stationary long-term real interest differential, especially
insofar as it applies to the recent period of floating industrial-country exchange
rates, contradicts much of the empirical literature produced through the mid-1990s.
Why do we find evidence of stationarity where others, such as Meese and Rogoff
(1988) and Edison and Pauls (1993), could not reject a unit root in recent data? We
note that previous authors only focused attention on the recent float, had shorter
month the U.S. official gold window was shut.
39 See Elliott, Rothenberg, and Stock (1996) and Elliott (1999). We use the DF-GLSu test from
the latter, which allows for the initial observation to be drawn from the unconditional mean of the
series. The RATS code for this procedure is available online at <http://www.estima.com>.

30

Table 3: Stationarity Tests: Long-Term Real Interest Differentials
GBR
FRA
DEU
GBR
FRA
DEU
GBR
FRA
DEU
GBR
FRA
DEU

(a) Historical Epochs
ADF
1890:1 2000:7 -4.30 ***
1890:1 2000:7 -6.05 ***
1890:1 2000:7 -4.64 ***
1890:1 1913:12 -1.38
1890:1 1913:12 -3.18 **
1890:1 1913:12 -3.86 ***
1921:1 1938:12 -3.59 ***
1921:1 1938:12 -2.39
1921:1 1938:12 -2.42
1951:1 1973:2 -5.09 ***
1951:1 1973:2 -3.81 ***
1951:1 1973:2 -3.32 **

DFGLSu
-5.54 ***
-6.36 ***
-5.14 ***
-3.44 ***
-4.36 ***
-3.70 ***
-4.01 ***
-4.31 ***
-2.84 **
-5.37 ***
-3.34 ***
-3.51 ***

GBR
NLD
FRA
DEU
ITA
JPN
CAN
GBR
NLD
FRA
DEU
ITA
JPN
CAN
GBR
NLD
FRA
DEU
ITA
JPN
CAN

(b) Recent Float
ADF
1974:2 2000:8 -2.42
1974:2 2000:8 -2.75 *
1974:2 2000:8 -2.70 *
1974:2 2000:8 -2.82 *
1974:2 2000:8 -2.52
1974:2 2000:8 -2.20
1974:2 2000:8 -3.71 ***
1974:2 1986:3 -2.61 *
1974:2 1986:3 -1.28
1974:2 1986:3 -2.21
1974:2 1986:3 -1.77
1974:2 1986:3 -2.56
1974:2 1986:3 -1.50
1974:2 1986:3 -1.92
1986:4 2000:7 -2.01
1986:4 2000:7 -2.61 *
1986:4 2000:7 -2.25
1986:4 2000:7 -3.34 **
1986:4 2000:7 -2.54
1986:4 2000:7 -2.43
1986:4 2000:7 -0.86

DFGLSu
-3.75 ***
-2.57 *
-2.52 *
-2.73 *
-2.87 **
-2.52 *
-3.15 **
-2.82 **
-1.19
-1.77
-1.64
-2.89 **
-1.72
-1.93
-2.62 *
-2.37
-2.50 *
-2.83 **
-2.55 *
-2.55 *
-2.28

Notes: See text. ADF is the Augmented Dickey Fuller t-statistic. DFGLSu is the test of Elliott (1999).
∗∗∗ denotes significance at the 1 percent level; ∗∗ at the 5 percent level; ∗ at the 10 percent level. The
critical values are, respectively, (−3.43, −2.86, −2.57) for the ADF test, and (−3.28, −2.73, −2.46)
for the DFGLSu test. Lag selection was via the LM criterion with a maximum of 12 lags.

samples, and used tests of low power such as the ADF test.
Indeed, our data and methods are consistent with earlier findings: if we switch
to the Meese-Rogoff sample of February 1974 to March 1986, and use the ADF
test as they did, and insist on a 5 percent significance level for rejection of the null,
then we replicate their conclusions exactly (as shown in the penultimate panel of
the table). Even if we switch to the DFGLSu test on the same data, we can reject
the null in only 2 out of 7 cases. The results for the post-1986 sample show similar
problems, even though for the post-1974 period as a whole we can reject the null.40
Our finding of stationarity in recent long-term real interest differentials is con40 Edison

and Melick (1999, p. 97) find mixed results on the stationarity of Canadian, German, and Japanese long-term real interest differentials against the U.S., but nonetheless base their
econometric analysis of real interest parity on the assumption that all real interest differentials are
stationary.

31

sistent with another strand in the literature that does find support for international
real interest rate equalization at longer horizons (Fujii and Chinn 2000). We conclude that earlier analyses of recent data were hampered by the low power of unit
root tests on samples of small span.41

2.3 Exchange-Risk Free Nominal Interest Parity
Perhaps the most unambiguous indicator of capital mobility is the relationship between interest rates on identical assets located in different financial centers.42,43
The great advantage of comparing onshore and offshore interest rates such as these
is that relative rates of return are not affected by pure currency risk. For much of the
period we study here, a direct onshore-offshore comparison is impossible. However, the existence of forward exchange instruments allows us to construct roughly
equivalent measures of the return to currency-risk-free international arbitrage operations.
Using monthly data on forward exchange rates, spot rates, and nominal interest
rates for 1921 to the latter half of 2001, we assess the degree of international
financial-market integration by calculating the return to covered interest arbitrage
between financial centers. For example, a London resident could earn the gross
sterling interest rate 1 + it∗ on a London loan of one pound sterling. Alternatively,
she could invest the same currency unit in New York, simultaneously covering her
exchange risk by selling dollars forward. She would do this in three steps: Buy et
41 A

more stringent test would examine the validity of long-term real interest parity. A focus
on long-term real rather than nominal interest rate parity seems preferable because with mean
reverting real exchange rates, it is easier to proxy long-run expected real exchange rates than the
corresponding nominal exchange rates. Meese and Rogoff (1988) rejected a version of real interest
parity based on the maintained assumption of an underlying sticky-price exchange rate model.
More supportive is the recent long-run panel cointegration study by MacDonald and Nagayasu
(2000) of 14 OECD countries relative to the United States. The statistical methodology of that
work, however, assumes that long-term real interest differentials are nonstationary. Chortareas and
Driver (2001) implement a similar approach using a 17-country panel of OECD countries versus
the U.S.; their conclusions are similar to those of MacDonald and Nagayasu. Chortareas and Driver
report mixed results for tests on the stationarity of long-term real interest differentials. One issue
pervading all of the work in this area is the effect of alternative proxies for long-term inflation
expectations. The proxies that are chosen often differ across authors, affecting some results. A
systematic discussion of these differences lies beyond the scope of this paper.
42 See the discussion in Obstfeld (1995), for example.
43 This section draws heavily on Obstfeld and Taylor (1998) for the case of Britain, but adds
new data on Germany for comparison. After our 1998 paper was published, we became aware of a
similar 1889–1909 U.S.-U.K. interest rate comparison contained in Calomiris and Hubbard (1996).

32

dollars in the spot exchange market (where et is the spot price of sterling in dollar
terms); next, invest the proceeds for a total of et (1 + it ) (where it is the nominal
dollar interest rate; and, finally, sell that sum of dollars forward for et (1 + it )/ft
in sterling (where ft , the forward exchange rate, is the price of forward sterling in
terms of forward dollars). The net gain from borrowing in London and investing
in New York,
et
(1 + it ) − (1 + it∗ ),
(3)
ft
is zero when capital mobility is perfect and the interest rates and forward rate are
free of default risk. The left-hand side of the preceding expression represents a
price of present pounds sterling in terms of future pounds sterling, i.e., of pounds
dated t in terms of pounds dated t + 1, but it can be viewed as the relative price
prevailing in the New York market, that is, as a kind of offshore interest rate. Thus,
our test, in effect, examines the equality of the onshore sterling interest rate i∗
with the offshore New York rate so defined. We perform a similar calculation for
mark interest differentials between London (considered as the offshore center) and
Germany (onshore), thereby gauging the difference between implicit mark interest
rates in London and the rates prevailing near the same time in Germany.
For pre-1920 data, we examine a related but distinct measure based on current
New York prices of sterling for (two-months) future delivery, as in Obstfeld and
Taylor (1998). The parallel Germany-London arbitrage calculation before 1920,
corresponding to the preceding New York-London comparison, is based on London
prices for marks to be delivered three months in the future. Forward exchange
contracts of the kind common after 1920 were not prevalent before then (except in
some exceptional financial centers, see Einzig 1937), so we instead base our pre1920 comparison of onshore and offshore interest rates on the most widely traded
instrument, one for which prices were regularly quoted in the major financial
centers’ markets, the long bill of exchange. Long bills could be used to cover the
exchange risk that might otherwise be involved in interest-rate arbitrage.44
To see how such a transaction would work, let bt denote the date-t dollar price
in New York of £1 deliverable in London after 60 days, and et the spot New York
price of sterling.45 One way to purchase a future pound deliverable in London
would be through a straight sterling loan, at price 1/(1 + it∗ ), where it∗ is the
London 60-day discount rate. An alternative would be to purchase in New York
44 Margraff

(1908, p. 37) speaks explicitly of the need to “cover” interest arbitrage through the
exchange market.
45 In fact such bills were payable after 63 days due to a legal “grace period” of three days, an
institutional fact we account for in the calculations below (Haupt 1894, p. 429).

33

a bill on London, at a price in terms of current sterling of bt /et . With perfect and
costless international arbitrage, these two prices of £1 to be delivered in London
in the future should be the same.
Perkins (1978) observed that the series (e/b) − 1 defines the sterling interest
rate in American financial markets, that is, the offshore sterling rate in the United
States. This series may be compared with the London rate i∗ , as we did in our
1998 paper, to gauge the degree of cross-border financial integration; that is, we
calculate the differential
et
− (1 + it∗ )
bt
before 1920.
Perkins’s (1978) primary aim was to modify earlier series of dollar-sterling
spot rates derived by Davis and Hughes (1960), who applied U.S. rather than U.K.
interest rates to the dollar prices of long sterling bills in order to infer a series of
sight exchange rates. Perkins argued that the sight bill rate should be derived by
multiplying the (lower) long bill rate by a sterling, not a dollar, interest factor, and
subsequent scholars have followed him; see, for example, the judgment of Officer
(1996, p. 69). From a theoretical point of view, the verdict is clear: the relative
price of current and future sterling defines a sterling nominal interest rate, in the
present case, the offshore New York rate that we compare to London rates.
The upper panel of Figure 5 is based on monthly differences between sterling
rates in New York and in London from 1870 to 2001, where we simply splice
together the 1870–1919 numbers based on time bill rates with the subsequently
available covered interest differentials. Differential returns are calculated as annual
rates of accrual.46
46 The U.S.-U.K. comparison is based on the data described in Obstfeld and Tayor (1998, p.

361,
n. 7), with the following amendments. From January 1975-August 2001, the London sterling interest rate i∗ is the three-month bank bill middle rate, from Datastream. From January 1981-August
2001, the New York dollar interest rate i is the discount rate on 90-day bankers’ acceptances, from
Datastream. Finally, from January 1981-August 2001 spot and three-month forward dollar-sterling
exchange rates come from Datastream. All of these new data are end-of-month observations.
For the U.K.-German comparison, data are monthly averages up until January 1981 and end
of month thereafter, as follows. Exchange rates: From October 1877 to July 1914 we use the
month-average spot mark-sterling exchange rate from the NBER macro-history database, series
14106 (hereafter “NBER”). London sterling prices for three-month bills on Berlin are “money”
rates taken from the “Course of Exchange” table in the Economist. From January 1921-September
1931 we average the weekly spot and three-month forward exchange rates listed by Einzig (1937).
From May 1955 to December 1980, spot exchange rates are from the Economist through 1957
and thereafter from Datastream. Forward exchange rates are from the London Times (May 1955October 1958), from the Economist subsequently through 1964, then from the London Times

34

Figure 5: Exchange-Risk Free Nominal Interest Differentials Since 1870: U.S.U.K. and U.K.-Germany
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2

U.S.–U.K. mean

U.S.–U.K. s.d.
-3
1870 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3

U.K.-Germany mean

U.K.-Germany s.d.
-4
1870 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000

Notes and Sources: Annual samples of monthly data, percent per annum. See text.

35

The figure broadly supports other indicators of the evolution of capital mobility.
Differentials are relatively small and steady under the pre-1914 gold standard, but
start to open up during World War I. They stay quite large in the early 1920s.
Differentials diminish briefly in the late 1920s, but widen sharply in the early
1930s. There are some big arbitrage gaps in the late 1940s through the mid1950s—including a sharp spike in volatility at the time of the 1956 Suez crisis.47
But these shrink starting in the late 1950s and early 1960s, only to open up again in
the late 1960s as sterling’s 1967 devaluation initiates a period of foreign exchange
turmoil, culminating in the unraveling of the Bretton Woods system in the early
1970s. Interest differentials have become small once again since the disappearance
of U.K. capital controls around 1980. The differentials appear even smaller now
than before 1914.48
Indeed, for the 1870–1914 data we observe a tendency, quite systematic albeit
declining over time, for New York sterling rates to exceed London rates. In arguing
in favor of a sterling discount rate for valuing long sterling bills traded in the U.S.,
Perkins (1978) demonstrated a tendency for the implicit offshore sterling interest
rate (e/b) − 1 to converge toward Bank Rate toward the end of the nineteenth
century (see his Figure 2, p. 399). Our Figure 5, however, compares the New York
through 1975, and, finally, starting January 1976, from Datastream. U.K. three-month interest rate:
Open market three-month discount rate, NBER series 13016, through September 1931. Data from
1955–74 come from the Federal Reserve banking data base (and are similar to the well-known
Capie-Webber series). Starting in January 1975 we use the U.K. interbank (money-market) threemonth middle rate of interest. German three-month interest rate: From October 1877 through
September 1931, where observations are available, we use the Berlin private open market discount
rate for prime bankers’ acceptances given as NBER series 13018. The German three-month money
market rate for 1955–59 is an average of monthly high and low rates taken from Monthly Report of
the Deutsche Bundesbank and thereafter, through end-1980, comes from International Financial
Statistics. Subsequent data are from Datastream, the three-month “dead middle” money market
rate.
47 See Klug and Smith (1999) for a fascinating empirical study of the Suez crisis. The paper
includes a discussion of daily covered arbitrage differentials from June 1, 1956—January 31, 1957.
48 We alert the reader to several potential problems with our calculations and data. First, as we
have stressed already above and indeed stressed quite clearly in Obstfeld and Taylor (1998), the two
measures of market integration that we calculate refer to different arbitrage possibilities before and
after 1920. Second, some forward transactions appear at different maturities in our data set. Third,
most data are observed at or near end-of-month, but some data are averages of weekly numbers.
Averaging has the effect of dampening measured volatility. Fourth, data from World War II reflect
rigidly administered prices and have no capital-mobility implications. Fifth, the data used are not
closely aligned for time of day (and even differ as to day in some cases), so that some deviations
from parity may be exaggerated. The purpose of the exercise, however, is merely to convey a broad
sense of the trend in integration, not to pursue a detailed hunt for small arbitrage possibilities.

36

offshore sterling interest rate with the London money-market rate of discount,
which tended to be somewhat below Bank Rate. Were we to use Bank Rate as the
London interest rate in the figure, much of the pre-1914 gap would be eliminated.
Given that the U.S. data consist of prices of high quality paper (such as bank bills),
however, comparisons with Bank Rate are probably inappropriate. As Spalding
(1915, p. 49) observes: “Bank Rate, as is well known, is usually higher than market
rate; therefore if ordinary trade bills are remitted [to London] from [abroad], to
find the long exchange, interest will be calculated at our Bank Rate, as trade paper
is not considered such a good security as bank bills.”49 Officer (1996, p. 69)
concurs, though on different grounds: “Whereas the Bank Rate was set by the
Bank of England, the money-market rate was a true competitive price …. The
money-market rate of discount is the better measure ….”
If it is impermissible to compare the sterling interest rate in New York with
Bank Rate in London, how, then, can we explain the systematic positive interest
gap in favor of New York before 1914? Much if not all of the gap can be explained
as an artifact of the procedure we have used to extract the “offshore” interest rate
from the observations on sight and time bill prices.
Continuing our focus on the New York-London comparison of sterling interest
rates, we notice that the published money-market discount rate for London is
quoted as a “pure” relative price of future in terms of present sterling. In contrast,
as practitioners’ textbooks of the period make amply clear, in determining the price
to be paid for a long bill of exchange on London, purchasers would factor in not
only the spot exchange rate and the London market discount rate, but, in addition,
commissions, profit margins, and, importantly, the stamp duty (0.05 percent of the
bill’s face value) payable to the British government. These factors made bill prices
lower than they would have been if they simply were equal to the spot exchange
rate discounted by the pure New York sterling rate of interest.
Margraff (1908, p. 121) estimates that for a 90-day bill, the total of such
factors amounted to 0.125 percent of face value. For a 60-day bill, that charge
would represent about 75 basis points in annualized form; Escher (1918, pp. 81–
2), published a decade later, cites a very slightly smaller number. By subtracting
that “tax” from the pre-1914 differentials plotted in the top of Figure 5, we see that
the apparent average excess return in New York disappears.
Indeed, the average return becomes negative for 1890–1914, so that 75 basis
points in additional costs may well be an overestimate for the entire prewar period.
Suggestive of declining costs is the tendency shown in the figure for the average
49 See

also the summary table in Margraff (1908, p. 112).

37

bias to decline over time. Perkins (1978, pp. 400–1) argues that U.S. foreign
exchange dealers of the period were able to exploit market power to inflate their
commissions. Certainly such market power declined through 1914 as markets
evolved, and Officer’s (1996, p. 75) data on brokers’ commissions supports this
view.50 Of course, a process of market integration increases competition and drives
commissions down. Thus, leaving aside the portion due to the stamp tax, the size
of the New York-London discrepancy is to some degree a reflection of financial
market segmentation and its secular decline evidence of a process of progressive
integration.
The lower panel of Figure 5 shows the difference between the implicit mark
interest rate in London and the one prevailing in Germany. Again the ∪-shape
evolution of capital mobility is evident over our entire sample period. Before
1914, the former, offshore, rate is calculated on the basis of 90-day prime bills of
exchange on Berlin traded in London. The results are remarkably consistent with
those for New York-London.
In particular, we again observe a systematic but secularly declining excess
return in London prior to 1914. The explanation is essentially the same as in the
New York-London comparison above. Germany levied a stamp duty on bills at the
same rate as Britain’s (0.05 percent; see Haupt 1894, p. 164, or Margraff 1908, p.
133). Margraff’s estimates of concomitant costs suggest that for a 90-day bill on
Berlin, about 40 basis points should be subtracted from the annualized sight bill
premium 4 × [(e/b) − 1] to ascertain the true London mark interest rate. On the
assumption that some costs decline over time, with 40 basis points an average for
the prewar period as whole, that cost adjustment brings the offshore and onshore
mark rates roughly into line.51
While the cost and tax considerations we have described potentially eliminate
the pre-1914 upward bias in our estimated series of offshore interest rates, other
financial transaction costs would, as usual, create no-arbitrage bands around the
point of onshore-offshore interest rate equality. One way to evaluate the evolution
of capital mobility through time would be to estimate over different eras what
50 Country risk type arguments cannot easily rationalize the pre-1920 interest differential in favor

of New York, as we pointed out earlier in Obstfeld and Taylor (1998, p. 361, n. 6). The reason is
that the two transactions we compare both entail future payment in the same place, London. This
is not the case in the post-1920 covered interest arbitrage calculations.
51 Flandreau and Rivière (1999) focus on a London-Paris comparison for 1900–14. Their results
are entirely consistent with the data that we show in Figure 5, including a systematic excess of
the London franc interest rate over that in Paris. Their rationale for the differential is apparently
different from ours, although they do not include details of their derivation.

38

Einzig (1937, p. 25) calls “transfer points,” i.e., the minimum return differential
necessary to induce arbitrage operations. Keynes and Einzig agreed that during the
interwar period, at least a 50 basis point covered differential would be needed to
induce arbitrage. That is, they suggested a no-arbitrage band of ±50 basis points.
Applying nonlinear estimation techniques including a TAR methodology to weekly
interwar data on dollar-sterling covered return differentials, Peel and Taylor (2002)
confirm that a no-arbitrage band close to ±50 basis points did appear to prevail, as
Keynes and Einzig claimed. Only outside of this range did arbitrage forces push
spot and forward exchange rates toward conformity with the band.
A detailed investigation is beyond the scope of this paper, but a first pass at the
data using the TAR methodology of Obstfeld and Taylor (1997) is suggestive. For
the dollar-sterling exchange between June 1925 and June 1931, we calculate a band
of inaction of ±60 basis points, very close to the Peel-Taylor estimate given that
we are using coarser, monthly data. For the corresponding interwar sterling-mark
exchange our estimated band is ±91 basis points wide. On 1880–1914 differentials,
in contrast, we find (after subtracting a constant mean differential) bands of only
±19 basis points for New York-London and ±35 basis points for London-Berlin.
By way of comparison, Clinton (1988) suggests that covered interest differentials
in the mid-1980s needed to reach just ±6 basis points to become economically
significant. Balke and Wohar (1998) produce an estimate 50 percent higher for the
1974–93 period. We suspect that a more careful analysis of pre-1914 differentials,
one taking account of the upward trend in market integration, would reduce our
estimated transaction cost bands for the early twentieth century. Accordingly,
the degree of integration among core money markets achieved under the classical
gold standard must be judged as truly impressive compared to conditions over the
following half-century or more.
The Great Depression, perhaps as part of a much broader interwar phase of
disintegration, therefore stands out as an event that transformed the world capital
market and left interest arbitrage differentials higher and more volatile than ever
before.

2.4 Equity and Bond Returns
It is interesting to ask whether the long-run evidence on the ∪-shape of capital
market integration extends to other criteria, and other markets such as equities.
Over the long run, global equity markets have evolved at a very different rate than
global bond markets, for example. Government bonds from core countries have
generally traded in financial centers in the last one hundred years, but for long spans
39

of time emerging-market debt was very difficult to place in the private sector, and
most went through multilateral intermediaries. Similarly, international trade in
equities, though quiescent in the middle of the century, grew substantially in core
countries after the lifting of capital controls in the 1970s and 1980s, and by the
1990s several emerging equity markets were involved too.
Does quantitative evidence exist to verify this narrative? Quantity data are
harder to find at a disaggregated level. Breaking down foreign investment into its
components is an enormous historical task, and few have attempted it in the quest
for long-run comparable series across many countries (but see Twomey 2000). We
will not attempt to press further here. Instead, we will examine price evidence to
see what changing patterns of equity returns might tell us about globalization.
There is certainly some debate about the indicators of equity returns in the long
run and what they tell us about globalization. Jorion and Goetzmann (1999) find
that most of the world’s stock markets have exhibited fairly low real returns over
the long run in the last century, around 1 percent, with the exception of the United
States, which has yielded around 4 percent annually since 1921. These figures
caution that U.S. exceptionalism might extend to stock market returns also, and
cast doubt on the general, global truth of the equity premium puzzle. The authors
also note that “survivorship bias” likely afflicts the U.S. and many other markets
in the core countries for which data exist. In many emerging markets, stock prices
have fluctuated wildly and many series break down at critical historical junctures
and during wars, limiting our ability to compare like with like.
In this section we take a fresh look at long-run equity returns using similar
data to that employed by Jorion and Goetzmann (1999), the Global Financial Data
source. We ask two questions not addressed by previous authors: to what extent
have stock returns (measured in a common currency, the U.S. dollar) diverged or
converged over time? and to what extent have the time series correlations of returns
across countries changed over time? We then consider what the answers may have
to say about globalization.
Figure 6 shows summary statistics for a sample of up to 22 country stock price
indices based on annual U.S. dollar-denominated returns since 1880.52 The bottom
chart indicates that the sample size diminishes markedly prior to 1950, evidence
of the survivorship problem. We usually have 20 countries in the sample after that
date, but in the interwar period the sample size is about a dozen, and before 1920
between five and ten. A wide line traces out the sample size for a limited set of
52 Since

dividend data are not available for the entire sample, the calculated returns are based on
equity-price changes only.

40

core countries, the G7. For this group there is a more consistent sample size over
time, though only three series before 1920.
The middle chart shows the standard deviation of returns across time, calculated
for a centered moving window of ten-year length and encompassing the largest
sample possible.53 Again, the thin line is the full sample, the wide line the G7.
As a description of the coherence of the returns in G7 equity markets this figure
is strikingly consistent with the ∪-shape hypothesis and the underlying arbitrage
arguments. Returns showed relatively little dispersion prior to 1914, but larger
gaps opened up in the interwar period. This dispersion reached a peak around
1945 or 1950, but has been falling since, with a minor reversal in the late 1960s,
but convergence again after 1980, roughly when G7 capital controls loosened.
The picture for the full sample is a little less clear, since the sample size is not
consistent. We do not know how much of the long run increase in dispersion,
for example, is due to an increase in the sample size over time; for example, the
addition in recent years of more volatile emerging markets might be expected to
raise the variance. But for the post-1950 period, when the sample is stable, the
trends are quite similar to those in the G7, although the returns are much less
coherent than the G7 in the 1970s and 1980s, a period in which capital controls
were much tighter in the periphery than in the core. It is also apparent that in the
1990s, the emerging markets have seen a much larger decline in dispersion, at a
time when economic reforms generally reduced barriers to capital mobility, and
emerging market portfolio investment grew rapidly.
Finally, the top chart explores a second measure of coherence of stock prices
across countries, based on the average correlation of annual dollar returns with that
on the U.S. market, again calculated for a centered moving window of ten-year
length and encompassing the largest sample possible, and where the thin line is
the average for the full sample, the wide line the G7. The correlations show clear
disconnects between markets during times of well know autarky such as the two
world wars. Periods of high correlation also appear more recently and before 1914
(though only just before). Although the noisiness of the correlations is quite large,
this much, at least, is consistent with the ∪-shape story. What isn’t consistent with
the story is the large spike in cross-country correlations in the 1920s and 1930s.
Why should this be so, in what was an era of supposedly fairly low capital mobility?
One answer has been provided already by Eichengreen and Sachs (1985, Figure 5), who show that the interwar patterns may simply reflect common shocks associated with going on and off the gold standard. To follow their example, consider
53 Specifically,

we plot ten-year averages of the cross-sectional standard deviations of returns.

41

Figure 6: Equity Returns in U.S. Dollars for the G7 and up to 22 Global Stock
Markets, 1880–2000
correlations (10 year window)
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

1960

1980

2000

1960

1980

2000

s.d. (10 year window)
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
1880

1900

1920

1940

sample size
25
20
15
10
5
0
1880

1900

1920

1940

Source: Global Financial Data.

42

Figure 7: Equity Markets and the Great Depression, 1929–35
1935 Tobin’s q versus
1935 Exchange Rate to Gold
(1929=100)

200

2.0

150

1.5
Tobin’s q

Stock Price Index

1935 Stock Price Index versus
1935 Exchange Rate to Gold
(1929=100)

100

50

1.0

0.5

0

0.0
50 100 150 200 250 300

0

Exchange Rate to Gold

200

400

600

Exchange Rate to Gold

Source: Global Financial Data; Obstfeld and Taylor (2002).

the 1929 to 1935 period. Countries that stayed on gold like France and Germany
endured a brutal downturn in prices and output, whereas countries that devalued
didn’t. This has been empirically verified for wider samples such as Latin America (Campa 1990). It is consistent with monetary explanations of recovery which
build on both the debt-deflation logic of Fisher and the expected-real-interest-rate
channel emphasized by Mundell, not to mention the conventional Keynesian transmission mechanism (Temin 1989; Romer 1992; Eichengreen 1992; Bernanke and
Carey 1996).
What did this mean for stock markets? In a world of non-neutral money,
devaluers would be able to drive up Tobin’s q by restoring positive investment
expectations. Eichengreen and Sachs (1985) found a statistically significant correlation between the change in q and the change in the exchange rate (relative to
gold parity) in a sample of nine countries from 1929 to 1935. We replicate and
extend their analysis in Figure 7. This figure shows that the correlation holds true
in a wider sample of 18 countries.
These results imply that we must therefore be cautious about interpreting an
increased correlation among markets as evidence of globalization per se. Instead,
certain high correlations might simply be a result of common shocks among a group
of countries, in this case countries experiencing, and then reacting to, the biggest
43

single macroeconomic shock of the twentieth century. This caveat is well known.
For example, a recent article in the Economist (Economics Focus, “Dancing in
Step,” March 24, 2001) reports that in the 1990s global stock market correlations
have risen to even higher levels than in the late 1980s (as high as 0.8 in year
2000, though at what frequency is not mentioned).54 This came after a decline
in correlations in the early 1990s, but “the long term trend is upward.” Overall,
the article concludes, this is consistent with increased globalization pressures, but
certain large shocks, like the recent crises in Asia, might also have also been
associated with higher correlations via contagion channels. As the article notes,
“stock markets tend to be more correlated at times of high volatility in share
prices; during calmer periods, correlations tend to be weaker.” Similar reasoning,
of course, could pertain to the roaring twenties, and the bust of the thirties.55

2.5 Summary
Many studies of market integration have focused on a single kind of criterion.
This approach seems unreasonably restrictive to us, since the interpretation of
such narrow criteria must necessarily rest upon untested auxiliary assumptions.
By contrast, we see no reason to dismiss any useful information, in either price or
quantity form, especially given the paucity of historical data in certain quarters.
Thus, we have opted for a broad battery of tests to try to cut down the possible set
of explanations that could account for the empirical record, and so, by a process of
elimination, work towards a set on controlled conjectures concerning the evolution
of the global capital market.
The preceding section succinctly conveys the benefits we think this kind of
approach can deliver. Our quantity-based tests delivered a certain set of stylized
facts, and the price-based tests another set of facts. Combining the two, and
introducing evidence on convergence and divergence in other economic phenomena
such as living standards and demography, we claim there is overwhelming support
for the notion that the major long-run changes in the degree of global capital
mobility have taken the form of changes in the impediments to capital flows, rather
than any encouragement or discouragement to flows arising from structural shifts
54 On

these correlations see also Gourinchas and Rey (2001) and International Monetary Fund
(2001, p. 76).
55 The definition of “contagion” is controversial: contagion may entail a structural intensification
of spillovers in crisis periods. As Forbes and Rigobon (2000) stress, however, higher return volatility
itself can mechanically raise cross-border return correlations even in the absence of any underlying
structural change, and it may be misleading to view this as a contagion effect.

44

within the economies themselves. That is not to discount the fact that such changes
have occurred, and are no doubt important at the margin; but it is an assertion that
the virtual disappearance of foreign capital flows and stocks in mid-century, and
the explosion in price differentials, can only be explained by an appeal to changes
in arbitrage possibilities as permitted by two major constraining factors in capital
market operations: technology and national economic policies.
From this point, it is a short step to the conclusion that a full accounting of
the phenomena at hand must rest on a detailed political and institutional history.
Clearly, technology is a poor candidate for the explanation of the twentieth century collapse of capital mobility. In the 1920s and 1930s, the prevailing financial
technologies were not suddenly forgotten by market participants: indeed some
technologies, such as futures markets for foreign exchange came to fruition in
those decades. Technological evolution was not smooth and linear, but, as we
have already noted, was at least unidirectional, and, absent any other impediments,
would have implied an uninterrupted progress toward an ever more tightly connected global marketplace.
Such was not allowed to happen, of course. Rather, the shifting forces of
national economic policies, as influenced by the prevailing economic theories of
the day, loomed large during and after the watershed event of the twentieth century,
the economic and political crisis of the Great Depression. Understanding the
macroeconomic and international economic history of the last century in these
terms, and the changes it wrought for the operation of the global capital market,
is a long and complex story, a narrative that properly accompanies the empirical
record presented in this paper, and we take up some of the political economy
dimensions of that story in the section that follows.

3 Political Economy
We have thus far amassed some evidence that international capital mobility has experienced two major swings over the course of the twentieth century: a pronounced
decline during the interwar years and a recovery in the later postwar years. The
timing is hard to pin down precisely, and, indeed, surely varied by country and by
the type of capital movements being considered.
Taking this as given, we now must ask, why did capital mobility follow this
path, and what corroborative evidence can we assemble to buttress an account of
these events that incorporates the forces of political economy? We start first with
the downturn in capital mobility after 1914.
45

3.1 The Downturn
The conventional macro-historical account of the collapse of capital mobility after
1914 focuses on the trilemma, as we have noted (Eichengreen 1996; Obstfeld
and Taylor 1998). The literature suggests that the major political economy forces
at work during this period were increasing pressure for macroeconomic activism,
particularly from newly- or better-enfranchised groups such as the working classes.
If fixed exchange rates were to be maintained, then capital mobility would have to be
compromised, at least on some occasions. Maintenance of capital mobility instead
would preclude an exchange rate target. Either option would raise uncertainty for
investors.
It is believed that prior to 1914, gold standard orthodoxy had been a sine
qua non for access to global capital markets on favorable terms. A first study
by Bordo and Rockoff (1996) found that adherence to gold standard rules acted
as a “seal of approval” for sovereign debt. Gold standard countries had lower
country risk, measured by the bond spread in London over the British consol.56
Accordingly, evidence of a new political dynamic after 1914 might be seen in a
changing relationship between country risk and gold after the gold standard was
reconstituted starting in 1925. With the rules of the game in question after World
War I, investors might have doubted whether the announcement of a gold standard
commitment alone would signal credibility. In addition, public solvency indicators,
such as debt-GDP ratios, or inflation, might be seen as having a bigger impact on
international bond spreads under the reconstituted gold standard than before. Do
such doubts manifest themselves in the data?
There is no uniform and comprehensive study of bond spreads across these
two eras that would allow us definitively to answer this question, but a second
study by Bordo, Edelstein, and Rockoff (1999) came to a conclusion that was
surprising, even by the authors’ own admission. Looking solely at 1920s bonds
they found continued evidence that the gold standard remained a seal of approval,
lowering bond spreads significantly, at least when a country stuck to its prewar
parity. Devaluers were not so lucky with their bond spreads, since for them, the
impact of being on gold was small and statistically insignificant. Such a conclusion
challenged the conventional wisdom that the interwar gold standard was a pale and
less credible shadow of its predecessor.
These are two pioneering studies but, for comparative work across regimes,
56 Clemens and Williamson (2001), however, find no statistically significant gold standard effect

on the shares of British capital flows to various foreign recipients during 1870–1913. It remains to
reconcile the apparently conflicting message of the price and quantity data.

46

they are not ideal. Unfortunately, they cannot be merged together into a consistent
picture because of differences in the methods and data employed. The former study
looked at long-term government bonds in the secondary market, and examined their
yield to maturity; the latter examined new issues and their yield at the moment of
flotation only. The former study therefore had complete time series, whereas the
latter had a small sample that was often interrupted by missing data in years when
no issues took place—a not uncommon event in the 1920s, and one that could raise
a potential sample-selection issue. Finally, the former studied prices in London,
the latter prices in New York, a switch that could be defended as the hegemonic
center of global capital markets shifted across the Atlantic around this time, and
one that allowed the use of Cleona Lewis’ (1938) data on new issues for the 1920s.
To overcome the differences between these studies, we re-examine the question
of what determined bond spreads in the pre-1914 and interwar years using a much
larger database that allows us to view a consistent set of data for a larger sample
of countries from 1870 to 1940. The Global Financial Data source includes yields
to maturity of government bonds traded in London for this entire period, and we
focus on 20 countries, some in the core and some in the periphery, to see how their
country risk evolved. This allows us to focus on the same market and the same
type of risk measure across both eras. To isolate the effects of default risk, our
spreads over London are exclusively for bonds denominated in gold or in sterling.
Figure 8 offers an overview of the data. The mean bond spread for the core and
periphery subsamples is presented in the top and bottom charts respectively, and
each is surrounded by a measure of dispersion, a band equal to plus or minus two
standard deviations. The units are percentage points and the scales are deliberately
the same on the two charts.57
57

Country risk is calculated as the spread between the country’s long bond, denominated in hard
currency or gold (the external London bond), and the British consol. The core and empire countries
are Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, India, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United States. The periphery countries
are Argentina, Austria, Brazil, Chile, Finland, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Portugal,
Spain, Uruguay. There are occasional missing data, due to the fact that bonds are only recorded
in domestic currency (paper) or are not recorded at all. Notable gaps are Argentina (1935–40),
Austria (1933–40), Chile (1933–40), Finland (1870–1910), Greece (1929–40), Italy (1914–40),
Netherlands (1918–40), Norway (1919–40), Mexico (1933–40), Portugal (1927–30), Spain (1914–
40), Sweden (1920–40), Switzerland (1870–1914), Uruguay (1919–26 and 1933–40), and several
countries around the time of World War One (1914–18). We supplant the Global Financial Data
source with more accurate data for Argentina (1884–34) from della Paolera (1988) and Nakamura
and Zarazaga (2003), and for the United States (1870–1914) from Bordo and Rockoff (1996), who
use Calmoiris’ adjusted gold rate, since at this time government bonds bore silver risk.

47

Figure 8: London Bond Spreads, Core and Periphery, 1870–1940
External Bond Spread: 14 Core & Empire Bonds
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
1870

1880

1890

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

External Bond Spread: 13 Periphery Bonds
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
1870

1880

1890

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

Notes: See note 57 Source: Global Financial Data.

48

The differences between the two subsamples are very striking: the core had
much smaller country risk than the periphery, as expected. Core countries usually
had interest rates within one or two percentage points of Britain’s. The periphery
could have spreads as large as ten percentage points, which was tantamount to
having a bond in default in many cases. But the figures also show some similarities,
once we normalize for this scale difference: both core and periphery experienced
a convergence in bond spreads up to 1914, and then a good deal of volatility in the
interwar years, when spreads widened.
The gradual convergence of bond spreads warns us that a simple static “on and
off” gold indicator is unlikely to capture the full dynamics of evolving country
risk in this period. Intuitively, these figures hint at high levels of persistence or
serial correlation in bond spreads, and it is easy to imagine why. Bond spreads
are a function of reputation, which in capital markets, as in any other repeated
game, cannot be built overnight. Instead, there is an “I know what you did last
summer” effect: one’s reputation in the previous period is likely to have substantial explanatory power in deciding one’s reputation today. Beyond this, levels of
public indebtedness were relevant for at least some countries. A general concern
is that macroeconomic variables correlated with gold-standard adherence might
be responsible for the apparent pre-1914 benefits of going on gold, or might mask
such benefits after the First World War. Before the war, countries on gold may have
had more disciplined fiscal policies, lower public debt, and hence more favorable
treatment by the bond markets. On the other hand, perhaps countries that inflated
away their public debts in the early or mid-1920s would have been unlikely to
rejoin gold at parity, making high public debts and a return to gold at prewar parity
positively correlated variables. In these circumstances, omitting macro controls
could lead us to overestimate the prewar benefit of gold standard adherence and
underestimate the postwar benefit of returning to gold at the prewar par.58
58 Flandreau, Le Cacheux, and Zumer (1998) argue that a major factor driving the evident conver-

gence of bond spreads after the early 1890s and through 1914 is worldwide inflation resulting from
gold discoveries, a factor that caused both an unexpected reduction in countries ratios of public
debt to nominal GDP and a more widespread adherence to the gold standard. For the pre-1914
period, Flandreau et al. investigate borrowing spreads over London using a country sample larger
than that of Bordo and Rockoff (1996) and an econometric specification encompassing the public
debt ratio to GDP as well as gold standard adherence. They report benefits from gold standard
adherence on the order of 35–55 basis points. They also find a positive effect of public debt on
borrowing spreads. (Bordo and Rockoff included the public deficit in their estimating equation
but found little effect.) It is possible that some of the benefits ascribed by Bordo and Rockoff to
gold standard adherence before 1914 can be accounted for by a tendency of association with more
moderate real public debt levels.

49

Following Bordo and Rockoff (1996), we investigate the relationship between
the dependent variable country risk, measured by the bond spread over London,
SPREADit = YIELDit − YIELDUK,t , and selected macroeconomic policy variables that could play a role for country i and time t. One such variable is gold
standard adherence, measured by two dummy variables: GSPARit , which takes
the value 1 if on date t country i is on gold at the 1913 parity, and GSDEVit ,
which takes the value 1 if the country is on gold at a devalued parity after 1913.
Monetary policy reputation is proxied by the lagged inflation rate, INFLi,t−1 . As
a final macro explanatory variable, we examine the effects of lagged public debt
levels, measured by the ratio of debt to output, PUBDGDPi,t−1 . We also include
country fixed effects to capture constant but unmeasured political, economic, institutional, or geographic features of individual countries (for example, location
on the “periphery”).
Like Bordo and Rockoff, we also find it necessary to account for global interest
rate shocks that affect spreads in all markets in a given year. To do this, following the
logic of the “international CAPM” model, we include (with a country specific slope,
or “β”) a measure of “market risk” in the form SPREADW ,t = YIELDWORLD,t −
YIELDUK,t , where this term is the average world spread on the “safe rate” (London)
for the countries in the sample at time t.59,60
59 We

experimented with other ways to control for time specific asset market shifts, such as
simple time dummies, but the results appear robust.
60 Bond spread series are from Global Financial Data as described in note 57.
Gold standard adherence data are from Meissner (2001) and Eichengreen (1992), available for
all countries in all years. Other variables are only available for a subset of years and countries, and
this restricts the sample in our econometric tests accordingly.
Central government public debt data (mostly starting in 1880) come from Bordo and Jonung
(1996) for a sample of 14 countries consisting of: Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, Netherlands (starting 1900), Norway, Sweden, Switzerland (starting 1913),
United Kingdom, and United States. For those countries, the same source has data on nominal
GDP. Central public debt data for Argentina before 1914 come from della Paolera (1988, Table 36)
and Argentine nominal GDP from della Paolera and Ortiz (1995). Prichard (1970, Table 30) reports
consolidated public debt data for New Zealand. New Zealand nominal GDP data are taken from
Hawke (1975, pp. 303 and 305). Data on the Australian general government debt (as a ratio to GDP)
for our entire period come from Barnard (1987, series GF7). Pre-war nominal GDP for Belgium
are estimated as Real GDP from Maddison (1995) times the price deflator from Obstfeld and Taylor
(2002). After 1914, we augment our other public debt data with the total central government debts
reported by United Nations (1948); and we use the nominal GDP figures from Obstfeld and Taylor
(2002) or Global Financial Data. For the interwar period, the subsample of countries for which we
have public debt data consists of the 14 Bordo-Jonung countries (now including Switzerland) plus
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Brazil, Chile, Greece, Hungary, India, New Zealand, Portugal, and
Spain, although we exclude the United Kingdom as it is used as the base country for the purpose of

50

Using pooled annual data for a large sample of countries, the basic regression
equation is then of the form
SPREADit = αi + βi SPREADW ,t + γ Xit + uit
where





Xit = 




GSPARit
GSDEVit
PUBDGDPi,t−1
INFLi,t−1
PERIPHERY × PUBDGDPi,t−1
PERIPHERY × INFLi,t−1

(4)










is the vector of explanatory variables, and PERIPHERY is a dummy variable equal
to one for the periphery countries (not including regions of the British Empire) to
capture the possibly different risk treatment of established versus emerging markets.61 The main question we ask is whether 1914 was a watershed—that is, if the
interwar gold standard differed from its predecessor. Accordingly we investigate
this relationship on prewar (1870–1913) and interwar (1925–30) samples.
In Tables 4 and 5 we present our results for the pre-war (1870–1913) and
interwar (1925–30) periods. Since we are focusing on spreads against London,
computing relative spreads. We also tried using deficit-to-GDP ratios, following Bordo and Rockoff
(1996), but, like them, we found deficit ratios to be statistically insignificant in preliminary testing.
Inflation data are based on consumer price indices taken from Obstfeld and Taylor (2002) or
Global Financial Data. CPI data before 1914 are missing for Austria-Hungary, Brazil, Chile,
Greece, India, New Zealand, South Africa (before 1895), and Uruguay; and for the interwar period
for Uruguay.
For a few observations imputed data are used based on trend interpolation, namely: New Zealand
bond yield (1924), the Brazilian debt-GDP ratio (1928), and Belgian nominal GDP (1925–26 and
1928–29).
We are unable to make our pre-1914 analysis of spread-debt relationships comparable with that
of Flandreau, Le Cacheux, and Zumer (1998), as their data, which comprise a different country
sample than ours, have not been made available. Besides apparently covering the countries in our
prewar sample, excluding Argentina, Australia, New Zealand, and the United States, the Flandreau
et al. sample adds public debt data for Switzerland and the five “European peripheral” countries
of Austria-Hungary, Portugal, Greece, Russia, and Spain. Judging from the 1892 data from Haupt
(1894) graphed by Dornbusch (1998),the latter five countries all had significant public debts relative
to GDP.
61 The core and empire countries are Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany,
India, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United
States. The periphery countries are Argentina, Austria, Brazil, Chile, Finland, Greece, Hungary,
Italy, Japan, Mexico, Portugal, Spain, and Uruguay. See Figure 8.

51

and we implicitly treat London as a benchmark of what is a safe yield under gold
standard credibility, we omit all other interwar years in our sample (our bond data
are end-of-year). Column 1 shows the OLS results, while column 2 adds an AR(1)
correction since we find evidence of high serial correlation in column 1, at least
prior to 1914.62
Being on gold appears statistically significant before 1914, contributing about
−57 basis points to the spread over London. But being on gold at the 1913 parity
appears to be statistically insignificant, or even incorrectly signed, for the interwar
years 1925–30 (in the latter period, some imprecision is to be expected because
the sample is much smaller).
An interesting perspective on the role of public debt as a negative signal comes
from interacting debt with dummies locating a country in the “core” or the “periphery.” The contrasting results for our two sample periods lend further support
to the hypothesis of a sharp change in credibility of the gold commitment. Prior to
1914, in the preferred AR(1) results, we see that it is only the peripheral countries
whose public debt levels appeared to increase spreads. After an autoregressive
correction to the 1870–1913 sample, the empirical spread equation indicates that
a 10 percent rise in a peripheral country’s ratio of debt to GDP added 7.2 basis
points to its borrowing cost.63
Inflation, on the other hand, is seen to have had an effect that was qualitatively
small and of low statistical significance in the prewar period. The autoregressive
parameter is quite high, 0.68, suggesting that during the classical gold standard
period countries could rely on some reputational persistence to help them maintain
credibility in the capital market. For countries in the core, then, classical gold
standard adherence alone seems to have been sufficient to warrant the market “seal
of approval.”64
62 For the prewar period, the Durbin-Watson statistics for the uncorrected equations are very low.

The AR(1) model was also used by Bordo and Rockoff (1996). Flandreau, Le Cacheux, and Zumer
(1998) add additional controls, the export-to-output ratio and output per capita, which appear to
soak up some serial correlation.
63 Thus, a debt-GDP ratio of 100 percent, assuming linearity, would raise the cost of foreign
borrowing by 0.77 percent per year, a sizeable effect at a time when the base yield on the U.K.
consol was about 3 percent. For core countries the estimated effect is negligible, slightly negative,
and statistically insignificant.
64 Flandreau et al. (1998, p. 145) conclude that before 1914, “countries had to plunge quite deep
into debt before they started feeling the pain.” The limited set of core countries generally had public
debt levels at which, according to Flandreau et al., “markets did not inflict massive punishments.”
This may explain why we find insignificant debt effects under the classical gold standard for the
core subsample of countries.

52

Table 4: Country Risk and the Gold Standard, 1870–1913
OLS
409
0.95
1.03
0.92
0.20
0.85
-0.30 (0.06)
-0.30 (0.13)
0.88 (0.37)
1.02 (0.18)
-0.25 (0.44)
—

Number of Observations
Adjusted R squared
Mean of Dependent Variable
Standard Error of Dependent Variable
Standard Error of Estimate
Durbin-Watson Statistic
GS
PUBDGDP(t–1)
INFL(t–1)
PERIPHERY × PUBDGDP(t–1)
PERIPHERY × INFL(t–1)
ρ

AR1
396
0.97
1.02
0.92
0.16
1.89
-0.57 (0.08)
-0.05 (0.21)
0.41
(0.27)
0.77
(0.29)
0.03
(0.32)
0.68
(0.04)

Notes and Sources: The dependent variable is SPREAD as in Figure 8. Standard errors appear in
parentheses. Country fixed effects (αi ) and slopes (βi ) are not reported. The 13 countries in the
unbalanced panel are Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, and United States. There are some missing data. In the AR1
model a common autoregressive parameter ρ applies to all countries. See text and footnotes 57
and 60.

Table 5: Country Risk and the Gold Standard, 1925–30
OLS
102
0.84
0.84
1.03
0.41
2.00
0.63 (0.23)
-0.01 (0.19)
4.33 (0.54)
0.02 (0.07)
-4.78 (3.20)
-2.97 (1.48)

Number of Observations
Adjusted R squared
Mean of Dependent Variable
Standard Error of Dependent Variable
Standard Error of Estimate
Durbin-Watson Statistic
GSPAR
GSDEV
PUBDGDP(t–1)
INFL(t–1)
PERIPHERY × PUBDGDP(t–1)
PERIPHERY × INFL(t–1)
ρ

AR1
85
0.93
0.81
1.04
0.28
2.26
0.10
(0.24)
-0.50 (0.21)
2.16
(0.52)
-0.08 (0.16)
-0.96 (2.97)
0.28
(1.34)
0.30
(0.11)

Notes and Sources: See Table 4. GSPAR denotes gold standard restored at the 1913 parity;
GSDEV denotes gold standard restored at a devalued parity. Many countries drop out of the
sample in the interwar period, since an increasing number of bonds were no longer issued in
hard currency such as gold or sterling. The 17 countries in the balanced panel are Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, India,
Japan, New Zealand, South Africa, Switzerland, and United States. In the AR1 model a common
autoregressive parameter ρ applies to all countries.

53

It is important to note that this pattern does not hold for the interwar period.
For that era, the market seems to have been more discerning in its scrutiny of all
borrowers’ public debt and inflation data. In these samples we also find much
weaker evidence of reputational persistence (as measured by the autoregressive
parameter of 0.30), perhaps further evidence of the fragile credibility associated
with the interwar gold standard where markets seemed to pay more attention to
current behavior.65
To be precise, we find no interwar evidence that the markets differentiated
between core and periphery countries in evaluating the country-risk implications of
rising debt burdens. In all countries, an interwar increase in public debt equivalent
to 10 percentage points of GDP could raise spreads by as much as 43 basis points
(in the OLS specification) or 22 basis points (in the AR(1) specification). By this
measure, the sensitivity of bond spreads to debt was about five times larger after
the war than before.
Inflation again shows only a small and statistically insignificant effect for core
countries. On the periphery, it has the incorrect sign under the OLS specification,
but this counterintuitive effect appears to be not very robust, as it is not preserved
under the AR(1) correction.66
These findings may help us to understand why many policymakers in the 1920s
and 1930s so feared the market response to unbalanced public budgets, notwithstanding the countercyclical case for fiscal expansion (James 2001). In this period,
being on gold was not, in itself, enough to soothe markets.
An unusual finding in the 1925–30 results of Table 5, is that returning to gold
at a devalued parity is estimated to have a more beneficial effect than returning
at prewar parity, very much contrary to the Bordo-Edelstein-Rockoff empirical
result.67 This finding offers some support for the theoretical view of Drazen and
Masson (1994) that policymakers may hurt rather than enhance their credibility
through policies that appear “tough” in the short term but are too draconian to be
sustained for long. The results are not conclusive, but further research is perhaps
warranted on this question.
65 A Durbin-Watson statistic of 2.00 in the OLS regression seems to indicate that an autoregressive

correction is unwarranted, though support for such a correction might be hard to find given the
short duration (six years) of the interwar panel data.
66 This effect, if extrapolated, might not be so small under some hyperinflationary conditions, as
pertained in the interwar period in various countries, but such data are omitted from our sample,
and, besides, we do not expect the relationship to remain linear under such extreme conditions.
67 Whether a devalued return to gold was better than floating seems less clear: in the OLS results
this is not true, but in the AR1 results it is.

54

To recapitulate: unlike Bordo, Edelstein, and Rockoff (1999), we find very
different behavior of bond spreads in relation to the gold standard over the interwar
period 1925–30 as compared to the pre-1914 period. This may be ascribed mainly
to differences in concept (use of around secondary-market bond yields in London
versus new issues in New York) and differences in macroeconomic control variables
(government debt rather than deficit). Of these features in our empirical approach,
the first, at least, seems necessary if we are to make comparisons on an equal
footing with Bordo and Rockoff (1996).
Before 1914, we find that the gold standard did indeed confer a “seal of approval,” whereas macro fundamentals, measured by public debt and inflation, seem
to have affected the spreads of peripheral more than core countries. We infer that
adherence to gold by core countries was pretty much sufficient to confer credibility,
whereas markets took a broader and more skeptical view of peripheral countries.
For the interwar period, a return to gold after devaluation seemed slightly more
credible, notwithstanding the arguments that led Britain and other countries to return to gold at par; indeed, returning at par yielded small benefits at best, and a
return after devaluation (as in the case of France) might have been more beneficial.
Moreover, for core and periphery countries alike, high public debts and inflation
were punished, suggesting that policymakers’ room for maneuver in fiscal and
monetary policy was further curtailed.
Both our results on the drop in spreads associated with going on gold, and
on markets’ differential response to public debt and inflation prewar and interwar,
suggest that the interwar gold standard was indeed seen as a pale imitation, and was
considered far less credible than its pre-1914 predecessor. It remains to reconcile
these results with findings such as those of Hallwood, MacDonald, and Marsh
(1996) that indicate a credible gold standard during the late 1920s, at least in the
short term. Perhaps the bond markets adopted a longer perspective under which
protracted adherence to unchanging gold parities seemed less probable than shortterm adherence.
These findings on bond markets serve to illuminate how different the interwar
global capital market was from its antecedent, the classical gold-standard regime
of 1870–1914. An image used quite often to describe this regime change in the
global economy is one of Humpty Dumpty falling to pieces, and these preliminary
statistical results show cross-regime evidence on how those pieces were scattered.
The findings offer persuasive evidence that the global convergence of the bond
market prior to 1914, so clearly seen in the figure, had been replaced by some quite
different disintegrative forces after 1914.

55

3.2 The Upturn
After the immediate post-World War Two dislocations, the world economy began
to reconstitute its severed linkages, a process both promoting and promoted by the
return of some degree of durable prosperity and peace. Postwar policy makers,
through the IMF, successive multilateral trade liberalization rounds, current account currency convertibility, and other measures, successfully promoted growing
world trade. By the late 1960s, the very success of these initiatives in forging trading linkages among countries simultaneously made capital flows across borders
ever more difficult to contain. As a result, the trilemma re-emerged with full force,
and on a global scale, in the early 1970s. The Bretton Woods system, initially
designed for a world of tightly controlled capital movements, blew apart. The
major industrial countries retreated to floating exchange rates.
While initially viewed as a temporary expedient, floating rates have remained
a durable feature of the international financial landscape. Floating rates helped
reconcile the social demand for domestic macroeconomic stabilization with the
interest of the business community for open markets in goods and assets. Some
episodes of exchange rate misalignment have prompted calls for renewed protection
and even capital-account restrictions. Some of these calls have been accommodated, but usually not in the form of across-the-board restrictions on international
transactions.
Other forces have also helped to promote liberalization. In Europe, the political and economic rationales for a large single market have prompted ongoing
financial liberalization; at the same time, the political (and, some argue, economic)
imperative of stable exchange rates has pushed toward the logical conclusion of a
single currency, the euro. Other regions, likewise, have opted for fixed exchange
rates, either by some form of ultra-hard peg or outright dollarization, in either case
bending to the trilemma by giving up monetary policy autonomy.
Since the late 1980s, the drive toward capital-account liberalization in the developing world is probably the most striking pattern in the evolution of global
capital markets. Clearly one element has been the widespread failure in the periphery of populist policies adopted in the 1980s and earlier. Reactions to those
failures gave free-market ideologies a greater influence. On a larger scale, the
collapse of the Soviet empire in the late 1980s also highlighted the advantages of
the capitalist model. The resulting decline in Cold War tensions certainly held out
the promise of greater fluidity in private international capital. Whether exchange
rates float or are fixed, there is much greater openness to private financial flows
on the periphery than in the 1980s. In part a reflection of U.S. business inter56

ests, American administrations have pushed developing economies to liberalize on
capital account; in some cases, liberalization ran far ahead of domestic financial
systems’ absorptive capacities, and clashed with national exchange rate policies.
The resulting contradictions helped spark the developing country currency crises
of the latter 1990s. To attract productive capital from the industrial world remains
a prime goal on the periphery, however, and that requires market-oriented reforms,
stable macro policies, and transparency in governance and legal systems.
There is, however, one critical dimension in which pre-1914 international capital flows differ sharply in nature from what we see today, with important implications for the periphery: to see this we return to the distinction between net
and gross international asset stocks. A cursory glance at the data reveals that this
problem is very serious in recent decades, but relatively unimportant in the pre1914 era of globalization. The reason is simple: in the late nineteenth century the
principal flows were long-term investment capital, and virtually unidirectional at
that. There was one notable exception, the United States, where both inflows and
outflows were large. But in most cases key creditor nations, principally Britain,
but also France and Germany, engaged in the financing of other countries’ capital
accumulation, and in doing so, developed enormous one-way positions in their
portfolios.
For example, circa 1914 the scale of Argentine assets in Britain’s portfolio was
very large, but the converse holding of British assets by Argentines was trivial
by comparison. Thus, the nineteenth century was an era of one-way asset shifts,
leading to great portfolio diversification by the principal creditor/outflow nations
like Britain, but relatively little diversification by the debtor/inflow nations. To a
first approximation, the gross asset and liability positions were very close to net in
that distant era. The 1980s and 1990s are obviously very different: for example,
the United States became in this period the world’s largest net debtor nation. But
whilst accounting for the biggest national stock of gross foreign liabilities, the
United States also held the largest stock of gross foreign assets.
Our earlier discussion of the gross stock data, and our inferences concerning the
recovery of foreign asset and liabilities in the world economy after 1980, therefore
need considerable modification to take into account this problem. And, indeed, it
is a significant problem for all of the countries concerned: the rank of countries by
foreign assets in the IMF data is very highly correlated with the rank by foreign
liabilities. Countries such as Britain, Japan, Canada, Germany, and the Netherlands
are all big holders of both foreign assets and liabilities. Strikingly, when we net out
the data, the result is that, since 1980, the net foreign asset position (or liability)
positions in the world economy have remained very low indeed, as indicated by
57

Figure 9. Unlike the gross stocks, the net stocks have increased little, and if we
trust the asset data rather more (arguably more of the net asset data are collected
in developing countries with better accounting methods) then the picture is one of
relative decline in the size of net foreign capital stocks relative to GDP.
Thus, for all the suggestion that we have returned to the pre-1914 type of
global capital market, here is one major qualitative difference between then and
now. Today’s foreign asset distribution is much more about asset “swapping” by
rich countries—diversification—than it is about the accumulation of large one-way
positions—a critical component of the development process in poorer countries in
standard textbook treatments. It is therefore more about hedging and risk sharing
than it is about long-term finance and the mediation of saving supply and investment
demand between countries. In the latter sense, we have never come close to
recapturing the heady times of the pre-1914 era, when a creditor like Britain could
persist for years in satisfying half of its accumulation of assets with foreign capital,
or a debtor like Argentina could similarly go on for years generating liabilities of
which one half were taken up by foreigners. Instead, still to a very great extent
today, a country’s net wealth will depend, for accumulation, on the provision of
financing from domestic rather than foreign sources (Feldstein and Horioka 1980).
An interesting, and closely related, insight also follows from looking at the
share of less-developed countries (LDCs) in global liabilities. This is now at an
all time low. In 1900, LDCs in Asia, Latin America, and Africa accounted for 33
percent of global liabilities, in the 1990s only 11 percent (Figure 3). The global
capital market of the nineteenth century centered on Europe, especially London,
extended relatively more credit to LDCs than does today’s global capital market.
Is this surprising? There are various interpretations for this observation. One is
that capital markets are biased now, or were biased in the past; for example, did
Britain, as an imperial power, favor LDCs within her orbit with finance? or, today,
does the global capital market fail in the sense that there are insufficient capital
flows to LDCs, and an excess of flows among developed countries? These are
hard claims to prove, as market failure could be a cause, as could a host of other
factors including institutions and policies affecting the marginal product of capital
in different locations. Of course, this result just follows from the fact that many of
the top asset holders also figure in the top liability holders, and most of them are
developed OECD countries.
Figure 10 both illustrates the periphery’s need to draw on industrial country
savings, as well as an important dimension in which the globalization of capital
markets remains behind the level attained under the classical gold standard. In the
last great era of globalization, the most striking characteristic is that foreign capital
58

Figure 9: Foreign Capital Stocks: Net Versus Gross
0.8
Assets/Sample GDP
Liabilities/Sample GDP
Net Assets of Creditors/Sample GDP
Net Liabilities of Debtors/Sample GDP

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
1980

1985

1990

1995

Source: IMF.

was distributed bimodally; it moved to both rich and poor countries, with relatively
little in the middle. Receiving regions included both colonies and independent
regions. The rich countries were the settler economies where capital was attracted
by abundant land, and the poor countries were places where capital was attracted
by abundant labor.68
Globalized capital markets are back, but with a difference: capital transactions
seem to be mostly a rich-rich affair, a process of “diversification finance” rather
than “development finance.” The creditor-debtor country pairs involved are more
rich-rich than rich-poor, and today’s foreign investment in the poorest developing
countries lags far behind the levels attained at the start of the last century. In other
words, we see again the paradox noted by Lucas (1990), of capital failing to flow
to capital-poor countries, places where we would presume the marginal product of
capital to be very high. And the figure may understate the failure in some ways:
a century ago world income and productivity levels were far less divergent than
68 On

the broad distribution of foreign capital then, see Twomey (2000).

59

Figure 10: Did Capital Flow to Poor Countries? 1913 Versus 1997
Share of world stock of foreign capital

50%
1913, gross stocks
1997, gross stocks
40%

30%

20%

10%

0%
<20

20–40

40–60

60–80

>80

Per capita income range of receiving region (U.S.=100)

Sources: The 1913 stock data are from Woodruff (1967) and Royal Institute for International Affairs (1937), incomes
from Maddison (1995). The 1997 data are from Lane and Milesi-Ferreti (2001), based on the stocks of inward direct
investment and portfolio equity liabilities.

they are today, so it is all the more remarkable that so much capital was directed
to countries at or below the 20 percent and 40 percent income levels (relative to
the U.S.). Today, a much larger fraction of the world’s output and population is
located in such low productivity regions, but a much smaller share of global foreign
investment reaches them.69
As we have noted, capital is discouraged from entering poorer countries by a
host of factors, and some of these were less relevant a century ago. Capital controls
persist in many regions. The risks of investment may be perceived differently
after a century of exchange risks, expropriations, and defaults. Domestic policies
that distort prices, especially of investment goods, may result in returns too low to
attract any capital. These conditions make a difficult situation much worse. Poorer
countries must draw on foreign capital to a greater extent than they do at present if
they are to achieve an acceptable growth in living standards. That is a fundamental
reason why reform and liberalization in the developing world, despite the setbacks
of the late 1990s, are likely to continue, albeit hopefully with due regard to the
painful lessons learned in the recent past.
69 See

Clemens and Williamson (2001) for a detailed analysis of the determinants of British
capital export before 1914.

60

References
Balke, N. S., and M. E. Wohar. 1998. Nonlinear Dynamics and Covered Interest Rate
Parity. Empirical Economics 23: 535–59.
Barnard, A. 1987. Government Finance. In Australians: Historical Statistics, edited by
W. Vamplew. Broadway, New South Wales: Fairfax, Syme & Weldon.
Baxter, M., and A. C. Stockman. 1989. Business Cycles and the Exchange-Rate Regime:
Some International Evidence. Journal of Monetary Economics 23 (May): 377–400.
Bernanke, B. S., and K. Carey. 1996. Nominal Wage Stickiness and Aggregate Supply in
the Great Depression. Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (August): 853–83.
Bhagwati, J. N. 1998. The Capital Myth. Foreign Affairs 77 (May–June): 7–12.
Bordo, M. D., M. Edelstein, and H. Rockoff. 1999. Was Adherence to the Gold Standard a
“Good Housekeeping Seal of Approval” During the Interwar Period? National Bureau
of Economic Research no. 7186, Working Paper Series (June).
Bordo, M. D., and B. Eichengreen, eds. 1993. A Retrospective on the Bretton Woods
System: Lessons for International Monetary Reform. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Bordo, M.D., B. Eichengreen, and J. Kim. 1999. Was There Really an Earlier Period of
International Financial Integration Comparable to Today? In The Implications of the
Globalization of World Financial Markets, edited by A. H. Meltzer. Seoul: Bank of
Korea.
Bordo, M. D., and L. Jonung. 1996. Monetary Regimes, Inflation, and Monetary Reform:
An Essay in Honor of Axel Leijonhufvud. In Inflation, Institutions, and Information:
Essays in Honor of Axel Leijonhufvud, edited by D. Vaz and K. Velupillai. London:
Macmillan.
Bordo, M. D., and F. E. Kydland. 1995. The Gold Standard as a Rule: An Essay in
Exploration. Explorations in Economic History 32: 423–64.
Bordo, M. D., and H. Rockoff. 1996. The Gold Standard as a “Good Housekeeping Seal
of Approval.” Journal of Economic History 56 (June): 389–428.
Bordo, M. D., and A. J. Schwartz, ed. 1984. A Retrospective on the Classical Gold
Standard, 1821–1931. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Brezis, E. S. 1995. Foreign Capital Flows in the Century of Britain’s Industrial Revolution:
New Estimates, Controlled Conjectures. Economic History Review 48 (February): 46–
67.
Calomiris, C. W., and R. G. Hubbard. 1996. International Adjustment under the Classical
Gold Standard: Evidence for the United States and Britain, 1879–1914. In Modern
Perspectives on the Gold Standard, edited by T. Bayoumi, B. Eichengreen, and M. P.
Taylor. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cameron, R. E. 1993. A Concise Economic History of the World: From Paleolithic Times
to the Present. New York, Oxford University Press.

61

Campa, J. M. 1990. Exchange Rates and Economic Recovery in the 1930s: An Extension
to Latin America. Journal of Economic History 50 (September): 677–82.
Chortareas, G. E., and R. L. Driver. 2001. PPP and the Real Exchange Rate-Real Interest
Rate Differential Puzzle Revisited: Evidence from Non-Stationary Panel Data. Bank
of England. Photocopy (June).
Clemens, M., and J. G. Williamson. 2000. Where Did British Foreign Capital Go?
Fundamentals, Failures and the Lucas Paradox 1870–1913. Working Paper Series no.
8028, National Bureau of Economic Research (December).
Clinton, K. J. 1988. Transactions Costs and Covered Interest Arbitrage: Theory and
Evidence. Journal of Political Economy 96 (April): 358–70.
Cohen, B. J. 1996. Phoenix Risen: The Resurrection of Global Finance. World Politics
48: 268–96.
Davis, L. E. 1965. The Investment Market, 1870–1914: The Evolution of a National
Market. Journal of Economic History 25: 355–99.
Davis, L. E., and R. E. Gallman. 2001. Evolving Financial Markets and International
Capital Flows: Britain, the Americas, and Australia, 1865–1914. Japan-U.S. Center Sanwa Monographs on International Financial Markets Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Davis, L. E., and J. R. T. Hughes. 1960. A Dollar-Sterling Exchange, 1803–1895. Economic History Review 13 (August): 52–78.
della Paolera, G. 1988. How the Argentine Economy Performed during the International
Gold Standard: A Reexamination. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago.
della Paolera, G., and J. Ortiz. 1995. Dinero, Intermediación Financiera y Nivel de
Actividad en 110 Años de Historia Económica Argentina. Documentos de Trabajo no.
36, Universidad Torcuato Di Tella (December).
Dornbusch, R. 1998. Discussion. Economic Policy 26 (April): 149–52.
Drazen, A., and P. R. Masson. 1994 . Credibility of Policies versus Credibility of Policymakers. Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 (August): 735–54.
Eatwell, J. 1997. International Financial Liberalization: The Impact on World Development. Discussion Paper Series 12. New York: United Nations Development Programme.
Edelstein, M. 1982. Overseas Investment in the Age of High Imperialism. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Edison, H. J., and W. R. Melick. 1999. Alternative Approaches to Real Exchange Rates
and Real Interest Rates: Three Up and Three Down. International Journal of Finance
and Economics 4: 93–111.
Edison, H. J., and B. D. Pauls. 1993. A Re-Assessment of the Relationship between Real
Exchange Rates and Real Interest Rates: 1974–1990. Journal of Monetary Economics
31 (April): 165–87.

62

Eichengreen, B. J. 1992. Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and The Great Depression,
1919–1939. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Eichengreen, B. J. 1996. Globalizing Capital: A History of the International Monetary
System. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Eichengreen, B. J., and M. D. Bordo. 2001. The Rise and Fall of a Barbarous Relic: The
Role of Gold in the International Monetary System. In Money, Capital Mobility, and
Trade: Essays in Honor of Robert A. Mundell, edited by R. Dornbusch, M. Obstfeld
and G. Calvo. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Eichengreen, B. J., and M. Flandreau. 1996. The Geography of the Gold Standard.
In Currency Convertibility: The Gold Standard and Beyond, edited by J. Braga de
Macedo, B. J. Eichengreen and J. Reis. London: Routledge.
Eichengreen, B. J., and J. Sachs. 1985. Exchange Rates and Economic Recovery in the
1930s. Journal of Economic History 45 (December): 925–46.
Einzig, P. 1937. The Theory of Forward Exchange. London: Macmillan.
Einzig, P. 1968. Leads and Lags: The Main Cause of Devaluation. London: Macmillan.
Elliott, G. 1999. Efficient Tests for a Unit Root When the Initial Observation is Drawn
from Its Unconditional Distribution. International Economic Review 40 (August):
767–83.
Elliott, G., T. J. Rothenberg, and J. H. Stock. 1996. Efficient Tests for an Autoregressive
Unit Root. Econometrica 64: 813–836.
Escher, F. 1918. Elements of Foreign Exchange, 8th edition. New York: The Bankers
Publishing Company.
Feldstein, M., and C. Horioka. 1980. Domestic Savings and International Capital Flows.
Economic Journal 90 (June): 314–29.
Feinstein, C. K. 1990. Britain’s Overseas Investments in 1913. Economic History Review
43 (May): 288–96.
Feis, H. 1931. Europe, The World’s Banker, 1870–1914: An Account of European Foreign
Investment and the Connection of World Finance with Diplomacy Before the War. New
Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
Flandreau, M., J. Le Cacheux, and F. Zumer. 1998. Stability Without a Pact? Lessons
from the European Gold Standard, 1880–1914. Economic Policy 26 (April): 115–62.
Flandreau, M., and C. Rivière. 1999. La Grande “Retransformation”? L’Intégration
Financière Internationale et Contrôles de Capitaux, 1880–1996. Économie Internationale 78: 11–58.
Forbes, K., and R. Rigobon. 2000. Contagion in Latin America: Definitions, Measurement, and Policy Implications. Working Paper Series no. 7885, National Bureau of
Economic Research (September).
Frieden, J. A. 1997. “Monetary Populism in Nineteenth-Century America: An Open
Economy Interpretation.” Journal of Economic History 57 (June): 367–95.

63

Fujii, E., and M. Chinn. 2000. Fin de Siècle Real Interest Parity. Working Paper Series
no 7880, National Bureau of Economic Research (September).
Gallarotti, G. M. 1995. The Anatomy of an International Monetary Regime: The Classical
Gold Standard 1880–1914. New York: Oxford University Press.
Goldsmith, R. W. 1985. Comparative National Balance Sheets: A Study of Twenty Countries, 1688–1978. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gourinchas, P.-O., and H. Rey. 2001. Stocks and Monies. Princeton University.
Hallwood, C. P., R. MacDonald, and I. W. Marsh. 1996. Credibility and Fundamentals:
Were the Classical and Interwar Gold Standards Well-Behaved Target Zones? In
Modern Perspectives on the Gold Standard, edited by T. Bayoumi, B. Eichengreen,
and M. P. Taylor. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hamori, S., and A. Tokihisa. 1997. Testing for a Unit Root in the Presence of a Variance
Shift. Economics Letters 57: 245–253.
Haupt, O. 1894. Arbitrages et Parités. 8th edition. Paris: Librairie Truchy.
Hawke, G. R. 1975. Income Estimation from Monetary Data: Further Explorations.
Review of Income and Wealth 21: 301–307.
International Monetary Fund. 2001. World Economic Outlook. Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund (October).
James, H. 2001. The End of Globalization: Lessons from the Great Depression. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Jorion, P., and W. N. Goetzmann. 1999. Global Stock Markets in the Twentieth Century.
Journal of Finance 54 (June): 953–80.
Kindleberger, C. P. 1984. A Financial History of Western Europe. London: George Allen
& Unwin.
Kindleberger, C. P. 1986. The World in Depression, 1929–1939. Revised edition. Berkeley
and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Klug, A., and G. W. Smith. 1999. Suez and Sterling, 1956. Explorations in Economic
History 36 (July): 181–203.
Lane, P., and G.-M. Milesi-Ferretti. 2001. The External Wealth of Nations: Measures
of Foreign Assets and Liabilities for Industrial and Developing Countries. Journal of
International Economics 55 (December): 243–62.
Lewis, C. 1938. America’s Stake in International Investments. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
Lewis, K. K. 1999. Trying to Explain Home Bias in Equities and Consumption. Journal
of Economic Literature 37 (June): 571–608.
Lucas, R. E., Jr. 1990. Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries? American
Economic Review 80 (May): 92–6.
MacDonald, R., and J. Nagayasu. 2000. The Long-Run Relationship Between Real
Exchange Rates and Real Interest Rate Differentials: A Panel Study. International
Monetary Fund Staff Papers 47 (November): 116–28.

64

Maddison, A. 1995. Monitoring the World Economy. Paris: OECD.
Margraff, A. W. 1908. International Exchange: Its Terms, Parts, Operations and Scope.
3rd edition. Chicago: Privately printed.
Marshall, M. G., and K. Jaggers. n.d. Polity IV Project: Political Regime Characteristics
and Transitions, 1800–1999, Dataset Users’ Manual. College Park, Md.: University
of Maryland, Center for International Development and Conflict Management.
Meese, R. A., and K. Rogoff. 1988. Was It Real? The Exchange Rate-Interest Differential
Relation over the Modern Floating-Rate Period. Journal of Finance 43 (February):
933–48.
Meissner, C. 2001. A New World Order: Explaining the Emergence of the Classical Gold
Standard. U.C. Berkeley. Photocopy.
Nakamura, Leonard I., and Carlos E. J. M. Zarazaga. 2003. Banking and Finance, 1900–
35. In Argentina: Essays in the New Economic History, edited by G. della Paolera
and A. M. Taylor. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Forthcoming.
Neal, L. 1990. The Rise of Financial Capitalism: International Capital Markets in the
Age of Reason. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Neal, L. 2000. How It All Began: The Monetary and Financial Architecture of Europe
during the First Global Capital Markets, 1648–1815. Financial History Review 7
(October 2000): 117–40.
O’Rourke, K. H., and J. G. Williamson. 1999. Globalization and History: The Evolution
of a Nineteenth-Century Atlantic Economy. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Obstfeld, M. 1995. International Capital Mobility in the 1990s. In Understanding Interdependence: The Macroeconomics of the Open Economy, edited by P. B. Kenen.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Obstfeld, M. 1998. The Global Capital Market: Benefactor or Menace? Journal of
Economic Perspectives 12 (Fall): 9–30.
Obstfeld, M., and K. Rogoff. 1995. The Mirage of Fixed Exchange Rates. Journal of
Economic Perspectives 9 (Fall): 73–96.
Obstfeld, M., and K. Rogoff. 2000. The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause? In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, edited
by B. S. Bernanke and K. Rogoff.
Obstfeld, M., and A. M. Taylor. 1997. Nonlinear Aspects of Goods-Market Arbitrage and
Adjustment: Heckscher’s Commodity Points Revisited. Journal of the Japanese and
International Economies 11 (December): 441–79.
Obstfeld, M., and A. M. Taylor. 1998. The Great Depression as a Watershed: International
Capital Mobility in the Long Run. In The Defining Moment: The Great Depression
and the American Economy in the Twentieth Century, edited by M. D. Bordo, C. D.
Goldin and E. N. White. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Obstfeld, M., and A. M. Taylor. 2002. Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis, and
Growth. Japan-U.S. Center Sanwa Monographs on International Financial Markets

65

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. In progress.
Officer, L. H. 1996. Between the Dollar-Sterling Gold Points: Exchange Rates, Parity,
and Market Behavior. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Oppers, S. E. 1993. The Interest Rate Effect of Dutch Money in Eighteenth-Century
Britain. Journal of Economic History 53 (March): 25–43.
Paish, G. 1914. Export of Capital and the Cost of Living. The Statist (Supplement)
(February 14, 1914): i–viii.
Peel, D. A., and M. P. Taylor. 2002. Covered Interest Rate Arbitrage in the Inter-War
Period and the Keynes-Einzig Conjecture. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 34
(February): 51–75.
Perkins, E. H. 1978. Foreign Interest Rates in American Financial Markets: A Revised
Series of Dollar-Sterling Exchange Rates, 1835–1900. Journal of Economic History
38 (June): 392–417.
Platt, D. C. M. 1986. Britain’s Investment Overseas on the Eve of the First World War:
The Use and Abuse of Numbers. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Polanyi, K. 1944. The Great Transformation. New York: Rinehart.
Prichard, M. F. L. 1970. An Economic History of New Zealand to 1939. Auckland: Collins.
Rajan, R. G., and L. Zingales. 2001. The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial
Development in the 20th Century. University of Chicago Graduate School of Business.
Photocopy.
Rippy, J. F. 1959. British Investments in Latin America, 1822–1949: A Case Study in the
Operations of Private Enterprise in Retarded Regions. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
Rodrik, D. 2000. How Far Will International Economic Integration Go? Journal of
Economic Perspectives 14 (Winter 2000): 177–86.
Romer, C. D. 1992. What Ended the Great Depression? Journal of Economic History 52
(December): 757–84.
Royal Institute of International Affairs. 1937. The Problem of International Investment.
London: Oxford University Press.
Sachs, J. D., and A. Warner. 1995. Economic Reform and the Process of Global Integration.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 1–118.
Spalding, W. F. 1915. Foreign Exchange and Foreign Bills in Theory and Practice. London: Sir Isaac Pitman and Sons.
Sylla, R. E. 1975. The American Capital Market, 1846–1914: A Study of the Effects of
Public Policy on Economic Development. New York: Arno Press.
Sylla, R. E. 1998. U. S. Securities Markets and the Banking System, 1790–1840. Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review (May/June).
Temin, P. 1989. Lessons from the Great Depression. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Triffin, R. 1957. Europe and the Money Muddle: From Bilateralism to Near-Convertibility,
1947–1956. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.

66

Twomey, M. J. 2000. A Century of Foreign Investment in the Third World. London:
Routledge.
United Nations. 1948. Public Debt 1914–1946. Lake Success, NY: United Nations
Publications.
Williamson, J. G. 1995. The Evolution of Global Labor Markets since 1830: Background
Evidence and Hypotheses. Explorations in Economic History 32 (April): 141–96.
Williamson, J. G. 1996. Globalization, Convergence, and History. Journal of Economic
History 56 (June): 277–306.
Woodruff, W. 1967. Impact of Western Man: A Study of Europe’s Role in the World
Economy 1750–1960. New York: St. Martin’s Press.

67

