                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     INDUSTRY DYNAMICS WITH ADJUSTMENT COSTS


                                             Robert E. Hall


                                          Working Paper 8849
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8849


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2002




This research was supported by the National Science Foundation under grant SOC SBR-9730341 and is part
of the research program on Economic Fluctuations and Growth of the NBER. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Robert E. Hall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Industry Dynamics with Adjustment Costs
Robert E. Hall
NBER Working Paper No. 8849
March 2002
JEL No. E3, J23, D92



                                                ABSTRACT

        Adjustment costs determine the dynamics of the response of an industry’s output to a shift in
demand. Absent any adjustment costs, an increase in demand not accompanied by any change in factor
prices raises output, labor, capital, and materials in the same proportion. In the presence of adjustment
costs, the elasticity of the response of factors with higher costs is less than one while the elasticity of those
without adjustment costs exceeds one. I develop a model of industry dynamics to capture these properties
and a related econometric framework to infer adjustment costs from the observed ratios of factor
responses to output responses. I find relatively precise evidence of moderate adjustment costs.




Robert E. Hall
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
hall@hoover.stanford.edu
I.      Introduction

         Output and factor inputs are surprisingly volatile in many U.S. industries. Figure 1
shows data for the electrical equipment industry.


                                       Output




                                     Labor input



                                     Capital input
   58

          60

                 62

                        64

                               66

                                      68

                                             70

                                                    72

                                                           74

                                                                  76

                                                                         78

                                                                                80

                                                                                       82

                                                                                              84

                                                                                                     86

                                                                                                            88

                                                                                                                   90

                                                                                                                          92

                                                                                                                                 94

                                                                                                                                        96
 19

        19

               19

                      19

                             19

                                    19

                                           19

                                                  19

                                                         19

                                                                19

                                                                       19

                                                                              19

                                                                                     19

                                                                                            19

                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                 19

                                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                                               19

                                                                                                                                      19




Figure 1. Ouput, Labor Input, and Capital Input in the Electrical Equipment Industry

Source: Data compiled by Dale Jorgenson; see Jorgenson and Stiroh [2001]. Data are detrended
with arbitrary scales. The horizontal axis is zero for all three series.


         This paper builds an equilibrium model of industry dynamics. The model
resembles—and is inspired by—dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models of the
entire economy, but its scope is more modest. Questions that can be answered with the
model include those about the dynamics of business earnings, the issue that led me to




                                                                       1
develop the model. I take as the baseline model a Cobb-Douglas technology, competitive
product and factor markets, and adjustment costs for labor and capital.
       The central topic of investigation is adjustment costs. Some authors, such as
Hamermesh and Pfann [1996], have concluded that adjustment costs substantially limit
changes in labor and capital input in the short run. In such an economy, an increase in
demand for an industry’s product causes an extended period of rents, as the industry moves
up its supply curve and prices rise. I find that adjustment costs are modest for both labor
and capital. The supply functions implicit in this work are quite elastic. Rents are small and
transitory. The results support the position I advocated in Hall [2001], that large
movements in the stock market are not the capitalization of rents, but reflect other forces,
such as the accumulation of large stocks of intangibles. This paper, however, does not
consider that subject any further—it is almost entirely concerned with adjustment costs. I
do find that there are adjustment costs for labor as well as capital, a source of transitory
rents not considered in my earlier work.
       The paper tries to take data, identification, and estimation seriously. I use Dale
Jorgenson’s 35-industry panel of annual data for output and factor inputs over the period
1959 through 1999. These data embody careful consideration of input quality and price
measurement. My identification strategy exploits the panel nature of the data. I study the
time-series correlations of output, labor input, and capital input with GDP for each
industry. In the typical industry, the elasticity of output with respect to GDP is somewhat
higher than the elasticity of labor input with respect to GDP and substantially higher than
the elasticity of capital input. The key empirical measures in the paper are the labor/output
response ratio and its counterpart for capital. The labor/output response ratio is the ratio of
the labor-GDP elasticity to the output-GDP elasticity. Absent adjustment costs and
responses of factor prices, an increase in demand would cause factor inputs to change in
the same proportion as output, and all the factor/output response ratios would be 1.0. If a
factor has adjustment costs, its own response ratio is less than one and the response ratios




                                             2
of other factors are higher than they would be otherwise. If any factor has adjustment costs,
factors without any adjustment cost will have output response ratios exceeding one.
       I use GDP as an index of aggregate shocks. These shocks include changes in
government purchases, shifts in consumption and investment behavior, changes in the
terms of trade, aggregate changes in productivity growth, and the like. The aggregate
shocks affect individual industries in a number of ways—they shift industry demand, they
affect productivity, and they affect factor prices. The aim of my approach to estimation is
to isolate the demand effects from the other effects.
       The correlation of GDP with industry output shows tremendous variation across
industries. The measured elasticities range from -0.2 to 5. My identifying assumption is
that this variation results from heterogeneity in demand effects. Effects operating through
national markets should be reasonably uniform across industries—for example, the
elasticity of the capital stock with respect to an increase in real interest rates caused by an
aggregate shock should be about the same across industries. My estimation method
measures uniform effects of aggregate shocks—indexed by real GDP—and does not use
them to infer adjustment costs. Only differences across industries in GDP elasticities enter
the measurement of adjustment costs. I measure the labor/output response ratio as the ratio
of the slope of the labor-GDP elasticities across industries to the slope of the output-GDP
elasticities. The intercept of this relationship captures the factor-price and aggregate
productivity effects that are approximately uniform across industries.
       In effect I measure the slope of the short-run supply functions and short-run factor
demand functions of the industries. My econometric method makes the notion of the short
run precise—the short run is the response within a year to a time-series innovation in GDP
in that year. As a result, I cannot distinguish internal from external adjustment costs. For
example, the limited short-run response of employment could result from training and
startup costs within the firm, or it could reflect the short-run inelasticity of labor supply to
an industry owing to labor mobility costs. For capital, what I measure as adjustment costs




                                             3
could include costs that actually arise in the capital-goods-supplying industries even
though I measure them in the using industries.
       I find that the labor/output response ratio is 0.77 and capital/output response ratio is
0.35. Both estimates have small standard errors—0.06 and 0.05. Materials inputs make up
the difference and have a response ratio greater than one, though I do not pursue this
feature in my approach to estimation. To interpret these two empirical findings, I use the
model and employ the strategy of indirect inference. First, I show that the model’s
prediction about these factor/output response ratios is close to invariant to parameters other
than the adjustment costs. Hence, I can solve the model for the values of the adjustment
costs of labor and capital that predict these response ratios without knowing the values of
the other parameters. From the derivatives of that solution, I can also find the standard
errors of the adjustment-cost parameters. The resulting estimates suggest adjustment costs
somewhat below those estimated by other methods.
       In my empirical work and parallel analysis with the industry model, I concentrate
on the responses to an innovation in the economic environment. In the model, this is an
innovation in real GDP, taken as a general measure of the effects of aggregate influences
on all industries. I argue that the study of responses to innovations is a robust approach to
the estimation problem. I show that it is much less sensitive to specification errors than the
existing approach based on the Euler equation, as in Shapiro [1986]. In addition, the
method is less sensitive to specification error than estimation based on observed measures
of Tobin’s q, although a huge specification error is needed to explain the bias in estimates
of adjustment costs with data from the U.S. stock market.



II.   Industry ModelEquation Section 2

       Consider the following broad class of dynamic models. An exogenous driving
force, xt , evolves according to




                                            4
                                         xt = f ( ε t , xt −1 ) .                     (2.1)


Here ε t is a serially uncorrelated random shock and f is a stationary rule mapping the
shock into a new value of the driving force given its previous value. Participants in the
industry observe ε t and the lagged values of the driving force, and they know the rule f.
Their interaction results in an equilibrium described by a vector of endogenous variables,
yt , and a function, g:


                                    yt = g (υt , yt −1, ε t , xt −1 ) .               (2.2)


Here υt is a vector of random variables associated with the formation of the endogenous
variables and with other random aspects of the industry’s environment.
        In my application of this framework, the endogenous variables, yt , resulting from
industry equilibrium are output, price, employment, capital stock, and materials input. In
the model, firms face adjustment costs that require looking into the future to maximize
value. I solve for the entire industry equilibrium over time. The autoregression for the
demand shift is part of the dynamic model. The model solves for the equilibrium in the
industry as a function of the current innovation in demand with the knowledge that future
levels of demand will probably be higher as a result of this year’s innovation.
        I model industry equilibrium as follows. First is the production technology, relating
labor input, nt , materials input, mt , and capital input, kt , to output, qt :


                                      qt = At ntα mψt kt1−α −ψ .                      (2.3)


At is an index of productivity, growing over time at a possibly variable rate. Next is
product demand,


                                         qt = dt ztω pt−δ ;                           (2.4)




                                                  5
The unobserved disturbance, dt , shifts the position of the demand function, zt is an

aggregate shift, ω is its elasticity, and δ is the price elasticity of demand, taken to be a
constant.
           Third is the factor adjustment technology. I assume that labor is the only input
required to increase the level of labor input to production and to increase the level of
capital input to production. These are recruiting and training costs for labor and planning
and installation costs for capital. Adjustment costs are convex in the inputs—they amount
to


                                         λ
                                             wt +1
                                                     ( nt +1 − nt )2 + γ      wt +1
                                                                                    ( kt +1 − kt )
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                     .   (2.5)
                                         2                nt              2               kt


These costs have constant returns to scale as discussed in Hall [2001]. Notice that I do not
include discrete costs of adjustment, despite their clear importance for understanding factor
adjustment at the plant level. I argue in Section III that discrete costs have little role in
industry dynamics.
           I approximate the stochastic equilibrium of the industry by solving the model with
infinitesimal demand innovations. The quality of this approximation is known to be high.
The firm maximizes the present value of its future cash flows. The relevant terms of the
present value for a decision made in period t are:


  1                                                                      λ     ( n − n )2 γ   ( k − k )2 
          pt At ntα mψt kt1−α − wt nt − pm,t − pk ,t +1 ( kt +1 − skt ) − wt +1 t +1 t − wt +1 t +1 t 
1 + rt                                                                  2          nt    2        kt    

− pk ,t ( kt − skt −1 ) −
                            λ
                                wt
                                     ( nt − nt −1 )2 − γ       wt
                                                                    ( kt − kt −1 )2
                            2            nt −1            2               kt −1
                                                                                                         (2.6)

Here wt is the wage, pm,t is the price of materials inputs, pk ,t is the price of new capital

goods, and s is the survival rate for capital (one minus the deterioration rate).




                                                                      6
                       nt − nt −1
         Let g n,t =              and similarly for gk ,t . The first-order conditions for value
                          nt −1

maximization are:


                     1       pt qt                                     
                   1 + rt
                            α
                             nt
                                                     (                  
                                                                           )
                                    − wt + λ wt +1 g n,t +1 + g n2,t +1  − λ wt g n,t = 0        (2.7)



                                                   pt qt
                                               ψ         = pm,t                                   (2.8)
                                                   mt



                     1                    pt qt                                             
                          (1 − α −ψ )
                   1 + rt                  kt
                                                                       (                   )
                                                 + spk ,t +1 + γ wt +1 g k ,t +1 + g k2,t +1 
                                                                                                 (2.9)
                   − pk ,t − γ wt g k ,t = 0


         I model the aggregate demand shift as a first-order autoregression,

                                               zt = ρ zt −1 + ε t                                (2.10)

         My goal is to derive the difference between the equilibrium resulting from an
innovation in the driving force and the stationary equilibrium. The stationary equilibrium
solves


                                        q* = An *α m *ψ k *1−α −ψ .                              (2.11)



                                                y* = dzp *−θ                                     (2.12)


                                                   p* y*
                                               α         =w                                      (2.13)
                                                    n*




                                                      7
                                            p* y*
                                        ψ         = pm                                (2.14)
                                             m*


                                    1−α p * y * 1− s k
                                               =      p                               (2.15)
                                     µ    k*     1+ r

To find the response function to an innovation, I find the derivatives of the model with
respect to ε 0 with all later innovations taken to be zero. For convenience I take the base
level of all the exogenous variables to be 1.
       I then solve for the derivatives of equations (2.3), (2.4), (2.7), (2.8), (2.9), and
(2.10) with respect to ε 0 together with those of the boundary conditions,


                      k−1 = k * , n−1 = n * , kT +1 = k * , and nT +1 = n * .         (2.16)

All 5 equations apply over periods 0 to T-1. I choose T to be large enough to approximate
the response in the case of an infinite horizon. There are 5 endogenous variables, y, p, m, k,
and n. The derivatives of the first three are to be determined in periods 0 through T-1, and
the second two in periods -1 through T. There are 5T equations and 4 boundary conditions.
There are 3T + 2(T+2) values to be solved. I solve for the derivatives of the equilibrium of
the model by solving the two-point boundary value problem as a large system of linear
equations.



III. Some Properties of the ModelEquation Section (Next)


A.     Differences across Industries and over Time
       When an aggregate impulse stimulates demand in one industry, the industry’s
output rises and its use of all factors of production rises. The factors with lower adjustment
costs rise more. The basic strategy of the paper is to infer adjustment costs from the ratios




                                                8
of the increase in factor inputs to the increase in output when demand rises. I associate
aggregate impulses with changes in GDP. There is wide variation in the empirical
elasticity of industry output with respect to GDP. An important feature of the model,
however, is that the ratio of factor responses to demand shifts and output responses to
those demand shifts is essentially invariant to other parameter values. Neither the elasticity
of demand nor the elasticities of the production function have any significant influence on
this ratio. Thus, if adjustment costs are roughly the same in all industries, they can be
estimated in panel data despite variation in the other parameters across the industries in the
panel.
         The factor/output response ratios of the model are literally invariant to the elasticity
ω of the demand function with respect to the demand shift. The evidence suggests wide
variation in these elasticities. Invariance with respect to them is the essential property of
the model leading to the estimation strategy of the paper. Industries that respond very
differently to aggregate shocks nonetheless respond the same when the factor responses are
normalized by the output responses.
         The factor/output response ratios are close to invariant with respect to the industry
elasticity of demand. Both output and factor responses are smaller in industries with more
elastic demand, but they are smaller in proportion. Because I have not yet found a
workable strategy for estimating demand elasticities, this near-invariance is fortunate.
Lowering the demand elasticity from 1 to 0.5 changes the labor/output response ratio from
0.77 to 0.75 and the capital/output response ratio from 0.35 to 0.33.
         An impulse that raises GDP does more than shift an industry’s demand function. It
also affects factor prices. The estimation method used here requires a separation of the
demand effects from the factor-price effects. The method exploits the substantial variation
across industries in the demand effects. I hypothesize that there is no cross-sectional
correlation of the factor-price effects and the demand effects. For example, an increase in
government purchases raises real interest rates. I assume that the effect of the higher
interest rate on, say, capital employed in an industry is uncorrelated with the industry’s




                                              9
demand shift. In the model, the effect of a change in the interest rate is literally invariant to
the demand-shift elasticity, ω . In fact, the only parameter that has much influence on a
factor’s response to prices is the adjustment cost for that factor and the adjustment costs for
other factors. Thus the hypothesis, more than anything else, is an assertion that adjustment
costs are not correlated across industries with responses to aggregate impulses operating
through factor prices.

B.     Discrete Adjustment Costs
       The model embodies the traditional specification of convex adjustment costs. A
vibrant recent literature has developed an analysis of non-convex costs—generally a
discrete cost of undertaking any change—and demonstrated the empirical importance of
those costs. In particular, the evidence is overwhelming that discrete costs influence plant-
level investment—the great majority of plants have zero investment in a given year, an
inexplicable circumstance with convex adjustment. See Caballero [1999] for a survey.
Caballero and Engel [1999], Cooper and Haltiwanger [2002], and Thomas [2001]
investigate the implications of discrete adjustment costs for industry aggregate investment.
       In brief, models with discrete adjustment costs work as follows: Within a zone of
inaction, there is no adjustment, as its benefit would not cover the discrete cost. An
impulse large enough to push a firm outside its zone of inaction causes a substantial
response. Aggregation of firms into industries tends to conceal most of this behavior. An
industry-wide impulse has no effects on most firms but large effects on some, and the
average is not so different from the corresponding setup without the discrete cost. In fact,
under certain (stringent) assumptions, there is exact cancellation and no aggregate
implications of discrete adjustment costs, a point made by Caplin and Spulber [1987] in the
context of discrete costs of price adjustment.
       Cooper and Haltiwanger [2000] estimate a model with discrete adjustment costs,
using plant-level data, finding, as expected, that the discrete costs add much to the realism
of the model for the micro data. They fit a model with convex adjustment to the aggregate




                                              10
of their plants and find that investment predicted by the aggregate model is reasonably
close to the aggregate data generated by the underlying model with plant-level discrete
costs. Caballero and Engel [1999] study the implications for industry-level time series of a
general model that includes discrete costs. They estimate either nonlinear adjustment rates
or adjustment costs from panel data by industry and year. They compare the forecasting
abilities of these models to a model with a constant adjustment rate, as implied by the
quadratic specification I employ. For structures, they find a substantial improvement in
forecasting power, but only a small improvement for equipment. Because equipment is
about 80 percent of total investment, it appears that their results confirm that, for industry
aggregates, the quadratic specification provides a reasonably accurate approximation.
Thomas [2001] reports that discrete costs have almost no implications for aggregate
general equilibrium dynamics.



IV. Econometric FrameworkEquation Section (Next)

       To estimate the adjustment costs, I use indirect inference (Smith [1993] and
Gouriéroux, Montfort and Renault[1993]). In that framework, a formal model has deep
parameters θ . The formal model for this paper appeared in Section II. But estimation of
the deep parameters is challenging or intractable. Instead, one estimates the parameters of a
simple descriptive model of the data. The descriptive model summarizes the relevant
properties of the data. Then one takes as estimates of the deep parameters the values that
cause the model to generate the same descriptive model. In most applications of this
general idea, the formal model simulates data for the relevant variables, so many
estimators in this framework are called simulation estimators. In my application, I calculate
the factor/output response ratios from the model rather than from simulations. But the
philosophy is the same. Cooper and Haltiwanger [2002] applied indirect inference to
capital adjustment costs in an earlier paper with a rather different setup.




                                             11
       The standard rationalization for using indirect inference rather than, say, maximum
likelihood, is the intractability of conventional estimators. In the application discussed
here, the use of indirect inference with a focus on the contemporaneous effect of the
demand innovation on the endogenous variables appears to be robust in the presence of
specification errors as well. I call this the innovation loading estimator.
       An advantage of the innovation loading estimator (ILE) over instrumental variables
(IV) applied to the Euler equation arises from imposing the boundary conditions in the
model. The Euler equation holds for wildly non-optimal behavior as well as for optimal
behavior that satisfies the terminal conditions. Consequently, an estimator that incorporates
the terminal conditions pins down parameter values more effectively than one that
considers only the Euler equation. On the other hand, the ILE fails to include information
from the responses of variables to lagged innovations. But the ILE performs much better in
the presence of likely forms of specification error.
       Figure 2 illustrates why the focus on the immediate effect of an exogenous shock is
appropriate. An innovation in the demand shifter results in a delayed response of
employment because of adjustment costs. With lower adjustment costs, the immediate
response is correspondingly higher. The same parameter controls both the height of the
curve at the left and its rate of decline from that point. Hence one can infer the adjustment
cost from the height alone without losing too much. The gain is to avoid entanglement in
the lower-frequency aspects of the model.




                                             12
 0.50


 0.45
                  Lower
 0.40             Adjustment Cost
 0.35


 0.30


 0.25   Higher
        Adjustment
 0.20   Cost
 0.15


 0.10


 0.05


 0.00
         0    1     2     3     4     5     6        7   8   9   10   11    12   13    14




Figure 2. Innovation Response Functions of Employment to Demand Shift with Two Values
for the Adjustment Cost


        A third estimation strategy exploits data on the value of factors in place. The
market value of installed capital, or the market value of an employment relationship with
an existing worker, reveals marginal adjustment cost directly. The first-order condition for
optimal levels of factor inputs with adjustment costs equates the marginal adjustment cost
to the shadow value of installed factors. Tobin [1969] suggested estimating adjustment
costs by reading the value of installed capital from the market value of the firm. Tobin’s
idea will only work with a single factor subject to adjustment costs. Thus it is disqualified
from use here by my finding that both capital and labor have adjustment costs and both
factors contribute rents that cause the market value of the firm to differ from the
acquisition cost of the firm’s capital stock.




                                                13
       I show later in this section that the theoretical performance of Tobin’s approach
could be spectacular. It is the unavailability of the appropriate data that stands in its way. If
there were active markets for separate claims on installed capital and on employment
relationships, Tobin’s method would probably perform best among all simple estimation
methods.

A.     The Innovation Loading Estimator
       First, I assume that the process generating the driving forces, described by f in
equation (2.1), is an autoregression:

                                        xt = ρ xt −1 + ε t .                              (4.1)

Second, I use the following model as my descriptive model:

                                     yt = Byt −1 + Lε t + υt .                            (4.2)

The vector L contains the contemporaneous innovation loadings—the immediate responses
of the endogenous variables to the shocks in the exogenous driving forces. Solution of the
analytical model yields theoretical values of the impulse response functions given the
vector of deep parameters θ . Denote the vector of contemporaneous theoretical innovation
responses by L% (θ ) . The estimates of θ are those that equate the theoretical loadings L% (θ )
to the observed loadings, L.
       The autoregression for the driving forces and the descriptive model form a joint
system:

                                    xt = ρ xt −1 + ε t
                                                               .                          (4.3)
                                     yt = Byt −1 + Lε t + υt


The identifying condition for this system is the orthogonality of ε t and υt : E (ε tυt′ ) = 0 .

This condition is essentially definitional—it says that ε t is an aggregate effect and υt




                                               14
captures effects at the industry level not contained in ε t . Let vt = Lε t + υt be the composite
disturbance in the descriptive model, so υt = vt − Lε t . The identifying moment condition is
                                           Eε t vt
E ε t ( vt − ε t L )  = 0 . Thus L =             . The corresponding expression in the sample is the
                                           Eε t2

vector of OLS coefficients for the regressions of the residuals from the endogenous
equations on the innovations from the exogenous autoregression.
         In principle, efficient estimation of equations (4.3) calls for multivariate regression
(seemingly unrelated regressions) with cross-equation restrictions. In my application, this
is difficult to accomplish in existing software, because I use panel data for the second
equation. Monte Carlo results showed that little is lost from estimating the autoregression
first and then including the residuals in the second equation. In particular, the standard
errors of the descriptive coefficients are actually slightly overstated by the reported
standard errors. So, to estimate the parameters of the descriptive model, L, I regress the
driving variable on its own lagged value to obtain the residuals ε t . Then I regress the
endogenous variables on their own lagged values and on the residuals from the equation
for the driving force. The resulting regression coefficients for the residuals, L, form the
descriptive model.
         Let Σ be the estimated covariance matrix of L. The final step is to calculate the
implied covariance matrix of the estimates of the deep parameters, θˆ .

                                                        −1          −1
                                                 ∂L%      ∂L% ′
                                              ˆ()
                                           V θ =      Σ ˆ  .
                                                 ∂θˆ      ∂θ 
                                                                                                  (4.4)



B.       Comparison to Other Estimators
         To compare the innovation loading estimator to other estimators, consider the
following simplified version of the adjustment cost problem. Demand is linear with unit
slope, dt − pt . One unit of labor produces one unit of output, and the wage is one.




                                                           15
                          λ
Adjustment costs are          ( nt +1 − nt )2 . With zero discounting, the first-order condition for
                          2
competitive profit maximization is

                              dt − nt − 1 = λ  nt − nt −1 − ( Et nt +1 − nt )  .         (4.5)


The left side is the marginal contribution of one worker to profit absent adjustment cost
(price minus wage cost) and the right side is current less future marginal adjustment cost.
        The demand shifter, dt , is the exogenous driving force, which I take to be a random
walk. I take λ = 1.2 . Optimal employment then follows the process,

                                          nt = (1 − L ) nt −1 + Ldt .                        (4.6)


Here L is the innovation loading and is one minus the smaller root of

λ x 2 − (1 + 2λ ) x + λ = 0 , or 0.587.

        Let qn,t be the shadow value of a worker in place—the analog for labor of Tobin’s

q for capital. The standard first-order condition equates marginal adjustment cost to the
shadow value:

                                            qn,t = λ ( nt − n−1 ) .                          (4.7)


Thus, given employment from the solution to the optimization, the shadow value is just the
adjustment cost times the rate of change of employment.
        I compare three estimators for λ :


(1) Instrumental variables (IV) applied to

                          dt − nt − 1 = λ  nt − nt −1 − ( nt +1 − ηt +1 − nt )  .        (4.8)




                                                      16
where η is the innovation in n, using dt , dt −1, and nt −1 as instruments


(2) The q-based estimator (QE) using the regression

                                                     1
                                        nt − n−1 =       qn,t                        (4.9)
                                                     λ

(3) The impulse loading estimator (ILE) using the regression

                                nt = ( 2 − L ) nt −1 + Lnt −2 + Lε t                (4.10)


and solving for the λ corresponding to the estimated value of the loading coefficient, L,
           L−2
from λ =         .
            L3
        I consider various cases involving sources of other random variation in the data
apart from the demand innovation, ε t . Equation (2.2) reveals a key difference between the

IV estimator and the other two. If the demand innovation ε t is the only source of random

variation in the endogenous variables—there is no other source of randomness υt —then

there is a non-stochastic relation between the observed ε t and the endogenous variables,
and also a non-stochastic relation among the endogenous variables. Either one could be
exploited to obtain an exact measure of the adjustment cost λ from a single observation.
For the QE, this is equation (4.6) for any period when employment changes (a non-
stochastic relation among the endogenous variables), and for the ILE, it is equation (4.10),
a non-stochastic relation between employment and the observed innovation in demand.
The QE and ILE obviously dominate the IV estimator in this case. Further, because the IV
estimator always contains a stochastic element from the demand innovation that is absent
from the other estimators even when there are other sources of variation, the IV estimator
suffers in comparison to the others in those cases as well.




                                                17
         Table 1 reports the results of Monte Carlo experiments with 10,000 repetitions
apiece. In each repetition, I draw 50 random normals and use them to calculate values for
nt from equation (4.6). The top line of the table considers estimation without any other

source of random variation. In this case, the ILE and QE both give exact estimates and are
not shown in the table. The average IV estimate of λ is 0.976 with a standard deviation of
0.075. The average reported standard error is 0.078, which is slightly conservative. The IV
estimator suffers from a considerable downward bias even when the equation is properly
specified.



   Additional   Estimator      Mean       Standard      Mean
   random                   estimate of   deviation   reported
   component                  λ (true                 standard
                              value is                  error
                               1.20)
 None               IV         0.976       0.194       0.206
 White noise        IV         0.255       0.152       0.119
 in                ILE         1.237       0.378       0.538
 employment        QE          1.203       0.065       0.081
 Random walk        IV         0.572       0.191       0.227
 in                ILE         1.218       0.237       0.350
 employment        QE          1.203       0.057       0.057
 White noise
                   QE         1.286        0.052       0.050
 in q
 Random walk
                   QE         1.881        3.630       1.375
 in q

Table 1. Sampling Properties of Alternative Estimators of Adjustment Cost


         Next I add white noise with a standard deviation of 0.2 to the employment
numbers. The average IV estimate of λ becomes 0.255 in the face of this specification
error, with a standard deviation of 0.152. The average ILE of λ is 1.237 with a standard
deviation of 0.378. The IV estimator is fatally biased in the presence of the specification
error, while the ILE estimator performs well. The QE performs even better, with an
average estimate of λ almost exactly unbiased and a small and correctly reported standard
error.




                                             18
       I also add a random walk to employment with an innovation standard deviation of
0.2. The average IV estimate of λ becomes 0.572 in the face of this specification error,
with a standard deviation of 0.191. The average ILE for λ is 1.218 with a standard
deviation of 0.237. Again, the IV estimator is seriously biased in the presence of the
specification error, while the ILE continues to perform well. The QE continues to perform
even better.
       The last two lines of Table 1 add a random element to the shadow value of labor,
qn . The addition of white noise (again with a standard deviation of 0.2) biases the

regression coefficient of qn downward and thus the estimated value of its reciprocal, the
adjustment cost λ , upward. The bias is much more severe in the case of a random walk
noise element in q. Nonetheless, the bias is much too small to explain the findings of the q
literature, where values of the adjustment-cost parameter at the absurd level of as high as
20 have been reported. The noise component of empirical measures of q must be huge to
explain those findings.
       These results confirm the finding of Garber and King’s [1983] famous unpublished
paper: Euler-equation estimation using lagged endogenous variables as instruments is
fatally sensitive to specification error of a type likely to occur. The ILE avoids this
problem completely, without becoming entangled in the complexities of maximum
likelihood estimation. The QE works extremely well if good measures of q are available,
though in practice this seems not to occur.
       Another conclusion from this experiment is that the reported standard errors are
slightly conservative estimates of the actual sampling variation of the parameter estimates,
despite the two-step estimator that might appear to bias the standard errors downward.

C.     Application in Panel Data
       As I discussed earlier, the estimation strategy in this paper exploits the cross-
sectional variation in the response of output and factor inputs to aggregate shocks. The
descriptive model is




                                              19
                                     qi ,t = ai ε t + Bq yt −1 + ν q ,i ,t             (4.11)



                               ni ,t = cnε t + bn ai ε t + Bn yt −1 + ν n,i ,t         (4.12)



                               ki ,t = ck ε t + bk aiε t + Bk yt −1 + ν k ,i ,t        (4.13)


Each industry, i, has its own innovation loading, ai , that describes the response of its
output to an aggregate shock, measured as an innovation in real GDP. The model describes
the effect of the shock on employment in two ways. The component cnε t is a common
effect across all industries. It captures effects of the shock that operate through factor
prices and the cross-industry element of productivity shocks. There is no reason to expect
these effects to be in proportion to the output effects. The term bn aiε t captures effects of

the shock that are in proportion to the output effects. The coefficient bn is the labor/output

response ratio. It describes the ratio of the effects of the innovation ε t on labor input and

output, and, similarly, the capital/output response ratio bk describes the ratio of the effects
on capital input and output.



V.    Data and EstimatesEquation Section (Next)


A.     Data
       I use the data compiled by Dale Jorgenson and his co-authors (Jorgenson and Stiroh
[2000] and earlier papers cited there; see http://post.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/
jorgenson/data.html). For each of 35 industries, the data report the value and quantity of
output, labor, capital, materials, and energy adjusted for quality, annually from 1959 to
1999. The measure of capital is conceptually the services of capital used during the year. It




                                                     20
is measured as the average of the beginning and end of year stocks. I used the measure for
the following year in my empirical work as the year-t measure corresponding most closely
to the end-of-year measure of the model. In effect, I am allowing for a 6-month lag of
investment behind its determinants, which could correspond to a 6-month period before
any adjustment can occur (a time to build of 6 months).

B.     Descriptive Model
       The coefficient of the autoregression for real GDP is 0.991 with a standard error of
0.009. The residuals from this autoregression are the innovations taken to characterize
aggregate shocks. In the rest of this section, when I refer to elasticities with respect to
GDP, I mean the coefficient on the GDP innovations in an equation like (4.7).
       Figures 3 and 4 show the basics of the descriptive model. The figures plot the
industry GDP elasticities for output on the horizontal axis and for labor or capital on the
vertical axis. That is, the horizontal position of each dot is the elasticity of output in an
industry with respect to GDP and the vertical position is the elasticity of labor or capital
with respect to GDP. The slopes are the response ratios. Although it would be an
econometric abuse, it would not be terribly different from the procedure actually used in
this work to fit regressions to these two scatter plots and call the coefficients the estimated
factor/output response ratios. The plots make it clear that both ratios are unambiguously
positive and that the labor response ratio is higher than the capital response ratio.




                                             21
                          4




                          3
 Labor input elasticity




                          2




                          1




                          0




                          -1
                               -1   0   1   2              3    4          5   6
                                            Output elasticity




Figure 3. Cross-Sectional Output-GDP elasticities and Labor-GDP Elasticities




                                                22
                             4




                             3
  Capital input elasticity




                             2




                             1




                             0




                             -1
                                  -1           0            1              2            3          4             5
                                                                    Output elasticity




Figure 4. Cross-Sectional Output-GDP elasticities and Capital-GDP Elasticities


                                   One might challenge the identification assumption underlying this approach on the
grounds that there is feedback from investment shocks common across industries to GDP.
Obviously GDP is not an exogenous variable—it is the sum of the values added by the
industries. Figures 5 and 6 check this by repeating the elasticity calculations using federal
government purchases as the aggregate shock. The movement of this variable is dominated
by changes in military spending, a component unlikely to respond to other economic
developments, especially investment. Although there is less variation in the output
elasticities shown on the horizontal axes of these plots, the upward slopes are still quite
visible.




                                                                      23
                          4




                          3
 Labor input elasticity




                          2




                          1




                          0




                          -1
                               -1   0   1   2              3    4           5          6
                                            Output elasticity




Figure 5. Cross-Sectional Output-Government Purchases Elasticities and Labor Elasticities




                                                24
                             4




                             3
  Capital input elasticity




                             2




                             1




                             0




                             -1
                                  -1         0             1          2              3    4         5           6
                                                                      Output elasticity




Figure 6. Cross-Sectional Output-Government Purchases Elasticities and Capital Elasticities


                                   Table 2 shows the coefficients and standard errors of the descriptive model. The
estimation method takes account of correlation and heteroskedasticity across industries and
heteroskedasticity across output, labor input, and capital input. It imposes the nonlinear
restrictions of equations (4.11), (4.12), and (4.13).


                                             Factor-price effect, c   Response ratio, b
Labor input                                           -0.01                 0.77
                                                     (0.10)                (0.06)
Capital input                                         0.17                  0.35
                                                     (0.09)                (0.05)

Table 2. Estimates for the Descriptive Model




                                                                          25
C.      Estimation of Structural Parameters from the Theoretical Model
        In addition to the two adjustment-cost parameters to be estimated from the
descriptive model, the industry model has 6 other parameters: two production elasticities,
α and ψ , the elasticity of demand with respect to the aggregate demand shock, ω , the
price elasticity of demand, δ , the survival rate of capital, s, and the real discount rate, r.
For the production elasticities, I use the overall averages of the corresponding factor shares
across all industries and years: α = .345 and ψ = 0.169 . I noted earlier that the
factor/output response ratios were literally invariant to ω , so I need not specify a value for
it. I take the price elasticity of demand, δ , to have the reasonable value 1—as I noted
earlier, the response ratios are nearly invariant to its value. I take the survival rate for
capital to be 0.9 and the discount rate to be 0.1.
        With these other parameters, the resulting estimates of the adjustment-cost
parameters are shown in Table 3. For labor, Shapiro [1986] finds zero adjustment cost for
production workers and an adjustment cost for non-production workers somewhat above
my estimate. For capital, my estimate is a little below those reported by Shapiro [1986].
See Appendix C of Hall [2001] for a discussion of the interpretation of Shapiro’s
estimates. His estimates of 8 or 9 for the capital adjustment cost parameter at quarterly
frequency correspond to 2 or 2.2 at the annual frequency considered here. My estimates are
well below the level suggested by Hamermesh and Pfann [1996] and well above the tiny
adjustment cost for capital reported by Cooper and Haltiwanger [2002].


Parameter                     Value and standard error
λ , labor adjustment cost               1.22
                                        (.41)
γ , capital adjustment cost             1.54
                                        (.48)

Table 3. Estimates for the Adjustment-Cost Parameters




                                                 26
       In addition to the Euler-equation approach, as I noted earlier, many authors have
pursued James Tobin’s [1969] insight that the adjustment cost parameter is the reciprocal
of the coefficient relating the flow of investment to the ratio of the market value of the
capital stock in place to its acquisition cost. That approach yields high—generally absurdly
high—estimates of the adjustment cost. For example, in a refined application of the
method to excellent data, Gilchrist and Himmelberg [1995] find values for the parameter I
call γ of around 20 (see the Tobin’s Q columns of their Tables 1 and 2). These findings
appear to confirm my conclusion in Hall [2001] that the market values of firms are driven
primarily by forces other than the short-term rents earned on capital from adjustment costs.



VI. Implications for Industry Dynamics

       Figure 7 shows some of the properties of the model with the estimated adjustment
costs. It displays the responses over an 8-year period to a permanent increase in demand
(not the slightly decaying increase typical of a shock to real GDP). The figure shows
industry equilibrium with factor prices that do not respond to the demand shock. The
elasticity of the immediate response of labor exceeds that of the capital stock because
labor’s adjustment cost is lower. The elasticity of the response of output is greater than the
elasticity for labor or capital because materials respond with an elasticity greater than one.




                                             27
                           1.2




                           1.0


                                 Output
  Elasticity of response




                           0.8

                                           Labor

                           0.6
                                                        Capital stock


                           0.4




                           0.2




                           0.0
                                  0        1        2         3          4     5        6        7        8

                                                                       Years


Figure 7. Responses of Output, Labor, and Capital to an Innovation in Demand When
Demand is a Random Walk


                             As discussed in Hall [2001], part of the fluctuations in the value of firms recorded
in securities markets comes from capitalized rents associated with adjustment costs.
Because these costs make the short-run supply curve of the firm slope upward, a force that
moves industry equilibrium up the supply curve creates rents. The dynamic model
describes the transition from the short run, where rents are greatest, to the long run, where
the rents disappear. Figure 8 shows the total capitalized rent and its labor and capital
components resulting from a permanent change in demand. The vertical position of the
curves is the percent change in the value of the firm in response to a one-percent
innovation in demand.




                                                                  28
                        0.8


                              Total capitalized rent
                        0.7



                        0.6
  Elasticity of value




                        0.5

                              Capital
                        0.4



                        0.3   Labor

                        0.2



                        0.1



                        0.0
                                 0       1        2       3          4      5        6        7        8

                                                                   Years


Figure 8. Value of Rents Earned as a Result of a Permanent Increase in Demand: Elasticity of
the Value of the Firm with Respect to the Demand Shock


                          The value of capitalized rent from labor is smaller at all times, and decays faster,
because labor’s adjustment cost is smaller. Although rents on the labor side are too big to
be ignored, it seems unlikely that they could overturn the conclusion in Hall [2001] that
rents from temporary fixity of factors are a small part of the story of the movements of the
stock market.




                                                              29
VII. Comparison of Actual and Predicted Movements of the
Endogenous Variables

       This section explores the performance of the model under the hypothesis that four
observed driving forces—the industry demand shift, industry productivity, wages, and
materials prices—are the only driving forces. I solve the model for its predicted
innovations in the endogenous variables and compare them to the actual innovations. A
finding that the two sets of innovations are essentially identical would confirm that I had
selected a full set of driving forces and that there was no randomness arising within the
model. Of course, there actually will be residuals suggesting other sources of randomness.
A weaker finding that the residuals were uncorrelated with the predicted innovations would
be interesting. Such a finding would support a GMM approach to estimation, treating the
driving forces as econometrically exogenous.
       I calculated time series for the driving forces in each industry as follows: I
calculated time series for the industry demand shift as the residual from the demand
function with price elasticity of unity. I calculated a time series for productivity as the
standard cumulated Solow residual. I took the wage data directly from Jorgenson’s data. I
aggregated energy and materials input into a single input using Divisia aggregation.
       For this exercise, I need to extend the model to include a stochastic model of the
driving forces. Following King and Watson [1996], I embed a VAR for the driving forces
in the model. Decision makers in the model form expectations of future values of the
driving forces from the VAR. I estimate the VAR in the panel data, with the same
coefficients on lagged variables for all industries, but with industry-specific intercepts. I
use a single lag in the VAR based on preliminary findings that two-year lags added
nothing. The VAR is close to a random walk separately for each of the four variables—its
off-diagonal elements are tiny. I then solve the model containing the VAR for its
innovation loading matrix that shows how the innovations in the exogenous variables drive
the innovations in the endogenous variables. The matrix appears in Table 4.




                                            30
                                Driving force
 Endogenous                                           Materials
  variable     Demand     Productivity    Wage         price
   Output        0.71         1.01         -0.17        -0.49
    Price        0.29        -1.01         0.17         0.49
 Labor input     0.53         0.02         -0.50        0.00
   Capital       0.24         0.02         0.02         -0.02
  Materials      1.00         0.00         0.00         -1.00

Table 4. Innovation Loading Matrix from the Model


        The effects of the industry demand shock in the first column are similar to those
underlying the earlier results (there, I divided the labor and capital coefficients by the
output coefficient). The productivity shock raises output almost in exact proportion and
lowers price in the same proportion (the coefficient would be exactly 1, given unit-elastic
demand, except for small cross effects in the VAR). The wage shock lowers output and
raises price in the same proportion, and lowers employment with an elasticity of a half.
The employment effect is constrained by the employment adjustment cost and the output
effect by both adjustment costs. Finally, the materials price shock lowers materials inputs
with an elasticity of one and lowers output and raises price with an elasticity of about a
half. Again, the output and price effects are held back by adjustment costs for other factors.
        To get the predicted innovations in the endogenous variables, I compute the
product of the innovation loading matrix and the innovations from the VAR for the
exogenous variables. I compare these to the innovations from a VAR fitted to the
endogenous variables, again with a single lag. Table 5 describes in relation between the
two in terms of the regression coefficients of the actual innovations on the predicted
innovations and the correlations of the two series.




                                                31
                 Regression
Endogenous     coefficient and
variable       standard error Correlation
Output              0.500       0.806
                  (0.010)
Price              0.662        0.501
                  (0.031)
Labor              0.477        0.493
                  (0.023)
Capital            0.211        0.167
                  (0.033)
Materials          0.854        0.727
                  (0.022)

Table 5. Coefficients of Regressions of Predicted and Actual Innovations in Endogenous
Variables, and Correlations


          These coefficients are not invariant to the elasticity of demand, but the basic story
holds for values of the elasticity of 0.5 and 2 as well as the value of 1 used in deriving
Tables 4 and 5. The correlations in the right-hand column speak to the issue of excluded
driving forces or endogenous randomness, including errors in measuring the endogenous
variables. For output and materials input, the correlations are quite high. For capital, on the
other hand, the correlation is low. The model omits variations in the financial determinants
of capital, though, because the investment literature has generally been skeptical of their
quantitative importance, it seems unlikely that adding them would raise the correlation
much. More likely is randomness in investment not captured by the model at all.
          If the orthogonality property mentioned earlier held, the regression coefficients in
Table 5 would all be 1. In fact, all of the coefficients are below 1—orthogonality is
rejected in all cases. GMM estimation treating the driving forces as econometrically
exogenous would probably not be a good idea, and I found that some experiments in this
area gave perverse results. The shortfall in the coefficients arises from two potential
sources—errors in measuring the driving forces and correlation of the driving forces with




                                              32
the errors in measuring the endogenous variables and in the unexplained randomness of the
endogenous variables.
        Figure 9 shows the scatter plot of the predicted and actual innovations in output for
the entire sample. The plot seems entirely consistent with the view that both measure the
same underlying variable, but both contain some errors so that the points do not lie
perfectly on the 45-degree line. Figure 10 shows the same plot for capital. The same
property holds, but it is clear that most of the variation comes from noise and it is difficult
to see much tendency to group on the 45-degree line.

                                           0.3




                                           0.2




                                           0.1




                                             0
 -0.3           -0.2           -0.1               0         0.1            0.2            0.3



                                           -0.1




                                           -0.2




                                           -0.3




Figure 9. Predicted Output Innovation (Horizontal Axis) and Actual (Vertical Axis)




                                             33
                                            0.1


                                           0.08


                                           0.06


                                           0.04


                                           0.02


                                              0
  -0.1     -0.08   -0.06   -0.04   -0.02           0   0.02   0.04   0.06     0.08     0.1

                                           -0.02


                                           -0.04


                                           -0.06


                                           -0.08


                                            -0.1




Figure 10. Predicted Capital Innovation (Horizontal Axis) and Actual (Vertical Axis)




VIII. Concluding Remarks

         Discrete adjustment costs appear to have little role in industry dynamics despite
their large role in plant dynamics, because the plants that do adjust by large amounts to a
shock make up for the plants that do not adjust at all. Industry dynamics are controlled by
convex adjustment costs, which lead all plants to spread their adjustment over time to
exploit the convexity. Firms earn rents from the upward slope that adjustment costs impart
to their supply curves. A model of industry equilibrium traces the response from the short
run to the long run, as each supply curve becomes more elastic. Although theory and
intuition agree that one should be able to estimate the parameters of adjustment costs from




                                              34
the relation between the values of the capitalized rents and the flows of new hires and
purchases of capital goods, no useful data have been uncovered for that purpose. Data from
securities markets appear to be hopelessly contaminated by factors other than capitalized
adjustment rents.
       Using the intuitively appealing proposition that surprises in demand should
stimulate the use of factors with low adjustment costs by more than it stimulates those with
high adjustment costs, I am able to measure adjustment costs separately for labor and
capital. I use the model to infer the parameters of adjustment cost from the observed
responses, using the econometric strategy of indirect inference. The resulting parameter
estimates suggest moderate adjustment costs, at the lower end of those estimated in most
previous work.




                                           35
References

Caballero, Ricardo J. 1999. “Aggregate Investment” Chapter 12 in John B. Taylor and
       Michael Woodford (eds.) Handbook of Macroeconomics (New York: Elsevier). Pp.
       816-862.
Caballero, Ricardo J., and Eduardo M.R.A. Engel. 1999. “Explaining Investment
       Dynamics in U.S. Manufacturing: A Generalized (S,s) Approach” Econometrica
       67: 783-826. No. 4. July.
Caplin, Andrew S., and Daniel F. Spulber. 1987. “Menu Costs and the Neutrality of
       Money” Quarterly Journal of Economics 102: 703-726. No. 4. November.
Cooper, Russell W., and John C. Haltiwanger. 2002. “On the Nature of Capital Adjustment
      Costs” unpublished. January.
Garber, Peter M., and King, Robert G. 1983. “Deep Structural Excavation? A Critique of
       Euler Equation Methods” NBER Technical Working Paper 31. November.
Gilchrist, Simon, and Charles P. Himmelberg. 1995. “Evidence on the Role of Cash Flow
       for Investment” Journal of Monetary Economics 36: 541-572. No. 3. December.
Gouriéroux, Christian, Alan Montfort, and E. Renault. 1993. “Indirect Inference” Journal
       of Applied Econometrics 8: S85-118. Supplement. December
Hall, Robert E. 2001. “The Stock Market and Capital Accumulation” American Economic
       Review 91: 1185-1202. December
Hamermesh, Daniel S., and Pfann, Gerard A. “Adjustment Costs in Factor Demand.”
     Journal of Economic Literature, September 1996, 34(3), pp. 1264-1292.
Jorgenson, Dale W., and Kevin J. Stiroh. 2000. “Raising the Speed Limit: U.S. Economic
       Growth in the Information Age.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity No. 1,
       pp. 125-211.
King, Robert G., and Mark W. Watson. 1996. “Money, Prices, Interest Rates, and the
      Business Cycle” Review of Economics and Statistics 78(1): 35-53, February.
Shapiro, Matthew D. “The Dynamic Demand for Capital and Labor,” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, August 1986, 101(3), pp. 513-542.
Smith, Anthony A., Jr. 1993. “Estimating Nonlinear Time Series Models Using Simulated
       Vector Autoregressions” Journal of Applied Econometrics 8:63-84.




                                         36
Tobin, James. 1969. “A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory” Journal of
       Money, Credit, and Banking. 1: 15-29. February.
Thomas, Julia K. 2001. “Is Lumpy Investment Relevant for the Business Cycle” University
     of Minnesota, unpublished. May




                                         37
