                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       EXCHANGE RATE PASS-THROUGH, EXCHANGE RATE VOLATILITY, AND
                      EXCHANGE RATE DISCONNECT


                                         Michael B. Devereux
                                            Charles Engel


                                          Working Paper 8858
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8858


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2002




This paper was prepared for the Carnegie Rochester Conference, Carnegie Mellon University, November
16-17, 2001. Devereux thanks SSHRC for financial assistance. Engel thanks the NSF for funding. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.


© 2002 by Michael B. Devereux and Charles Engel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Exchange Rate Pass-Through, Exchange Rate Volatility, and Exchange Rate Disconnect
Michael B. Devereux and Charles Engel
NBER Working Paper No. 8858
April 2002
JEL No. F3, F4



                                              ABSTRACT

        This paper explores the hypothesis that high volatility of real and nominal exchange rates may
be due to the fact that local currency pricing eliminates the pass-through from changes in exchange rates
to consumer prices. Exchange rates may be highly volatile because in a sense they have little effect on
macroeconomic variables. The paper shows the ingredients necessary to construct such an explanation
for exchange rate volatility. In addition to the presence of local currency pricing, we need a) incomplete
international financial markets, b) a structure of international pricing and product distribution such that
wealth effects of exchange rate changes are minimized, and c) stochastic deviations from uncovered
interest rate parity. Together, it is shown that these elements can produce exchange rate volatility that
is much higher than shocks to economic fundamentals, and `disconnected' from the rest of the economy
in the sense that the volatility of all other macroeconomic aggregates are of the same order as that of
fundamentals.




Michael B. Devereux                                               Charles Engel
Department of Economics                                           Department of Economics
University of British Columbia                                    University of Wisconsin
997-1873 East Mall                                                1180 Observatory Drive
Vancouver, BC                                                     Madison, WI 53706-1393
V6T 1Z1 Canada                                                    and NBER
and NBER                                                          Tel: 608-262-3697
Tel: 604-822-2542                                                 Fax: 608-263-3876
Fax: 305-946-6271                                                 Email: cengel@ssc.wisc.edu
Email: devm@interchange.ubc.ca
           Empirical evidence indicates that nominal exchange rate changes are not fully passed

through to goods prices. In fact, it appears that consumer prices are very unresponsive to

nominal exchange rate changes.1                An implication of this finding is that the “expenditure-

switching” effect of exchange rate changes might be very small. That is, a change in the nominal

exchange rate might not lead to much substitution between domestically-produced goods and

internationally-produced goods, because the relative prices of those goods do not change much

for final users.

           If the exchange rate change has little effect on the behavior of final purchasers of goods,

then it may take large changes in exchange rates to achieve equilibrium after some shock to

fundamentals. For example, if there is a shock that reduces the supply of foreign goods, a very

large home depreciation might be required in order to raise the relative price of foreign goods

enough to reduce demand sufficiently. That is, low pass-through of exchange rates might imply

high exchange-rate volatility in equilibrium. That intuition was first expressed by Krugman

(1989), and explored by Betts and Devereux (1996).

           However, fully-articulated equilibrium open-economy macroeconomic models with

sticky nominal prices (in the style of Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995)) have found that exchange-rate

volatility is difficult to generate even when there is little exchange rate pass-through. While

Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995) assume complete pass-through of exchange rates to prices because

they assume that nominal prices are set in the currency of the producer, several studies have

extended the Obstfeld-Rogoff framework to the local-currency pricing case.2               Under local-

currency pricing, firms set a price in their own currency for sale to households located in their

country, but set a price in foreign currency for sales to foreign households.



1
    See Engel (1993), Parsley and Wei (2001), or the references cited therein.
2
    See Betts and Devereux (1996, 2000) and Devereux and Engel (2000).
       The purpose of this paper is to explore the conditions under which local-currency pricing

might induce a high level of exchange-rate volatility. By impeding the linkage of goods prices

across countries, local currency pricing leads to deviations from purchasing power parity (PPP),

and therefore, in principal, may be able to explain high exchange rate volatility following the

intuition of Krugman. But there are some major caveats to this conclusion. Much of the paper is

devoted to understanding them. First, if international financial markets allow for full risk-

sharing across countries, then exchange rates will be determined by a risk sharing condition,

despite the fact that local currency prices are independent of exchange rates. Second, even if risk

sharing is limited, the linkage of assets prices through bond markets will impose a tight limit on

the degree to which exchange rates can move. Third, even without any international asset trade

at all, local currency pricing does not guarantee high exchange rate volatility because wealth

effects of exchange rate changes through firms’ profits will limit the degree to which the

exchange rate can change. Finally, while within a particular model of local currency pricing it

may be feasible to choose a parameter configuration that delivers a high level of exchange rate

variability (e.g. Chari et al. 2000), this parameterization may have quite counterfactual

implications for other macroeconomic variables. Our aim is not just to explain high exchange

rate volatility, but, in the spirit of the original Krugman discussion, to understand both why

exchange rate variability can both be high and not matter for real variables. In this respect, we

are influenced by the seminal empirical findings of Baxter and Stockman (1990), Flood and Rose

(1995). They show that high exchange rate volatility under floating exchange rates is not

obviously tied to or reflected in high volatility of other macroeconomic variables. Exchange

rates are a puzzle not just because they are volatile, but also because they seem to be




                                                2
`disconnected’ from the real economy, as discussed by Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000), and Duarte

and Stockman (2001)3.

        Given these prerequisites for explaining exchange rate volatility, the paper constructs a

model in which a combination of three factors is key in generating exchange rate volatility that is

much higher than the volatility in underlying macroeconomic shocks, or the volatility in other

endogenous macroeconomic variables. The first factor is the presence of local currency pricing:

exchange rate changes do not pass through to goods prices in the short run.

         The second feature is the presence of heterogeneity in the way that products are sold and

prices are set in international commodity markets. We assume that some firms market their

products directly in their export market, but others use foreign distributors. When an exporting

firm uses a foreign distributor, it sets the price in its own currency. The distributor takes on the

exchange-rate risk – buying goods priced in the exporter’s currency, and selling in the

consumers’ currency. In those cases, a home currency depreciation bestows a positive wealth

shock on the distributor.

        We posit that exporters are more likely to set up foreign offices and undertake their own

distributing activities for large consumer markets, but they are more likely to sell to firms that

specialize in distributing for sales to smaller markets. We show that under this configuration, the

wealth effects of foreign exchange rate changes are minimized, potentially generating very high

exchange rate volatility even for small shocks.

        Finally, however, even with this structure of price setting and international commodity

distribution, the degree of exchange rate volatility is restricted by arbitrage in international assets


3
  In many respects, our paper is similar to Duarte and Stockman (2001). They emphasize that shipping costs,
leading to deviations from PPP, and volatile risk premiums, leading to deviation from UIRP, are joint requirements
in the understanding of high exchange rate volatility. In our emphasis on the nature of international pricing and
product distribution, as well as the nature of the breakdown in UIRP (see below), however, the channels explored in
our paper are quite different.

                                                         3
markets.    When we allow for trade in non-contingent nominal bonds across countries,

unanticipated movements in the exchange rate (in the presence of local currency pricing)

generate a real interest rate differential across countries that itself tends to restrict the movement

of the exchange rate. But this channel depends critically on the uncovered interest rate parity

(UIRP) condition, which (aside from a negligible risk-premium term) continues to hold in a

model of local currency pricing and heterogeneity in international goods distribution. In light of

this, we extend our model to allow for the presence of foreign currency traders whose

expectations of future exchange rates are conditionally biased. In this, we follow closely the

recent paper of Jeanne and Rose (2000), showing how `noise-traders’ can generate high

exchange rate volatility in a monetary model of the exchange rate.

       Our results show that the presence of all three factors – local currency pricing,

heterogeneous international distribution of commodities, and `noise traders’ in foreign exchange

markets – can potentially generate a high-frequency volatility of the exchange rate that is

completely out of proportion to the underlying monetary shocks to the economy. Moreover,

while exchange rate volatility is ultimately tied to volatility in the fundamental shocks to the

economy, the exchange rate can display extremely high volatility without any implications for

the volatility of other macroeconomic variables.       We find that the volatility of consumption,

GDP, the real interest rate, and the current account may be quite low (of the same order of

magnitude as fundamentals), while at the same time the volatility of the exchange rate may be

much, much higher. In this sense, the exchange rate becomes `disconnected’ from the real

economy.

       The paper is organized as follows. In section 1, we develop a baseline two-country

general equilibrium model that is used throughout the paper. In that section we also show in

detail why the assumption of complete international assets markets cannot provide an empirical

                                                  4
explanation for exchange rate volatility. In section 2, we illustrate the determination of the

exchange rate under incomplete markets, local currency pricing, and heterogeneous international

distribution in commodity markets. In order to develop the intuition, we restrict ourselves

simply to a one-period horizon in that section, however. Section 3 extends the model to a

dynamic (infinite horizon) environment, introducing a role for `noise traders’ in foreign

exchange markets.



1. The Basic Model of Exchange Rate Determination

       Here we outline the basic features of the modeling framework. There are two countries;

`home’ and `foreign’.       Households in each country maximize expected utility, which is a

function of consumption, real balances and labor. They take prices and wages as given.

       The representative household in the home country is assumed to maximize

                                             ∞
                                                           Mt
                                         E0 å β tU (Ct ,      , Lt ), β < 1
                                            t =0           Pt

             1                 æM     ö   η 1+ψ
where U =        Cs1− ρ + χ ln ç s    ÷−     Ls , and ρ > 0 . Compared to other papers in the
            1− ρ               è Ps   ø 1 +ψ

literature (Bacchetta and Van Wincoop, 2000, Chari et al. 2000), we make the assumption of

separability in consumer preferences over consumption, real balances, and labor supply. In our

model, the key features of exchange rate volatility will come from factors that are essentially

independent of the preference specification. While allowing for non-separability on its own

could alter some of our results (possibly generating a higher predicted level of exchange rate

volatility for a given volatility of monetary policy for instance), it would not solve the `exchange

rate disconnect’ problem.




                                                    5
        C is a consumption index that is a CES function of goods produced at home (Ch) and in

the foreign country (Cf):
                                                                              ω
                                                                                  (ω −1)
                                        æ ω1 1− ω1      1
                                                          1− ö
                                                            1
                                    C = ç n Ch + (1 − n) C f ÷
                                                        ω   ω
                                                                                           .
                                        è                     ø

The elasticity of substitution between home and foreign consumption aggregates is ω . We

assume that there are n identical households in the home country, 0 < n < 1 . Ch and Cf are

indexes:

                                           λ                                                                      λ
                    −1          λ −1           λ −1                                 −1           λ −1                 λ −1
           C h = én λ ò C h (i ) λ di ù                               C f = é(1 − n) λ ò C f (i ) λ di ù
                        n                                                               1

                 êë    0              úû                                    êë          n              úû

where λ >1. M           are domestic real balances, and L is the labor supply of the representative
                    P

home agent.

        The price index, P, is defined by

                                                                             1
                                          P = éë nPh1−ω + (1 − n) Pf1−ω ùû    1−ω
                                                                                    ,

where

                                        1                                                                     1
                                         1− λ                                                                  1− λ
                  é1 n              ù                                             é 1 1                   ù
             Ph = ê ò Ph (i )1−λ di ú                                        Pf = ê      ò  Pf (i )1−λ di ú
                  ën 0
                                    û                                             ë1 − n  n
                                                                                                          û

        There are 1 − n identical households in the foreign country. Their preferences are similar

to home country residents’ preferences. The terms in the utility function involving consumption

are identical in the home and foreign countries. The functional form for real balances and labor

are the same as for the home country residents, but, for foreign residents, they are functions of

foreign real balances and foreign labor supply. We denote foreign aggregate consumption by C*

and the foreign price level by P*. Throughout the paper an asterisk superscript indicates a

foreign quantity.

        Optimal consumption is given by:
                                                            6
                                             −λ                                                               −λ
                          1 é P (i ) ù                                                        1 é Pf (i ) ù
                C h (i ) = ê h ú                  Ch                             C f (i ) =        ê      ú        Cf
                          n ë Ph û                                                          1 − n êë Pf úû

                                        −ω                                                                  −ω
                               éP ù                                                               é Pf ù
                        Ch = n ê h ú         C                                      C f = (1 − n) ê ú            C
                               ëPû                                                                ëPû

                    n                                                                1
                ò0
                        Ph (i )C h (i )di = Ph C h                                 ò P (i )C
                                                                                    n
                                                                                         f     f   (i )di = Pf C f




1.1 Complete Markets

          The choices available to households depend on the opportunities for financial market

trade. The first result we obtain is a negative one. We will show that if there is a full set of state

contingent nominal assets traded, then we cannot obtain high exchange rate volatility, or at least

high volatility that is disconnected from the rest of the economy. When households of each

country can purchase a full set of state-contingent nominal bonds, Chari, et al (2000) show that

the following risk-sharing condition obtains

                                                                             ρ
                                                       St Pt*       æC ö
(1.1)                                                         = Γ 0 ç *t ÷
                                                        Pt          è Ct ø

where St is the home currency price of foreign currency, and Γ0 is a constant, depending on

initial conditions.4 Consumption will differ across the two countries only to the extent that there

are changes in the real exchange rate.

          In addition to the consumption demand equations listed above, we can derive the money

demand equation for the representative home-country resident:

                                                       Mt      χCtρ
(1.2)                                                     =
                                                       Pt   (1 − Et qt )



4
    We assume Γ0 = 1.

                                                                7
                Pt C tρ
where qt = β                is the equilibrium state contingent nominal pricing factor. The trade-off
               Pt +1Ctρ+1

between consumption and leisure is given by:

(1.3)                                         Wt = ηPt C tρ Lψt

        Government increases the money supply with direct transfers. Home and foreign money

transfers are determined as random injections, and these represent the only source of uncertainty

in our model. We assume that the money supply follows a random walk:

                                             æ M ö
(1.4)                                     Et ç t ÷ = µ , µ ≤ 1.
                                             è M t +1 ø

The conditions for the foreign country are analogous.

        Using (1.2) and (1.4), it is easy to demonstrate that the nominal interest rate is time

                             1
invariant, and equal to        − 1 . Then without any further specification of the model, we can
                            βµ

derive an equilibrium expression for the exchange rate. Equations (1.1) and (1.2) yield:

                                                  Mt
(1.5)                                      St =          .
                                                  M t*

According to this relationship, the exchange rate is proportional to relative money supplies. That

is, the exchange rate is no more volatile than the fundamentals.

        The striking thing about this solution is that it does not depend at all on how prices are

set, or how persistent is price stickiness. The exchange rate is equal to the relative money

supplies whether or not nominal goods prices are fixed in the currency of households or

producers, and no matter how long it takes prices to adjust. Indeed, the equation holds whether

or not there is any nominal price stickiness. The intuition for the result is that the marginal

utility of nominal balances in the home and foreign countries are χ            and χ          ,
                                                                          Mt           M t*


                                                             8
respectively. The complete set of nominal assets ensures that the marginal utility of money,

expressed in a common currency, is equalized. This relationship is expressed in equation (1.5).

With complete markets, then, there can be no excess volatility.



1.2 Extending the Preference Specification

        Is this conclusion sensitive to our particular preference specification? The fact that

exchange-rate volatility is independent of how prices are set is an artifact of our assumption that

real balances enter the utility function logarithmically. For instance, we could allow a more

                                                                                              1−ε
                                                                    1            æ Mt    ö
general functional form for money in the utility function, such as               çç      ÷÷         . Going through
                                                                   1− ε           è Pt    ø

the same steps leads us to the exchange rate solution

                                              ε        ε −1
                                      æ M ö æ P* ö            (1 − Et d t )
(1.6)                            St = ç t* ÷ ç t ÷
                                      è M t ø è Pt ø          (1 − Et d t* )

It is no longer true, in the case ε ≠ 1 , that the nominal interest rate is constant. Therefore, the

exchange rate will in general depend on the response of home and foreign nominal interest rates.

This precludes an analytic solution to (1.6). But we may linearize (1.6) in the neighborhood of a

deterministic steady state. Define x = ln X t − ln X . Then using the condition for uncovered

interest rate parity, we may obtain the approximate solution

                                                                  1
(1.7)                   st = ε (mt − mt* ) + (ε − 1)( pt* − pt ) + Et ( st +1 − st )
                                                                  i

where i is the common steady state nominal interest rate in each country. Now we take the

analogue of condition (1.4) to be that the log of the money supply is a random walk in each

country. If there is full PCP price setting, where the law of one price holds for all goods, we




                                                       9
would have pt = st + pt* , and the solution for equation (1.7) is the same as (1.5), so the exchange

rate is proportional to fundamentals, even in this extended model.

         On the other hand, if there is complete LCP pricing, then the solution to equation (1.7)

gives the exchange rate response:

                                                    (1 + ε i )
(1.8)                                        st =              (mt − mt* )
                                                     (1 + i )

For ε>1, the exchange rate can display volatility in excess of fundamentals, and volatility under

LCP pricing exceeds that under PCP pricing. Note however that since i is the nominal interest

rate, it would take extremely large values of ε to generate a very high exchange rate response to

money shocks. Moreover, high exchange rate volatility can only be generated if the marginal

utility of consumption is very volatile (from equation (1.1).) In this setting, a high value of ε

implies a high response of the marginal utility of aggregate consumption to monetary shocks5.



2. Incomplete markets and Local Distribution6

         Having established that a complete market set-up cannot give an adequate description of

exchange rate volatility, we now turn to a setting with limited financial markets. For the rest of

the paper, we maintain the assumption that consumer prices are set (in advance) in local

currency. But we allow for differences in the identity of the price setters of consumer goods.

Domestic firms are all owned only by domestic residents, and foreign firms by foreign residents.

But there are two types of firms in each country: producers and distributors. Each producer sells

its product directly to residents of its own country without benefit of a distributor. But when

marketing its product to the other country there are two possibilities. Home producers, for

5
  Note that in a one period economy, which can be interpreted as the case i → ∞ , the elasticity of the exchange rate
fundamentals is equal to ε, which in principle may be very large. But again, this implies a high volatility of the
marginal utility of consumption.
6
  For the rest of the paper, we return to the original preference specification of section 1.

                                                           10
example, might choose to sell directly to foreign households or they might sell to a foreign-

owned distributor. The foreign distributor then sells the home-produced product to foreign

households.

       If the home producer sells directly to foreign households, it sets prices in the foreign

currency. However, if the home producer sells to foreign distributors, it sets a price in home

currency. The distributor absorbs the exchange-rate risk because it buys at prices set in the home

currency, but it sets prices for foreign consumers in foreign currency. Distributors use no

resources. Their only role is to purchase goods from producers priced in the producers’

currencies, and then sell those goods to consumers at a price set in consumers’ currencies.

       In particular, our model deliberately eliminates any “expenditure switching” role for

exchange rates, in order to highlight the role of the contribution of local-currency pricing to

exchange-rate volatility. Some studies (McCallum and Nelson (2000), Obstfeld (2001)) have

allowed for a difference between import prices and consumer prices as we do, but posit that the

distributors have a wide scope for substituting between imports and domestically-produced

alternatives when the exchange rate changes. The distributor in those models combines imports

and home products to make the final consumer good, and can vary the proportion of the

intermediate products in the final good. In essence, we have made the extreme assumption that

the distributor has zero elasticity of substitution between imports and home products.

       Producers manufacture output from labor, using a linear technology. Each production

firm is a monopolist, and sets prices in advance to maximize expected discounted profits. Sales

are demand determined. We assume that distributors sign binding contracts ex ante to distribute

however much of the good is demanded. After the state of the world is realized, distributors

might find themselves either making pure profit or pure loss on each unit that they sell.

However, they cannot exit the market if they are making a loss. We also assume that there is

                                                 11
free entry ex ante into the distribution market. That means that prices by distributors are set so

that expected discounted profits from distribution are zero in equilibrium7.

Producers

          First let us look at the situation of the home producing firm. A home producer j sets price

Pht ( j ) in home currency for sales to the home market. If the home producer distributes directly

to a foreign household, she sets a price PhtP* ( j ) in the foreign currency. But if she sells to a

distributor, she sets a price Qht ( j ) in the home currency. The foreign distributor buys the good

at Qht ( j ) per unit, and sells to households at a price PhtD* ( j ) set in foreign currency8. The price


                                                                                              (                                   )
                                                                                                                                   1
index of home goods for foreign consumers Pht* is given by Pht* = θ ( PhtP* )1−λ + (1 − θ )( PhtD* )1−λ                           1− λ



where θ is the fraction of home firms that sell directly to households in the foreign country.

          Revenues of home producer j from sales of home goods are given by

                         −λ                −ω
           æ P ( j) ö         æ Pht   ö
nPht ( j )çç ht     ÷÷        çç      ÷÷        C t , which represents the demand for product j of the n home
           è ht ø
              P                è Pt    ø

households multiplied by the price of product j. If the producer markets directly to foreign

                                                                                                  −λ       −ω
                                                            æ P P* ( j ) ö æ P * ö
households, revenue from foreign sales is (1 − n) S P ( j ) ç ht * ÷ ç ht* ÷    P*
                                                                             t ht                               Ct* in domestic
                                                            è Pht ø è Pt ø

currency. This comes from taking the demand for product j of the 1-n foreign households,

multiplying by the foreign price of product j and by the exchange rate to express in domestic

currency.



7
 This is essentially the set-up we used in Devereux, Engel and Tille (1999). In that paper, we assumed that all
exported goods were sold by distributors. In a complete markets setting, we showed that this implied an equivalent
allocation to the situation where exports are sold directly to the foreign consumer. By contrast, here we allow some
exports to go through distributors, and some to be sold directly by producers to households, and of course, we do not
assume that markets are complete.
8
    Under complete markets, we would have Pht
                                                         P*
                                                              ( j ) = PhtD* ( j ) , (see Devereux, Engel and Tille 1999).

                                                                        12
             If the home producer decides to engage a foreign distributor however, revenues are given

                                         −λ           −ω
                    æ P D* ( j ) ö æ P * ö
by (1 − n)Qht ( j ) ç ht * ÷ ç ht* ÷                       Ct* . The represents the demand for product j by all (1-n)
                    è Pht ø è Pt ø

foreign households, multiplied by the domestic currency price that is charged to foreign

distributors.

Distributors

             A home country firm that engages in the distribution of foreign good j has revenue

                     −ω              −λ
            æP ö          æ PftD ( j ) ö
nPftD ( j ) ç ft ÷        çç           ÷÷ Ct , which represents the demand for good j by all n home residents
            è Pt ø         è Pft ø

multiplied by the price of good j. The costs incurred by the home country distributor are

                               −λ         −ω
            æ PftD ( j ) ö æ Pft ö
nSt Q ( j ) ç
            ç P ÷÷ ç P ÷
        *
        ft                                     Ct , since the foreign producer j sells her good denominated in
            è      ft    ø è t ø

foreign currency at the price Q*ft ( j ) .

Profits

             Now imposing a symmetric equilibrium, so that producers in any sub-category always set

the same prices, we can calculate the total profits received by the n home country firms, of

whom θ directly market to foreign households, and 1 − θ sell to foreign country distributors, as

well as the 1 − n home firms who engage in distributing foreign products. Total profit income

received by home country consumers may then be written as

                          −ω                                        −λ          −ω                                  −λ          −ω
               æP ö                               æ P P* ö æ P * ö                                           æ P D* ö æ P * ö
             2
         n Pht ç ht ÷          Ct + θ (1 − n)nS P ç ht* ÷ ç ht* ÷
                                                         P*
                                                      t ht                           C + (1 − θ )(1 − n)nQht ç ht* ÷ ç ht* ÷
                                                                                      *
                                                                                      t                                              Ct*
               è Pt ø                             è Pht ø è Pt ø                                             è Pht ø è Pt ø
(2.1)                                                          −λ         −ω
                                        æ PftD                ö æ Pft ö
         +(1 − θ )n(1 − n) ( P − St Q ) ç
                 *                   D           *
                                                              ÷÷ ç ÷           Ct − nWt Lt
                                    ft  çP       ft
                                        è ft                   ø è Pt ø




                                                                         13
        The first expression represents revenue from the home market. The second and third

expressions represent revenue from the foreign market for the direct marketers and the firms that

use a foreign distribution network, respectively. The fourth expression represents profits of

home distributors, and finally the fifth expression measures total wage costs.

Foreign Firms

        Analogously, foreign producer k sets the price Pft* (k ) for sale to foreign residents. A

fraction θ * of foreign firms directly sell their product to home households at a home-currency

price of PftP (k ) , while the remaining 1 − θ * sell their product to home-based distributors at a

price of Q *ft (k ) in foreign currency. The home distributors sell those goods to home consumers


                                      (                                               )
                                                                                       1
at the price P (k ) . We have Pft = θ
               D
              ft
                                          *
                                              ( PftP )1−λ   + (1 − θ   *        D 1−λ 1− λ
                                                                           )( Pft )          . Foreign revenues may be

evaluated in the same way as before, and total profits to foreign households are described by an

equation analogous to (2.1).

        Prices are set by home and foreign producing firms and distributors to maximize

expected discounted profits. The full equilibrium of the dynamic model with incomplete

markets requires a set of assumptions about the types of financial assets that households can

trade between countries. But before we analyze the nature of international financial markets, it is

instructive to explain how the structure of commodity distribution alone helps to generate high

exchange rate volatility in an environment of local currency goods pricing. We do this by

examining the special case of a one-period horizon.




                                                            14
2.1 Static model

        In a one period version of the economy, there is no international asset trade of any kind,

since bond trade can only take place over time. We may define an equilibrium as follows9.

Expression (2.2) and (2.3) describe money market clearing and the labor supply curve for the

home country:

(2.2)                                             M t = χPt C tρ

                                                             ρ ψ
(2.3)                                             Wt = η PC
                                                          t t Lt .


        The budget constraint facing a typical home household is:

(2.4)                                     t t + M t = Wt Lt + Π t + Tt .
                                         PC

Here, Π t are profits from domestic producers and distributors as defined in (2.1) and Tt is the

transfer from the central bank. The home country goods market clearing condition is:

                         −ω                              −λ              −ω                                        −λ              −ω
             æP     ö                        æ PhtP* ö        æ Pht* ö                                 æ PhtD* ö        æ Pht* ö
(2.5) Lt = nçç ht   ÷÷        Ct + (1 − n)θ çç * ÷÷           ç
                                                              ç P* ÷
                                                                     ÷        C t*   + (1 − n)(1 − θ )çç * ÷÷           ç
                                                                                                                        ç P* ÷
                                                                                                                               ÷        C t*
             è Pt    ø                       è Pht ø          è t ø                                    è Pht ø          è t ø

The left hand side of this equation represents total home country output. The right hand side is

demand for home country goods from home households, from the foreign households who buy

directly from the home firms, and by foreign households who buy from foreign distributors.

        Conditional on pre-set prices, a static equilibrium may be defined by equations (2.2) and

(2.3), and their counterparts for the foreign economy, the home country budget constraint (2.4)

(recognizing the money market equilibrium condition M t = Tt ), and the goods market clearing

condition (2.5) with its counterpart for the foreign economy. This gives set of seven equations




9
 Technically, we obtain a one period outcome by setting              β = 0 in the previous model (without the risk-sharing
conditions).

                                                                    15
that give implicit solutions for the seven variables Ct , Ct* , Wt , Wt* , Lt , L*t , and St . Combining

(2.4) with the profit expression (2.1) gives the equation:

(2.6)

                    1−ω                                1− λ           1−ω                                     1− λ          1−ω
              æ Pht ö                    æ PhtP* ö            æ Pht* ö                            Qht æ PhtD* ö      æ Pht* ö
 t t (1 − n ) ç
PC                  ÷     = θ (1 − n) St ç * ÷                ç *÷          Pt C + (1 − θ )(1 − n) D* ç * ÷
                                                                                *   *
                                                                                    t                                ç *÷         Pt*Ct*
              è Pt ø                     è Pht ø              è Pt ø                              Pht è Pht ø        è Pt ø
                                             1− λ             1−ω
                  æ S Q*         ö æ PftD   ö       æ Pft ö
+ (1 − θ )(1 − n) ç1 − t D ft
        *
                                 ÷÷ çç      ÷÷      ç ÷             PC
                  ç                                                  t t
                  è    Pft        ø è Pft    ø      è Pt ø

In combination with (2.2) and its counterpart for the foreign economy, equation (2.6) determines

home and foreign consumption, and the nominal exchange rate. Equation (2.6) is simply the

balance of payments equilibrium in the one-period world economy (to see this, note that in the

special case when θ = θ * = 1 , ω = 1 , and prices set by direct marketers and distributors are

identical, the condition just says that the nominal value of home spending should equal the

                                         t t = St Pt Ct ).
                                                    * *
nominal value of foreign spending; i.e. PC

         Notice that the exchange rate plays two roles on the right hand side of (2.6). A

depreciation will increase home country revenue by increasing the earnings of domestic firms

who sell their products directly to foreign households and pre-set prices in the foreign currency.

On the other hand there is a negative wealth effect of exchange rate depreciation arising from the

reduced profits of home country distribution firms, who have to purchase foreign goods at a

higher domestic cost. It is the conflict between these two wealth impacts of exchange rates that

is critical to the results below.

         In general the response of the exchange rate to monetary shocks will depend on the levels

of pre-set home and foreign prices. However, we can again determine the degree of exchange

rate volatility by examining the properties of the model in the neighborhood of a deterministic

equilibrium. In a deterministic economy with S = 1 , it is easy to see in this case that

                                                                           16
                                                     *
                                             Qht Q ft
PhtP* = PhtD* = Pht* , PftP = PftD = Pft ,        =     = 1 . Then taking a log linear approximation of
                                             Pht*   Pft

equation (2.2) (and its counterpart for the foreign country) and (2.6), we find that

                                1
(2.7)              st =                 (mt − mt* ) .
                          ρ (θ + θ − 1)
                                  *




        If all goods were directly marketed to households (i.e. θ = θ * = 1 ), exchange rates would

be more stable in this setting than under complete markets. The response of the exchange to

                                                    1
changes in the relative money supplies is             . A reasonable assumption is that ρ > 1 , so the
                                                    ρ

exchange rate elasticity is less than unity (as it would be under complete markets.) This is

precisely the result in Engel (2001) under balanced trade.

        But we have argued that some goods are likely to be priced in the producers’ currencies

and sold to distributors. In fact, it seems plausible that θ + θ * may be close to one. For

example, when a large country sells to a small country, only a small fraction of firms might

directly market their products, so θ will be small. But many of the small country exporters will

directly market their goods in the large country, so θ * would be large. It might be that the

fraction of goods that are marketed are close to the relative size of the country, so θ may be

close to 1 − n , and θ * may be close to n.

        As θ + θ * approaches unity from above, the response of the exchange rate to monetary

shocks approaches infinity. The intuition is easy to see. With local currency pricing, there is no

`expenditure switching’ effect of exchange rate changes. The only effect that the exchange rate

has on the economy comes through its effect on profits. A home depreciation raises the profits

of the θ home producers that directly sell their products to foreign producers. But a home

depreciation lowers the ex post profits of the 1 − θ * distributors in the home country that sell


                                                          17
foreign products. Under balanced trade, when θ approaches 1 − θ * , the two effects cancel out.

So, with this sort of asymmetric marketing, we can arrive at a situation where nominal exchange

rate changes have essentially no effect on the economy. There is no expenditure-switching effect

because all prices are set in the consumers’ currencies. And the wealth effects on profits are nil

as the gains from one sector of the economy cancel with the losses from another sector.

        Note that this economy may exhibit very high exchange rate volatility without any

equivalent volatility in real magnitudes. From (2.2) and (2.5) it is easy to establish that

consumption and employment are

                              mt
(2.8)                  ct =
                              ρ

                              nmt + (1 − n)mt*
(2.9)                  lt =
                                     ρ

Thus, the volatility in the nominal (and real) exchange rate may be out of all proportion to

volatility in the underlying economy.



3. Dynamic Model

        The results so far provide some analytical support for the `disconnectedness’ of the

exchange rate from the economy. But the absence of inter-temporal dynamics represents an

important drawback of the analysis. Exchange rate changes had little impact on the static

economy because they did not affect relative goods prices, and through the combination of local

currency pricing and domestic distributors, both the expenditure switching and wealth effects of

exchange rate shocks were limited. But in a dynamic model, an exchange rate shock also affects

interest rates, and through a combination of uncovered interest rate parity (UIRP; this will hold

in a linear approximate dynamic version of our economy), and temporary deviations from PPP,



                                                 18
monetary shocks drive a wedge between real interest rates facing the home and foreign

household. This real interest rate effect allows the exchange rate to play a critical role that is not

present in the static model. As we show, the real interest rate mechanism may be important

enough to sharply limit the volatility of the exchange rate.

       But the real interest rate linkage relies critically upon the validity of UIRP. As is now

well known, UIRP does very poorly as an empirical prediction in exchange rate data. Moreover,

the literature has been unsuccessful in attributing deviations from UIRP to a risk premium based

on utility-maximizing behavior. In fact, the literature has explored a number of possible avenues

for explaining the deviations from UIRP in terms of a risk premium. These include

generalizations of preferences to allow departures from time additivity, or from the axioms of

expected utility. Models have explored the role of heteroskedasticity of driving variables, time

aggregation, frictions in goods markets and consumption externatilities. Several recent studies

have attempted to model deviations from UIRP as a risk premium, but have concluded that there

remain fundamental obstacles to this approach. These studies include Bekaert (1996), Bekaert,

Hodrick, and Marshall (1997), Backus, Foresi, and Telmer (2001), and Moore and Roche (2001).

Engel (1996) surveys earlier literature.

       In light of these developments, it is plausible to turn to small deviations from rational

expectations to reconcile the evidence on deviations from UIRP. Evidence from surveys of

traders in foreign exchange markets has suggested departures from conditional unbiasedness (see

Frankel and Froot (1987), and Froot and Frankel (1989).) Jeanne and Rose (2000) develop a

model of noise trading in foreign exchange markets, where the presence of noise traders

introduces a time-varying liquidity premium in the excess returns on foreign currency

investments (or a liquidity premium in UIRP). In this section, we extend our basic model of

local currency pricing and international marketing to incorporate a noise-trader generated

                                                  19
liquidity premium in foreign exchange rates. Using the framework of Jeanne and Rose, we

show that, even in a dynamic model, the link between exchange rates and fundamentals is

weakened dramatically. The combination of local currency pricing, asymmetric marketing, and

the presence of noise-trading liquidity premiums in foreign exchange markets generate the

fundamental features of `disconnection’ between exchange rates and fundamentals.

Households

           Households now trade in domestic and international bonds. Since incomplete markets

are critical, our assumption is that households can trade in non-contingent nominal bonds only.

Household bond trading is defined in a special way however. First, we assume that households

can directly trade only in domestic currency denominated nominal bonds. All home country

trading in foreign currency bonds is carried out by `foreign exchange dealers’ the activities of

which will be described more fully below. Foreign exchange dealers give households a net

payment of Π tf per period, denominated in domestic currency, which the households take as

given. In fact, this may be positive or negative, as the households may be required to pay in to

the foreign exchange fund in some periods. Since foreign exchange dealers act in household’s

interests, this represents a delegation by households of all foreign exchange transactions to

specialized dealers.

           The budget constraint of the typical home household is then written as

             t t + d t Bt +1 + M t = Wt Lt + Π t + Π t + M t −1 + Tt + Bt .
                                                      f
(3.1)       PC

All variables are defined as before. Bt is the number of domestic currency denominated bonds

held by the home household, and dt is defined as the price of a bond10. Π t represents profit




10
     In equilibrium there will be zero net trade in these bonds, but it is convenient to define the equilibrium price   dt .

                                                              20
income from production and distribution firms, as defined in (2.1). Π tf is the payment made by

foreign exchange dealers at time t.

        Conditions describing optimal behavior for the home household include (1.2), (1.3), and

                                                            ρ
                                                      PC
(3.2)                                      dt = Et β     t t

                                                     Pt +1Ctρ+1

which is the Euler equation for optimal choice of domestic currency bonds.

        Foreign country residents have identical preferences, but trade directly in foreign

currency bonds. Given the institutional setup for foreign exchange trading that is described

below, it is irrelevant whether foreign residents trade directly in foreign currency denominated

bonds, or have this done by specialized foreign exchange traders. In addition, we assume that

foreign residents do not trade in domestic currency denominated bonds. Accordingly, we may

write the foreign residents budget constraint as:

                       Pt*Ct* + dt* B*ft +1 + M t* = Wt * L*t + Π *t + M t*−1 + Tt* + B*ft

where dt* is the price of a unit of foreign currency delivered in period t+1. Optimal behavior for

foreign residents involves the analogous conditions to (1.2) and (1.3), as well as the condition

describing the optimal choice of bond holdings:

                                                               Pt*Ct* ρ
(3.3)                                          dt* = Et β
                                                               Pt *+1Ct*+ρ1


Foreign Exchange Dealers

        In the home country, foreign exchange dealers buy or sell foreign currency denominated

bonds to maximize the discounted expected returns of cash flow, evaluated at the home

household’s discount rate. Expected returns are

                                       Etn (qt S t +1 Bht* +1 − d t* S t Bht* +1 )


                                                          21
where Etn represents profit expectations taken by the foreign exchange dealers, and dt

represents the state contingent value of domestic currency delivered in period t+1

            Pt C tρ
( qt = β                ). Home country residents receive an amount St Bht* from foreign exchange
           Pt +1Ctρ+1

dealers at time t, and make new payments of d t* St Bht* +1 to the dealers. Thus, the net amount

received by home residents is Π tf = St Bht* − d t* St Bht* +1 . This is the current return on the foreign

exchange fund for home residents.

        We assume that foreign exchange dealers exhibit bias in their conditional forecasts of the

future exchange rate. Thus, they can be thought of as `noise traders’. Following closely the

work of Jeanne and Rose (2000),11 we make the following assumption about noise trader’s

subjective distribution over the log of the exchange rate12

(3.4)                                          Etn st +1 = Et st +1 + vt

(3.5)                                         Vart n ( st +1 ) = Vart ( st +1 )

        Here we assume that vt is i.i.d. and satisfies; Et −1 (vt ) = 0 . The notation Etn−1 ( xt ) refers to

the conditionally biased expectations of noise traders. The period t+1 exchange rate expected by

noise traders based on period t information differs from the true conditional expectation by a

random error. But noise traders correctly forecast the conditional variance of the exchange rate.

Finally, we assume that the conditional variance of vt is proportional to the conditional variance

of the exchange rate itself. Thus

(3.6)                                       Vart −1 (vt ) = κVart −1 ( st ) , 0 < κ < 1



11
   Jeanne and Rose (2000) model the entry and exit of noise traders, which we neglect. However, the
macroeconomic model of Jeanne and Rose is not fully developed. They use an ad hoc monetarist model.
12
   Since our approximate model below is written in terms of log deviations from the steady state, we must make
distributional assumptions with respect to the logs of the exchange rate.

                                                          22
The logic behind condition (3.6) is that the bias in noise trader expectations must be related to

the volatility of the exchange rate itself, since otherwise, noise traders might anticipate that the

future exchange rate was volatile, even in a fixed exchange rate regime13.

           Finally, we assume that foreign exchange dealers make accurate expectations of the

households state contingent discount factor qt 14.

           Assuming that there is no entry cost into the foreign exchange dealing market, but that

each new (home country) foreign exchange dealer continues to exhibit biased expectations, we

have expected returns driven to zero, so that

                                                                   qt S t +1
(3.7)                                               d t* = Etn
                                                                     St

Firms

           The expressions for revenue of home and foreign firms are the same as before, and firms

use the same pricing rules as before. Now however, a money shock may have long-lived effects

through its impact on the current account (as in Obstfeld and Rogoff, 1995).

Model Solution

           The appendix describes the complete solution of the model. Here we take a heuristic

approach. Again, we characterize the properties of exchange rates by taking a linear

approximation around an initial non-stochastic, symmetric steady state. Thus, we let lower case

letters represent log deviations from an initial steady state, so that xt = ln( X t ) − ln( X ) . In the

initial steady state consumption, net foreign assets, prices and the exchange rate are all constant.

Again, we assume that money shocks are given by


13
     It may seem strange that the conditional variance of   vt is proportional to the conditional variance of st rather
than of   st +1 . But in fact, as we show below, the conditional variance of the exchange rate is constant over time.
14
  We could rationalize this under the supposition that there existed a full set of state contingent home currency
bonds, traded only within the home country, so that the bond prices would reveal the state discount factor.

                                                              23
                             mt = mt −1 + ut          mt* = mt*−1 + ut*

where Et −1ut = Et −1u*t = 0 .

         To begin with, we may establish that, in a linear approximation, firms will set prices to

equal anticipated marginal costs

                             pht = Et −1wt                   pht* = Et −1 ( wt − st ) 15

A similar result holds for the foreign prices. Together, this implies that the price index for home

and foreign countries is:

(3.8)                                   pt = nEt −1wt + (1 − n) Et −1 ( wt* + st )




(3.9)                                   pt* = nEt −1 ( wt − st ) + (1 − n) Et −1wt* .

         Equations (3.8) and (3.9) together imply that in an expected sense, purchasing power

parity (PPP) holds. Not surprisingly, with one-period ahead pricing and without non-traded

goods, our model does not address the determinants of persistence in the real exchange rate.



Interest Rate Parity

         We may derive the interest rate parity relationships implied by this model by taking a

linear approximation of (3.3) and (3.7), taking into account the assumption on foreign exchange

dealer’s expectations (3.4). This gives

(3.10)             ρ Et (ct +1 − ct ) + Et ( pt +1 − pt ) = ρ Et (ct*+1 − ct* ) + Et ( pt*+1 − pt* ) + Et st +1 − st + vt

         The expression on the left hand side of this equation has the interpretation as the

domestic nominal interest rate. The first two expressions on the right hand side represent the


15
   Although the foreign currency price of imports from the home country depends on the price set both by home
firms selling directly to the foreign market, and foreign retailers, it can easily be shown that they both set the same
price, up to a linear approximation.

                                                                24
foreign nominal interest rate. Equation (3.10) then says that the presence of conditionally biased

expectations, introduces a stochastic deviation from uncovered interest rate parity. The source of

this deviation is precisely the bias in expectations of the future exchange rate. It is important to

distinguish between this deviation from UIRP and deviations due to conventional risk premium

terms, which would arise from risk aversion and Jensen’s inequality terms in the true non-linear

solution (as opposed to the linear approximation). These conventional risk-premium terms tend

to be both very small and have little variability (see Engel, 1996.) By contrast, the liquidity

premium arising from noise-traders is on average zero, but displays volatility that is proportional

to the exchange rate itself.

         Equation (3.10) also implies that while UIRP may fail due to expectational shocks on the

part of noise traders, it holds in expected value. Conditional on period t-1 information, nominal

interest rate differentials reflect expected changes in exchange rates.

Solving for expected values

         Now using (3.8), (3.9), and a linear approximation of (1.3) and (2.5), (and the equivalent

for the foreign country), and taking expectations dated t-1, we get

                                                                   ρ
(3.11)                             Et −1 ( wt − wt* − st ) =             Et −1 (ct − ct* ) .
                                                               (1 + ψω )

Take a linear approximation of the balance of payment constraint (3.1) (after imposing home

money market equilibrium M t = M t −1 + Tt , and the equilibrium relationship for profits of the

producers and foreign exchange dealers), using the fact that (as will hold in equilibrium) in an

expected sense, any initial change in net foreign assets is persistent, and then using the pricing

equations above, we get

                                                                                             dBht*
(3.12)              Et −1 (ct − ct* )   = (1 − ω ) Et −1 ( wt −   wt*   − st ) + (1 − β )
                                                                                          (1 − n) PC


                                                           25
This says that relative home consumption is increasing in the change in the initial home country

expected net foreign asset position, and decreasing in the expected terms of trade (as long as

ω > 1 ). Equations (3.11) and (3.12) give a relationship between the expected consumption

differential and the initial net foreign assets:

                                                            1 − β dBht*
(3.13)                                Et −1 (ct − ct* )   =                ,
                                                              σ (1 − n) PC

                    (1 − ω ) ρ
where σ ≡ (1 −                 ) . An increase in the home country net foreign assets leads to an
                    (1 + ψω )

anticipated rise in home consumption, relative to foreign consumption16. Net foreign assets

represent the only persistent state variable in the model.

           Now take a linear approximation of the home and foreign money market conditions,

using condition (3.13), and take expectations. This gives us the solution for the expected

exchange rate

(3.14)                                 Et −1st = Et −1 (mt − mt* ) − ρ Et −1 (ct − ct* ) .

In an expected sense, the exchange rate is consistent with the standard monetary model.

Effect of Money shocks on exchange rates

           Now let xˆ ≡ x − Et −1 x represent the deviation of a variable from its expected value, where

the expectation is dated t-1. Thus, Et xˆ t +1 = Et xt +1 − Et −1 xt +1 , etc. Now, from the linear

approximation of the balance of payments constraint, we can establish that

                                                      βdBˆ ht* +1
(3.15)                                cˆt − cˆt* +                = [θ − (1 − θ * )]sˆt
                                                     (1 − n) PC




                                                                    (1 − ω ) ρ
16
     To avoid issues of `immiserizing growth’, we assume that                  <1.
                                                                    (1 + ψω )
                                                               26
The right hand side of (3.15) represents the relative wealth impact of unanticipated shocks to the

exchange rate. As in the previous section, if θ + θ * > 1 , an unanticipated depreciation raises

relative wealth of the home country. This relative wealth increase will then be spread between

an increase in relative home consumption, and net foreign asset accumulation.

         Using (3.13) (updated to period t+1) in equation (3.15) gives us a relationship between

current relative consumption, expected period t+1 relative consumption, and the unanticipated

movement in the exchange rate:

                                                  σ
(3.16)                             cˆt − cˆt* +     Et (cˆt +1 − cˆt*+1 ) = éëθ − (1 − θ * ) ùû sˆt
                                                  r

What is the relationship between current relative consumption and anticipated future relative

consumption? Take the interest rate parity equation (3.10), and take expectations dated t-1.

Since PPP is expected to hold at time t+1, and the current price level in both countries is

predetermined, we may subtract the dated t-1 expected value of (3.10) from (3.10) itself to get

(3.17)                  ρ Et (cˆt +1 − cˆt*+1 ) = ρ (cˆt − cˆt* ) − sˆt + vt

Expected consumption growth in the home country decreases in response to an unanticipated

exchange rate depreciation, since this generates an unanticipated real depreciation, therefore

reducing the home country real interest rate. But a `noise’ shock, representing a shock to foreign

exchange traders expectations of the future exchange rate, will raise the home country real

interest rate. This leads to a rise in expected home country relative consumption growth.

         Now putting together (3.16) and (3.17), we obtain a relationship between the

unanticipated movement in the exchange rate and the unanticipated movement in relative

consumption.




                                                               27
                                                                 σ                     σ
                                                             (1 +   ) ( cˆt − cˆt* ) +     vt
                                                                  r                    rρ
(3.18)                                               sˆt =
                                                               éσ                      * ù
                                                               ê r ρ + θ − (1 − θ ) ú
                                                               ë                         û

Finally, from the linear approximation to the money market equilibrium, and using (3.14) and

(3.17), we may establish that

                                                       (mˆ t − mˆ t* )
                                         (cˆt − cˆ ) =
                                                 *

                                                             ρ
                                                 t




so that the unanticipated movement in the exchange rate is

                                                               σ                     σ
                                                             (1 + )(mˆ t − mˆ t* ) + vt
(3.19)                                               sˆt =      r                    r
                                                           éσ                       * ù
                                                           êë r + ρ (θ − (1 − θ )) úû

         Unlike the static model of the last section, there is still a determinate exchange rate when

θ + θ * = 1 . This is because, through the interest rate parity condition (3.17), the relationship

between expected future consumption and current consumption is affected by the movement in

the exchange rate. That is, the exchange rate determines the optimal response of the current

account to a money shock.

         Can the exchange rate display `excess volatility’ in this environment? Recalling

assumption (3.6), we may evaluate the conditional variance of the exchange rate from

                                         σ 2
                                  (1 +     ) Vart −1 (mˆ t − mˆ t* )
                                         r                                         éσ                    ù
(3.20)        Vart −1 ( sˆt ) =                                      ,         Φ = ê + ρ (θ − (1 − θ * ))ú
                                             é    é κσ  ù
                                                          2ù
                                                                                   ër                    û
                                         Φ 2 ê1 − ê ú ú
                                             êë ë rΦ û úû

         Given that the volatility of the conditional bias in noise traders expectations is determined

by exchange rate volatility, the conditional volatility in the exchange rate depends only on




                                                                    28
fundamentals; i.e. on the volatility in relative moneys. Moreover, from an examination of (3.20),

we may establish the following proposition

Proposition

         As θ + θ * → 1 from above, and for κ = 1 , the conditional volatility of the exchange rate

rises without bound.

         Proof. From examination of (3.20).

Thus, the presence of local currency pricing, combined with asymmetric distribution and noise

trading in foreign exchange markets, implies a degree of exchange rate volatility that may be far

in excess of the underlying shocks.

         The intuitive explanation of the proposition comes from combining elements of the

previous section on the static environment and the additional presence of noise traders in this

dynamic economy. As before, the presence of local currency pricing and domestic distributors

tends to remove both the substitution and the wealth effects of exchange rate movements, at any

point in time. But without noise traders, an unanticipated shock to the exchange rate will drive a

wedge between the real interest rate in the home and foreign country. For instance, an exchange

rate depreciation in the home country will reduce the relative real interest rate in the home

country, and tilt the path of consumption so that home consumers will wish to consume more in

the present, relative to the future. Then, from (3.13) and (3.16), the movement in the exchange

rate is limited by the degree to which the current account must adjust to maintain an expected

future level of consumption (governed by the parameter σ ), even if θ − (1 − θ * ) is very close to

unity.

         In general, equation (3.16) and equation (3.17) with the expectational noise omitted

reveal why exchange rates will not be volatile under interest parity when there is local-currency

pricing. Any depreciation of the home currency implies an increase in wealth, as the domestic

                                                  29
currency value of foreign sales increases. This works to increase both current and future

consumption, as equation (3.16) demonstrates. But a depreciation in the current period raises the

real exchange rate today relative to the real exchange rate in the future. (This period’s real

exchange rate rises one-for-one with the nominal exchange rate when there is local currency

pricing. The future real exchange rate is fixed by long-run purchasing power parity.) So by

interest parity (3.17), a current depreciation must raise current consumption relative to expected

future consumption (holding foreign consumption constant.) Disconnect means that current

consumption does not change much when the exchange rate changes. The interest parity

condition then only allows large increases in the nominal exchange rate and disconnect to occur

simultaneously when there are large drops in expected future consumption. But this contradicts

the implications of the wealth effect of the depreciation, which must engender a rise in expected

future consumption. We can conclude that interest parity precludes exchange rate volatility

under local-currency pricing.

       But when exchange rate forecasts are biased by noise trader errors, and the conditional

volatility of these errors are proportional to the exchange rate, then exchange rate volatility is not

limited by the response of the current account, because of the direct presence of noise trader

shocks which also drive a wedge between home and foreign real interest rates. Holding the vt

shock constant, we see from (3.19) that the response of the exchange rate is limited by the inter-

temporal current account parameters. But this does not effectively limit the magnitude of

nominal exchange rate volatility, because the (conditional) volatility of vt itself is proportional to

exchange rate volatility.

       Moreover, the critical implication of our model is that exchange rate volatility exceeds

that of other relative prices and aggregate variables. To see this, we note the following. First,

from the money market equilibrium conditions (1.2), and the analogous condition for the foreign

                                                  30
economy, it may be established that the nominal interest rate in each country is constant. This

implies that consumption in each country responds in the same way as equation (2.8). Second,

given that nominal prices are predetermined in each economy, it is easy to show from the labor

market clearing condition (2.5) (and its equivalent for the foreign country) that employment and

output in each country responds identically to shocks to world consumption; (i.e.

by ncˆt + (1 − n)cˆt* ), as in equation (2.9). Therefore, again, consumption and output volatility is

proportional to the volatility of the monetary `fundamentals’.

         The movement in the home country current account is given by

                                                   æ1                     σ  σ ö
                               éëθ − (1 − θ * ) ùû ç (mˆ t − mˆ t* )(1 + ) +    vt
                   β dBˆ*
                                                   è ρ                    r  r ρ ÷ø
(3.21)                  ht +1
                             =                                                      − (cˆt − cˆt* )
                 (1 − n) P C*
                                               éσ                    * ù
                                               ê r ρ + θ − (1 − θ ) ú
                                               ë                        û

As θ − (1 − θ * ) → 1 from above, the response of the current account to a money shock approaches

the negative of the response of relative consumption. Moreover, any impact of the noise trader

shock vt tends to be eliminated.

         Finally, we may establish that as θ − (1 − θ * ) → 1 from above, the response of the home

country real interest rate to money disturbances converges to

                                                r
                                            −     (mˆ t − mˆ t* )(1 − n) − mˆ t
                                                σ

         We draw the conclusion that the path of all real variables in the economy is essentially

independent of exchange rate variability. The combined presence of local currency pricing,

asymmetric marketing, and `noise-trader’ conditionally-biased expectations in foreign exchange

markets generates the possibility for a degree of short term exchange rate volatility that is

completely out of proportion to all shocks impacting on the economy. Thus, as in the static



                                                            31
example above, in the full dynamic economy we may observe the basic pattern of `disconnect’

between the exchange rate and the rest of the economy.

         Table 1 reports some illustrative estimates of the effect of local currency pricing,

asymmetric distribution networks, and noise trading for the volatility of the exchange rate.17

Here it is assumed that the money shocks are uncorrelated across countries, and that each has

variance unity. The parameter values used in the calculations are reported at the end of the table.

For any value of κ , a fall in the value of θ + θ * increases exchange rate volatility. For

comparison the Table reports the volatility under producer currency pricing, where the volatility

of the exchange rate is lower, and is unaffected by movements inθ + θ * . For higher values of κ

under LCP, the impact of a fall in θ + θ * on exchange rate volatility becomes dramatic. The Table

also shows the correlations of the exchange rate with consumption and the home real interest

rate. The striking feature is that these correlations remain very low, even as the volatility of the

exchange rate itself becomes extremely high, in response to a combination of asymmetric

distribution networks and noise trading. Thus, our model of high exchange rate volatility

requires neither a high absolute volatility of other macroeconomic variables, nor a high

correlation between the exchange rate and these other variables. The correlation between output

and the exchange rate is not reported, because in the symmetric case of equal sized countries and

an identical distribution of monetary shocks across countries, this is in fact zero (this can be

inferred directly from 3.10 and 4.19).




17
   Clearly we have not developed a model with which we would try to “match moments” as is done in many
calibrated models that are solved numerically. For example, there is no persistence in our model in either price
stickiness or expectational errors, so we cannot hope to match the persistence of exchange rates.

                                                         32
5. Conclusions

       This paper has made an attempt at developing a fully specified general equilibrium model

of the exchange rate which accords with the conjecture of Krugman (1989) that exchange rate

volatility is extreme because fluctuations in the exchange rate matter so little for the economy.

We show that a combination of local currency pricing, heterogeneity in international price-

setting and goods distribution, and expectational biases in international financial markets may

combine to produce very high exchange rate volatility without any implications for the volatility

of other macroeconomic aggregates.

       We have developed testable hypotheses about the nature of exchange-rate volatility and

exchange-rate disconnect. In particular, there ought to be a greater disconnect when the degree

of local-currency pricing is high and the wealth effects of exchange rate changes are small. But

ours is not a fully developed model that is capable of matching all of the empirical features of

exchange rates. In particular, in order to explain not just real exchange rate volatility but also

persistence, we might want to have more persistent price setting, and perhaps endogenous capital

accumulation. We could pay more attention to the underlying incentives that exporting firms

have to set up foreign distribution networks, and the pricing structure they use in conjunction

with this. We have focused on the extreme case in which there is no expenditure-switching

effect of exchange rate changes, but a more realistic model would allow for some substitution

possibilities. With respect to the presence of expectational errors in financial markets, we could

explore in more detail the microeconomic foundations of noise traders. We have merely

clarified what type of deviation from UIRP is necessary to generate very high exchange rate

volatility in face of local currency pricing and heterogeneous distribution of products.

Nevertheless, our results suggest a number of key elements that may be part of the `exchange

rate disconnect’ puzzle.

                                                  33
                                           References

Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop, 2000, Does exchange rate stability increase trade
       and welfare?, American Economic Review 90, 1093-1109.
Backus, David K.; Silverio Foresi; and Chris I. Telmer, 2001, Affine term-structure models and
       the forward premium anomaly, Journal of Finance 56, 279-304.
Baxter, Marianne and Alan Stockman, 1989, Business cycles and the exchange rate system,
       Journal of Monetary Economics 23, 377-400.
Bekaert, Geert, 1996, The time-variation of risk and return in foreign exchange markets: a
       general equilibrium perspective, Review of Financial Studies 9, 427-440.
Bekaert, Geert; Robert J. Hodrick; and David A. Marshall, 1997, The implications of first-order
       risk aversion for asset market premiums, Journal of Monetary Economics 40, 3-39.
Betts, Caroline, and Michael B. Devereux, 1996, The exchange rate in a model of pricing-to-
       market, European Economic Review 40, 1007-1021.
Betts, Caroline, and Michael B. Devereux, 2000, Exchange rate dynamics in a model of pricing-
       to-market, Journal of International Economics 50, 215-244.
Chari, V.V.; Patrick J. Kehoe; and, Ellen R. McGrattan, 2000, Can sticky price models generate
       volatile and persistent exchange rates?, National Bureau of Economics Research, working
       paper no. 7869.
Devereux, Michael B., and Charles Engel, 2000, Monetary policy in the open economy revisited:
       price-setting and exchange rate flexibility, National Bureau of Economic Research,
       working paper no. 7665.
Devereux, Michael B.; Charles Engel; and Cédric Tille, 1999, Exchange rate pass-through and
       the welfare effects of the euro, National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper
       no. 7382 (revised version forthcoming in International Economic Review).
Duarte, Margarida and Alan Stockman, 2001, Rational speculation and exchange rates, National
       Bureau of Economic Research, working paper no. 8362.
Engel, Charles, 1993, Real exchange rates and relative prices: an empirical investigation, Journal
       of Monetary Economics 32, 35-50.
Engel, Charles, 1996, The forward discount anomaly and the risk premium: a survey of recent
       evidence, Journal of Empirical Finance 3, 123-192.
Engel, Charles, 2001, Optimal exchange rate policy: the influence of price setting and asset
       markets, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 33, 518-541.
                                               34
Flood, Robert and Andrew K. Rose, 1995, Fixing exchange rates: a virtual quest for
       fundamentals, Journal of Monetary Economics 36, 3-37.
Frankel, Jeffrey A., and Kenneth A. Froot, 1987, Using survey data to test standard propositions
       regarding exchange rate expectations, American Economic Review 77, 133-153.
Froot, Kenneth A., and Jeffrey A. Frankel, 1989, Forward discount bias: is it an exchange risk
       premium?, Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 139-161.
Jeanne, Olivier and Andrew K. Rose, 2000, Noise trading and exchange rate regimes, Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Krugman, Paul (1989) Exchange Rate Instability, MIT Press.
McCallum, Bennett T., and Edward Nelson, 2000, Monetary policy for an open economy: an
       alternative framework with optimizing agents and sticky prices, Oxford Review of
       Economic Policy 16, 74-91.
Moore, Michael J., and Maurice J. Roche, 2001, Less of a puzzle: a new look at the forward
       forex market, Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.
Obstfeld, Maurice, 2001, International macroeconomics: beyond the Mundell-Fleming model,
       IMF Staff Papers 47, 1-39.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1995, Exchange rate dynamics redux, Journal of
       Political Economy 103, 624-660.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2000, The six major puzzles in international
       macroeconomics: is there a common cause?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, 339-
       390.
Parsley, David C., and Shang-Jin Wei, 2001, Explaining the border effect: the role of exchange
       rate variability, shipping costs and geography, Journal of International Economics 55,
       87-105.




                                              35
                                                                          Appendix

          Here we derive the results that are obtained in section 3 of the paper. The full model can

be described by the following 18 equations. Given the definition of foreign exchange dealer

profits, consumer price indices, and the conditional bias in expectations, these implicitly give a

solution for the sequence; Ct , Ct* , Wt , Wt* , St , Bht* , dt , dt* , Lt , L*t , Pht , Pft* , PhtP* , PftP , PhtD* , PftD , Qht , Q*ft .

(A1)       Pt Ct + d t Bt +1 + M t = Wt Lt + Π t + Π tf + M t −1 + Tt + Bt

                          −ω
                æP ö                 æ æ P P * ö − λ æ P * ö −ω          −λ       −ω
                                                                æ PhtD* ö æ Pht* ö ö
(A2)       Lt = ç ht ÷         nCt + çθ ç * ÷ ç * ÷ + (1 − θ ) ç * ÷ ç * ÷ ÷ (1 − n)Ct*
                                          ht            ht

                è Pt ø               ç è Pht ø è Pt ø           è Pht ø è Pt ø ÷ø
                                     è

                          −ω                                         −λ                −ω                          −λ                −ω
               æ P* ö                     æ æ PP                ö         æ Pft   ö                    æ PD   ö         æ Pft   ö         ö
(A3)       L = ç ft* ÷
             *
                               (1 − n)C + ç θ * ç ft
                                            *
                                                                ÷÷        çç      ÷÷        + (1 − θ ) ç ft
                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                              ÷÷        çç      ÷÷        ÷ nCt
             t çP ÷                       ç çè Pft
                                            t                                                          çP                                 ÷
               è t ø                      è                      ø         è Pt    ø                   è ft    ø         è Pt    ø        ø

                      ρ ψ
(A4)       Wt = η PC
                   t t Lt



(A5)       Wt* = η Pt *Ct* ρ L*tψ

                            ρ
                      PC
(A6)       dt = Et β     t t

                     Pt +1Ctρ+1

                        qt S t +1
(A7)       d t* = Etn
                          St

                         Pt*Ct* ρ
(A8)       dt* = Et β
                         Pt *+1Ct*+ρ1


           Pht =
                                    (
                     λ Et −1 Wt C t1− ρ             )
(A9)
                    λ − 1 Et −1 Ct1− ρ  (       )
                  =
                                    (
                     λ Et −1 Wt*C t*1− ρ                )
(A10)      Pft*
                    λ − 1 Et −1 Ct*1− ρ (           )
                   =
                                        (
                      λ Et −1 Wt Ct*Ct− ρ                   )
(A11)      PhtP*
                                        (
                     λ − 1 Et −1 Ct*Ct− ρ S t               )
                                                                                  36
(A12) PftP =
                                       (
                    λ Et −1 Wt*Ct Ct*− ρ                       )
                   λ −1        æ C C *− ρ ö
                        Et −1 çç t t          ÷
                               è         S t ÷ø


                              æ C *1− ρ            ö
                       Et −1 çç t                  ÷
                                                   ÷
                 = Qht        è St                 ø
(A13) PhtD*
                        Et −1 Ct*1− ρ  (           )
(A14) PftD = Q *ft
                                   (
                        Et −1 S t Ct1− ρ           )
                         Et −1 Ct1− ρ  (       )
(A15) Qht =
                                       (
                    λ Et −1 Wt C t*C t− ρ                  )
                   λ − 1 Et −1 C t*C t− ρ  (           )
(A16) Q *ft =
                                       (
                    λ Et −1 Wt*Ct Ct*− ρ                       )
                   λ − 1 Et −1 C t C t*− ρ (           )
                           ρ
      Mt       Ct ε
(A17)    =χ          1
      Pt    (1 − dt ) ε

                           *ρ
      M t*       Ct ε
(A18)    *
           =χ           1
      Pt      (1 − d * ) ε     t


           Equation (A1) is the home country balance of payments condition. Equations (A2) and

(A3) represent the labor market clearing conditions for both countries. Equations (A3) and (A4)

implicitly define labor supply conditions for each country. Equations (A5)-(A8) define the Euler

equations for each country, as well as the expectations-biased form of the interest rate parity

condition. Equations (A9)-(A16) represent the optimal pricing equations for firms in each

country18. Finally, equations (A17) and (A18) represent the money market clearing conditions.




18
     To derive the optimal pricing conditions, see Devereux, Engel and Tille (1999).

                                                                   37
Solution technique

         To solve this system, we take a linear approximation around an initial symmetric steady

state, where net foreign assets are zero, all prices are equal, and the exchange rate is initially

unity. Using lower case letters to designate a deviation from initial steady state, the linearized

versions of the CPI price indices and equations (A9)-(A16) are given by:

(A19) pt = npht + (1 − n) p ft = npht + (1 − n)(θ * p ftp + (1 − θ * ) p Dft )

(A20) pt* = npht* + (1 − n) p*ft = n(θ phtp* + (1 − θ ) phtD* ) + (1 − n) p*ft

(A21)              pht = Et −1wt         p*ft = Et −1wt*

(A22)              phtP* = Et −1 ( wt − st )       phtD* = Et −1 ( wt − st )

(A23)              p Pft = Et −1 ( wt* + st )      p Dft = Et −1 ( wt* + st )

(A24)              qht = Et −1wt         q*ft = Et −1wt*

This implies that the CPI prices may be written as:

(A25)              pt = nEt −1wt + (1 − n) Et −1 ( wt* + st )

(A26)              pt* = nEt −1 ( wt − st ) + (1 − n) Et −1wt* .

         Linearizing the balance of payments condition (A1), labor market clearing conditions

(A2)-(A3), and the labor supply conditions (A4)-(A5), gives us (A27).




                                                                 38
(A27)


ct +
      βdBht* +1
        PC
                                                                    [
                = nct + n(1 − ω )( p ht − p t ) + (1 − n)θ s t + p ht  *
                                                                          − p t + (1 − λ )( p htP* − p ht
                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                          ) − ω ( p ht* − pt* ) + ct*   ]
                   [
+ (1 − n)(1 − θ ) q ht − pt − λ ( p htD* − p ht
                                             *
                                                ) − ω ( p ht
                                                          *
                                                             − pt* ) + ct*         ]
                     [
+ (1 − n)(1 − θ * ) (1 − λ )( p Dft − p ft ) + (1 − ω )( p ft − p t ) + ct     ]
                    )[s                                                                      ]     dBht
− (1 − n)(1 − θ *         t   + q *ft − p ft − λ ( p Dft − p ft ) + (1 − ω )( p ft − pt ) + ct +
                                                                                                    PC


          lt = n [ −ω ( pht − pt ) + ct ] +
(A28)
          (1 − n) éëθ (−λ ( phtP* − pht* ) − ω ( pht* − pt* )) + (1 − θ )(−λ ( phtD* − pht* ) − ω ( pht* − pt* )) + ct* ùû


          lt* = (1 − n) éë −ω ( p*ft − pt* ) + ct* ùû +
(A29)
          n éëθ * (−λ ( p Pft − p ft ) − ω ( p ft − pt )) + (1 − θ )(−λ ( p Dft − p ft ) − ω ( p ft − pt )) + ct ùû

(A30) wt = pt + ρ ct + ψ lt

(A31) wt* = pt* + ρ ct* + ψ lt*

         Finally, the linearization of the Euler equation, the interest rate parity equation, and the

money market clearing conditions gives:

(A32) dt = pt + ρ ct − Et ( pt +1 + ρ ct +1 )

(A33) d t* = pt + ρ ct − Et ( pt +1 + ρ ct +1 ) + Et st +1 + vt − st

(A34) d t* = pt* + ρ ct* − Et ( pt*+1 + ρ ct*+1 )

                       ρ     1
(A35) mt − pt =          ct + d t
                       ε     εr

                              ρ * 1 *
(A36) mt* − pt* =               ct + dt
                              ε     εr

         Now using (A19)-(A26), together with the assumption of i.i.d. shocks, in equations

(A27), (A28) and (A29), gives:




                                                                     39
                                                                               dBht*
(A37) Et −1 (ct − ct* ) = (1 − ω ) Et −1 ( wt − wt* − s t ) + (1 − β )
                                                                            (1 − n) PC

(A38) Et −1 (lt − lt* ) = −ω Et −1 ( wt − wt* − st )

where (A37) represents (3.12) of the text. Now (A30)-(A31) and (A35)-(A36) give

(A39) Et −1 ( wt − wt* − st ) = ρ Et −1 (ct − ct* ) + ψ Et −1 (lt − lt* )

                                         ρ
(A40) Et −1st = Et −1 (mt − mt* ) −        Et −1 (ct − ct* )
                                         ε

So that

                                        ρ
(A41) Et −1 ( wt − wt* − st ) =               Et −1 (ct − ct* ) ,
                                    (1 + ψω )

which is equation (3.11) of the text. From (A37) and (A41) we get (3.13) of the text.

          To get (3.15) of the text, take the expectation of equation (A27), and subtract from (A27)

  itself. Then use (3.13) to derive (3.16). Equation (3.17) is obtained by combining (A33) and

   (A34), imposing expected period t+1 PPP. Then, using (A33)-(A36), we may establish the

relationship between money shocks and relative consumption used in deriving (3.19) of the text.




                                                                40
                              Table 1

κ =0         t −1   σ s2   t −1   σ s2        ρ ( s, c )   ρ ( s, r )   θ +θ *
                           (PCP)
             1.74           0.72              0.044        0.18         2.0
             1.8            0.72              0.044        0.18         1.75
             1.9            0.72              0.044        0.18         1.50
             2.0            0.72              0.044        0.18         1.25
             2.1            0.72              0.044        0.18         1.0

κ = 0 .5     t −1   σ s2   t −1   σ s2        ρ ( s, c )   ρ ( s, r )   θ +θ *
                           (PCP)
              2.2           0.78              0.04         0.16         2.0
              2.3           0.78              0.04         0.16         1.75
              2.5           0.78              0.04         0.16         1.50
              2.6           0.78              0.04         0.15         1.25
              2.8           0.78              0.04         0.15         1.0

κ = 0 .9     t −1   σ s2   t −1   σ s2        ρ ( s, c )   ρ ( s, r )   θ +θ *
                         (PCP)
              5.3          1.0                0.025        0.10         2.0
              6.1          1.0                0.024        0.1          1.75
              7.2          1.0                0.023        0.09         1.50
              8.8          1.0                0.021        0.08         1.25
              11.0         1.0                 0.02        0.08         1.0
     Parameter assumptions:
 ω =8        ψ =1          r = 0.1            ρ =4         n = 0.5




                                         41
